 The NPS Institutional Archive DSpace Repository Theses and Dissertations . The archive contains the largest repository of the NPS archive of all documents .
 NPS is the Naval Postgraduate School's public access digital repository for D U DLEY research materials and institutional publications created by the NPS community . Calhoun is named for Professor of Mathematics Guy K Calhoun, NPS’s first KNOX appointed — and published —
 Pobe Asad nee ’ tA cbs 5 Mite re . ‘ ' % nar Se ah Ue eee ae AGH an Vp Pat ob whey 8 x j tae 3 Bay ett ss ‘4 Bi | th #03
 Ea fos ats 4 a’ 9 cha Tek. ay ‘aaa Ae ts eecreed a cea. A eee: a Yb. array { 24 vee 4. vee . Ea . fos . ats .
 Ty i tat | i 2 a : f ay er ey ae ey a apnea . A ad ad Ar gS vie ened “pe age ls cae give at ’ : v ’ pat.” ‘: ‘Pe age ls
 4 tye JRO Pea heel EY te f qaers shy : 2 Boula or a a a ee 8, let ek as se eee ric ; ig ie se © s0¥gek Yo Pt Bee BLA ete tA
 GF thas nee oa ee ee Bi cine a oo Me atte ye Pi SAS fat ontets toh 9° ry Re a inser Pesky + ee ay ; tant to eke ek lw \ Pegs h *) 48
 Niece ee tS Aaa ee Vertis | G2 eo ss ag VP ae ty aes yah ‘ ral ate) At 43) 98 an. 98 an . Niece .
 The bibliographic information for this thesis is contained in UMI’s Dissertation Abstracts database . The only central source for accessing almost every doctoral dissertation accepted in North America since 1861 is the Dissertions database .
 Some thesis and dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of computer printer . Some copies may be made from a computer printer, others from a printer .
 The quality of this reproduction is dependent on the quality of the copy of the photograph . The photograph was taken at the request of request of the photographer .
 Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleedthrough, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction . Broken or blurry print, colorless illustrations and photos, bleedthrough and substandard margin margins, are examples .
 In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted . UMI will also report missing pages .
 If unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion . Also, if unauthorized content was removed, it will be removed .
 Oversize materials are reproduced by sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand corner .
 Each original is also photographed in one exposure and is included in reduced form at the back of the book . The book includes a selection of photographs of each original .
 These are also available as one exposure on a standard 35mm slide or as a 17” x 23” black and white photographic print for an additional charge .
 Photographs included in the original manuscript have been reproduced xerographically in this copy . This copy includes photographs taken from the original manuscripts .
 This fails to capture the complexity of crisis interaction and crisis stability, it says . It is not the first time a crisis has been solved by a crisis, it has been revealed .
 Interactions at each level evolve separately and can independently influence whether or not ae Cue escalates “war’s “ war.” Interactions between the two levels evolve separately .
 The objective is to develop a theory of crisis interaction cast in the form of contingent generalizations that offer discriminating explanations for the eccurrence of crisis stability problems . The objective of this is to create a theory that offers discriminating explanations .
 The method of structured, focused comparison is used to conduct empirical research on two sets of historical cases . The method is used in the study of two historical cases.
 Structured comparison of these cases reveals that the stratified interaction model provides an accurate description of international crises . The model is based on the fact that the international crises are likely to be solved by international crises, the authors say .
 Tactical-level interactions normally are not under direct direct control of national leaders . Under certain conditions, they can become decoupled from political-military objectives and strategy of leaders . The U.S. has a long history of tactical-level interaction with foreign leaders .
 The factors that can cause decoupling of tacticallevel interactions and the factors that determine whether or not decoupled interactions escalate uncontrollably to war are identified . The factors are identified in the context of the decouplings .
 The opinions expressed in this dissertation are not to be construed as representing views or policies of the Department of the Navy . The opinions are the author's alone .
 Portions of this dissertation were submitted for security review in a with applicable Department of Defense and Department of the Navy instructions . Portions were submitted to security review .
 The author's dissertation was reviewed by the University of Cambridge . The review did not result in any changes in the substance of the dissertation, the author says .
 The staff of the Civilian Institutions Program provided superb support for me while I was at Stanford . The Civilian Institution Program is a non-profit organization .
 Both were marvelously patient and persevering in dealing with the unique problems of having an active duty naval officer as a graduate student . Both were remarkable and perseverant .
 The Naval Historical Center, Washington, D.C., provided invaluable assistance for author's research .
 I am particularly indebted to Bernard Cavalcanti, Westly Price, and the staff of the Operational Archives Branch . I am grateful to have been given the opportunity to speak to the author .
 The Ship’s History Branch and Naval Aviation History Branch were also of assistance . The Department of the Navy Library was also of help .
 Commander Figueras al the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, the staff of the Navy Command Center, Vice Admiral Jonathan T Howe at the Joint Chiefs of Staff, The Honorable William A Cockell, Jr., at the National Security Council, and Paul Stillwell and Susan Sweeney
 Among the ante officers who dead and critiqued portions of my dissertation, Captain Robert A Doll was especially helpful . Captain Doll was one of the officers who died in the process .
 I thank Lieutenant Commander Yarosh and the Administrative Office at Naval Air Station Moffett Field for handling the extra administrative burdens created by my graduate progran. vii 3 4 oar particularly great debt to over one hundred retired naval officers and government efi Seite that agreed to interviews or
 This essential crisis management requirement has been identified as a potentially serious problem area . This is a 'potentially serious' problem area for the NHS .
 Preplanned military operations and contingency plans may not be appropriate for the unique circumstances of a crisis . Military operations may not support the political-diplomatic strategy adopted by national leaders to resolve a crisis, experts say .
 Delegated command of military operations could allow unintended military incidents to occur, which the adversary could misperceive as a deliberate escalation of the crisis er signal of hostile intent .
 Military alerts ordered to deter the adversary and increase the readiness of the armed forces could set in motion a chain of events exceeding the control of national leaders . Military alerts could set up chain-of events exceeding control of leaders, experts say .
 Such problems are sources of concern because they could cause national leaders to lose control of events in a crisis, starting an escalatory spiral leading to war . Such problems could start a spiral of war, leading to an escalator spiral, experts say .
 Some scholars believe inadvertent military actions can contribute to crisis management problems and the occurrence of inadvertent war . Attention should be focused on the political and psychological pressures on top-level decisionmakers .
 There is a genuine risk of major war not from ‘accidents’ in the military machine but from a diplomatic process of commitment that is itself unpredictable . This is why there is the risk of a major war, not from an accident, but from an unpredictable diplomatic process .
 The unpredictability is not due solely to what a destroyer commander might do at midnight when he comes across a Scviet freighter at sea, but to the psychological process by which particular things become identified with courage or appeasement .
 There is disagreement among students of crisis and war over the effects of inadvertent military incidents on crisis leor .
 Inadvertent military incidents are viewed as Gangerous in and of themselves because they can directly trigger escalation . This issue is of practical relevance in crisis decisionmaking, as well as being of theoretical interest in the study of international crises .
 The focus of this study is on the problems that can arise when using military force as a political instrument in crises . The study is focused on how military force can be used in a political crisis .
 Inadvertent escalation--any increase in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them--is a significant danoer .
 A distinction can be drawn between the political and operational requirements of crisis management, such as limiting political objectives and military means, and maintaining control of military operations . A distinction is also being drawn between political and military objectives of crisis .
 Richard N Lebow discusses the imm:diate causes of war, the long-term sources of hostility and tension . He discusses the particular events, such as a crisis, sparking a war, that spark a war .
 This study starts from -the premise that Lebow is correct, that immediate causes are important for understanding how and why wars occur . This study is based on the premise that . immediate causes, such as . the causes of war, are important to understand why wars are fought .
 The causes of war can be viewed as falling on a timespan spectrum, with long-term underlying causes working their effects over years, decades or centuries toward the left end . Long-term causes occur over days or weeks toward the right end of the spectrum .
 Sagan refers to this as the operational dimension of crisis management . The underlying causes toward ‘scott’s’ are the underlying causes, he says .
 System structure has a strong influence on how “ware prone” international politics is at a given time . System structure can influence how ‘ware-prone’ international politics are at a moment .
 Historical, cultural, economic, and ideological variables help shape the political framework within which rivalries arise . These factors contribute to the intensity of the hostility and tensions between them .
 Geographic factors, and the state of military technology shape the strategic relationships between nations, contribute to the level of tensions between them . Geographic factors are factors that shape the relationship between nations .
 This study will be ad@ressing causes of war at the far right end of that spectrum . Events occurring over hours, or even just minutes, at the speed of modern warfare . The study will focus on the fast-paced nature of warfare .
 There is no intent to slight the importance of underlying causes or longer-term immediate causes, which arrange the political and strategic circumstances for war to occur .
 The intent is to supplement those causes with greater understanding of how military interactions in a crisis could inadvertently trigger war . Rather than supplementing those causes, the aim is to provide greater understanding .
 One of the fundamental problems in international relations is to identify the necessary and sufficiert conditions for war to occur, says George W. Bush . He says the problem is to find out what is necessary to prepare for war .
 This study makes two assumptions on the necessary and sufficient conditions for War . This study is based on the need and desire of War .
 An international environment marked by confrontation over national interests, hostility, and tension are necessary condition for war to arise from a crisis, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: An environment of confrontation is necessary for a crisis .
 The implication of this assumption is that inadvertent military incidents will not spark escalation leading to war . In the absence of confrontation, hostility and tensions, tensions will be avoided .
 This study focuses on inadvertent escalation arising under conditions of acute international crises, when the necessary condition for war are present . This study is based on the fact that the necessary conditions for war were present .
 The second assumption is that the underlying causes of war are not sufficient conditions for war . The underlying causes, such as war, are not enough conditions to justify war, it says .
 War can be avoided even under conditions of confrontation, hostility, and tension so long as national leaders on each side are willing to continue bargaining with the other side . Leaders must also be willing to sacrifice certain interests in order to protect or advance others .
 A number of factors can provide conditions sufficient for war once the necessary conditions are present . This suggests that a number of conditions can provide sufficient conditions for war .
 Examples include a belief that vital national interests cannot be protected through bargaining . A misperception that the other side will not bargain seriously or intends to resort to war at an opportune moment .
 These factors can give rise to either deliberate decisions to go to war or to inadvertent war . These factors may be deliberate or inadvertent .
 The immediate causes of war can provide sufficient conditions for war if the necessary conditions are present . The immediate cause of war provides sufficient conditions to war .
 The remainder of this introduction will present a brief critique of the literature on crises and crisis management, an overview of the theory being proposed, the research design, the historical cases and case selection criteria, and a summary of the organization .
 Existing literature on crises and crisis management has three serious weaknesses . Critigue of Crisis Theories is critical of the existing literature on crisis management .
 First, the various political and military interactions that occur betgebn thé two sides in a crisis are assessed in the context of an implicit single interaction sequence model of crises .
 U.S. leaders often exercise close control over military operations in crises . Lack of familiarity with military ‘command and control procedures has produced an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises,’s author says .
 Third, and derived from the two previous weaknesses, the concept of crisis stability is poorly developed . There is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war. Third and fourth, and there is a lack of understanding of these processes .
 Previous studies of international crises have implicitly viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence . The first weakness is that previous studies of crises have seen them as one sequence of interactions .
 The flow of events in a crisis is viewed as a single sequence of actions and reactions . Crisis flow is seen as a sequence of events and reactions, says CNN.com .
 A consequence of this perspective is the implicit assumption that all the actions taken by a nation during a crisis either are ordered by national leaders in pursuit of their policy objectives, or should not have occurred and therefore represent a loss of control .
 A policy objective desirable for avoiding war is control of military operations by political authorities . Control of crisis military operations is treated as the norm against which actual crisis management efforts are compared . Under the single interaction sequence model of crisis interaction, crisis interaction is compared .
 The occurrence of military —o not directly controlled by national leaders is then viewed a potentially dangerous breakdown of crisis management . The occurrence . of military . not directly . controlled by . leaders is viewed a dangerous breakdown .
 The single interaction sequence model does not accurately describe international crises, experts say . The model is based on the interaction sequence of events in the world . It is not the first time the model has been used in international crises .
 What actually occurs is multiple interaction sequences that only partially influence each other . What actually 9 occurs is a series of interaction sequences .
 U.S. leaders exercise close control over military operations in crises, says CNN's John Sutter . This apparently resulted from a lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures, he says .
 Crisis management literature typically describes the control of crisis military operations as being highly centralized . This is in contrast to routine peacetime operations, which are described as highly decentralized .
 This description fails to grasp the true complexity of military command and control, leading to inaccurate assessments of the crisis management problems arising from the employment of military forces in crises and how those problems can affect stability .
 Under certain circumstances military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking pdemiveion from higher authorities . Military commanders can also use conventional forces without seeking permission .
 The scope of their authority is spelled out in a variety of documents, which collectively will be referred to as mechanisms of indirect control .
 There are even provisions for commanders to act contrary to their written instructions when circumstances dictate .
 Some scholars have recognized that these features exist in the U.S. military command and control system . But the actual complexity of that system has not been reflected in the literature on crisis management .
 The literature is founded on a simple distinction between policymaking and policy implementation . It turns to concepts such as bureaucratic politics and eniganiodttoral process to explain why actions are taken that were not ordered by mational leaders .
 This fails to recognize that military commanders at all levels in the chain of command have important policy-making roles . Military commanders are not simply bureaucrats executing policy decisions. They are role models for policy-makers .
 An understanding of the mechanisms through which authority to make operational decisions is delegated to militaty commanders is essential for accurately assessing the crisis management problems that arise .
 Crisis stability is viewed as being primarily a function of weapons technology, particularly the — to which it gives an advantage to the offense . Crisis stability has been viewed as a factor in stability in the world .
 Lacking is an appreciation of the operational factors that affect crisis stability once a decision is made to employ military forces in a crisis . Lacking a . appreciation of . operational factors, it is not enough to make a decision to deploy military forces, it says .
 The escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war are also poorly developed . The escalation process that could be triggered by a crisis is poorly developed, experts say .
 There is growing concern over inadvertent or accidental war, but these concepts are not well defined . The scenarios in which they could occur lack plausibility, say experts .
 Crisis military operations can trigger or contribute to an escalatory process leading to war . But the manner in which they do so are subtle and complex--and best understood in the context of stratified interactions . The U.S. has a long history of military operations in the world's most
 The weaknesses in the crisis management literature are an implicit and misleading single interaction sequence model of the political and military interactions that occur in a crisis . The weaknesses are an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises .
 The concepts presented in the research design are summarized here to provide an overview of the concepts presented . They are summarized to provide a summary of the findings .
 Both sides in a crisis seek to protect or advance vital national interests . Both sides have vital interests at stake that they are unwilling to sacrifice for the purpose of avoiding war .
 Both sides take military actions intended CoMaunport crisis bargaining and to counter military moves by the other side . Both sides thus take military action intended to counter each other's moves .
 The second assumption is that neither side desires war as the outcome of the crisis . Neither side wants war, but neither does they want war .
 Leaders on each side limit their objectives and restrain their military moves to avoid being mBisperceived by the other side as intending to launch a war .
 Both sides seek to avoid inadvertent escalation of the crisis while deterring escalation by the other side . Both sides are seeking to avoid accidental escalation, but also deterring further escalation .
 When both the conditions are met, the primary danger is of war arising from inadvertent escalation . The primary danger of war is of accidental escalation, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The first corollary to the theory is that tactical-level interactions can become decoupled from the political-military objectives of national leaders .
 The term decoupled is used to mean that vertical command and control links to operational military forces at the scene of a crisis are severed or severed .
 Decoupling occurs to the extent that operational decisions on the employment of military forces differ from the decisions political level decisionmakers would have made to coordinate those military actions with their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis .
 This is an inductive theory arrived at through empirical historical research into crisis interactions . This is the result of historical research on crisis interactions in crisis situations .
 Neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow . Crisis stability exists to the extent that neither side has a reason to strike first strike .
 The crisis security dilemma is that, in a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of the adversary . In a crisis a state can increase security but also increase its negotiating position, the government says .
 The stratified crisis security Gilemma is that, in a crisis, the securicy dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of violence .
 These phenomena-stratified interaction, decoupling of tactical-level interactions, and stratified crisis stability--are strictly symmetrical or can also be asymmetrical . An important issue is ee ten these phenomena .
 The conditions necessary for these phenomena to occur must be present on both sides in a crisis, or can can can the phenomena arise when the conditions are present on only one side . That is the question .
 The focus of the study will be on the United States and the role of United States forces in crisés . This issue will be addressed in the empirical research on the theory .
 The preliminary assessment is that stratified interaction tends to be symmetrical (both sides in a crisis normally experience the conditions for stratification), but that 15 decoupling and stratified crisis stability can be either symmetrical or asymmetrical .
 Another aspect of crisis stability is the danger of misperception under conditions of stratified interaction . This is probably a more likely and dangerous scenario than one in which symmetrical decoupling occurs .
 The concept of the misperception dilemma describes the inadvertent results that can occur when military forces are used for signalling in a crisis . It describes the unintended results that may be seen in military situations .
 When signalling adversaries, the dilemma is between —— on signals of hostility and inadvertent signals of acquiescence . The dilemmas are when signalling adversaries and when signals are ambiguous .
 When “signalling an ally or friend, the misperception dilemma is between . inadvertent signals of encouragement and inadvertent . signals of retrenchment,’s David Cameron says .
 Given stratified interactions, then perceptions of the adversary can also be stratified . Different perceptions are held at different levels of interaction, with different levels being held .
 Misperceptions can arise at one level without other levels necessarily being aware of them, providing a mechanism by which ser eeneied interactions can become decoupied . Misperception provides a mechanism for which interactions can be decouceded .
 The interaction of political and military considerations when military force is employed as a political instrument in crises will be a central focus of the study . A 16-page study of the use of military force in political crises will focus on the interaction between military and political considerations .
 Political-military tensions are inherent in the use of force as a political instrument under conditions of stratified interaction . These tensions can give rise to difficult policy dilemmas in a crisis, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The first is tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations . On the other is the tension between military considerations and diplomatic considerations, on one hand .
 The third is tension between a ceria of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions . The tension is between the political and military readiness of the U.S. military .
 These three tensions between political and military considerations affect the degree of which stratified interactions become decoupled in a crisis, thus having a significant impact on Crisis decisionmaking and crisis stability . The three tensions are between political, military considerations .
 Addressing the immediate causes of war gets at that element of randomness and unpredictability, allowing identification of various sets of specific circumstances in which the probability of war is increased .
 This study will examine a subset of the immediate causes of war, those arising from the use of force as a political instrument in crises . It will examine the use and effectiveness of force in crises as political instruments .
 The type of theory this study seeks to develop is what Alexander L George describes as a “differentiated” theory . George describes it as an explanatory theory cast in the form of contingent generalizations and offering discriminating explanations .
 Contingent generalizations are regularities that occur only under certain specific conditions, such as in certain situations . Contingents are not generalizations that occur under certain conditions, but they are more specific to certain circumstances . Contestent generalities are regularity of generalizations .
 They offer a different typology of situations in which the phenomenon of interest manifests itself . Collectively they offer a differentiated typology, including situations where interest occurs .
 The objective of a differentiated theory is to identify the variety of different causal patterns that ean occur for the phenomenon, and the conditions under which each distinctive causal pattern occurs . A differentiated theory can identify a variety of causal patterns and conditions under each of these patterns .
 The value of a differentiated theory is that it has greater policy relevance than theories cast in the form of probabilistic generalizations . It provides policy-makers a mecns of . Giagnosing the significance of specific situations .
 The purpose of structured comparison of a small number of cases is to reveal the different causal patterns that can occur for the phenomena, and the conditions under which each distinctive causal pattern occurs . The purpose is to compare the different patterns that occur for each case .
 The dependent variable is whether on not inadvertent escalation occurs in an international crisis, says the author of the book, is whether accidental escalation occurs .
 Typaa. 19 or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their orders . Typaa . 19 is expected to be released by the end of the month .
 The specific phenomena to be explained in this study are the interaction of military forces in crises . The impact of such interactions on crisis stability is to be studied .
 Analysis will define discrete patterns of tactical-level crisis interaction, each associated with a particular causal pattern . The analysis will focus on the impact of the crisis in the United States .
 The patterns of tacticallevel interaction are arrived at empirically . The patterns identified in this study probably will not cover the universe of interaction patterns . Additional patterns could well be identified through further empirical research .
 Hese tepies address some of the greatest weaknesses in crisis management literature . The first phase will be an examination of the mechanisms of delegated command, the nature of tactical-level military interactions .
 The purpose of this phase of the research is to clarify 20 existing concepts and, when necessary, present new concepts of crisis military operations before commencing the case studies .
 The purpose of this phase will be to develop contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction . This phase will focus on generalizations of the theory .
 Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory will be answered through structured focused comparison . To develop the contingent generalizations, eight questions will be developed .
 More than one of these factors can occur simultaneously, further increasing the likelihood of an unexpected escalation . The risk of an escalation is that more than one factor can be added to the equation .
 The first is that one or more of the seven seven potential causes of decoupling was present, creating opportunities for decouplings to occur . The other is that the chances of a decoupled person to be able to decouplate is that they are able to do so
 The second, and usually more difficult to establish, finding is that operational decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differ from those made by political-level leaders . The finding is often difficult to determine, but it's important to do so to coordinate actions with political strategy .
 The fifth question addresses the second corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that the security dilemma is stratified in crises . The security dilemmas are stratified when they are in crises, the author says .
 Decisionmakers at political and tactical levels can hold different perceptions of the offense-defense balance, vulnerability to preemption, and the need to strike first . The implication of this is that decisionmakers at the political, tactical levels may hold different .
 The sixth question addresses the third corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that escalation dynamics can be stratified in acrisis . The question is whether the crisis can be solved in a crisis .
 A limitation 24 dmposed on this study by the circumstances of post-World War II history . No crises during the period escalated to a war in which the U.S. was a participant .
 Decoupled, stratified interactions generate stratified escalation dynamics, leading uncontrollably to war . Thus, the research design cannot address what would otherwise be the most interesting question .
 Research will be done to identify conditions which may have inhibited ott deur sea escalation dynamics from occurring . Although this question cannot be addressed directly, research cannot be done directly .
 The 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident did not lead to immediate and sustained U.S. intervention in the war . When tactical-level interactions do begin escalating, what factors inhibit escalation dynamics from being transmitted upward to war .
 The bombings were in retaliation for subsequent attacks on United States forces in the South . Although the United States commenced bombing North Vietnam after the incident, the U.S. bombed North Vietnam in retaliation .
 Significant escalation of the U.S. role in the war, in the form of ground combat troops, did not occur until seven months after the Tonkin Gulf Incident . Ground combat troops were deployed in the Vietnam War in the early 1950s .
 The first source of CCuitton (political reus military considerations) tends to pit military men against their civilian superiors . These tensions are not imply issues of civil-military relations .
 The second yurce of tension can merate disputes between military commanders at the ylitical, strategic, and ewererad levels . The tension can also be seen as a tension between the military and the public .
 The third source tension involves significant conflicts between crisis Llitary objectives and wartime military objectives, as well as political objectives . Crisis missions versus readiness versus readiness for wartime issions .
 All three tensions arise from the quirements of crisis management, the essence of which is Lacing political constraints on military operations . The essence of the crisis management is to deal with political constraints, the author says .
 The purpose of this phase will be to further develop and refine contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction . The next phase will focus on developing and refining the theory .
 The focus will be on how the naval and military chain of command reacted to the attack . Whether or not crisis management problems arose from that reaction .
 To further develop the contingent generalizations, four of the previous eight questions will again be answered in a structured, focused comparison . The comparison will be structured and focused to further clarify the generalizations .
 The four questions address decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified 28 pscalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions .
 The cases to be examined all concern the use of United States naval forces as a political instrument in crises and peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships . The cases will be examined .
 Navy is the service called upon most often to respond to crises . 30 of the 30 branches of the United States armed fowesa:,.vie Navy .
 U.S. leaders and many analysts perceive naval forces as having important advantages in crisis response . Second, American leaders believe naval forces are important advantages are otner types of forces for crisis response.
 Some U.S. Navy officers and civilian analysts feel that the role of naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood . Third, in spite of the frequency of use and perceived advantages of the naval forces, some .
 Some analysts believe ffaval forces have a greater escalatory potential than other forces . Fourth, some analysts believe that ffav forces have greater potential than do other forces.
 Naval forces have long had an important role in the foreign policies of maritime nations . The U.S. Navy has long been involved in foreign policy decisions .
 The United States Navy has often been called on to serve as an instrument of national policy . The U.S. Navy in particular has often served as a major instrument of policy .
 Wartime combat missions are the fundamental raison d'etre of navies . But peacetime political missions are their most common employment .
 The U.S. Navy is the branch of the armed forces most commonly employed as a political instrument . Navy forces are perceived as having several inherent advantages for that role .
 The oceans provide naval forces with wide geographic reach . Only the few nations without sea coasts and beyond the reach of carier aircraft are not readily influenced by sea power .
 Naval forces are readily moved to a tension area, maneuvered to signal intentions and resolve, and withdrawn when U.S. objectives are achieved . Naval forces will be readily moved .
 Endurance, the ability to remain on station in a tension area for a prolonged period of time, is another important attribute of naval forces . Endurance is another attribute of a naval force that can stay on station .
 The endurance of naval forces allows national leaders to send Navy ships to a tension area and then wait and see what develops . The endurance allows leaders of nations to send ships to an area where tension is high .
 Naval forces in a presence role serve primarily as a visible symbol of U.S. power and influence . Their combat strength is a central element in their role .
 The ability of naval forces to project power ashore on short notice with naval gunfire, carrier airpower, and cruise missiles provides national leaders with a wide range of military options for conveying carefully crafted threats .
 These combat capabilities also provide options for seeking military soluticn tc the crisis should it become necessary . Equally important, these combat capabilities provide options to seek a military solution if necessary .
 They often require prepared bases, and may not be welcome on foreign soil . They often need prepared bases .
 Nationalism is a powerful emotion in many countries, particularly former colonies . Even nations desiring U.S. support may be hesitant to incur political strife that a foreign military presence can ignite .
 Land-based forces have a long and heavy logistical tail that makes them a cumbersome political instrument . Land based forces cannot be rapidly deployed other than in small units with low endurance, and once inserted can be difficult to withdraw . Land forces are difficult to rapidly deploy, but they can be a
 Deployment of land-based forces by air, or even use of long-range bombers for show of force, can be precluded by reluctant allies .
 Land-based forces imply a teeth xx degree of permanence than do naval forces . Land based forces can signal a stronger and less flexible of commitment, says John Defterios .
 Changes in the structure and conduct of international politics since the end of World War iI have been the primary factors causing maritime powers to place greater emphasis on the use of naval forces as a political instrument .
 The superiority of naval forces over land-based troops was clearly demonstrated during the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, when Marines were landed with carrier air cover exactly when the President specified .
 Severe logistical problems delayed the deployment of Air Force and Army units to the theater . Severe logistics problems delayed deployment of units .
 U.S. naval officers have been asserting the existence of a “regulated” strategic environment for some time . United States naval officers, in somewhat less analytic terms, had been asserting the existence .
 See Admiral Arleigh A Burke, "The United States Navy's Role in General War and Conflict Short of General War," Naval War .
 Chase's description of Pax Ballistica is essentially the same as the regulated strategic environment described by Osgood and Tucker, but preceded it by a decade . Chase: "Pax Ballistica" is essentially a regulated, regulated environment .
 The 1973 War Powers Act requires the President to consult with Congress when U.S. forces are introduced into hostilities or a situation of imminent involvement in hostilities . Navy lawyer Dennis R Neutze suggests that the 1973 Act makes naval forces preferable .
 Naval forces can be deployed near the scene of a conflict without actually being introduced into hostilities . They do not activate the consultation requirement or the sixty-day limit in the War Powers Act until hostilities are actually initiated .
 Presidents have tended to ignore the War Powers Act when compliance with it would have interfered with their policy objectives . President Obama has argued that the law should not have been passed . The U.S. military is the branch of the armed forces favored by leaders for crisis response .
 The role of naval forces as a political instrument in peacetime received a great deal of attention in the U.S. Navy in the 1970s .
 Despite efforts made to develop concepts and principles of ""naval presence,"" as peacetime naval employment was known, there remains dissatisfaction with our understanding of such political missions . Despite the efforts made by the U.S. military, there is dissatisfaction with such missions .
 There are grounds for questioning how well U.S. leaders understand the implications of employing naval forces for crisis response . Analysts and politicians alike express concern that the use of naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood .
 Several observers have expressed concern over the escalatory dangers associated with the employment of naval forces . Several observers expressed concern .
 Of particular concern is the escalatory pressure that can arise when a U.S. Navy ship is attacked . Some observers are concerned about the risk of escalation in response to an attack .
 There is something very magical about an attack on an American ship on the high seas . The attack on the U.S. ship was the first of its kind in the world .
 An attack on a military base or an Army convoy doesn't stir up that kind of emotion . An attack is not likely to stir up the emotion of the attack on military bases .
 An attack on an American ship on the high seas is bound to set off skyrockets and the ‘Star Spangled Banner’, qnd ‘Hail to the chief’ and everything else .
 Cooper’s remarks have been expanded upon Cooper‘s remarks . George H Quester and Sean M Lynn-Jones have expanded on Cooper's remarks .
 There is a greater risk of nuclear war erupting at sea than ashore, experts say . Another view is that the risk of a nuclear war at sea is greater than ashore .
 The possibility of nuclear war at sea must be regarded as at least as likely as in other theaters, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "Nuclear War at sea" is regarded as as least likely as the occurrence of such a nuclear war .
 There is probably a greater likelihood of accidental or unauthorized launch of sea-based nuclear weapons . The constraints on the authorized release of nuclear weapons are possibly more relaxed than those that pertain to land-based systems .
 As will be discussed in Chapter VII, no U.S. Navy commander in the chain of command thought that the Soviets had conducted the attack . This has not been adequately addressed in studies of naval diplomacy and crisis management .
 The characteristics of naval forces that give them their advantages as a political instrument also generate three serious potential ecb eats for crisis management . The characteristics give them advantages as an effective political instrument .
 Political signals sent by naval forces are particularly prone to being misperceived, inadvertently sending the wrong signals to allies and adversaries . First, the political signals sent to naval forces should not be misperperceived as allies or adversaries .
 The nature of the maritime environment, in which forces of the two sides in a crisis routinely operate at point blank range, exacerbates problems of maintaining control of events . Second, the nature of a crisis in the . maritime environment .
 Third, the nature of the naval warfare environment, which places a premium striking first in tactical engagements, exacerbates problems of crisis stability and escalation control . The nature of striking first is to blame for the problems .
 Two sets of historical cases will be used as sources of empirical data, one set of cases for each phase of the research design . Two historical cases are used to provide empirical data .
 Full-scale case studies will not be conducted . These cases will be used as sources of empirical data for deriving the contingent gcmer's findings .
 The criteria for case selection in the first phase of the research were significant U.S. naval operations were conducted which influenced the outcome of the crisis . There was a possibility of fighting erupting between the United States and the other side .
 Given the large number of crises in which the U.S. navy has played an important role, case selection was particularly difficult for this phase of the study .
 Among the more prominent cases considered and rejected were the 1954 Quemoy-Matsu Crisis, the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, and the 1970 Jordanian Crisis . The 1971 Indo-Pakistani War was also rejected in 1971 .
 The Navy's role in the 1956 Suez Crisis was limited to evacuation of civilians . There was little tactical-level interaction, and there was little concern that the crisis would escalate to war .
 There was little tactical interaction in the 1958 Lebanon Crisis . Little concern that the crisis would escalate to war with the Soviet Union . After the Marines were landed, there was little concern that U.S. would be involved in civil war .
 There was minor tactical-level interaction in the 1970 Jordanian Crisis . The Navy's role was small and there was little concern that the crisis would escalate to war .
 Aithough there was tactical-level interaction and concern among Navy officers over the Soviet naval threat in the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War, there was little concern that the crisis would escalate to war .
 The criteria for case selection were the attack was on a United States naval vessel, and the attack occurred during a crisis or under circumstances that could have provoked a U.S. military response .
 The second criterion excludes limited war situations, such as the Korean War and the Vietnam War . The second criteria is that limited wartime situations are limited situations .
 The four cases that were selected are of interest because they come closest to illustrating the circumstances in which stratified interactions could become decoupled and escalation dynamics occur . The cases were selected to illustrate the circumstances of decoupling and escalation .
 This study will focus on the use of naval forces as a political instrument . The limitations of this approach are recognized, the study says .
 Non-naval activities, particularly Giplomatic efforts, may be as important to the success of naval diplomacy as the actions of the ships at the scene of tensions . Non-military activities are important to naval diplomacy, especially in the region .
 It is usually difficult to assess the effect of Naval Presence alone on decisions which of necessity are made as the outcome of reaction to a broad range of American signals-military, economic, and political--perceived by other nations .
 This study will begin in Chapter II with a review and critique of the literature on crises and crisis management . Chapter II will begin with a critique of literature on crisis management and crises .
 Chapter III defines the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries . Chapter III of the Theory of Stratified interaction .
 Chapter IV examines the mechanisms of indirect control, providing background on the command and Control procedures that influence the stratification of crisis interactions . Chapter IV provides background on command and control procedures . Chapter III examines the mechanism of indirect controls .
 Chapter V discusses tactical-level military interaction, illustrating the range of interactions that can occur in crises . Chapter V also discusses the role of the U.S. military in a crisis .
 Chapter VI explores the use of naval force as a political instrument in crises . It applies the theory of stratified interaction under the particular operational circumstances surrounding the use . of naval forces .
 Chapter VII presents the second research, the four case studies . Chapter VIII presents the third research, and the fourth case studies ships . Chapter VI presents the first research and the last research .
 Chapter IX presents the phase of the empirical on crisis naval operations . Chapter IX present the contingent generalizations on stratified interaction . Chapter VIII presents the . phase of . the empirical On peacetime attacks on navy findings of the case studies .
 Internal and external factors that appear to prevent stratified interactions from decoupling will also be discussed . Internal or external factors also will be discussed in this article .
 Chapter X presents conclusions on the theory and suggests the policy implications of the findings . Chapter X present conclusions and suggests policy implications in Chapter X .
 Current concepts and theories of crises and crisis management have three serious weaknesses . Current concepts of crisis theory have a serious problem with crisis management .
 Political and military interactions that occur between the two sides in a crisis are assessed in the context of an implicit single interaction sequence model of crises . The model is based on an implicit model of the interaction sequence of crises.
 U.S. leaders often exercise close control over military operations in crises . Lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures has produced an erroneous view of the way military forces are controlled in crises, he says . He says .
 Third, and derived from the two previous weaknesses, the concept of crisis stability is inadequately developed . There is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war. Third and fourth, and there is a lack of understanding of these processes .
 This chapter will review and critique the literature on crises and crisis management . Develops in detail three major weaknesses in current concepts and theories .
 The first section will review basic concepts on international 46 47 crises . The second section will present the perspective on crises that will be used in this study . The third section will provide an overview of the crises .
 The second section will critique the concept of crisis interaction . This will explain the weaknesses in the single interaction sequence model that implicitly underlies existing crisis theories . The third section will discuss the weaknesses of the model .
 The third section will review basic concepts of crisis management, focusing on the measures required for national leaders to maintain control of events in crises . The final section of the book will review the measures needed to keep national leaders in control .
 The fourth section will review and critique the concept of crisis stability . It will present a definition that more accurately reflects the mature of crisis interaction . This will explain the weaknesses in current conceptions of crises stability .
 The final section will review @ serious problem in crisis management--misperception of i tantions and resolve--and present concepts that more accurately describe the problems decisionmakers face in trying to avoid misperceptions when using force in crises .
 Through journalistic and political license the term ""crisis"" has been stretched to describe a wide range of phenomena . The term "crisis" has been used to refer to a variety of phenomena in the world .
 Any problem for which national leaders do not have a ready solution can be labeled a crisis, experts say . Any problem that is not solved can be called a crisis by pundits or politicians .
 The broad definition of crisis used in the vernacular lacks sufficient precision for this study because it covers far too wide a range of political situations . This study is based on the broad definition that covers too many political situations to be considered a crisis .
 A crisis is a situation with three necessary and sufficient conditions, deriving from a change in its external or internal environment, according to International Crisis Behavior Project head Michael Brecher . The definition of a crisis is that: a crisis has three necessary or sufficient conditions to bring it to a crisis
 The essential features of acute international crises are a confrontation, short of war, between two sovereign states, and a perception by national leaders of a significantly increased danger of war breaking out, or greatly increased uncertainty .
 Shortness of duration is has been used by some observers to distinguish an acute crisis from other crises . Some observers say it can be used to distinguish a crisis's duration from a crisis .
 Syoung, P15; Williams, 25. 50 national interests of the parties involved . 50 national interest of the players involved .
 An acute crisis can arise during a prolonged crisis if either side takes an action seriously violating the tacit norms of behavior being observed . Additionally, an acute crisis may also arise if both sides violate tacit norms .
 The phenomena of interest in this study are most prominent in short-duration acute crises . They also occur during the periods of acute crisis that can arise during a prolonged crisis .
 While prolonged crises are not excluded from this study, when they are addressed attention will be focused on the periods of acute emiigas within then .
 A feature of some crises, which can contribute to crises being of short duration, is that national leaders perceive themselves as acting under time constraints . Action must be taken immediately to avert unacceptable losses to vital national interests, writes CNN.com .
 The effect of a perception of time constraints is to raise the level of stress experienced by national leaders . This may reduce the effectivenesss of their analysis and decisionmaking, according to experts .
 Perception of time constraints is a variable rather than a parameter in crises, and can vary widely in intensity . Perception of a crisis can be a variable, rather than an intensity .
 In a prolonged crisis all the features of the crisis are present except the perception cof time constraints . Time constraints are the only thing that matters is the perception of time .
 Perception of time constraints tends to be strong in the type of crisis of interest to this study, but is not a necessary condition for an international crisis to exist . Time constraints are a factor in time constraints, but are not necessary conditions for a crisis .
 National interests are important enough to warrant a crisis, such as security of the nation and its allies, spheres of influence and international principles such as freedom of the seas or rights of neutrals .
 The nation's reputation as a world power and its bargaining reputation have sometimes been included as FHolsti, 9; Hermann, 13; Williams, 25; Lebow, Between Peace and War, 10 . Such interests normally become involved when a threat to one of the more concrete
 Each side, in planning its own course of action, must take into account the objectives and 12 anticipated objectives of the other side . Thus each side must also consider the objectives of each other and the outcome of each side .
 In crisis 100nis definition of acute crisis omits surprise as a characteristic, which is included by Holsti, 10, and Hermann, 13 . The definition of an acute crisis in the world is not considered a characteristic .
 A crisis need not surprise national leaders by its occurrence, and could build up gradually from a prolonged dispute, so long as it arises in such a way as to give national leaders the perception that it threatens serious damage to important national interests .
 The outcome still depends of the decision by the other side whether to resist or to sacrifice its interests in order to avoid war . The outcome of the conflict still depends on the decision to resist .
 $3 bargaining may continue to achieve a final resolution of the dispute . The two sides have common or complementary dnterests, as well as conflicting interests .
 To emphasize bargaining is not to deny that crises are an intense form of strategic competition over interests perceived as being vital by national leaders on the two sides .
 The focus on bargaining provides a useful means for conceptualizing how strategic competition is conducted in crises, writes David Frum . Frum argues that bargaining is a useful way to conceptualize strategic competition in crises .
 Bargaining of some sort is, of course, present across the entire spectrum of international intercourse, from peacetime negotiations to full-scale war . Bargaining is a part of the world's entire spectrum, from routine peacetime talks to war .
 International crises stand apart from both peacetime Giplomatic disputes and wartime conflict due to their unique political-military nature . International crises are very different from peacetime disputes and war .
 In crisis bargaining, varying combinations and sequences of persuasion, coercion and/or accommodation are applied in an effort at resolving the conflict on favorable terms . In crises bargaining, different combinations and combinations of persuasion and coercion are applied .
 In crises both the political and military dimensions are prominent . The Conventions of Crisis , 50. 54 threat, is rarely ever totally excluded in peacetime Giplomacy .
 "In an acute crisis the confrontation has intensified to the point that coercion begins to dominate the relationship" "The grounds for accommodation begin to shrink toward little more than a mutual desire to avoid war," the author says .
 The prominence of coercion has led some observers to classify crises as an intermediate status of relations between peace and war . Crisis combines elements of both peacetime accommodation and wartime coercion .
 Bargaining interactions include formal negotiations, official diplomatic communications, informal communications via intermediaries or the media, and actions taken to convey political signals . Bargaining conversations include informal communications, formal negotiations and informal communications .
 Focusing on interaction highlights the interdependence between the two Sides . Focusing focuses on interaction highlight the importance of interaction between the Sides of the two .
 It will be useful to review the typologies of crises that have been proposed in the crisis literature . The crisis literature has been used to suggest a variety of types of crises .
 Coral Bell distinguishes between adversary crises, those between nations regarding themselves as adversaries, and intramural crises . Bell: Intramural crisis are those among allies or members of a regional organization .
 A more useful approach is to distinguish among different motives for provoking a crisis, says Simon Tisdall . A crisis can be triggered by a single motive, he says .
 Snyder and Diesing'’s arguments for treating a war scare as a separate category of crisis are not persuasive . Snyder's argument is not persuasive.
 War scare crises are better viewed as a form of coercive bargaining crisis in which the security dilemma has a major impact on crisis stability . The security dilemma is a major factor in crisis stability, writes Peter Bergen .
 Lebow's spinoff crisis also will not be addressed as separate category because it does not address the motives for the crisis so much as the circumstances in which it arose . Lebow is not a separate category as it doesn't address the circumstances of the crisis .
 All spinoff crises fall into either coercive bargaining or pretext to attack categories . All spinoffs fall into the coercive or pretext-to-attack categories . This is the case of the coercive bargaining and pretexts to attack .
 Accidental crises have not been adequately addressed in the crisis literature, says Lebow . Lebow says Snyder and Diesing excluded them from the literature but included them in the literature .
 The role of military accidents in provoking or exacerbating crises has received attention, but as yet there are not adequate concepts for dealing with the effects of accidents . As yet, as yet, there have not been adequate concepts to deal with the effect of accidents, such as military accidents .
 Inadvertent military incidents will be viewed as provoking or exacerbating one of the other two major categories of Crises--coercive bargaining or pretext to attack -- depending on how the two sides respond to the incident .
 Of these two categories, the coercive bargaining or brinkmanship crisis is the type of interest in this study . The study will focus on coercive bargaining and brinkmanship crises .
 A direct crisis is one in which the U.S. is in direct confrontation with 1% of the population . Analysts can't distinguish between “pretext to attack” and “coercive bargaining” crises .
 That the outcome of a crisis was war is insufficient to establish that crisis as having been a pretext . It must also be shown that the nation which precipitated the crisis desired war to be the outcome regardless of the response .
 The motives of the nation precipitating the crisis can also change during the crisis, experts say . The motive behind the crisis may also change depending on the nation's motives .
 A crisis provoked for coercion could result in war if the target nation is unwilling to accept the initiator'’s demands . The initiator then decides to use the crisis as grounds for war . Conmverseiy, a crisis provoked by coercion could end in war .
 While its is useful to distinguish among crises on the basis of motives, the possibility of dual motives and changes in motives must be recognized . Thus, while its useful to identify crises on basis of motive, it is also necessary to recognize dual motives in crises .
 The seizure of the USS Pueblo in 1968 generated a direct crisis between the U.S. and North Korea . North Korea seized the ship in 1968 . The seizure was the first of its kind in North Korea to take place in the country .
 The term direct Pinecaen de crisis will be used to describe a direct crisis in which the Soviet Union is the daiorsere . The term will also be used in reference to a crisis in the Soviet Russia .
 An indirect crisis is one in which the United States is involved because it is supporting a friend or ally who is a direct participant . The U.S. is involved in an indirect crisis because it's not directly involved in the crisis . The United States has been involved in indirect crises since
 The 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis was an indirect crisis between the United States, supporting allies on Taiwan, and China . The U.S. and its allies in Taiwan were involved in the crisis .
 The term indirect superpower crisis will be used to describe an indirect crisis in which the U.S. and the Soviet Union are brought into confrontation by a conflict between their respective allies or clients . The term "indirect superpower crisis" is used to refer to a crisis involving the United States
 The 1967 and 1973 Middle East Wars generated indirect superpower crises . The 1967, 1973 and 1973 Mideast Wars generated direct superpower crises in the region .
 Yaacov Bar-Simon-Tov described as a “limited local war’s’ “indirect superpower crisis"" described as an ‘indirect superpowers crisis'
 A crisis is a bargaining relationship between the two sides, and, as such, consists of a series of interactions between them . A crisis involves a crisis of bargaining between two sides . Crisis is a negotiating relationship between two parties, and consists of interaction between them.
 Additional features of acute international crises are that national leaders perceive important national interests to be at stake in the conflict . They tend to perceive themselves as acting under severe time constraints .
 This study will be limited to adversary crises, excluding intra-alliance crises . The study will focus on adversary crises against each other .
 Of the two major categories of crises--coercive bargaining and pretext to attack -- the coercive bargaining crisis is the type that is of interest in this study . The coercive bargaining crises are the type of crises that are of interest .
 Previous studies of international crises have implicitly viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence . Interaction in Crises can be seen as a sequence of interaction sequences .
 This perspective on crisis interaction will be referred to as the single interaction sequence model . This perspective will be known as 'single interaction sequence models'
 The single interaction sequence model does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction . The model was used to model the complex nature of the crisis crisis in the world .
 What actually occurs in a crisis is multiple interaction a that only partially influence each other, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Ina crisis, national political leaders on the two sides are interacting through diplomatic communications and political signalling . Military forces in the field are interacting as they respond to orders from higher authorities and the actions of adversary forces .
 "Multiple interaction sequences" arise when national leaders do not make all operational decisions themselves, but must delegate significant decisionmaking authority to 21 young, 15; Snyder and Diesing, 6. 62 subordinates . Such multiple interaction sequences, evolving simultaneously and semi-independently, arise when
 The single interaction sequence model views these multiple interaction sequences as a single flow of events . The model is based on the model of multiple interaction events .
 The weakness of the single interaction sequence model model ids that in subtle ways it leads towards a unitary actor perspective of national behavior . The weakness  of the model is that it leads to unitary actors perspective .
 Unitary actor model assumes that all actions taken by a nation are at least authorized, ir not specifically ordered, by national leaders . In its pure form, the model assumes all actions by nations are authorized by their leaders .
 Unitary actor model is typically used in strategic analyses of national interests, objectives, and strategies that lead to crises . Unitary actors are used in analyses of the national interests and objectives of national security .
 Countries are treated as entities having ceaeiiaiaa ae. objectives, and strategies, and . strategies . Countries are . treated as . entities having . ceaiiiaaa aa. objectives and strategies .
 The role of organizations and individuals in the formulation and execution of policy are essentially ignored . The role is essentially ignored by the U.S. government .
 Accidents and the possibility of national leaders losing control of the momemtum of military actions receive scant attention . Accidents happen in the U.S. and abroad .
 The single interaction sequence model is compatible with the implicit, even indavertent, assumption that national leaders have authorized or are in direct control of the actions taken by their forces in a crisis . The model is based on the assumption that leaders in crisis control their forces .
 The weaknesses in the unitary actor model are well recognized, which has lead to widespread use of the bureaucratic politics and organizational process models for analysis of international crises .
 Policy perspectives held by participants in decisionmaking are shaped by the organizations they represent . Policy recommendations made by participants will be influenced by the eee wee een of their organizations, the model says .
 Bureaucratic politics and organizational process models provide a more accurate description of decisionmaking than the unitary actor model . They are not without their faults, but they are more accurate .
 The bureaucratic politics model tends to treat all policy recommendations made to the President and his closest advisors as having been motivated primarily by parochial bureaucratic self-interest .
 There is thus an inherent bias toward interpreting evidence of policy disagreements as evidence of bureaucratic oe liiediee s+"" The model does not 22¢rahan Tt. It does not distinguish between the model and the model of government .
 According to this theory, a principle cause for the outbreak of war was that the armed forces of the European powers had a bias for offensive military doctrines . This is apparent in the “cult of the offensive” theory of the origins of World War I . The theory is that the
 Their bias for the offensive is portrayed as being the result of parochial organizational interests . The bias is said to be based on autonomy from civilian control, larger budgets and prestige .
 Some of the European powers needed offensive strategies to fulfill alliance commitments . Others had definite policies of expansion and aggrandizement .
 Bureaucratic politics model resulted in ignoring factors other than parochial organizational interests being ignored and over-emphasis of the role of such interests in shaping national strategies .
 Jack S Levy criticizes the theory for its emphasis on bureaucratic routines as the causal link between crises and war . Levy also criticizes for the theory's emphasis of bureaucratic routines .
 Levy argues that while bureaucratic factors may well lead to an offensive bias, that bias does not inevitably cause crises to escalate to war . He says additional, non-bureacratic conditions must be present for war to erupt .
 It implicitly accepts the simple public administration distinction between policymaking and policy implementation . The public administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Organizational routines only serve only to explain how presidential orders are corrupted in the process of implementation .
 This, in turn, leads to the implicit assumption that all actions taken by a nation during acrisis either are ordered by national leaders in pursuit of their policy objectives, or should not have occurred and therefore represent a loss of control over events . This leads to an implicit assumption of all actions
 This raises the second weakness in the crisis management literature, which is based on an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises . The second weakness is that the literature has a view of how military forces should be controlled in crisis .
 This ee resulted from the frequently observed phenomenon of U.S. leaders exercising close control over military operations in crises, combined with a lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures . The ee result from the phenomenon of United States leaders exercising . close control .
 Crisis management literature typically describes the control of crisis military operations as being highly centralized, with top-level civilian authorities exercising direct control . In contrast to routine peacetime operations, which are described as highly decentralized and having little involvement of ' civilian political authorities'
 This description fails to grasp the complexity of military command and control, says the author of the book .
 Military commanders are delegated significant authority to make operational decisions on the employment of their forces . Even in crises, military commanders have significant authority on the use of force decisions .
 Military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking permission from higher authorities . Under certain circumstances, military commanders can do so without needing permission .
 The scope of their authority is spelled out in a variety of documents, which collectively will be referred to as mechanisms of delegated command . They will be known by the end of the year as the National Guard .
 Returning to the organizational process model, its two serious flaws can now be seen . The organization process model has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Many government organizations, the armed forces in particular, are delegated siginificant authority to make decisions . The detailed decisions on how to carry out policies are made by government organizations . The normal state of affairs is for there to be innumerable military actions taking place that the President is not directly controlling
 The organization model fails to account for the fact that decisionmakers in many goverment organizations, particularly military commanders, often face mic aeearicee that had not been anticipated by national leaders when deciding upon a course of action . Second, the organizational process model .
 Lower-level decisionmakers can be confronted with a requirement to make what is essentially a policy decision without specific guidance on how to make it or sufficient time to seek further guidance from higher authority .
 His model recognizes only one legitimate policymaker, the President, and treats all other government actors as advisors or administrators without autonomous policymaking authority . The model is based on the substantial legitimate decisionmaking authority of military commanders .
 SocE beta many of these weaknesses in crisis theory . Replacement of single interaction sequence model of crises in favor of a model recognizing the existence of multiple interaction sequences SocE Beta .
 Each interaction sequence consists of series of actions and reactions between specific groups of decisionmakers on each side . The interaction sequence is a series of interactions between groups of people involved in each other .
 Limited only by the number of decisionmakers capable of affecting the crisis, this results in a model of excessive complexity . Although any number of interaction sequences could be postulated, the model is too complex to be considered .
 A relatively simple model of three interaction sequences will be used . Instead of a relatively complex model of interaction sequences, we will use a simple model .
 Each of the three interaction sequences will be associated with a specific level in the ewan of command, leading to a depiction of crisis interaction as being stratified into three levels .
 The stratified interaction model can be applied to any organization that is sufficiently large and comples that top-level decisionmakers are incapable of exercising continuous direct control of its myriad interactions with the environment . The model is described in detail in Chapter rr. °°° 30 .
 The model would also apply to large corporations and universities, such as universities .
 When constant, direct, positive control of operational forces is not being exercised, different sets of decisionMakers are delegated authority to make specified operational decisions . Different sets of decisions can be made by the same set of decision-makers . The U.S. military says it is committed to
 Their decisionmaking authority is bounded by the existing conditions of delegated command, which could range from tightly controlled to being essentially autonomous . They could range between tightly controlled or autonomous .
 Instead of relying on the vast organizations which are needed to manage the complex integration process, they rely on vast organizations . The integration process is complex and complex .
 He also demonstrates that similar conditions pervade military command and intelligence systems--conventional as well as nuclear .
 The fact that different sets of decisionmakers are responsible for making different operational decisions does not in itself lead to stratified interaction, says the author of the book .
 Hypothetically, if all of those decisionmakers possessed identical beliefs, objectives, and perceptions, the operational decisions they make would be the same ones that national leaders would make if exercising positive control of the country .
 Organization Theory explains why this hypothetical situation will not necessarily be the case . Organization theory explains why Organization Theory will not be applied to the hypothetical situation .
 Different organizations and sub-organizations possess distinct belief systems, referred to as an “organzational essences” or “bureaucratic ideologies” in organization theory, which shape the perceptions of their members . Different organizations are thought to have distinct beliefs that shape
 In military organizations, organizational belief systems become formalized in the strategic and tactical doctrines formulated for employment of their forces . The military's belief systems are formalized into the strategic, tactical doctrines .
 Decisionmaking in organizations is bounded by cognitive limits on rationality . Decision making in organizations can be made by people who have a range of cognitive limits . Decisionmaking is bounded in organizations by the cognitive limits of rationality . It can also be made to cope with ambiguity and dealing with value complexity .
 A principle s2onis is the assumption that is made in the ""unitary actor"" model of national behavior . It is an assumption that the model is based on the model of a nation's behavior .
 There are ample theoretical grounds for expecting that military commanders will make operational decisions different from those that national leaders would have made if they had been in a position to make them . Theoretically, there are grounds to expect that military .
 Threatening Soviet military action or alert can be detected almost immediately by American warning and intelligence systems and conveyed to force commanders . This mutual coupling occurs because of a threatening Soviet action . U.S. warning systems can detect almost immediately if a threat is imminent .
 The detected action may not have a clear meaning, but because of its possible consequences protective measures must be taken against it . It may not be clear what action is taking, but it may have a negative effect .
 The action-reaction process does not necessarily stop after two moves, however, however . The action is not necessarily the same thing, however.
 It can proceed to many moves and can, and often does, extend from sea-based forces to air and land-based . The effect of tight coupling can be the same as tight coupling in the air or land .
 U.S. and Soviet actions prompt increasingly higher alert levels on both sides . This action-reaction process can produce what Bracken calle “a mutually reinforcing alert,” in which the two countries respond to each other's actions .
 Two modifications to Bracken's concept are needed to derive the stratified interaction model . The model is based on a model of the interaction between a person and a group of people .
 Bracken makes this clear in his description of the command and control system, but includes national leaders in the action-reaction loop when describing the process .
 The process can proceed without national leaders specifically having to order alerting actions as military commanders act in compliance with their standing orders .
 The second modification to Bracken's model is that U.S. conventional forces are vertically integrated with warning and intelligence systems, and tightly coupled with Soviet conventional forces, in a manner similar to nuclear forces .
 Maritime Strategy is founded on early and rapid surging of naval forces to key forward operating areas . It is also true for the U.S. Navy .
 An action by either side to increase the readiness of major conventional force baieends is readily detected by the command on the other side responsible for dealing with that threat . The other side takes actions to compensate for the changed peratente situation .
 As a crisis situation emerges the tightness of coupling between the conventional forces of the two sides actually increases . Surveillance efforts are stepped up and focused on those adversary forces most likely to play an immediate role in the crisis .
 In some military environments, particularly in naval warfare, U.S. and Soviet forces are tightly coupled down to the tactical level . The United States and the Soviet Union are closely linked to each other in military environments .
 A surprise attack by either side could be tactically decisive in an individual engagement . Operational forces on both sides keep their adversary under close and constant surveillance .
 An action by either side's tactical forces to increase their readiness or improve their tactical situation is readily detected by the other side . The other side then take actions to compensate for the changed tactical situation .
 The intensity of surveillance increases as the level of tensions rise in a crisis . This is the normal state of affairs in peacetime, and the intensity increases as tensions rise .
 Significant information on the status of the other side's forces flows directly to military commanders at these levels from organic sensors under their control and dual reporting from intelligence sources outside their Saewariés .
 Military commanders are obligated to immediately report such actions to their superiors, thus allowing their orders to be countermanded, if necessary . Military commanders must immediately report the actions .
 Control of U.S. operational forces is delegated widely to commanders with their own sources of intelligence on Soviet forces . The key point is that within 37 See Chapter IV for a detailed discussion of military command and control .
 In summary, interaction between the two sides in crises has been viewed in terms of an implicit single interaction sequence model . This model does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction .
 The weakness of the single interaction sequence model is that in subtle ways it leads toward an implicit assumption that national leaders are in control of the actions taken by their nation in a crisis . The weakness is that it leads to an assumption that the actions of the nation in crisis are taken by the
 The bureaucratic politics and organizational process models do not entirely correct this weakness and have serious problems of their own . The problem is not solved by bureaucratic politics or process models, it says .
 The key to correcting these weaknesses is a more accurate understanding of the complexity of the military command and control system . Military commanders are delegated significant decisionmaking authority, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A model containing three interaction sequences will be used . Each sequence is associated with a specific level in the chain of command . The model is based on a model of interaction sequences with three levels .
 Crisis interaction is stratified when the military establishment of a country is sufficiently large and complex that national leaders are incapable of exercising direct control over all operational units that could have an impact on a crisis . Crisis interaction stratified in a country with a large military establishment such as a large number of
 Paul Bracken’s concept of ""tightly coupled forces" is modified by the observation that tight coupling is stratified, occurring separately at the 78 strategic and tactical levels . Then explains how interaction sequences can arise .
 Williams describes crisis management as an attempt to balance attainment of national goals in the bilateral competition against efforts to avoid the shared danger of war . Williams: "Crisis management is a way of balancing national goals and national interests"
 Decisionmakers commonly perceive that a crisis can develop a self-sustaining force or impetus of its own, degrading their ability to control events . Decisionmakers often perceive that crises can develop self-staining forces or impetus .
 S. H. Snyder, "Crisis Bargaining," 240.5 years ago . Snyder: Thus, maintaining sO it1iams, 29.5 .
 Schelling's description of brinkmanship as ""manipulating the shared risk of war” and his concept of ""the threat that leaves something to chance"" do not convey an accurate image of how national leaders manage crises . Snyder has observed that, while delegating control of military operations
 A wide range of actions can be taken with military forces during a crisis in pursuit of military and political objectives . Military forces can be used in a crisis to achieve military or political objectives, say experts .
 Political signalling is a primary function of military forces in crises, competing with or even overshadowing their nominal military missions . As Bell suggests, political signalling is an important military function .
 Almost all military actions undertaken in a crisis have a dual political-military nature . Although attempts have been made to draw distinctions between military and political purposes .
 Actions taken for military purposes, such as increasing the readiness or reducing the vulnerability of military forces, can have political impact if perceived as a signal of hostile intent . Actions taken to increase readiness or reduce the vulnerability can be perceived as signals of intent .
 Actions taken for political purposes, such as withdrawing forces from a contested area to signal limited objectives, can have military impact . Conversely, withdrawing forces in contested areas can have a military impact by shifting the local balance of forces .
 In a crisis, political missions such as coercion and signalling intentions are assigned to forces that must also be ready for limited combat operations and the possibility of sudden escalation to full-scale war .
 Studies of crisis management have identified stringent requirements for the success of crisis managers . Studies have identified requirements for a crisis management success .
 Political authorities must control military operations, including details of deployments and low-level actions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says political authorities must also control the timing and details of military operations .
 The tempo of military operations may have to be deliberately slowed, creating pauses for the exchange of diplomatic signals, assessment, and aeGiic ltogpiektier . Second, the tempo of operations may also be deliberately slowing .
 Military actions have to be coordinated with diplomatic actions in an integrated strategy for resolving the crisis acceptably without war . Third, military actions must be coordinated to resolve the crisis without war, experts say .
 Fourth, scivbae ean trestle taken for signalling purposes must send clear and appropriate signals consistent with diplomatic objectives .
 Five military options should be avoided that give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare, possibly prompting him to pre-empt . Military options should not be given the impression that an impending war is imminent, military officials say .
 Sixth, military and diplomatic options 495011, 49. 84 should be chosen that signal a desire to negotiate a solution to the crisis rather than to seek a military solution .
 Seventh, military options and diplomatic proposals should leave the adversary a way out of the crisis compatible with his fundamental interests . Military options and diplomacy should leave a way for the adversary to find a solution .
 This precludes military actions which the other side would perceive as leaving it no way out of the crisis other than war . The other sides would perceive this as leaving them no way to escape the crisis .
 This technique places limits on military options, calling for carefully limited use of force as opposed to drastic, precipitous military actions . This technique is called "strategic limited" and "preventative military actions"
 Second, orchestrating actions, particularly military actions, with declarations of intent so as to use multiple channels of communication to convey the same message . Third, orchestrate actions, including military action, with declaration of intent .
 This also affects the — of military forces, requiring that their actions be coordinated with diplomatic moves for signaling purposes . Military forces are required to coordinate their actions with diplomatic signals .
 Oceorge: Third, making efforts to slow the pace of crisis . Third, trying to make efforts to speed up crisis, he says .
 This requires dampening the tempo of military operations, which typically emphasize speed of execution for tactical success . The tempo of operations in the U.S. should be dampened, military officials say .
 Fourth, keeping responsible policy makers in control of the details of implementation as well as broad strategic decisions . Fourth, keep responsible policy making in control .
 This raises the civil-military relations issue of who is to control execution of military operations in the field . Whether political or military considerations should govern operational decisions should govern military decisions, he says .
 Both emphasize close control of military operations by national leaders . Tailoring military options to support crisis bargaining and avoid escalation of the crisis .
 A significant weakness in crisis management literature is that, with few notable exceptions, there has been scant recognition that tensions can arise in attempting to reconcile military considerations with crisis management requirements .
 The nature of the tensions that can arise between political and military considerations in a crisis have been >2oucted in Bell, 2.2.3ceorge .
 The events of October 1962 created considerable tension between military men seeking to protect those under their command, in the event of an outbreak of war .
 Had men in fact died as a result, had ships sunk or airplanes fallen by the score, the crisis in civil-military relations would have taken a more dramatic turn . I suspect civilian leaders would have accommpdated commanders far more than they actually did .
 Crisis management literature has not recognized that important, legitimate military considerations arise when military forces are employed as a political instrument in crises . Tensions can arise in attempting to reconcile military requirements with crisis management requirements, author says .
 Crisis management did not replace military strategy . Crisis management created complex challenges for effective formulation and execution of military strategy on behalf of political-diplomatic objectives. Crisis management creates complex challenges .
 Crisis management is the exercise of detailed control of diplomatic and military activities by national leaders . It aims to avoid war while attempting to advance their state's interests or protect those interests .
 The essence of crisis management is to find the optimum balance between SS e1iot A Cohen, 6. gs efforts to advance or protect national interests, and efforts to avoid war, Cohen says .
 Political signalling is a primary function of military forces in crises . Political signalling has been a military function in the past . Military signalling is an important military function .
 The U.S. should impose limits on the military means employed which are commensurate with the limited ends being sought . Close top-level control of military measures, and carefully tailoring military options to support crisis bargaining and avoid escalation .
 A serious weakness of the crisis management literature is that it has not adequately addressed the tensions that can arise between crisis management requirements and military considerations . Crisis management literature has failed to adequately address the tensions between the military and crisis management .
 The third weakness in crisis management literature is that the concept of crisis stability is poorly developed . There is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war . Crisis stability is a key problem for crisis managers .
 Crisis stability is viewed as a function of weapons technology and military doctrine . Military doctrine, particularly doctrines emphasizing the superiority of the offensive, is seen as a factor in crisis stability . Crisis stability depends on weapons technology, and doctrine .
 Lacking is an appreciation of the operational 89 factors that affect crisis stubility once a decision is made to employ military forces in a crisis . Lacking a . appreciation of . the operational factors that make a decision to employ . military forces is a failure to appreciate the operational . factors that
 The escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war are also being developed . Weor1¥ developed. Weor
 There is growing concern over inadvertent or accidental war, but these concepts are not well defined . There is a very low probability that any of the scenarios would occur .
 The definition of crisis stability generally accepted in crisis management literature is that neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow, launching a preemptive attack on the other side . Crisis stability exists when neither side is incentivized to strike first strike, experts say .
 The concept of crisis stability has generally been used to assess the stability implications of particular weapons technologies and force postures . Crisis stability has been assessed in the past by crisis experts .
 Weapons that enhance crisis stability are survivable, providing an assured retaliatory capability, and do not provide first strike capabilities for use against the other side . Weapons that add stability to crisis stability can be survivable and provide a first strike capability .
 Weapons that degrade crisis stability are vulnerable to preemption, experts say . They could present leaders with a “use them or lose them” dilemma in a crisis, they say . Weapons that destabilize crisis stability can be used in the future, they argue .
 The most destabilizing weapons 90 are those which are valuable for launching a first strike, such as by providing a rapid, precise hard-target kill capability--but which are themselves vulnerable to preemption . The weapons 90 include those which provide a rapid and precise kill capability .
 What is needed is a broader definition encompassing the full range of factors which could cause efforts at crisis management and escalation control to fail, resulting in war .
 The perceived impact of weapons technology on the nature of warfare exacerbates the security dilemma in crises . It is 93 years old, the author says .
 When the prevailing weapons technologies in a particular area of warfare are perceived as giving an inordinate advantage to offensive action or being the first to strike, military commanders will have a strong incentive to preempt .
 The perceived impact of weapons technology on the offense-defense balance is not the only factor exacerbating the security dilemma . Perceptions of military strategy and doctrine are equally important, say experts .
 The difficulty of distinguishing offensive from defensive weapons tends to make strategy and doctrine more important than technology . In fact, the difficulty is to distinguish offensive weapons from defensive ones .
 Most weapons not emplaced in fixed fortifications can be used with nearly equal effectiveness for offense or defense . Most weapons, including virtually all conventional weapons, can't be used in fixed Fortifications .
 Arms and Influence, 234. 94, is the military strategy and doctrine prescribing how those weapons will be used in war . It is based on the doctrine of the U.S. armed forces .
 Decisionmakers assess the threat posed by a potential enemy's forces and make contingency plans . Decisionmakers attempt to estimate the adversary's iftantions .
 The security dilemma can arise from perceptions held by each side that the other side has adopted an offensive military strategy or a military doctrine emphasizing preemption or surprise attack . Thus, the security dilemmas can arise when each side is concerned about the other's military strategy .
 In circumstances of mutual perceptions of offensive strategies, actions taken by each side to increase its security, even when motivated by defensive intentions, will be perceived by the other side as decreasing security .
 Each side has an incentive to strike first so as to be able to effectively execute its own strategy and preempt the enemy from executing his .
 The ""cult of the offensive” is subordinated to his emphasis on technology . The 'cult' of the . offensive’s security dilemma is subordinate to the . security dilemma, but subordinated . to the emphasis on . technology .
 In his study of threat perception, Dean G Pruitt identifies military actions as an important source of evidence used to infer the intentions of an adveraary . The third source of the security dilemma is the 64 operations being conducted by military forces .
 Crisis military operations help define whether the forces being employed have an offensive or defensive purpose . But crisis military operations also help to define if the forces are employed have a defensive or offensive purpose .
 Naval vessels, for example, may appear defensive when kept close to their homeports, far from the scene of a crisis, but appear offensive to an adversary when deployed off his coast .
 School of thought contends that this was the strategic environment in 1914, when a relatively minor incident rapidly escalated to war. This can occur regardless of the school of thought . This can happen regardless of whether the situation in 1914 was strategic .
 Forward deployed naval vessels can appear to have offensive purposes even when the national strategy they support is essentially defensive or deterrent . Similarly, forward deployed naval ships can be seen as having offensive purposes .
 Military operations reinforce perceptions of strategy and doctrine . Military operations can also confirm estimates or assumptions that an saveceecy holds an offensive strategy .
 In a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of the adversary, at least in his perception . In the crisis, the actions of a state take to increase security and increase its . position decrease security of an adversary,
 This is a particular case of the security dilemma as defined by Jervis. This is one of many cases of security dilemmas . This is an example of a security dilemma .
 The primary difference is that in a crisis the most important sources of the dilemma are the military strategies and doctrines of the two sides, the author says . In a crisis, the main source of the problem is the military strategy and doctrines, he says .
 Under normal peacetime conditions, the “many actions"" refers to are primarily force posture and weapons procurement decisions, in which the technological characteristics of the forces play an important role in determining the offefense balance .
 In a crisis, decisionmakers focus on the adversary's immediate intentions and the actions he is taking with his military forces . These factors are predominant in determining the offense-defense balance .
 The implication is that the security dilemma can be much more gevere in a crisis, when military forces are being used for coercive and deterrent threats . Military forces can be used to threaten and deter the threat of terrorism, author says .
 A second aspect of crisis stability that is not well developed in the existing literature is escalation from crisis to war . A second part of the crisis stability is the threat of war, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Concepts that have been used to address this topic include the escalation spiral and accidental or inadvertent paths to war . Concepts have also been used in this article to address the issue .
 Some of these concepts have not been well integrated with other crisis and crisis management concepts . Although some of these are useful, some are not well integrated into other crisis concepts .
 Even the point at which a confrontation shifts from being a crisis to being a war is unclear in the literature, it's unclear how it begins .
 We lack a separate term to describe the transitional state of conflict that exists during the period after violence erupts but before a limited war exists . The transitional period is known as the transitional period of conflict .
 Some analyses implicitly limit crises to political disputes in which use of military force is only threatened, not actually carried out . Some analyses of crises implicitly limit use of force to be limited to political crises .
 Other analyses encompass the use of force, such as to achieve a military fait accompli in a crisis . Other analyses of force include using force in order to achieve an objective objective .
 For the purposes of this study the definition of crisis will include limited use of force as well as the threat of force . Both approaches have merit, but both have merit .
 The distinction between crisis and limited war will be based on the perceptions and strategies held by national leaders on the two sides, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the distinction will be made based on national leaders' perceptions .
 If they perceive themselves as involved in a crisis or as attempting to prevent a conflict from erupting in war, then the conflict is a crisis . Even if fighting has broken out, it's a crisis even if it's not a war, the crisis is a problem .
 If they perceive themselves as launching or fighting a limited war, then the conflict has transitioned to a state of war, no matter how limited . If they think they are fighting a war, they will be launching or launching a war . If that happens, the conflict will transition to a war
 The point at which a confrontation shifts from being a crisis to being a war could be difficult to ascertain in actual cases . It could even be unclear in the minds of leaders on the two sides .
 Nations can be involved in i ‘phony war,” in which there is a declared state of war but no fighting, as were Britain and France with Germany from September 1939 to May 1940 . Nations were involved in a “phony war” between September 1939 and May 1940
 Nations can also be involved in recurring episodes of intense but brief fighting without a declared state of war . The Soviet Union and Japan along the Manchurian border from July 1938 to September 1939, and the People’s Republic of China from 1969 .
 The distinction between crisis and war on the perceptions of the participants is superior to an arbitrary definition of crisis that excludes the use of force . Nevertheless, basing the distinction between war and crisis on the perception of the people involved is superior .
 Rising stakes increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail in the crisis, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 An escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles . Smoke's analysis is limited to the cycles of escalation processes that occur after war has broken out .
 Bell has described the 1914 case as being an example of a “crisis slide,"" in which a series of crises gather irresistible momentum toward war . Bell has called 1914 a "case of a crisis slide" The 1914 case is described as one of many examples of a "c
 Understanding the events or pressures that can trigger an escalatory spiral is at least as important as understanding the dynamics that drive the spiral after it starts . Understanding the dynamics of a spiral is important to understand, especially when it begins .
 The basic categories are premeditated attack, catalytic war, accidental war, preemption, and inadvertent war . Premeditated war is preempted attack, catalysttic war and accidental war .
 Catalytic war is one started by a third party, which can be either a nation or some other group, such as a terrorist organization . Catalystic war can be started by either a country or a terrorist group .
 The typical scenario is the launching of a nuclear weapon at one of the two superpowers, which responds by retaliating against the other superpower thinking it to be the source of the initial blow .
 Accidental war is the result of either equipment malfunctions or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons by military commanders . The U.S. has not been able to use nuclear weapons in the past .
 These three paths to war are generally regarded as much less likely than the other two . The other two paths are considered less likely .
 These three paths to was can occur whether or not crisis is in progress . However, they are probably more likely to occur in crises as military forces are alerted for readiness and political signalling purposes .
 Preemption is motivated by perceptions and fears that the other side is about to strike first . Preemption can be motivated by perceived perceptions, fears that other side will strike first. Preemption should be seen as a result of perceptions, perceptions .
 Preemption can also result from correct perceptions that the other side is about to launch a premeditated attack . Preemption is also possible in the case of premeditating attack .
 There are two preemption paths, one generated by the crisis security Gilemma and the other generated by an actual impending premeditated attack . There are thus two preemptive paths, both generated by crisis security and an impending attack .
 This study will address the preemption path that arises from the crisis security dilemma . Study will focus on preemption paths that arise from crisis security dilemmas . The study will be published in the spring of 2015 .
 Accidents and other inadvertent military actions can contribute to this process . Accidents, other unintended military actions may contribute to the process .
 Smoke says deliberate and inadvertent actions increase tensions and harden resolve until the process results in a war that neither side wanted or expected when the crisis first arose . Such deliberate actions increase tension and hardens resolve, resulting in war .
 This is a useful concept, but suffers from insufficient specificity as to how individual actions contribute to an escalation process . It omits significant factors that can also contribute to inadvertent war, such as the individual actions .
 First, it does not directly address the nature of the decision for war that arises out of the escalation process . It does not address the fact that the decision to go to war is made out of escalation .
 A deliberate decision for war could result from the perception that the otherside cannot be bargained or coerced into making concessions being demanded, leaving war as the only perceived means for avoiding severe damage to vital national objectives .
 A decision for preemptive war could result from the crisis security dilemma . The escalatory process generates perceptions that the adversary is preparing to strike first . A decision could result in a decision to preempt war could be made by the U.S.
 The second weakness in the inadvertent war concept is that it does not capture the true complexity of the crisis escalation process . The idea of a war without war is a flawed concept, the author says .
 In a crisis, interaction is stratified into multiple interaction sequences that can evolve semiindependently of each other . In this case, these sequences evolve semi-independently of each another .
 It is theoretically possible for fighting to erupt and an escalation process to be set in motion between the forces of the two sides at the scene of a crisis without escalation occurring .
 There appear to be factors that inhibit the crisis escalation process from occurring and inhibit inadvertent war from resulting even when escalation does occur .
 Identifying factors will make a significant contribution to our understanding of the inadvertent war path and the strengths and weaknesses of crisis management . Identifying those factors will help us understand how to deal with the unintended war path, the author says .
 The crisis ee dilemma is that in a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease, or can appear to decrease, the security of the adversary . In this crisis, the state takes fewer actions to increase security, or appear to
 The definition of crisis used in this study will include limited use of force as well as the threat of naeoe . The distinction between crisis and limited war is based on the perceptions held by national leaders the two sides .
 There is an escalation dynamic driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail . An escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles, says author .
 The preemption and inadvertent paths to war are particularly relevant to the study of crises . The preemptive and unintended path to war should be studied, says John Sutter .
 Preemption is motivated by perceptions that the other side is about to strike first . Preemption can be motivated by perception that other side will strike first. Preemption may be motivated to be preempted by perceptions of other side's intentions . Preempting is a form of preemption that
 The preemption path to war that results from the crisis security dilemma is the path that will be addressed in this study . The study will address the security security dilemma in the U.S.
 Inadvertent war arises from an escalation process in which the two sides employ increasingly threatening military and Giplomatic moves in an effort at gaining leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions .
 The escalation process increases tensions and hardens resolve until it results in a deliberate or preemptive decision for war . It increases tensions until it leads to a pre-emptive decision to go to war .
 Second, they can defeat attempts to signal limited objectives and a desire to resolve the conflict without war . They can defeat efforts to signal a desire for peace without war, they say . The U.S. should not send troops to Iraq in Iraq .
 "The effectiveness of a deterrent threat is dependent upon its credibility," says President Obama . The effectiveness of the deterrent is dependent on its credibility, he says .
 For a variety of military, political, and cognitive reasons, the nation may not perceive the deterrent threat as being credible, or may miscalculate the consequences of challenging a deterrent threat .
 Clarity of signals being sent to the adversary may not suffice to prevent escalation of the conflict . Thus, careful attention to the Clarity . of signals is not enough to stop escalation .
 The sources of misperceptions and their general role in crises are well developed in crisis management literature . Crisis management literature has been developed in the past .
 The effect that . awareness of the danger of misperception has on decisions concerning the use of force in crises remains a weak point . However, decisionmaker awareness . of the . danger of . misperceptions has . little effect on the decisionmaker .
 The danger of gilgnais sent by military forces being misperceived creates a dilemma for decisionmakers attempting to use force as a political instrument in a crisis .
 The misperception dilemma, as this problem will be called, pervades all decisions on the use of force in a crisis . It will be known as the 'misperception dilemmas'
 The dilemma in signaling allies and friends is between inadvertent signals of encouragement and signals of retrenchment . The U.S. should be careful not to send signals of support for allies or friends, says Obama .
 This misperception dilemma only arises in indirect crises, such as when the U.S. role arises from its support for an ally or friend . This is only when the United States is involved in an indirect crisis .
 Efforts to signal limited objectives and interest in a negotiated solution can be misperceived as showing lack of resolve, lack of capability or a willingness to sacrifice the interests at stake in the crisis in order to avoid an armed clash .
 The result can be erosion of credibility, undercutting of the nation’s bargaining position, and debilitation of efforts te negotiate a solution to the crisis .
 Such misperceptions could induce an adversary to preempt in an effort at seeking a military solution with low expectation of concerted resistance . Even worse, such misperception could induce a preemptive military solution .
 An inadvertent signal of acquiescence can trigger an inadvertent war of the type begun with a Geliberate decision during a crisis .
 The result can be an appearance of bad faith which interferes with efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis, or escalation of tensions and hostility in the crisis . Worst case is a perception by the adversary that war is inevitable .
 This can be either the type of preemption decision motivated by the crisis security dilemma--fear of imminent attack--or the type begun with the perception that the crisis cannot be satisfactorily resolved short of war . This is either the kind of decision that is motivated by a deliberate decision
 When a crisis involving the United States arises from a dispute between two other nations, one of whom is an ally or friend of the U.S., the second misperception dilemma comes into play . The crisis involves a dispute involving two nations .
 Studies of naval diplomacy have noted that allies and friends as well as adversaries can misperceive the signals sent by naval forces . Navy diplomacy is a form of diplomacy that can be misperformed by enemies and allies alike .
 These problems comprise the misperception dilemma as it affects signals to allies and friends . It affects signals from allies to friends and signals to friends .
 Efforts to signal resolve or support for an ally, to convey coercive military threats for deterrence or compellence, can send an inadvertent signal of encouragement, and be misperceived by the friend or ally .
 The result can be an appearance of unlimited commitment which interferes with efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis, or escalation of tensions in the crisis .
 The result can be erosion of credibility with the friend or ally, thus undercutting influence on his behavior . It can be a decision by the friend to seek support from other powers or to build up his military power for autonomous action .
 An inadvertent signal of hostility to an adversary would tend to be paired with a signal of encouragement to an ally or friend . But there is no inherent reason for misperceptions to occur in these pairs, he says .
 Misperceptions result from the individual decisionmaking processes in each nation, responding to stimuli and cognitive factors which can be much different, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There may be grounds for postulating that certain combinations of ‘perceptions and misperceptions are more likely than others’ than others . The occurrence of such combinations should be couched in probabilistic terms rather than described as inherent or inevitable .
 The danger of signals sent by military forces being misperceived creates the misperception dilemma . The danger is the danger of sending signals to the wrong side of the enemy .
 The dilemma in signaling adversaries is between inadvertent signals of acquiescence and unintentional signals of hostility . The dilemmas of signaling adversaries are not always clear when it signals acquiescence .
 These concepts clarify the problems facing leaders as they make decisions on employment of military force as a political instrument in crises .
 This chapter has reviewed and critiqued the crisis management literature . It explains the major weaknesses in current concepts and ePoteheing new concepts to correct those weaknesses .
 It began with a review of basic crisis concepts, ereseri€ing the perspectives that will be used in the study . It followed a critique of the concept of crisis interaction, particularly the weaknesses in the single interaction sequence model that implicitly underlies existing crisis theories .
 It reviewed crisis Management concepts, focusing on measures required to maintain control of events in crises . Critiqued the concept of crisis stability . presented a definition that more accurately reflects the nature of crisis interaction .
 The following paragraphs summarize the key new concepts that were presented . The following paragraph is a summary of the new concepts .
 Interaction between the two sides in crises has often been viewed in terms of an implicit single interaction sequence model . This model does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction . Crisis interaction is complex and complex .
 To correct these weaknesses a model containing three interaction sequences was presented . Each sequence was associated with a specific level in the chain of command .
 Paul Bracken’s concept of ""tightly coupled forces" is modified by the observation that tight coupling is stratified, occurring separately at the strategic and tactical levels without national leaders necessarily being involved . Then explains how separate interaction sequences can arise .
 Crisis management requires close control of 1153 military operations by top-level political authorities . One of the most important requirements for the success of crisis management is maintaining close control over military operations .
 A weakness in crisis management literature is that it has not adequately addressed the tensions that can arise between crisis management requirements and military considerations . Crisis management literature hasn't adequately addressed tensions between the military and crisis management, author says .
 The most important sources of the dilemma are the military doctrines and the military operations being conducted by the two sides, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . The most significant source of the problem is the military doctrine and military operations, he says .
 Inadvertent war arises from an escalation process in which the two sides employ increasingly threatening military and diplomatic moves in an effort at gaining leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions .
 Accidents and other inadvertent military actions contribute to the process . The U.S. military says it is committed to the U.N. commitment to the United States .
 The escalation dynamic is driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail . An escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side, in recurring cycles . Rising stakes in a conflict increase motivation for national leaders
 One of the most difficult problems of crisis management is misperception of intentions . Crisis management is often difficult to deal with, says CNN.com .
 The danger of signals sent by military forces being misperceived creates the misperception dilemma for national leaders . The danger is the danger of sending signals to the wrong side of the enemy .
 The next chapter will build on these concepts to present the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries of decoupled interactions, the stratified crisis security dilemma, and stratified escalation dynamics . The chapter concludes that the theory will be presented in the next chapter .
 There is concern that interactions between the military forces of the two sides in a crisis could develop their own momentum . Underlying this emphasis on control, there are concerns that interactions could develop momentum .
 Neato that could cause such a decoupling have not been adequately addressed in theories of crisis bargaining — escalation dynamics . This concern has been expressed in crisis management studies .
 The principle contention of this study is that the single interaction sequense model is inadequate for undertanding the manner in which nations interact in crises, and the complexities and difficulties of crisis decisionmaking .
 This chapter begins by describing the stratified interaction model of crisis interactions . This chapter will begin by describing how the model was developed .
 The theory of stratified interaction and its first corollary, decoupled interactions, will be defined . With the underlying model in place, the theory of Stratified interaction is defined .
 The theory of stratified interaction will then be applied to the concept of crisis stability, producing the concepts of the stratified crisis security dilemma and crisis escalation dynamics .
 Finally, crisis management will be reexamined to show how efforts to prevent stratified interactions from becoming decoupled generate tensions between political objectives and military objectives in a crisis . Crisis management will also be examined to show that stratified interaction can create tensions between military objectives and political objectives
 These are separate interaction sequences —— distinct groups of decisionmakers at each level on both sides in a crisis . These are distinct interaction sequences . They are separate interactions sequences .
 In the model, these interactions represent horizontal linkages between decisionmakers at the same level . The model is based on the interactions between decision makers in the U.S.
 Vertical linkages connect decisionmakers at the three levels within each nation . Vertical linkings connect decision makers at three levels in each country . The U.S. is one of the fastest growing economies in the world .
 There are flows in both directions, downward and upward, in each channel . There is flow of water in each of the channels .
 In the nolicy Channel, there is a flow of orders and policy guidance downward from national leaders to strategic and tactical military commanders, and from strategic level commanders .
 There is also an upward flow of requests for permission to take action, recommended courses of action, reports of intended actions that have not yet been taken, and reports of reports of actions already intitiated .
 In the information channel, there is a downward flow of intelligence on the adversary, assessments of the adversary's intentions and likely moves, and backgound information on the objectives and strategy being pursued .
 Vertical interaction between decisionmakers at three levels in each country takes place through these channels . Policy and information channels are key to interaction between government and private sector .
 Political interaction is between the top-level political authorities in each nation -- the head of government and his immediate advisors, what I have been calling national leaders . Political interaction should be between political leaders and their advisors, he says .
 Military considerations will, of course, be at least as prominent as political considerations in decisionmaking . Although the term “political” is used to label this top level of interaction, military considerations will also be prominent .
 Interactions between the two sides at the political level encompass the full range of diplomatic and military interactions under the cognizance of national leaders . Interactions include the political, military and diplomatic relations between the countries .
 Strategic interaction is between the strategic nuclear forces and major military commands on each side, thus encompassing conventional as well as nuclear forces .
 Tactical interaction occurs primarily at the scene of a crisis, but can take place anywhere the military forces of the two sides are operating in close proximity to each other . Tactical interaction is most likely to take place at a crisis .
 Examples include interaction between the United States Sixth Fleet and the Soviet Mediterranean Eskadra, interaction between a United States *ybid.
 Small-scale encounters are part of a larger interaction between military commands on each side responsible for operations in the region encompassing the scene of a crisis .
 In the naval realm, tactical interaction will generally be regarded as being between larger units, such as fleets or task forces . Thus, in the naval world, interaction will most likely be between large units .
 In the stratified. interaction model, coupling between the forces of the two sides in a crisis is stratified . The model is based on the fact that the forces in the crisis are stratified and the relationship between the two forces in a given crisis is highly dependent on each other .
 Tight coupling at each of the three levels of interaction-political, strategic, and tactical--can occur . Decisionmakers at each level receive direct inputs from warning and intelligence systems .
 Much of the intelligence also goes to appropriate lower levels in the military chain of command . Inputs from national-level assets go to decisionmakers at the political level .
 The sensitivity and content of the intelligence determine the recipients of it . The intelligence is the most sensitive and most sensitive of all intelligence .
 Distribution of certain intelligence can be restricted to a small group of decisionmakers . The decision is then made whether or not to promulgate it to lower levels .
 Strategic warning systems include the distant early warning radar system and early warning satellites . Pave Paws SLBM warning radars, certain ELINT and COMINT systems are used .
 Early warning Systems initially go to appropriate decisionmakers at the strategic interaction level . Inputs from strategic early warning systems go to the appropriate decision makers .
 Information gathered by Mitte Gila Muthang systems can be automatically transmitted to appropriate political level control centers, such as the Nad Vona2 Military Command Center and the White House situation room .
 Tactical sensors include radar, sonar, visual and photographic reconnaissance, electronic support measures, and tactical ELINT and COMINT systems .
 Information from certain tactical sensor systems is simultaneously reported directly to strategic level commanders . With specific prior arrangements, the information can be transmitted directly to Bei ie ail level control centers .
 Two important features these warning and intelligence systems must be noted. The warning system is designed to help people in the U.S.
 Dual reporting--simultaneous transmission of intelligence to multiple users at various levels in the chain of command--is widely used . Dual reporting is widely used to expedite the flow of crucial information to the military .
 Dual reporting generally involves the political and strategic levels, but can also be used with certain tactical sensors . Dual reporting can be used on political, strategic levels but also on the tactical levels .
 It enhances the ability of national leaders to exercise Close control of military operations in crises by keeping them better informed of events at strategic and tactical levels .
 It can ereasd the autonomy of decisionmakers at the strategic and tactical levels by reducing their dependence on higher authority . But, on the other hand, it can also reduce the dependence of higher authority to source of warning and intelligence .
 Which of these two competing tendencies prevails in a crisis, or in a particular incident, depends upon the specific circumstances in which operational decisions must be made .
 National-level assets and strategic warning systems can simultaneously detect some military actions . For example, national-level military assets can be simultaneously detected .
 Even tactical sensors can detect some military actions being monitored by strategic warning systems and national-level assets . The U.S. military is monitoring some of the world's most important military actions .
 Overlapping coverage thus can either intensify or inhibit stratification of crisis interaction . Overlaps of coverage can be either intensified or inhibited in crisis situations .
 P designates political level decisionmakers, S$ designates strategic level decision makers, and T designates tactical level decisionsmakers, with the subscripts designating the two sides . S$ is S$, with P designating political level decisions, and S $ designating strategic level
 "I, is political interaction, I is strategic interaction, and I is tactical interaction," she said . "I am not just a politician, but I am a person who has a very important role in my life," she added .
 The P,T, arrow and the P.-T. arrow represent efforts by political level decisionmakers to exercise direct, positive control of operational forces in a crisis . The P.T, T, T and P.A. arrow are used to express positive control over the situation in
 Political interaction is between the top-level political authorities in each nation . Political interaction between political authorities is between political leaders in each country . The United States is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Tactical interaction is between those operational military units of the two sides that are in direct contact with each other . Tactical interaction occurs between those units that are operational .
 In addition to these three horizontal interaction sequences, there is also vertical interaction between decisionmakers at the three levels in each country .
 These vertical interactions take place through the policy and information channels that link the three levels . The three levels include the policy, information channels, and the information channels .
 Given conditions of delegated command, tight coupling, and acute crisis, interactions between the two sides will have a tendancy to become stratified into separate political, strategic and tactical interactions . The U.S. has a tendency to be stratified in its relations with Russia and China .
 The definitions of the political, strategic, and tactical levels of interaction are as given above fur the stratified interaction model . The definition of the levels of interact are as defined by the model above .
 As stated in the definition of the theory, three conditions contribute to stratified interaction . The three conditions are said to be three conditions: Stratified interaction .
 Military forces of the two sides are tightly coupled through warning and intelligence systems that are vertically integrated with major military commands and operational forces . Second, the military forces of two sides .
 This condition is driven by perceptions that striking first will accrue significant strategic or tactical advantages, thus requiring warning of attack to ensure the survival of operational forces and the ability to effectively execute wartime contingency plans .
 Third, stratified interaction occurs in an acute international crisis, when military forces are being used as political instrument for crisis bargaining . Military forces are used as a political tool in crisis bargaining, says David Frum .
 This results in actions being taken with military forces that deliberately or inadvertently convey a military threat to the other side . This means actions are taken deliberately and inadvertently convey military threats to other sides .
 Strategic and tactical level level interactions also occur under normal peacetime conditions and in crises that do not pose a danger of war .
 Under normal peacetime conditions, ees could be numerous interaction sequences taking place between forces in direct contact with the other side’s forces . In fact, under peacetime .
 This is because the perception of an acute danger of war is not present and the interactions do not occur in the context of deliberate efforts to convey military threats to the other side . This is not the case of deliberate military threats being made to the enemy .
 U.S. and Soviet naval forces have been at odds with each other in peacetime incidents at sea for decades . The United States and the Soviet Union were at odds during the Cold War .
 The United States and Soviet fleets are almost always in clos® proximity somewhere in the world . Their interactions occasionally produce incidents, such as shouldering , threatening actions with weapons, and even collisions .
 Such incidents have never produced more than diplomatic protests, even at the height of the cold war . The 1972 U.S.-Soviet Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed .
 Dozens of American aircraft shot down by the Soowet Union, China, and the Warsaw Pact countries during the 1950s and 1960s . Another example is the dozens of American military aircraft fired on or shot down .
 The existence of stratified interaction in a crisis is not in itself important, says Simon Tisdall . He says the existence of a crisis in crisis isn't important .
 The three interaction sequences are described as being parallel when the intensity of the hostilities and magnitude of threat being W4ignallied by strategic and tactical level interactions are roughly what national leaders desire to implement their politicaldiplomatic strategy for managing the crisis .
 National leaders could lose control of events in a crisis and touch off an escalatory spiral . What is of analytical interest is the decoupling of interactions at the three levels, which could cause national leaders to lose control in crisis .
 Decoupled interactions are defined to be an interaction sequence at the strategic or tactical level in which the intensity of hostilities, level of violence, and magnitude of threat being conveyed to the other side are not under the control of national leaders . This is defined as a sequence of interactions at the
 This can occur when there is some sort of interruption or severe degradation of the vertical policy and information channels between decisionmakers at the three levels . This can be when there are some of the interruption or degradation of vertical policy .
 When interactions are decoupled, the three interaction sequences are no longer parallel . The interaction sequences no longer take part in the same sequence .
 The intensity of hostilities at the strategic or tactical levels no longer supports the political-diplomatic strategy being prusued by pica national leaders in the crisis . It is not a political strategy now being used by national leaders .
 In principle, decoupling can lead to the intensity of hostilities at the strategic and tactical levels being greater or lesser than that desired by national leaders . Decoupling may lead to greater or less intensity of warfare at strategic or tactical levels, writes Peter Bergen .
 The escalation dynamics theory predicts that the tendency would normally be toward escalation of hostilities, but this is a question for empirical research . This is the theory that this is the reason for the increase in hostilities .
 Decoupling of stratified interaction is averted to the extent that political level decisionmakers exercise constant, direct, positive control over operational military forces, or ensure that the guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated command produce operational decisions .
 Inept or indiscriminate use of military force by national leaders can defeat crisis management efforts . Military force can defeat crises management efforts as easily as inappropriate operational decisions by on-scene commanders .
 On-scene commanders are quite able to act with prudence and caution when not under direct control by national leaders .
 Military commanders are never without operational guidance of some sort . Military commanders never have to rely on operational guidance from the White House . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 When direct control is interrupted, for whatever reason, they will base operational decisions on the last direct guidance received until the tactical circumstances change sufficiently to make that guidance inapplicable . This can happen very quickly .
 At that point they revert to the operational guidance contained in the mechanisms of delegated command . "At that point, they revert" to operational guidance, the commander says .
 This is an entirely rational system of command, reflecting the reality that decisionmaking at the tactical level does not cease simply because national leaders are unable to make the decisions . This is the reality of decisionmaking in the military, not national leaders, it says .
 Once operational forces make this de facto shift to delegated command, even though nominally still under direct command, decoupling of direct command can occur .
 As these potential causes suggest, decoupling can occur even when national leaders are attempting to exercise constant, direct, positive control over operational forces . As well as potential causes, the potential causes are also possible .
 Communications problems can sever the links from mational leaders to operational forces, leaving those forces temporarily under delegated command . Communications problems often sever the link between military and operational forces .
 The problems can take many forms, including outright loss of radio contact, garbled messages, delays in message delivery due to system overload . System overload, misrouting of messages, and deliberate interference by the adversary .
 Although the U.S. military communications system has been vastly improved over the last four decades--without which the President could not even attempt to exercise close control of military operations-~it is still not infallible .
 Information flows can be interrupted by communications problems, excessive secrecy and compartmentation, or even a simple failure to realize that a particular report warrants the immediate attention of decisionmakers . Information flows should be interrupted .
 Exclusive information is a resource that confers influence on policy decisions, which can lead to hoarding or hiding of crucial facts . Exclusive information can be used to influence policy decisions and influence the public .
 Information problems prevent national leaders from exercising effective direct control over crisis military operations . Information problems such as these can keep national leaders out of control of crisis operations .
 Real-time guidance not being provided to operational forces even when communications channels are intact . Impairment of top-level decisionmaking under the stress of a crisis, or preoccupation with a particular aspect of the crisis, can result in a lack of real-time information .
 Selective attention to problems is a well-recognized cognitive limit on decisionmaking . Selective and sequential attention is the cognitive limit of a cognitive limit .
 In a fast-paced tactical environment, tactical decisionmakers may not have time to describe their circumstances to national leaders and await a decision before having to take action . Decisionmakers may have to explain their circumstances and wait for a decision .
 When missiles are inbound the captain of a ship cannot wait for the National Security Council to convene and haggle over his fate . To use an exaggerated example, when a ship is hit, the captain can't wait for his fate to be decided .
 Operational commanders always have a certain amount of decisionmaking authority delegated to them, regulated by the rules of engagement . For this reason, operational commanders have a lot of power to make decisions .
 When urgent operational decisions must be made on the basis of delegated command rather than on consultation with national leaders, what might be called momentary decoupling occurs . This is when urgent operations decisions are made using delegated command .
 National leaders are uncertain as to the implications of their political-diplomatic strategy for tactical military operations . National leaders may issue orders to military forces that are ambiguous or ambivalent .
 Crisis management consists of the dual goals of protecting vital national interests while avoiding unwanted escalation of the confrontation . To some degreee this problem is inherent in the nature of crisis management, which involves protecting vital interests .
 Ambiguous or ambivalent orders are particularly likely when they must be formulated under the stress and time pressures of a crisis . Thorough evaluation of alternative tactical options may not be possible before an order must be given .
 A military commander faced with ambiguous or ambivalent orders may not have time to seek guidance on how to interpret them in a specific situation .
 If his decisions do not support the political-diplomatic initiatives being pursued to manage the crisis, then decoupling has occurred . If he does not support these initiatives, decouples have occurred, he will not be able to continue .
 If toplevel control can be re-established, the decoupling will only be momentary . Sima ia eeaey re-establishing will be a matter of time .
 When this occurs, the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control becomes crucial to eftective crisis management . The alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency Plans, and rules of engagement are crucial to management .
 If national leaders do not pay sufficient attention to that guidance, military actions could occur that they had not anticipated and which exceed the scope of operations they had dasizeay . This could cause momentary decoupling and lead to an interaction sequence that is decoupled from the political
 The final possible cause of decoupling is a deliberate unauthorized action by a military commander, military commander .
 Paaeriegng decides to disobey orders and carry out an action contrary to the letter and intent of his orders . In this case the commander has specific orders for the mission he is to carry out .
 A military commander deliberately takes unauthorized action because he perceives his local tactical situation as more threatening than do national leaders . More likely, however, would be the case in which he took unauthorized action, or believes his orders are infeasible .
 The military commander's assessment of the situation could be entirely correct, but the action is still unauthorized . The action could still be unauthorized, says the military commander .
 The theory of stratified interaction states that, given conditions of delegated command, tight coupling, and acute crisis, interactions between the two sides will become stratified into separate political, strategic and tactical interactions .
 In an acute crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level . Seais: Security dilemma arises from interaction processes .
 This corollary contends that the adversary's military intentions--whether they are essentially offensive or defensive--can be perceived differently by decisionmakers at the political, strategic, and tactical levels of crisis interaction .
 Many military moves are ambiguous as to their offensive or defensive intent, and can increase capabilities in both areas . Military moves can be interpreted as either an offensive or a defensive move .
 Interactions at strategic and tactical levels can generate circumstances in which actions taken by one side to increase the security of their forces or improve their tactical position can decrease, or appear to decrease, the other side’s forces .
 Actions by one side prompt countermeasures by the other side that in turn contribute to an escalatory action-reaction spiral . Military commanders on both 1s seek to maintain or increase their strategic or tactical advantages, military commanders say .
 Military commanders could have authority to preempt for self-defense under conditions specified in their standing orders or rules of engagement . They could be required to seek authority from national leaders, including national leaders .
 The key point is that the interaction process that created the circumstances in which preemption was perceived to be necessary was not under control of national leaders . The interaction process created the . circumstances in . which preempted preemptions was perceived as necessary .
 The mutually reinforcing alert phenomenon described by Bracken is an example of the stratified security dilemma at the strategic level of inveractién . The mutually reinforce alert phenomenon is described as a 'strategic security dilemma'
 This type of interaction occurred between U.S. carrier battle groups and Soviet anti-carrier forces in the Mediterranean during the 1973 Middle East War .
 Soviet ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles moved into positions where they could launch preemptive strikes against the U.S. Sixth Fleet on short notice .
 Sixth Fleet maneuvers to evade being targeted by Soviet cruise missile platforms . Sixth Fleet deploys ships, submarines, and armed aircraft into positions where they could strike Soviet cruise missiles platforms .
 If it starts at the political level, with national leaders making the escalatory decisions, it immediately encompass all levels and thus is not stratified . It also encompasses all — levels — levels, thus thus not stratifying, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 If an escalation spiral starts at the tactical or strategic level, it will not necessarily be transmitted upward to higher levels of interaction . The escalation spiral will start at a tactical level, not necessarily at the strategic or tactical level .
 A sudden outbreak of fighting at the tactical level would appear to confirm perceptions of the other side's offensive intent and fears of war being imminent . While this scenario is theoretically possible, it is not likely under the stress of a crisis .
 It is even less likely that national leaders would be able to let an escalation spiral play itself out without a full-scale war resulting, writes Andrew Hammond .
 An escalation spiral at the tactical or strategic levels would be the loss of control over events that crisis management is intended to prevent . Crisis management is meant to prevent an escalation of events that should be prevented .
 First, reliance on delegation of decisionmaking authority to military commanders at the strategic and tactical levels can allow interaction sequences to gain momentum without direct involvement of national leaders .
 Decisionmakers at the strategic and tactical level could base their operational decisions on their Standing orders and operational dcctrines, rather than on direct guidance from national leaders . Second, decisionmakers could, for a number of reasons, base their operations decisions on standing orders .
 Both of these means of controlling escalation can be difficult to implement in practice . It is also difficult to control escalation in the workplace .
 Direct control can be interrupted or degraded by a wide range of technical, operational and even psychological impediments . As was dicussed earlier, direct control can't be interrupted by a variety of technical or operational obstacles .
 Ensuring that the mechanisms of indirect control support the political-diplomatic strategy is made exceedingly difficult by the near impossibility of anticipating every possible tactical situation that a military commander might face .
 There are grounds for postulating that an escalation spiral beyond the control of national leaders could arise at the tactical or strategic levels . Thus, there are ample grounds to postulate that such a spiral could arise .
 A key point of the stratified escalation dynamics concept is that the phenomenon can exist under an assumption of rational decisionmaking . The concept is based on the assumption of a rational decision making .
 Fully rational strategic and tactical level level decisionmakers, acting strictly in accordance with approved operational guidance, could well initiate an action-reaction sequence that becomes an uncontrollable escalation spiral . A fully rational decisionmaker could well trigger an action reaction sequence, leading to a spiraling spiral .
 The record of U.S. and Soviet behavior in superpower crises shows a great deal of caution on the part of operational commanders, rather than excessive aggressiveness .
 Misperception and miscalculation are highly likely during a crisis, experts say . Crisis military operations could touch off an escalation spiral, they say .
 The ee security dilemma creates a decisionmaking environment in which misperception and miscalculation are not only more likely to occur, but are also likely to touch off an escalation spiral . This is especially true in the U.S. State Department of Defense .
 Stratified interactions can cause misperceptions of the intentions of adversaries, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Barry R Posen's definition of inadvertent escalation is a central element of his definition of accidental escalation . Posen: Military commanders acting on their own initiative, responding within the bounds of their thsvitary evasion of civilian control .
 If viewed as having been ordered by national leaders, strategic and tactical level interactions are interpreted in the overall political and military context of the crisis, rather than the limited immediate circumstances that surrounded the dnteraction .
 This can result in strategic and tactical level interactions being viewed as signals of the intentions of the adversary's leaders, which may not have been the case at all . This can be seen as signals that the leaders' intentions may not be the case .
 Misperception of intentions can arise from interactions among forces at the strategic and tactical levels, as well as from signals being exchanged at the political level . Misperceptions of intentions may arise from interaction between forces at strategic, tactical and political levels .
 Inadvertent military incidents are most likely to occur under conditions of stratified interaction . Leaders are relying on mechanisms of delegated command for indirect control of military forces .
 An inadvertent military incident could spark an action-reaction escalation sequence at the tactical or strategic level decoupled from interaction at the political level . Military commanders acted in accordance with mechanism of delegated command .
 Serious fighting could erupt without escalation dynamics spreading to the political level, that is while national leaders on the two sides are still trying to resolve the crisis without war . Serious fighting can also erupt without escalating tensions spreading to political level .
 An intense engagement between the forces of the two sides in direct contact in the field or at sea could spread upward to the major theater commands in charge of those forces (the strategic level) through the operation of delegated decisionmaking authority at the strategic level .
 The most likely scenario is deliberately slowing the tempo of military operations and creating pauses for exchange of diplomatic communications . This is intended to halt such an escalation process .
 Paul Bracken is an extreme example of this. The Interaction of Political and Military Considerations,"" Survival 26 (September/October 1984): 226. : lithe mutually reinforcing alert described by Paul Bracksen. The interaction of political and military Considerations" is an
 In an acute crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately . In summary, the stratified crisis security dilemma involves the interaction of processes occurring at each level .
 Political-Military Tensions underlie the emphasis national leaders piace on maintaining close control of military forces in crises .
 An irony of crisis management is that efforts to prevent interactions at the strategic and tactical levels from becoming decoupled from the political-diplomatic strategy being pursued to manage a crisis can generate tensions between political and military considerations .
 These tensions and the manner in which they are resolved directly affect, and are directly affected by, stratified interaction . These tensions directly affect and directly affect the way they resolve, such as tension in the society .
 Tensions between political and military considerations are inherent in the use of military force as a political instrument . The U.S. should not rely on military force for political purposes, says President Obama .
 National leaders' ability to manage a crisis are exacerbated under conditions of stratified interaction . They would arise in a crisis even without stratified interactions, they say . The impact on the ability of national leaders are exacerbated when they are in the midst of crisis .
 Both sets of considerations are those being pursued to influence the outcome of the crisis . Both sides of the debate are being pursued by the government .
 Tensions between political and military considerations arise because military forces must always be prepared for the possibility of combat even when being used for political signaling . Tensions arise when military forces are used for signaling .
 Such tensions arise well before force is actually used in a crisis . Thus, such tensions arise before force can be used in the crisis .
 There are two approaches to using military forces deployed to the scene of a crisis for political signaling . The U.S. should not use military forces to signal political signals, experts say .
 In the first approach--the symbolic or iaekeaae threat-token forces are sent to signal resolve to protect vital national interests and as a symbol of the overall military power of the nation . In the second approach, the symbolic forces were sent to symbolize national security .
 Token deployments are often used in conjunction with increases in the readiness of other forces in the theater or forces held in strategic reserve for rapid deployment to the scene . Token deployments have been deployed in the U.S. since 2003 .
 The token forces at the scene convey a threat that other, more powerful forces will be used if the target nation does not respond in a satisfactory manner to the threat being conveyed . A token force is used to communicate a threat to a target nation if it is not dealt with .
 In some circumstances token forces serve as a tripwire, enhancing, ékeough the likelihood of their being involved in any fighting that erupts, the credibility of a deterrent threat .
 token forces typically do not have 4 mission other than to be present at the scene of the crisis, leaving them without a clear military objective other than survival . token forces may be compromised when placed im an exposed position as a tripwire .
 Military moves by the adversary that are hardly worth the attention of national leaders can present an imminent threat to the token force . The U.S. should be wary of military moves that are not worth national leaders' attention, experts say .
 It is to be expected that on-scene military commanders will have perceptions and priorities much different from those of national leaders in this situation .
 Strong forces are used to convey a direct threat with their intrinsic warfighting capabilities . In the second approach to using military forces for political signaling, strong forces are well beyond what would be needed for a token force .
 Alerting strategic nuclear forces during a crisis is an example of a direct threat . Alerts are intended to achieve deterrence by threat of punishment . Alerting nuclear forces is a form of direct threat to the U.S. military .
 Deployment of substantial ground, air, or naval forces capable of engaying the adversary's forces at the scene of a crisis is another example of a direct threat . Deployment is intended to achieve deterrence by threat of denial, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This is because the credibility of the threat being conveyed by the forces is a function of the adversary's perception of the capability to carry out the military actions being threatened, as well as the credibility . This is a matter of the perception that the threat is credible to the adversary .
 The adversary's perception of the likelihood of the forces actually being used is the more important consideration, but his perception of their capabilities can influence that assessment . The adversary is more likely to use his own forces against the odds of being used .
 A threat to intervene with a battalion of troops to halt an invasion by a division-sized force would probably not be credible . For example, a threat of intervention with a Battalion of troops would probably be not credible .
 Three groups of adversary decisionmakers--at the political, strategic, and tactical levels--are assessing the credibility of the force . Three separate groups of adversaries are also assessing credibility .
 Different decisionmakers could well focus on different indicators of intent . Different decisions could well be made by different officials .
 Military commanders are likely to be more attentive to capabilities as an janceree of intentions than are national leaders weighing a broader range of considerations . Military commanders, particularly those commanding forces in contact with the adversary force, will be paying attention to capabilities .
 It is a product of quantity of forces and specific types of weapons weapons employed . It is also a result of quantity and types of forces employed .
 Readiness and tactical situation are the operational dimension of credibility, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com . Readiness, tactical situation and readiness are key to credibility .
 Tactical situation refers to the impact of geographic position, relative to adversary fenses, on the ability of the forces employed in a crisis to effectively carry out combat operations . Tactical situation is defined as a situation in which the forces are deployed to carry out operations .
 The degree to which a particular tactical situation is advantageous or disadvantageous is a complex calculation involving geography, the capabilities of each side's weapons, surveillance and warning capabilities, and the speed required by each side to react to threats .
 The elements of warfighting capability (strength, readiness, and tactical situation) were described above . The elements are described as strength, readiness and tactical situations .
 The second military consideration affected by crisis management, tactical planning, requires elaboration, says the U.S. president .
 Military commanders seek to adhere to or exploit certain operational considerations believed to provide tactical advantages in combat . These considerations are known as the 17 principles of war . The 17 principles are commonly referred to as "the 17 principles"
 Four of these principles are 16, orge, ""Crisis Management,” 226. 17 arouments over the value and proper formulation of the principles are irrelevent to the point being made .
 The principles provide a convenient description of what military commanders try to do in battle . Regardless of their specific wording or ranking, the principles provide an overview of what they do .
 The principle of the objective is that military operations must be directed toward a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable military objective . The principle is that operations should be directed to a clear defined and decisive military objective, such as a clear-eyed military objective.
 The principle of initiative, often called the principle of the offensive, is that seizing the initiative with offensive action in almost always necessary to achieve decisive results . Seizing the initiative is almost always always necessary .
 Exploitation (or pursuit) is an element of initiative intended to keep the enemy off balance and on the defensive . Pursuit follows up initial success with further offensive action with further action .
 The principle of concentration, often called the principle of mass, is that superior combat power must be concentrated at the critical time and place for a decisive purpose . It is a function of quality as well as quantity of arms .
 The reverse aspect -- the impact of military considerations on crisis management requirements -- should be obvious in each case . "The reverse aspect" is obvious in both cases .
 "Unrestrained pursuit of the military principles will usually preclude meeting the crisis management requirements," says President Obama .
 Satie renty exploiting initial success with further offensive action makes it difficult to use surprise . Deliberately slowing the tempo of military operations violates the principle of initiative, particularly its component principle Satie Renty says .
 Coordinating military actions with diplomatic actions can have a wide range of negative impacts . Coordination of military actions and diplomatic actions is critical to the U.S. military .
 Coordination is Geant to support an integrated strategy for resolving the crisis acceptably without war . Military objectives of crisis operations are not well defined--violating the principle of the objective, Geant says .
 Crisis management is to avoid war or unwanted escalation of a limited use of force, which is difficult for military planners to use as the basis for planning tactical operations . A principle objective of crisis management is avoiding war, unwanted escalation .
 Military forces are used primarily as a means of signaling intentions and conveying coercive threats, a political mission Gifficult for military planners to address as an objective in the military sense . Resolving the crisis acceptably is achieved through political-diplomatic bargaining, in which military forces are
 Coordinating military actions with diplomatic actions can also require limiting the size and composition of the forces employed, violating the principle of concentration and constraining the strength of the force, an element of its warfighting capability .
 Limiting actions that military forces can take in self*defense or to improve tactical situation can violate the principle of initiative and constrain their readiness for combat . Limiting military forces' actions in self-defense or improving tactical situation, normally done for escalation control purposes, can violate principle of
 Using force in gradually increasing increments, a common tactic of coercive bargaining, is the military planner's second worst nightmare (second only to being the victim of strategic surprise), violating the principles of initiative , concentration, and surprise .
 Avoiding military options that give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare can also have a broad range of impacts on military considerations . Avoiding such a move could also have an impact on the military's decision to engage in large war .
 The principles of tactical planning dictate that the military options favored by military planners will be precisely those which give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare . In the case of surprise attack, the options favored will be those that give the enemy an appearance of an actual resort
 An optimum battle plan calls for wotnaiing the initiative by concentration of superior force and launching a surprise attack against a strategic objective . Then rapidly exploiting that attack with further offensive action .
 Such a battle plan is precluded by the requirements of crisis management . Such a crisis management plan would not be possible in the world, says David Cameron . "Such a plan is not possible," says Cameron .
 Delegating decisionmaking authority to lower levels can deprive national leaders of the ability to control the momentum of a conflict, experts say . National leaders can also be prevented from coordinating military operations with diplomatic initiatives, they say .
 On the other hand, centralizing decisionmaking authority in the hands of national leaders can rob on-scene forces of tactical flexibility, leaving them incapable of adapting to a rapidly changing situation and vulnerable to surprise attack . Centralizing decision making authority in national leaders may leave forces with tactical flexibility .
 "It cannot be resolved, it must be managed on an on-going basis every time a crisis occurs," says David Cameron . Cameron: "It is not a crisis that can't be resolved. It cannot be solved, it cannot be managed"
 The nature of the interactions at the political and tactical levels can be quite different, and probably often are, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Given a crisis in which leaders on the two sides are pursuing strategies of coercive diplomacy, efforts by each side to enhance the credibility of its coercive threats or to counter the adversary's coercive threats by 19 3 . This study will concentrate on tensions arising over the control of tactical level forces .
 The commanders of those forces are constantly evaluating their tactical situation relative to adversary forces . They assess the seriousness of the threat they represent and the ability of his own forces to counter that threat .
 When the tactical situation is dynamic, both sides act to maintain or improve their tactical situation, the result is a test of capabilities at the tactical level . The result is the result of a dynamic situation, with both sides acting to maintain the situation .
 The test of capabilities is no less real for no shots having been fired . No shots have been fired, but it's a real test of capability .
 The tactical commanders are constantly calculating the likely outcome of an engagement with each new development in the tactical situation . This is the first time the U.S. forces have been able to engage in an engagement .
 Even though political level interaction may be marked by coercive diplomacy, tactical level interaction can become a test of capabilities . The U.S. should be able to test its own capabilities, the U.K. says .
 This illustrates why the level of control issue can be a source of tensions . This illustrates how it can be the source of tension .
 The tactical situation can appear much different to the on-scene commander, operating under the guns of the adversary, than it does to top-level political leaders, negotiating with that same adversary .
 A military move by the adversary that is viewed as a political signal by national leaders can be viewed as an immediate military threat to the tactical commander . A move by an adversary that's viewed as political signal can be seen as a military move . The move is viewed by the nation as a
 A tactical commander is going to perceive an urgent need for as much decisionmaking authority as he can get from his chain of command . Under the conditions of a test of capabilities, a tactical commander will want to be able to make decisions .
 The result is tension between the tactical commander's need for flexibility and initiative, and the politcal leader's need to close control of military operations . The result of the tension is to be seen as the result of a tight-knit military team .
 Military forces do not necessarily drop their wartime contingency tasking when assigned to crisis operations . The first reason is that military forces don't necessarily drop the tasking tasking they are assigned to .
 Their wartime tasking may change to make it more compatible with their crisis tasking, for example by assigning them wartime missions in the vicinity of the crisis . But their wartime taskings are rarely dropped altogether .
 Forces equipped with dual-capable weapons are most likely to have simultaneous crisis and wartime tasking . Dual weapons are capable of carrying nuclear and conventional warheads .
 U.S. forces would be tasked with small-scale conventional operations against a much smaller nation . War contingency tasking involves large-scale nuclear operations against the Soviet Union .
 Second reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that forces detached from major operational units may be replaced by other forces in order to maintain readiness for wartime missions .
 Another carrier battle group must be surged from its homeport in the U.S. to cover the wartime commitments of the first battle group .
 Third reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that alliance commitments can inhibit forces deployed for support of allies in wartime from being used in a crisis .
 If forces normally committed to the defense of an ally are diverted to a crisis, other forces may have to be deployed from their home bases to avoid sending an inadvertent signal of retrenchment to the ally . Alternatively, if forces normally dedicated to an ally's defense are diverted, other
 U.S. forces in Korea are not readily available to respond to crises elsewhere in Asia . For example, United States forces in Korean are not immediately available to help in Asia crises .
 The frequent refusal of U.S. allies, notably NATO and Japan, to provide forces in support of United States military actions in crises further compounds crisis-wartime trade-offs for the United States .
 The fourth reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that as a crisis escalates military forces are placed at increasingly higher levels of readiness .
 Certain preparations can be initiated by strategic level military commanders on the basis of authority delegated to them in mechanisms of delegated command, without an increase in DEFCON orders from political level leaders .
 For conventional forces preparations for wartime operations include increased security measures to thwart enemy surveillance and deployment to wartime battle positions . For . conventional forces, preparations for . war operations include . increased . security measures .
 In summary, tensions between political and military considerations are inherent in the use of military force as a political instrument . In the U.S. military force is an important political tool .
 The first source of tension is conflict between political considerations and the needs of Giplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations . On the other, military considerations and needs of military operations are the other .
 Tensions between political and military considerations arise because military forces must always be prepared for the possibility of combat even while carrying out political signaling missions . Tensions arise when military forces are carrying out military signaling missions.
 This is a dilemma that cannot be resolved, it must be managed on an on-going basis every time a crisis eccurs. This is the dilemma that can't be resolved . This is an urgent need to be dealt with every crisis, says David Cameron .
 The first corollary to the theory, decoupled interactions, was then presented .
 The theory of stratified interaction was then applied to crisis stability . The second corollary to the theory was that of crisis stability. The theory was applied to the crisis stability of the United States .
 Extending the theory to the problem of escalation resulted in the third corollary to the theory, stratified escalation dynamics . Extending this theory resulted in a new theory of escalation dynamics, the theory of the theory .
 Stratified interaction was used to explore the tensions that arise between political and military considerations when military force is used as a political instrument in crises .
 With the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries defined, we can now begin to explore the use of force as a political instrument in crises . We can now start to explore how force can be a political tool in crises.
 The first task, which will be undertaken in the next chapter, is to examine the rae ecions of delegated command . The next chapter will examine how delegated command can be used .
 President and top-level military commanders cannot exercise real-time direct control over all the activities of the U.S. armed forces . These ieatani ons are important in crisis management because the President, and even military commanders, cannot possibly exercise real time direct control of all the
 The mechanisms of delegated command strongly influence the degree of crisis interactions are stratified . The likelihood of stratified interactions becoming decoupled, and the intensity of the tensions between political and military considerations, are key factors .
 There is always a danger that national leaders could lose control of events in a crisis, allowing crisis military operations to escalate uncontrollably to war . The danger is that the military operations could become uncontrollable .
 The methods, capabilities, and limitations of military command and control are important factors in the ability of national leaders to maintain control over events, experts say .
 Second, the occurrence of stratified interaction in crises is largely a function of the military command and control procedures being employed to direct crisis military operations . Third and fourth reasons for stratified interactions in crises .
 "Great familiarity with military command and control will enhance our understanding of escalation dangers in crises," he says . "The problems of crisis management should be addressed," he adds .
 The methods and problems of military command and control have received scant attention in studies of warfare and virtually no attention to studies of crisis aanagewent .
 Connectivity issues are important, but there is much more to effective command and control . Connectivity is important to operational forces, but it is also important to National Command Authority . The U.S. military says it's important to ensure operational forces are reliably and securely linked with National Command
 The purposes of this chapter are to set military command and control in the context of theories on delegation and control . The purpose of the chapter is to explain how the U.S. military command system is exercised .
 The first section will present organization and management theories on delegation and control . It will show how they apply to military command and control in military command .
 The second section will explore basic concepts of delegation and control used in the U.S. military command system .
 The final section will examine rules of engagement--the fifth mechanism of indirect control . The final part of this article will examine the rules of engagements .
 First, it is based on a Marrow and critically flawed conception of delegation and control in organizations . First, the Marrow project is based in a flawed conception . Second, it's based on Marrow's Marrow .
 Second, it fails to account for the manner in which military command and control is exercised, he says . It also fails to explain the significant delegation of decisionmaking authority, he adds .
 The organizational process model implicitly accepts the simple public administration dine sacra owdiate Ber policymaking and implementation . The organization model is based on an organizational model of public administration .
 In the organizational process model, the President makes policy decisions and government organizations implement those those those decisions . In the model, government organizations are put together by the President .
 Organizational processes explain why the actions taken during implementation differ from the actions the President desired or expected when he made the decision . Organizational process explains why the President wanted or expected the decision to make .
 Jeffry L Pressman and Aaron Wildavsky note that distinction between policymaking and implementation is an oversimplification . The passage of time wreaks havoc with efforts to maintain tidy distinctions between the two functions .
 They contend that in the midst of action the distinction between the initial conditions and the chain of causality begins to erode . They say the distinction in the middle of action erodes .
 This observation, while essentially correct, leads to an oversimplified model of government behavior . This observation leads to a model of governmental behavior as consisting of policy decisions by government leaders, and subsequent efforts by those leaders to control organizational routines .
 The model ignores the deliberate delegation of decisionmaking authority and the role of such delegated authority in shaping policy . The model thus ignores the role such delegations can be used to shape policy decisions .
 There are many contexts in which the latitude of those charged with implementing policy is so substantial that studies of implementation should be turned on their heads . Study of implementation of policy in many contexts is often turned on heads .
 In these cases, policy is effectively ""made"" by the people who implement it . Policy is effectively "made" by the person who implements it, rather than the government .
 People "make" policy in hidden concert with others in similar positions through patterned responses to the situation and circumstances in which they find themselves . People “make’t policy” in public agency jobs, people who implement public agency activities, writes .
 The organizational process model needs to be revised to reflect the significant decisionmaking authority--authority to define objectives and design programs--delegated to certain officials in government organizations .
 The necessity for delegation of discretionary powers and coordination problems have long been recognized in organization and management theory . Delegate powers are necessary to solve problems such as coordination problems in organization .
 Chester Barnard recognized that delegation of discretion results in policies being defined at all levels in an organization, rather than just at the top .
 Jay R Galbraith has drawn a distinction between two methods of delegating decisions in maori Uae tiisibay . He has also drawn a useful refinement of this concept .
 In the first approach, rules, programs, and procedures are used to move repetitive decisions to lower levels in the organization without delegation of discretion . In the second approach, the rules and programs can be used to make repetitive decisions easier to manage .
 Galbraith: The primary effect is an information processing one--the elimination from hierarchical channels of communications concerning routine events . According to the author, "The primary effect of this is the elimination of hierarchical channels"
 Second approach is to delegate discretionary decisionmaking authority . The second approach would delegate discretionary authority to decision makers .
 The combination of rules and hierarchy, like hierarchy alone, is vulnerable to task uncertainty . Rules and hierarchy alone are vulnerable to tasks uncertainty, the author says .
 As the organization's subtasks increase in uncertainty, fewer situations can be programmed in advance and more exceptions arise which must be referred upward in the hierarchy . As the organizations' subtasks become more uncertain, more exceptions must be made .
 As more exceptions are referred upward, the hierarchy will become overloaded . The U.N. system will be overloaded with more exceptions .
 Serious delays will develop between the transmission of information upward and a response to that information downward, officials say . Serious delays are expected to develop between transmission and response to information downward .
 In this situation, the organization must develop new processes to supplement rules and hierarchy . The organization must also develop processes that supplement rules .
 As the task uncertainty increases, the volume of information from the points of action to points of decision making overloads the hierarchy . As the . task uncertainty increase, the . volume of . information . from the . points of . action to decision making overloaded the hierarchy, the hierarchy overloads
 In this situation, it becomes more efficient to bring the decision down to the points of action where the information exists . In this case, the decision should be made with the information where it exists .
 This can be done by increasing the amount of discretion exercised by employees at lower levels of the organization . This can also be done in order to increase the discretion of employees in the workplace .
 Discretionary delegation of decisionmaking raises the problem of ensuring that the decisions made by lower-level officials support the goals established by top-level leaders .
 There arises an inherent tension between autonomy and control when discretionary delegation of decisionmaking is used to cope with uncertainty . When this is not the case, delegated discretion results in “authority leakage,"" a divergence of goals between top-level and lower-level officials .
 In practice, at least a small amount of Giscretion is allowed under rule-governed delegation . Rules govern discretionary delegation, even if only discretion to determine which rules are applicable .
 These concepts of delegation and control have been widely used in studies of school administration . These concepts have been used in schools administration .
 The U.S. should not be too tightly constrained that they can't respond to changing conditions . They must not be so loosely controlled that they seek personal rather than organizational goals, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Superiors must afford the principal enough autonomy to cope with unexpected problems or variable local conditions, while still keeping schools in line . Superiors need to be able to afford enough autonomy for the principal to cope .
 In short, superiors seek an appropriate balance of control and autonomy that will maximize organizational effectiveness . In order to maximize effectiveness, superiors must balance control with autonomy .
 School principals typically are controlled largely by collegial and nonhierarchical controls, rather than by hierarchical controls . School principals are controlled by collegia and non-interference .
 The model would assume that the sole function of school principles is to carry out school district policies . It would then assume that policy differences among schools and policy disputes between principals and school district officials are related to organizational processes .
 Allison's organizational process model leads to three serious analytical errors in this type of organizational setting . Allison's organization process model is flawed, Allison says . Allison: "Allison's organizational model leads ... to three major analytical errors"
 The model assumes that school district officials are always ""right" and principals always "wrong" in order for the actions of principals to be attributable to organizational processes .
 Allison's model must assume that the policy preferences expressed by school district officials when a dispute arises with a school principal were the policies that they had decided upon . Allison: "Ally's model assumes that the specific policy preferences . expressed by district officials are the policies they decided upon to begin
 The model needs to allow for the pos-sibility that school district officials may not have known exactly what policy they preferred until after eee saw what the principal had decided upon . The model should be flexible and flexible .
 Allison's model excludes the effect of variation in the environment of different decisionmakers, particularly ete effect of differences in constituencies and political influences . Allison says his model is based on the fact that different decisions are made by different decision makers . Allison: "Allison's model does not include
 The model needs to allow for such variations in the external environment. The model must be flexible and flexible, the author says .
 With these modifications, the organizational process model becomes applicable to an organization composed of several independent operating units, such as a school district or operational military forces .
 Studies of business management reveal patterns of delegation and control similar to those seen in public administration . Business delegations are similar to that of public administration, studies show .
 Large business sugudiioae sons face an inherent tension between the need to delegate decisionmaking and the need for centralized control . Large businesses are composed of diverse, autonomous operating units .
 Management controls are the business equivalent of organizational controls used in organization theory . They employ combinations of management controls (the business equivalent) including business variants of hierarchical, collegial, and nonhierarchical controls .
 Businesses that decentralize decisionmaking authority perform better than businesses that centralize it . The interesting point, however, is that decentralizing authority typically performs better than centralizing authority .
 "They are better able to respond to diverse and rapidly changing market, resource and regulatory conditions," says the government . They say they will be better prepared to deal with the changing market and resource conditions .
 Delegation of decisionmaking is driven by the limits on decisionmaking, which cause decision-making by toplevel officials to deteriorate as the size and complexity of the organization increase .
 Delegation of decisionmaking can range from highly rule-governed, for standard, repetitive situations, to highly discretionary, for situations that cannot be anticipated . Delegating of decisions can range between highly rule governement, or highly discretionary .
 Tension between autonomy and control is always present, especially in organizations with independent operating units . Tension is especially present, particularly in organizations consisting of numerous independent units .
 Robert S McNamara adopted a highly centralized management style at Ford and brought with him to the Department of Defense in 1961 . Studies in public administration and business management show that optimum results are achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate controls .
 Attention to communications and information processing is certainly ensr'om fail . The effective exercise of command and control is crucially dependent on the commander's ability to build a clear picture of the situation .
 Even Satdee the shooting starts, it is crucial that the chain of command up to top-level national leaders have as clear a picture of the situation at the scene of a crisis .
 From a crisis management perspective, ensuring that radios and computers operate properly is the lesser problem . Knowing how to effectively control military operations with them is the more difficult problem .
 Little attention is paid to the methods, procedures, and hecifen te ns of command in the military .
 Rapid advances in communications and information processing technology are having a tremendous impact on military command and control . However, the manner in which the systems are employed operationally is still a function of the personnel using the systems . Command and control philosophy held by the personnel who uses the systems is still important
 Command and control procedures and > mechanisms are defined by the military . It is necessary to understand the fundamental concepts of command and control as they are defined .
 Authority is the power to Girect the operations and movements of the forces under one’s command . Authority is a power to direct the operations of one's command. Authority is also a power of Girect .
 Responsibility is being . accountable for the performance and well-being of the forces and men under one's command . responsibility is being responsible for the . performance of the . forces and . men under your command .
 A closely related principle--unity of command--states that if a commander is given responsibility for forces, he must have authority over them commensurate with that responsibility . Unity of command states that if you have responsibility for your forces, you have authority .
 Ambiguous delegation of authority almost invariably leads to diffusion of responsibility, a phenomenon highly visible when military operations fail . Military commanders and civilian authorities alike face a constant temptation to restrict the authority of subordinates even while holding them accountable for their actions .
 He retains responsibility for the forces, but grants the subordinate authority over them . He retains control of the forces but grants them subordinate authority .
 The subordinate commander is then responsible for the forces under his control . He is the commander of his subordinate commander .
 Company commander delegates control of squad to squad leader, but still in command of them . For example, when a company commander sends a squad out on patrol, he delegates control to the squad leader .
 When military command functions in accordance with this principle, the superior commander exercises authority over the subordinate commander, not over the forces placed under the control of the . commander . The superior commander exercise authority over his subordinate commander .
 The military chain of command is founded on the principle of delegating control while retaining command . The chain is founded by the principle that delegates control while retains command .
 A key point that is often missed in studies of command and control is that this distinction starts with the commander in chief of the armed forces--the President . The President is the person in charge of the military .
 The President is, in principle, in command of every unit and individual member of the United States armed forces at all times . Under the U.S. constitution, the President is in charge of all units and members of the armed forces .
 President retains control of the armed forces, but delegates substantial control to the Secretary of Defense . He also delegates significant control to subordinate commanders .
 President retains tight control over release of nuclear weapons, but exercises very little control over routine peacetime military operations . For example, the President exercises little control of release of nukes .
 Understanding the distinction between command and control and the delegation of control to military commanders is essential for understanding how crisis military operations are controlled . Understanding this distinction is essential to understanding how military operations can be controlled .
 This section examines four aspects of military command and control . This section will examine four aspects .
 The tension between delegation and control in the military command system will be explored . The arguments for and against centralized control of military operations will be presented here .
 The methods of exercising control--direct versus delegated, and positive versus by negation--will be explained . Second, the methods of exercise control will be explained. The methods will be used to exercise control .
 The differences between initiatory actions and contingent responses will be defined . Third, the differences between initiating actions and responding responses will also be defined.
 United States Navy commanding officers will be discussed and illustrated with historical examples . Finally, the authority ise ise U.S. Navy Commanders .
 Tension between delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority and maintenance of control is always present in organizations, particularly in large organizations . Delegation and Control is a tension between delegating authority and maintaining control .
 There is no better example of such an organization than the U.S. armed forces . The United States is one of the world's most successful military organizations .
 The armed forces are charged with a mission crucial to the survival of the nation . Unlike any other organization in the U.S., the armed forces have a mission that is crucial to its survival .
 Organization theory would lead to the expectation that there would be significant tension between delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority and maintenance of control in the military chain of command . Organization theory suggests that there is significant tension .
 Centralization versus decentralization in the control of military operations had been a major issue in American civil-military relations . The design of the U.S. military command system since the National Security Act of 1947 has been an issue since 1947 .
 The Truman-MacArthur dispute during the Korean War and military dissatisfaction with Johnson Administration “micro-management"" of the air war against North Vietnam are only two of the most prominent examples of such tensions .
 It is important to understand the roots of such tensions -- the reasons advanced for centralized control and the opposing reasons for decentralized delegation of control .
 Three primary reasons or explanations for the trend toward centralized control of military operations have been advanced . The trend has been advanced in the United States for decades .
 This affects almost every aspect of military operations and is widely recognized within the military . It affects almost all aspects of operations and widely recognized in military .
 Since World War II United States Air Force doctrine has called for centralized control of tactical air power . The U.S. Air Force says it wants to centralize air power in the wake of the Second World War .
 The contention is that effective command and control systems multiply the combat utility of available forces by allowing them to be rapidly applied where they are most needed or where they can 23.
 The higher level in the chain of command at which control is centralized, the broader the force multiplier effect can be applied . In principle, the higher achieve the greatest results. The higher . achieve the . greatest results .
 Of these three reasons for centralized control, escalation control and crisis management concerns are the most important factors prompting civilian control of military operations . The U.S. military says it has a right to be able to control its operations .
 Two primary reasons are advanced for decentralized control of military operations . Two of the main reasons are to decentralize military operations.
 First, the ability of toplevel decisionmakers to effectively exercise close control of military operations is severely constrained by limits on Gecisionmaking and information processing . Second, the limits on the ability to exercise control over military operations are severely constrained .
 Top-level decisionmakers can be overwhelmed by information overload, preventing effective assessment of tactical options . Decisionmakers can also be overwhelmed with information overload .
 They may not have sufficient time to effectively control multiple operations, or may have their attention diverted by one aspect of the operations, neglecting others . They may have to work around the clock to control the operations .
 There have been quantum leaps in the level of knowledge that the President must have of military forces in order to be able to employ them effectively .
 Communications channels typically become overloaded with the vast amounts of information needed to exercise close control of military operations, causing delays in decisionmaking and transmission of orders to operating forces .
 Problems arise in centralized control of military operations is not surprising . The same phenomena drive decentralization in all types of large organizations . Compounding these problems, modern communications systems can give top-level officials a false sense of having complete information and being in eecou .
 The second set of arguments for decentralized control of military operations are based on the on-scene commander's superior ability to control the employment of his forces . The third argument is that the commander has superior control of his own forces .
 His information about the current tactical situation is normally superior that of his superiors . His information is usually superior to his superiors' .
 The German army has since the eighteenth century based its tactical doctrine and command procedures on the concept of auftragstaktik . It emphasizes granting subordinates the maximum possible freedom of action in carrying out assigned missions .
 Only the on-scene commander can fully appreciate and adapt to the inevitable “friction” in military operations, the commander says . Only the commander can truly appreciate the multitude of problems that shape the execution of military plans .
 The historical trend has been for increases in the scale, speed, and complexity of warfare to exceed the ability of command and control systems to keep higher level commanders fully in control, experts say .
 Present-day military forces give no evidence whatsoever of being one whit more capable of dealing with the information needed for the command process than were their predecessors a century or a millennium ago .
 Modern technical means undoubtedly enable present-day command systems to transmit and process more information faster than ever before . However, their ability to approach certainty has not improved to any marked extent .
 The goal has proved elusive through every one of the many revolutions in organization, technology and procedure that have taken place in the past, does there appear to be much hgpe of achieving it in the foreseeable future? Nor, given the fact that this goal has proven elusive through .
 There is little reason to expect that innovations in communications and information processing systems will sovle crisis command and control problems .
 The military chain of command, from the President down to the lowest levels, is founded upon the principle of delegating control of forces to subordinate commanders . Methods of Control include the President, the Commander of the Armed Forces, and the President .
 Modern naval command and control systems add to the complexity of warfare, rather than simplifying its control, by allowing a wider variety of weapons covering larger ocean areas to be brought to bear on the enemy .
 This has lead to enemy command and control systems becoming a primary wartime target . This has led to enemy control systems being a primary target .
 Communications links with operational forces are used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis . In this method, communications links with . operational forces . are used .
 If the on-scene commander wants to take an action other than that ordered by higher authority, he must request and receive permission to do so before initiating the action . On-scene commanders must request permission to take action before initiating it .
 The effectiveness of positive direct control is crucially dependent on communications connectivity and having the full, undivided attention of higher authority . The effectiveness  dependent on connectivity is also dependent on having the right to communicate with higher authority, experts say .
 This form of control is rarely used for wartime or large-scale crisis operations . It is cumbersome and incapable of keeping pace with a rapidly changing tactical situation .
 Toward the center of the tightness of control spectrum is a method that will be referred to as direct control by negation . The method will be called "Direct Control by Negation"
 Communications links with operational forces are used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis . As in positive bidet control, communications links with operations forces are also used .
 The onscene commander is déVigated partial authority to control his forces . However, he has limited control of his forces in the event .
 The scope of the on-scene commander's decisionmaking authority is defined in his mission orders, and the joint commands . Despite efforts by the JCS to standardize it, it's not standardizing it .
 The key feature of this method of control is that the on-scene commander reports his proposed course of action to higher authority, and then carries it out unless it is specifically vetoed .
 The effectiveness of direct control by negation is crucially dependent on communications connectivity and having the full, undivided attention of higher authority . Like positive direct control, the effectiveness of this type of control depends on communication connectivity .
 In the loose form, the on-scene commander initiates action before reporting it . The loose form is called "initiative action" and initiates it .
 The loose form of direct control by negation is the method of control that military commanders typically prefer when they must be placed under direct control . Military commanders prefer to use this method when they are in direct control of their troops .
 Toward the loose end of the tightness of control spectrum are the various forms of delegated control . Toward that loose end is the various types of delegating control .
 In this method of control the immediate commander of a force is delegated direct control over its operations . In this way of control, the commander of the force is delegated direct control of the operations .
 The commander is issued orders to perform a certain mission and then allowed to carry out that mission on his own initiative . Commander is then given the option to perform his own own mission . The mission is then carried out on the commander's own initiative.
 The scope of his authority and the actions he is permitted to take in pursuit of the mission are spelled out in mission orders . Mission orders can range from granting him wide freedom of action to restricting him to specific plan of action .
 In monitored delegated control, the on-scene commander is required to keep his superiors informed of the status of his forces, the progress of his mission, and his operational intentions . If possible, if possible, real-time reports of crucial information are required .
 The chain of command intervenes in the conduct of the operation only when absolutely necessary to ensure that it supports the overall strategy being pursued or to correct serious errors by the on-scene commander .
 Control by negation is often employed in monitored delegated control, as well as under direct control . It is often used in monitoring of delegated control or under direct direct control of negation .
 Gelegated control allows the on-scene commander greater freedom of action than does direct control by negation . The difference between the two methods is that monitored control allows on-scenes commander more freedom .
 Monitored delegated control is viewed by most military officers as the ideal method of control . It strikes a balance between autonomy and control, striking an effective balance .
 When direct communications links are not available or not feasible, autonomous delegated control is the form of control that is employed . Autonomous delegated control can be used in emergencies or when it is not possible .
 In autonomous delegated control the on-scene commander is given his mission orders . He is not expected to report again to higher authority until he successfully completes or aborts the mission . In autonomous control the commander is expected to be able to successfully complete or abort a mission .
 This method of control is not often favored by military commanders because it lacks flexibility . It is therefore only used when absolutely necessary, such as when necessary .
 The U.S. armed forces rely on a combination of direct and delegated methods of control . The United States armed forces have taken a eeooeloate approach to control .
 The balance between autonomy and control is based on the nature of the operations being conducted and the tactical environment--including the political environment--to be considered . The balance will be based on how the operations are conducted, the author says .
 In some cases, different methods of control can be used in conjunction . Different methods can be employed in conjunction to control the system .
 An onscene commander could be under monitored delegated control, but have certain tactical options placed under positive direct control . For example, an onsite commander could have been under monitored .
 A concept useful for ay eee military command and control is the distinction between initiatory actions and contingent responses . Initiatory Actions and Contingent Responses are different concepts .
 Initiatory actions are taken to initiate a new course of action intended to achieve specific objectives . Initiatory action is taken to achieve the objectives of the government .
 Initiatory actions are taken on the basis of an assessment of the overall political-military environment and the local tactical situation . They are not the product of rules designating a particular response to a specific action, they say .
 The on-the-scene commander is taking the initiative, acting rather than reacting . The commander of the scene at the scene of a shooting in Afghanistan is on the ground .
 Contingent responses, on the other hand, are actions taken in response to specific actions . Contingenting responses are more likely to occur in the U.S. Contingency responses are less likely to happen in the future .
 The taking of such actions is contingent upon the prior occurrence of specified actions or the existence of specified tactical 3745 in the previous section . These terms are derived from terms used by the three services, but are not the exact terms used in any of the services .
 Contingent responses are rarely ever fully automatic, they usually require a deliberate operational decision by the on-scene commander . Contingency responses are not always fully automatic .
 Decisions on the use of force governed by rules of engagement are a form of contingent response . Decisions are made based on the fact that they are subject to a contingent response, says the U.S. government .
 Other contingent responses, usually broader in scope, can be included in operations orders, eperations plans and contingency plans .
 As a general rule, the broader the scope and the greater the level of violence involved in a contingent response, the higher up the chain of command the decision to employ that response must be made . The broader scope of the scope, the greater . the . greater the violence involved, the
 The best-known example is the MK 16 Close-In Weapon System, installed on all U.S. Navy warships . In automatic mode, the system will fire on any air target that meets its engagement parameters .
 The Aegis combat system also has sophisticated automatic reaction and engagement capabilities . The new Aegis system is designed to be the most powerful weapon in the world . Aegis is the latest in a long line of combat systems to be developed .
 A retaliatory attack can be either a contingent response authorized in operational guidance or an initiatory action ordered by national leaders . For example, a retaliatory response can be authorized in . operational guidance , or a . initiatory response ordered by . national leaders--even though taken as a repr
 Contingent responses and initiatory actions can have the same political-military intentions and objectives as military responses . Contingency responses and initiating actions can be the same military-led response as military actions .
 A retaliatory attack, to continue the example, could have as its purpose the signaling of a coercive threat . Whether it was a contingent response or an initiatory action, it could signal coercive threats, says the author .
 The primary difference between these two types of military actions is that operational commanders can, on their own authority, execute contingent responses under specified tactical circumstances, whereas appropriate higher authority (normally the President in peacetime) must approve initiatory actions .
 An important feature of the flexible system of direct and delegated command used by the U.S. military is that authority to order contingent responses can be delegated .
 Orders for a particular mission can specify positive direct control of initiatory actions, while at the same time employing monitored delegated control of contingent responses . Orders can be specified positive direct . direct control .
 As always, a careful balance must be struck between direct and delegated command when using this differentiated approach . The U.S. government is using this approach to combat terrorism in the Middle East .
 The decision on direct versus delegated command is not an “all or nothing” proposition . Flexible combinations of the two iwethods are possible . The important point is that the decision is not all or nothing .
 U.S. Navy command and control philosophy has no equivalent in the other services . Delegation of authority granted to commanding officers of ships and other commanders is extremely high .
 British and American naval officers often played important foreign policy roles on their own initiative . This is a tradition in the United States Navy, one inherited from the Royal Navy and centuries-old traditions of the sea .
 British naval officers were under standing orders to “act in the best interests of the Queen” when deployed to distant stations . Officers were given freedom of action to handle situations not covered in sailing orders .
 This tradition exerts a strong influence on Navy command and control philosophy today . This tradition is still strong in the Navy .
 The actions of individual commanding officers could have a major impact on the management of a crisis . It is important to understand their authority as spelled out in U.S Navy Regulations .
 The responsibility of the Commanding Officer for his command is absolute, except when, and to the extent, relieved therefrom by competent authority, or as provided otherwise in these regulations .
 The authority of the Commanding Officer is commensurate with his responsibility, subject to the pimits proscribed by law and regulations .
 Commanding Officer who departs from his orders or instructions, or takes official action which is not in accordance with such orders and instructions, must report immediately . Report immediately to the officer from whom the prior orders were received .
 It permits a commanding officer, under unanticipated extraordinary circumstances, to exercise initiative--even when contrary to his orders . So long as he immediately informs his chain of command of his action, he can exercise initiative . The law allows him to exercise his own initiative even if contrary to orders .
 In practice, commanding officers are extremely cautious about taking such an action, says the BBC .
 Their professional training and experience instill in them strong respect for the chain of command and orders issued by higher authority . They also respect the authority of the military .
 Two examples of Navy officers acting on their own initiative, contrary to orders, illustrate how the provisions of Navy Regulations are applied in practice .
 The first case occurred in July 1953, two days after the end of the Korean War . The case is the first of its kind .
 On July 29, 1953, a U.S. Air Force RB-50 reconnaissance plane was shot down by Soviet fighters in international airspace over the Sea of Japan . It was apparently in retaliation for the downing of a ‘lobia.’
 All but one of the crew were able to bail out of the water . Several were spotted in the water by American search plawes . The crew was able to escape .
 Vice Admiral Schindler received a response directing him to remain clear of Soviet territorial waters . By the time he received the response, he had already recovered the only survivor .
 Admiral Schindler confirmed that he sent the message reproduced in Gallery's book . Gallery, 58, and Gallery, 44 -ield, 459; Gallery, . 58; Schindlers, letter to author, March 19, 1988 .
 Admiral Schindler informed his superiors of his intentions, allowing control by negation . Adm. Schindlers told his superiors that he would not be allowed to take part in the Holocaust .
 Vice Admiral Schindler used a message to his superiors stating his intentions in order to clarify ambiguous orders, and, by keeping his force clear of Soviet territorial waters, acted with appropriate caution .
 The second case occurred in Zanzibar, an island nation off the eastern coast of Africa, in January 1964 .
 Zanzibar, a former British protectorate, gained independence on December 10, 1963 . Zanzibia was a former protectorate of the British monarchy .
 On January 12, 1964, African rebels overthrew the government of sultan Seyyid Jamshid Bin Abdullah in a bloody coup . The coup took place in Africa's capital in 1964 .
 Little was known about the rebel group or its intentions, leading to grave concern for the safety of foreigers on the isana . Little is known about its intentions .
 A rebel leader broadcast a warning that they would not tolerate interference by foreign powers . While the destroyer was en route, however, a rebel leader issued a warning about foreign interference .
 U.S. authorities in Washington ordered Manley to remain out of sight over the horizon from the island, then later cancelled Manley's orders entirely .
 The sixty-three Americans on the island, including the staff of a NASA space tracking station, had fled to the English Club on the Zanzibar city waterfront . The staff of NASA's space tracking program had fled the island .
 The American Charge d'‘Affairs, Frederick P Picard, informed the destroyer that their situation on the island was desperate and that they were in grave danger . The American charge d''Affairs informed the American .
 Manley's Commanding Officer, Commander Robert Ruxton, reported the evacuation request to his immediate superior, Rear Admiral {Crpid. Manley . Manley’s Commanding . Officer reported the request to Rear Admiral Rear Admiral Crpid Manley .
 Manley sent the ship's Executive Officer, Lieutenant Commander Joseph E Murray, Jr., ashore to organize the evacuation . Murray was in white uniform when he was sent ashore to help organize evacuation .
 Murray and Picard negotiated with rebel leaders, assuring them that the U.S. warship would not interfere in Zanzibar's internal affairs . Murray, Picard: "The United States warship will not interfere with the internal affairs"
 At one point in the talks, John Okello put a gun to Murray's head and threatened to kill him if the U.S. ship did not depart . The rebel leader threatened to shoot Murray if the United States ship didn't depart .
 Murray and Picard persevered, gaining permission from the rebel leaders to evacuate American women and children . Murray, Picard and Picard were able to evacuate the women, children and women .
 Murray and Picard convinced rebel guards that they had permission to evacuate all of the Americans . When they returned to the English Club, they convinced the rebels that all Americans had been evacuated . Murray: "It was a good night for the Americans"
 Murray succeeded in ferrying all of the Americans to Manley before rebel leaders discovered what had happened . Murray succeeded to ferry the Americans from Manley to safety .
 Wets hanger was unable to participate because it did not have radio or cable communications with 47 shia . Manley embarked 61 Americans and 30 other foreign nationals, and departed for Tanganyika .
 U.S. officials in Washington were incapable of staying abreast of a rapidly changing political situation . United States officials were unable to stay in touch with the changing situation, officials say .
 Knowing only that rebel leaders had broadcast a warning 48 bia; ""Four to be Hanged in Zanzibar," Mombasa Times , January 15, 1964, 1. 1.
 Manley's Executive Officer was personally commended for his role in the evacuation . Manley was personally praised for his work at the airport .
 The situation could have been much more serious with sixty-one potential hostages on the island, as the United States would learn later in Iran . The U.S. learned later that the situation was more serious .
 Allison's original organizational process model would seriously misconstrue both of these incidents, Allison says . Allison: "Allison's original organization process model" Allison: The original organizational model would have been very different from Allison's model .
 The model does not account for the substantial authority delegated to Navy commanders . It includes authority to disregard orders when warranted by unanticipated extraordinary circumstances .
 Admiral Schindler allowed his superiors to exercise control by negation when he sent the message stating his intention . In the absence of a timely response acted with prudence and kept his ships clear of Soviet territorial waters .
 Rear Admiral Schade disregarded orders issued by the Secretary of Defense via the military chain of command in order to respond to the evacuation request . Manley carried out the evacuation with caution to avoid incidents .
 The behavior of Navy and Marine Corps commanders during the 1958 landings in Lebanon was much different from that of Navy commanders in the Zanzibar episode . Neither organizational routines nor evasion of civilian control was a factor in these two axdietdietments .
 The first request was that the Marines not be landed over the beach to seize the airport, that they be kept aboard ship and brought into the harbor . The request was made for the Marines to be kept on ship and kept in harbor .
 This request was made after the first battalion of Marines was ashore and deployed, which would have required lengthy backloading of the men and their equipment . This request would have had to be backloaded of the troops .
 President Eisenhower had already announced the landing to the world . President Eisenhower also announced the mission to the U.S.
 The second request was for a company of Marines to be sent from the airport to the presidential palace to guard against a possible coup . The request was made about thirty minutes after the first request .
 Lebanese officials and the U.S. ambassdor completely reversed their position from the earlier request . Note that in making this request, Lebanese officials changed their position completely .
 This request was refused because the Marine commander thought that the small force would have been in an exposed and vulnerable position, and cut off from the main force . The request was turned down by the commander of the small Marine force .
 Tension between delegation and control is always present in the military chain of command . Tension is present in military chains of command in the US .
 Pressures toward centralized control are driven by the complexity of modern warfare, fear of nuclear war, and efforts to exploit the force multiplier effect . Pressures to central control driven by complexity of warfare and fear of nukes war .
 Pressures toward decentralized control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations . The advantages gained by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative are gained by allowing on-scenes commander flexibility .
 Improvements in communications and information processing systems are unlikely to reduce the need for delegation of control, experts say . The need to delegate control is unlikely to be solved, they say .
 The methods of exercising control cover a ""tightness of control” spectrum ranging from very tight to very loose control . The methods are covered by a range of methods, including very tight and very loose .
 The second battalion had deen landed . The airport and landing area was secured until the second battalion landed .
 Lebanese tanks and artillery massed on the road into Beirut, almost causing an armed clash . Marine commander's caution appears to have been warranted given that when the first column of Marines attempted to leave the airport the next day, they met Lebanese tanks .
 Marine commander ashore felt his orders were excessively rigid . Political and military considerations were at least as important as organizational routines in determining decsions .
 Toward the loose end of the spectrum are monitored delegated control and autonomous delegated control . In addition to delegated control, delegated control can be monitored by delegated control or autonomous .
 The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control . The U.S. armed forces relies heavily on direct or delegated control of operations .
 Forces can be rapidly shifted from one method to another as the situation warrants . Certain of the methods of control can oe used in conjunction .
 A Gistinction between initiatory actions and contingent responses is used to delegate authority to take certain actions, while withholding authority to do others . This is used as a way to delegate authority in certain actions .
 Navy command and control doctrine is unique in the scope of the authority granted to commanding officers . Commanders can even act contrary to orders when the situation warrants, Navy says .
 These are the basic concepts on which military command and control procedures are based . The basic concepts are based on basic concepts such as command, control and surveillance .
 Emphasis is on delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority in conjunction with appropriate methods of control . Emphasis was on delegating discretionary decision making authority .
 In addition to direct control via communications links, commanders can exercise indirect control of subordinates even after having delegated them substantial autonomy . Commanders can exercise direct control over subordinates via direct communications links .
 The mechanisms of indirect eontrol are the subject of the next section of this article . We will discuss the mechanisms of direct eontrolling .
 When a military commander delegates control of operational forces, he does not relinquish all control of those forces to his subordinate . Mechanisms of Indirect Control include the ability to delegate control to a subordinate .
 The commander has at his disposal various mechanisms of indirect control . Additionally, the commander has . at least one of the most direct means of direct control .
 Mechanisms of indirect control are orders, instructions, or detailed guidance issued to a commander prior to the start of a mission in order to ensure that the decisions he makes support the objectives and intentions of his superiors .
 Such instructions can range from being very detailed and specific to very general in nature . Such instructions may be very detailed, specific or very general nature .
 As the subordinate is granted increasing freedom from direct control--the importance of the mechanisms of indirect control increases . As the eatihod of control being used moves across the ""tightness of control"" spectrum from tight to loose--that is the "tightness of control" spectrum from
 When a subordinate is operating under autonomous delegated control, with no direct communications links at all, the mechanisms of indirect control are the only means of control available . The mechanisms of direct direct control are often used to control subordinates .
 The DEFCON system defines the overall framework for controlling the readiness of U.S. forces . It provides a uniform system for all operational commands . The system is designed to control readiness of United States forces .
 Following guidance from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, individual commands Peeeriasatie alert procedures and readiness postures applicable to their forces .
 The system is highly flexible, allowing different major commands to be placed at different DEFCON levels as the world situation Warrants . Different major commands are placed at . different levels as well as the . world situations .
 It is not unusual for U.S. forces in different parts of the world to be at different DEFCON levels . It's not unusual .
 Much of the detailed guidance for operational forces is not part of the alert system per se . It is included in standing orders and contingency plans activated as higher levels of DEFCON declared .
 A commander need not dssue detailed orders to every subordinate command specifying the measures he wants them to take, he says . A commander needs to be able to direct his subordinates to comply with his orders, he writes .
 The measures required for each level of readiness are spelled out in standing orders . All the commander needs to do is state the level he cesires and then monitor the messages that come in reporting attainment .
 This frees the commander from having to directly manage details of implementing the alert, leaving him free to concentrate on assessing the situation and planning subsequent military operations . The commander is free to assess the situation, planning subsequent operations .
 Commanders must maintain minimum readiness level set by JCS . They can place their forces at a higher condition of readiness if warranted by threat .
 Commanders in Chief can select from among various readiness postures--tailored for different types of threats--within a given DEFCON level . Commanders can also select among various postures within a given level .
 A Navy battle group or fleet commander can place his entire force in an increased readiness status on his own authority . Navy battle groups or fleet commanders can place their own force in readiness status .
 Standing orders are detailed guidance on operational procedures prepared on a routine basis during peacetime . Standing orders provide guidance on military procedures prepared for peacetime use .
 The intent is that they provide stable guidance, thereby minimizing uncertainty over operational procedures . Although they are revised periodically, the intent is to minimize uncertainty over operations procedures .
 United States Army Field Manuals , United States Navy Naval Warfare Publications, and NATO Allied Tactical Publications 34 Doctrine serves as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to issue a very brief order directing that a particular tactic or procedure be executed .
 Doctrine can be taught and rehearsed in peacetime, thus reducing confusion arising from unfamiliar procedures . Doctrine can also be taught, rehearsed, and thus reduce confusion arising in unfamiliar procedures.
 The prior formulation of a doctrine for carrying out the action still facilitates controlling it . Certain procedures require amplifying information for coordination purposes, such as direction and timing of actions .
 Doctrine reduces the amount of details that must be included in situation reports in order to explain the progress of an operation . Doctrine also reduces communications up the chain of command by reducing the number of details .
 A common misconception about doctrine is that it specifies only a single tactic to be used in each situation . A common mistake is that doctrine is only to specify only one tactic to use in every situation .
 In fact, doctrinal publications typically define a range of options for any given situation, and provide criteria for selecting among them . "Dismotical" publications define a variety of options, such as a number of options .
 The complexity of doctrine and the range of options it encompasses has increased in direct proportion with the complexity of warfare, says the author of the book . "The complexity of doctrines and options has increased," he says .
 The greater the variety of sensors, platforms, and weapons at a commander’s disposal, the greater are his options in any given situation . The greater a commander's options in a given situation, the more options a commander has .
 The easy part of tactical training is teaching standard tactical procedures, the difficult part is selecting the most appropriate option, or combination of options, for a particular situation . The difficult part for tactical decisionmakers is how to select the best option for a situation .
 Most doctrinal publications explicitly recognize that not every tactical situation can be anticipated, and that the standard procedures they contain should be used as building blocks . Command for constructing an appropriate plan of action. and control would not be as complex as it is .
 The term “operations order"" is a Navy term, but the other services have equivalent documents . The term "operations orders" is Navy term .
 A standing operations order typically defines command relationships, communications channels, logistics procedures, and other such routine information . A standing operation order defines commands, relationships, and communications channels .
 It serves as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to repeatedly issue the same orders to cover repetitive routine situations . It relieves a commander from having to repeat repeated routine orders .
 Standing operations orders define the scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders on a routine basis . An important function of standing operations orders is to define scope of . decisionmaking . authority .
 Standing operations orders are a good example of hierarchical controls or rule-governed delegation of decisionmaking . Standing operations order is an example of a hierarchical control of decision-making .
 Operations Plan is a comprehensive set of Plans for the conduct of a specific operation . An operations plan is a set of plans for conduct of an operation . Operations plan is based on a plan to conduct an operation in a specific area .
 Standing operational plans are those that have been activated for execution of particular peacetime operations . Stand-out plans are standing operational plans that are activated for the execution of certain peacetime missions .
 Standing operations orders are limited in scope to a single operation . They serve a function similar to that of standing operations orders, but are limited to one operation .
 The single operation could well consist of a series of repetitive missions, such as reconnaissance flights . The single mission could be a prolonged series of repeated missions, like reconnaissance flights.
 An operations plan serves as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the routine aspects of an operation . Operations plan is a means of direct control of a commander's control of the operations plan .
 Standing operations plans define the scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders on a routine basis . An important function of standing operations plans is to define scope of decisions .
 Standing operations orders are another good example of hierarchical controls or rule-governed delegation of decisionmaking . Standing operations order is another example of such a structure or hierarchy .
 Long-range schedules are prepared for such recurring activities as surveillance missions, major maintenance periods for ships and aircraft, ship deployments and exercises .
 Long-range schedules are often “nested,” with shorter-term schedules filling in the details of longerrange schedules . Short-term and long-range plans are often "nested"
 Long-range schedules serve as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to approve a large number of recurring routine operations at one time . The details of planning and executing each one of these operations can be left to subordinates .
 Long-range schedules are an important means of indirect presidential control of the U.S. armed forces . The schedules are important for the president to control the armed forces.
 The operations listed in a schedule are authorized for execution unless specifically cancelled . Once a schedule is approved, the operations listed are allowed for execution . This is the first time a schedule has been approved by Congress .
 The schedules are reviewed to ensure that the operations are still appropriate and will not interfere with U.S. foreign policy . They review the schedules .
 If questions arise concerning the political implications of a particular operation, it may be cancelled or referred to the President for a final decision . The operation may also be referred to a decision by the President .
 Most longrange schedules for routine evolutions are not subjected to this close scrutiny after they are approved . The schedule is not subject to this scrutiny after it is approved .
 Long-range schedules are subject to frequent changes due to the fickle nature of world politics . But they nonetheless serve important planning and control functions . The U.S. has a long-range schedule for the next few years .
 Mission orders include letters of intent, operations plans or operations orders issued for a specific short-term operation . Mission orders are used to initiate routine and non-routine operations .
 Mission orders are important when the monitored delegated control method is used, and crucial when the autonomous delegated control system is used . Mission orders can be important when using the autonomous control method .
 They are less important when one of the direct control methods is used, says CNN.com .
 Mission orders can range from being very detailed and ip Hed Rc to being very brief and general . Mission orders may be very detailed, but can be very brief .
 A mission order can include the same amount of detail as an operations plan . But a mission order is not always as detailed as an operation plan .
 Mission orders serve as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the details of an operation's execution . Mission orders relieve a commander from exercising direct control of a commander's mission .
 Mission orders define scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders . An important function of mission orders is to define the scope of decisions made by commanders .
 Mission orders provide a means of allowing a commander to focus his attention on the most important decisions that come up in the course of an operation without being distracted by routine matters . Mission orders are a way of keeping the commander from being distracted .
 This in turn helps prevent communications channels and decisionmakers from becoming overloaded . This is in turn by preventing communications channels from being overloaded .
 Contingency plans serve as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to rapidly issue a single order to execute an operation that he and his staff have had time to prepare in detail ahead of time . Contingencies plans are a mechanism for indirect control of the military .
 Contingency plans are distributed in advance, eliminating the burden of having to issue a large volume of orders when a decision in made to carry out the operation . Contingencies are distributed to avoid the burden on issuing large volume orders .
 The only direct orders that are needed are last-minute revisions to the contingency plan and the mission order directing that 1t be executed as modified . The mission order must be directed to execute as modified.
 The single most important U.S. contingency plan is the Single Integrated Operational Plan for the employment oo | of United States strategic nuclear forces . The plan is designed to protect the United States from a nuclear attack .
 An important feature of the U.S. alert system is that increasing the readiness condition activates preparations to execute designated contingency plans applicable to the conflict at hand .
 DEFCON is much greater when forces have a specific mission that they are preparing to execute than when they simply increase their readiness without being assigned a mission . This type of preparation is closely linked to Gye aileee system because of its effectiveness .
 Routine contingency planning takes place on a continuing basis in peacetime to prepare plans for the most likely and most dangerous situations that can be anticipated . The U.S. military says it is prepared to prepare contingency plans for most likely situations .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff and commanders in chief of the unified commands have primary responsibility for deciding what contingency plans are written . The Joint chiefs of Staff are responsible for the decision .
 The National Security Council has cnly a very small role in routine contingency planning . It has played a very little role in the planning process .
 Crisis contingency planning consists of revising existing plans or formulating new plans for a range of military operations after a crisis has sigan . The National Security Council plays a significant role in determining which contingency plans are updated or prepared during crisis contingency planning .
 Joint Staff and unified command responsible for the area in which the crisis is located begin crisis contingency planning as soon as indications are received .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff are often described as incapable or unwilling to provide a broad range of military options for dealing with a crisis . This does not appear to be accurate, but this appears to be true .
 The National Security Council will provide a range of options when directed to do so, sources say . The consensus among present and former NSC staff members is that the JCS will provide options .
 They always have a preferred option, which typically entails decisive use of superior force so as to reduce the risk of defeat and to deter escalation . "They always have to use decisive force," says President Obama .
 It is not unusual for the option preferred by the JCS to be viewed as politically infeasible by civilian authorities . The option preferred is often viewed as political infeasibility .
 The JCS also tend to resist civilian involvement in the details of operational planning . The objectives and basic parameters of an operation have been defined .
 These include activating crisis management staffs, informing subordinate commanders of the situation, assembling personnel with specialized training and experience in the area, canceling or modifying routine operations that might exacerbate the crisis or delay a military response .
 Many such actions can be executed without prior approval of the President, though he is normally informed of them via the Secretary of Defense or the National Security Advisor .
 Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations 1955-1961, was particularly adept at quietly alerting Navy units and readying them for potential crises . He was particularly fond of alerting units to potential crises in the Navy .
 The Navy was able to conduct the 1958 landing in Lebanon on short notice . It was due to such actions by the CNO that the Navy could conduct the landing .
 As a general rule, authority to order retaliatory attacks is not delegated to military commanders, it is closely held by the President .
 Contingency planning for such attacks makes an important contribution to the effectiveness of peacetime and crisis military operations . It provides the President with military options for a prompt response to provocations .
 In contingency planning for retaliation, as in all other types of routine contingency planning, preparation of a plan is not an indication of intent to execute the plan . Preparation is not intended to execute a plan, as well as the intent to do so, experts say .
 Opinions vary widely as to the value of routine contingency planning for crisis management . The U.S. has been in the throes of a crisis crisis in recent years .
 These factors impose inherent constraints on the ability of routine contingency planning to provide plans that are ideally suited for management of particular crises . The factors impose constraints on planning, such as the need to be able to manage crises .
 The planning process itself can make an important contribution to crisis management . The plans produced by routine contingency planning may not be appropriate or adequate for the specific crises .
 "You have to do a considerable amount of improvising outside the plans," says the author . "They have to be modified to fit the particular circumstances at the time," he says .
 The comments offered by Aatiaead 5 Wylie, Rivero and Ward reveal three reasons for the value of contingency planning .
 First, contingency planning educates the staff officers that prepare the plans and the commanders that review them on the characteristics of the area in which the operations will be conducted . First, they educate staff officers and commanders that prepare plans .
 Horacio Rivero, Jr., Jr., letter to author, March 10, 1988 . Second, the operational and logistical problems 64 amiarl Horacio . Rivero: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm sure I'm going to do it"
 Third, a contingency plan provides a baseline or starting point for further planning after a crisis arises . A contingency plan is a starting point to further planning for a crisis .
 It is almost always easier to modify an existing plan than to create a new plan from scratch . Even when a plan requires extensive modification, it usually contains much valuable information .
 The disadvantage of contingency planning is that the existence of a plan can preclude other options that might be superior for dealing with the crisis . The disadvantage is that it can prevent other options, such as a plan .
 A perception can arise that there is not sufficient time to prepare alternative plans . A perception of time is not enough time for alternative plans can arise, says CNN.com editor .
 Support for an existing plan can restrict the search for alternatives, or create a bias against alternative plans that have not been staffed as well due to time constraints . Time constraints can also create bias against new plans that are not staffed .
 The officers who prepared the original plans sometimes resist modifications to them out of pride in authorship . The original plans were prepared by the original officers of the Royal Marines .
 The mechanisms of indirect control relieve higher authorities of the burden of having to closely closely # Gl Bay the details of military operations . The burden can quickly exceed their information processing and decisionmaking capabilities when large-scale operations are Béham .
 The mechanisms of indirect control aid in striking an appropriate balance between autonomy and control in the execution of military operations . When used properly by national leaders, this can contribute to crisis managment, writes Peter Bergen .
 Discussion of mechanisms of indirect control has focused on how they are supposed to work in principle . Thus far this discussion of the mechanisms of direct control has been limited to how it works .
 Neither the mechanisms themselves nor the decisionmakers that use them are are perfect, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The mechanisms themselves are not perfect," he says . Sutter says .
 Many things can go wrong in the stress and confusion of crisis military Operations . Many things go wrong during a crisis military operations, say officials .
 There are inherent limits on the ability of these, or any, mechanisms to ensure that decisions made at one level are those that are most appropriate for the situation at another level . More importantly, there are inherent limitations on these mechanisms, as well as any mechanisms .
 National leaders could give tactical orders that are disastrous for the on-scene forces, or tactical commanders could take an action that seriously disrupts the crisis management efforts of national leaders . For example, a tactical commander could take a decision that could seriously disrupt national leadership efforts .
 This problem is inherent because decisionmakers at the different levels are operating in different environments . This is because they operate at different levels of decisionmaking . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 They can develop different threat perceptions, priorities of objectives, and expectations as to the future course of the crisis . They can also develop much different threats perceptions and priorities .
 Chapters VII and VIII present the case studies . How the mechanisms of indirect control perform in practice will be examined in Chapters VII, VIII .
 Rules of engagement are particularly important in crisis management . They will be discussed in greater detail in the next section of this article .
 Rules of Engagement are orders issued to define the circumstances in which the U.S. armed forces are authorized to use their weapons Soi defense against hostile forces in peacetime . Rules of engagement serve combat operations in wartime as a mechanism of indirect control .
 Rules of engagement provides guidance on how to respond to threat of attack in peacetime and on limitations on fighting in wartime . Rules of Engagement provides guidance to operating forces .
 Wartime rules of engagement place limits on military action when U.S. forces are engaged in an armed confiace .
 Wartime rules of engagement allow military action under such circumstances only for self-defense . The adversary is forced to decide to escalate or expand the conflict .
 Peacetime rules of engagement are founded on the right of self-defense . Self-defense is defined under international law and in U.S. Department of Defense .
 Peacetime rules of engagement are intended to prevent unwanted military incidents and support crisis management . The rules are designed to avoid unwanted incidents .
 The rules of engagement are intended ""to restrain aggression, prevent the outbreak of hostilities, and to uT33"
 Standing rules of engagement are written for routine peacetime operations . The U.S. military says it has no obligation to engage in military operations .
 Special rules of engagement are issued to cover particularly sensitive situations, such as operations near a country openly hostile to the U.S. and during an international crisis .
 The President, as commander in chief of the armed forces, is the ultimate source of all rules of engagement . The President's role is to ensure that the rules are met by the President .
 Navy aircraft supporting the Marines in Lebanon from July to October 1958 were ordered “not to return fire"" when fired on by rebel forces . U.S. Navy aircraft were ordered not to return return fire when fired by rebels .
 Civilian authorities are involved in the formulation, review and approval of rules of engagement . The level of their involvement varies widely . Civilian authorities are involved in some of the most significant changes to the rules .
 Civilian authorities become directly involved in the formulation and review of special rules of engagement and major revisions to standing rules of . engagement .
 NSC interdepartmental group reviewed proposed aes of engagement to ensure that they support overall presidential policies . Policy Review Group is chaired by the Deputy National Security Advisor and composed of top deputies from the Department of State, Department of Defense, and Defense .
 The National Security Advisor reviews important revisions to rules of engagement, and submits revisions involving relaxations of restrictions to the President for approval .
 Martin interview; briefings for author at Navy Command Center, National Military Command Center and National Security Council . Author: Martin interview was conducted by the U.S. National Command Center .
 These successive additions to the rules of engagement are not dntended to modify . The purpose of these additions is to tailor what is usually generalized guidance to specific circumstances . These additions are not intended to modify the rules, but to tailor them to specific situations .
 Commanders in chief of the unified commands and subordinate commanders must submit proposed revisions to their rules of engagement via the chain of command to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for approval .
 Top-level military and civilian authorities directly involved in crisis management have ready access to all rules of engagement promulgated to U.S. forces .
 On-scene commander (the senior officer in command of the forces at the scene of a crisis) and tactical decisionmakers (commanding officers of individual units) use the rules of engagement as guidance for making operational decisions on the use of force .
 Rules of engagement do not require that a commander attempt to consult with higher authority before taking action in self-defense . Rule of engagement does not require a commander to consult a higher authority .
 The rules exist specifically because commanders in the field or at sea may not have the means or sufficient time to contact higher authority . The rules are designed to allow commanders to call higher authority if they have time to do so .
 The fundamental objective of rules of engagement is for the operational decisions made by tactical commanders to support national objectives and policies as well as ensuring the defense of U.S. forces . Rules of engagement are for tactical commanders, the U.N. says .
 Rules of engagement are a central element in the flexible United States system of direct and delegated control . Rules are central to the flexible U.S. system of federal government .
 Restrictive rules of engagement narrow the tactical decision-making authority of the on-scene commander, in effect imposing a greater degree of direct control on him . The rules are meant to narrow the commander's tactical decision making authority, say officials .
 Permissive rules of engagement broaden his decision-making authority, shifting him toward greater delegated control . Rules of engagement broadens his authority, allowing him to take more control .
 The authority to revise rules of engagement is itself an important issue in the balance between direct and delegated control . The balance of authority is itself important in balancing the balance of direct and delegate control .
 Reserving authority to revise rules of engagement to top-level authorities can have the same negative impact as attempting direct control of operations . delegating authority to lower levels can raise the same problems of coordinating national policies as delegated control .
 Commanders in the chain of command usually have limited authority to revise rules of engagement . On-scene commander has limited authority when such revisions do not result in significant relaxation of the rules .
 Authority to make broader revisions to the rules of engagement, particularly to issue significantly more permissive rules, is reserved for toplevel authorities . Authority to change the rules to the rule of engagement is reserved from topleplevel authority .
 Rules of engagement are atrectes by the same tension between delegation and control that affects all other aspects of command and control . Rules are thus at risk of a repeat of the tension that occurs in the military .
 Guidance from other sources of operational guidance is often incorrectly attributed to rules of engagement . Rules of engagement rules are often attributed to operational guidance from sources of guidance .
 The two categories overlap in that both address requirements for identifying unidentified contacts . Both address requirements to identify unidentified contacts and identify contacts .
 At times during the Vietnam War (when fighter pilots were required to visually identify air targets in order to avoid firing on other U.S. oa measures to avoid mutual interference were included in the rules, but this has subsequently been corrected .
 NATO forces may operate in the same battle area in some NATO environments . Measures to avoid mutual interference are particularly important, even overshadow rules of engagement .
 Measures to avoid mutual interference do not have a Significant role in crisis management, so will not be discussed further . Measures do not play a significant role in the crisis management .
 The remainder of this discussion will focus on peacetime rules of engagement . The rest of the discussion will be focused on the peacetime .
 wartime rules of engagement are of great importance, particularly in the study of limited war . But they raise a different set of issues than those of interest in e¥tieike management .
 Commanders in the field or at sea may not have the means or sufficient time to contact higher authority . Commanders may not be able to reach higher authority in time to respond to requests .
 The speed of modern warfare causes the tactical situation to change much faster than it can be explained to higher authority . The destructiveness of modern weapons can make decisionmaking delays fatal .
 Giscussion of peacetime rules of engagement is applicable to all of the U.S. armed forces . Initiatory actions, such as retaliatory attacks or Bonis Giscussions, are possible .
 The basic principles and concepts presented in the section on peacetime naval rules of engagement are also applicable to the other services . The focus is on how they apply to naval forces .
 Rules of engagement affect the day-to-day operations of the Navy and Air Force much more than those of the Army . The rules of engagement are important to the Navy, Air Force and the Navy .
 The U.S. ships on the high seas and planes in international airspace are frequently in close proximity to potential adversaries . This is because national borders tend to keep ground forces separated .
 Rules of engagement do not require that a commander attempt to consult mit Gun diatrers authority before taking action in self-defense . Thus, rules of engagement .
 United States Navy Regulations, 1973 state that the right of self-defense may arise in order to counter either the use of force or the threat of force . U.S. Navy ships and aircraft are generally authorized to take defensive action .
 A primary function of rules of engagement is to define actions and indicators that are to be used to determine that hostile intent is being demonstrated . Rules of engagement are designed to define the actions and . indicators that will be used in determining hostile intent, such as . actions .
 The third reason why rules of engagement are necessary is that not all nations that are potentially hostile to the United States present the same level of military threat to U.S. forces . Rules of engagement is necessary for the U.N. to engage in combat in Afghanistan .
 U.S. forces legitimately need great leeway toward certain openly hostile and militarily unpredictable countries, particularly when they have attacked United States forces in the past . United States needs leeway in dealing with hostile and unpredictable countries .
 The U.S. has evolved fairly stable, tacit ""rules of the game" in its military relationships with other countries . On the other hand, the United States has evolved a fairly stable relationship with the Soviet Union, particularly the former Soviet Union .
 With such countries the threat is more predictable and greater care can be taken to avoid inadvertent incidents without unnecessarily risking U.S. forces .
 The rules of engagement reflect a wide range in the stability and predictability potential military threats . Rules are more permissive rules when the danger is greater and more restrictive rules when interactions are better regulated .
 Rules of engagement are necessary to ensure that in responding to a hostile act or hostile intent, U.S. forces adhere to the international legal principles of proportional force and minimum force . The fourth reason for rules of engagement is necessary is to ensure the United States .
 The principle of proportional force requires that the force used in self-defense be proportional to the amount used in the hostile act or threatened when hostile intent was shown . Self-defense is a form of self-defence in the United States .
 The principle of minimum force requires that the level of force used in response to a hostile act or hostile intent be limited to the minimum necessary to prevent the threat of further attack .
 Rules of engagement are used to spell out when defensive action may be taken in such circumstances . Rules of Engagement are used by the club to deal with situations such as the situation .
 The United States Navy has had almost two centuries of experience with political limitations on the use of force due to its role as an implement of foreign policy in the Nineteenth century . The U.S. Navy has been involved in the warships of the past two centuries .
 A Juridical Examination of the Use of Naval Forces in Support of U.S. Foreign Policy,” JAG Journal 32 : 111 .
 The United States was far removed from potential enemies and its forces were rarely in contact with those of potential adversaries . The U.S. was far from enemies and troops were rarely involved in combat .
 Long-range aircraft and the growth of U.S. global security commitments changed the situation . The U.N. says it has a long-range presence in the world .
 As the Cold War with the Soviet Union intensified, confrontations between the superpowers became more frequent and dangerous . The U.S. became a major ally of the West in the 1950s and 1960s .
 1948 Berlin crisis saw Soviet closing of ground access to the city and harassment of supply flights threatened to cause armed clashes . This was starkly apparent in the 1948 crisis, when Soviet closing access to Berlin was threatened with armed clashes.
 There were two serious incidents between American and Soviet aircraft during the Korean War, both involving Soviet planes threatening U.S. Navy ships . There were also several lesser incidents between the two sides .
 The first incident in which a Soviet fighter attacked an American plane off the Soviet coast occurred on October 15, 1945, less than two months after Japan surrendered . The first such incident occurred in October 1945, when a Soviet plane was attacked .
 Between 1945 and 1950 there were at least nine instances of Soviet or Warsaw Pact fighters attacking U.S. or British planes . The incident occurred during the Cold War .
 Initial guidance was later assessed to be overly restrictive, and was replaced by a revised interception policy in 1952 . This initial guidance was assessed as being overly restrictive .
 The two presidential directives constitute the origins of Unites States rules of engagement . Although the term . had not yet officially entered the military vocabulary, the term rules of . engagement per se had not . yet officially . entered the . military vocabulary .
 The United States Air Force was the first service to use the term rules of engagement to a intercept and engagement policy . The Air Force began using the term in the fall of 1952 in the joint planning arena .
 The unified commands shifted over to the new term at about the same time . The unified command system is now used by the U.S. military .
 The term was not widely used in the fleet until the Vietnam War, when rules of engagement became a major factor in shaping combat operations . In fact, the term was used in Vietnam War .
 All of the major concepts upon which U.S. rules of engagement are based were adopted during the 1950s . Rules of engagement were adopted in the United States during the early 1960s .
 The Air Force first proposed allowing the use of force against aircraft ""manifestly hostile in intent"" in 1953, leading to aia of the principle of anticipatory self-defense on the basis of hostile intent .
 The Navy adopted this principle in 1958, allowing anticipatory selfdefense when there was “clear and present danger to the United States or its forces."" provision was adopted in 1958 . It was not a significant factor in U.S. Navy operations until the late 1960s, when the
 Under the doctrine of hot pursuit, United States forces could pursue 2 oftice of the Chief of Naval Operations, “Protective Measures to be Taken in Applying the Right of SelfPreservation in Peacetime,”"" OPNAVINST 03300.8,
 Hot pursuit could even be carried into the airspace of another country . Under certain circumstances, hot pursuit could be carried out in the country's airspace . Hot pursuit may even take place in the air .
 Punitive reprisals, on the other hand, could only be authorized by the President . Punitive revenge reaction could only be authorized by the president .
 That these important concepts originated in the National Security Council illustrates that civilian authorities have long had a direct role in shaping rules of engagement . Civilians have long played a key role with the decision to engage in combat in Afghanistan .
 The next significant changes in the rules of engagement took place ee the Vietnam War .
 The rules of engagement became detailed, complex, and cumbersome, requiring positive identification of targets on the basis of features that were exceedingly difficult to discern in combat . Rules of engagement are detailed and complex and require positive identification .
 The rules of engagement for the air war over North Vietnam were viewed by military commanders as seriously and unnecessarily endangering the lives of American pilots . American pilots were killed in the Vietnam War .
 During the 1960s and 1970s the scope and complexity of U.S. rules of engagement grew . More sophisticated weapons and electronic systems entered the United States and Soviet dnventories .
 The complexity of rules of engagement reflects the complexity of the warfare environment . Rules of engagement reflect the greater the number of contingencies that have to be covered by rules, the author says .
 There were two major reviews of U.S. rules of engagement in the 1970s . Rules of engagement were reviewed by the United States military in the 1980s .
 The first was in 1973-1975, and entailed deletion of the cumbersome and confusing Vietnam War provisions from the rules as the U.S. withdrew from the Vietnam War .
 The second was in 1979-1981, and entailed standardization of the format of the rules among the major commands and expansion of the tactical options for dealing with threats . The first time the rules were standardized was in the 1980s .
 The 1979-1981 review produced the most significant changes to U.S. rules of engagement since the system of rules originated in the early 1950s . The review was published in 1981 .
 The rules could better meet the needs of United States leaders without creating excessive risks for U.S. forces at the scene of a crisis .
 U.S. Navy ships and aircraft have an inherent right of self-defense under international law . They may use their weapons to defend themselves if a hostile act of violence is committed against them .
 The use of force by U.S. naval personnel against a friendly foreign state is illegal . Use of force is illegal against anyone within the territory of a friendly state .
 The right of self-preservation is a right which belongs to states as well as individuals, says the EU . In the case of states it includes the protection of the state, its honor, and its possessions, and the lives and property of its citizens .
 The conditions calling for the application of the right of self-preservation cannot be defined beforehand, but must be left to the sound judgement or responsible officers, who are to perform their duties in this respect .
 In no case shall force be exercised in time of peace otherwise than as an application of the right of self-preservation as above defined . Force must be exercised only as application of right to self-Preservation .
 "It must be used only as a last resort, and then only to the extent which is absolutely necessary to accomplish the end required," he said .
 It can never be exercised with a view to inflicting punishment for acts already committed, it says . It can't be exercised in the way of punishing people who commit crimes already committed .
 The article allows use of force to protect American citizens and their property when ""irreparable injury"" is threatened . Note that this article does not allow the use of violence in the U.S.
 This was the guidance (amplified by applicable rules of engagement) governing the use of force by U.S. Navy commanding officers from 1948 to 1973 . The guidance was issued from 1948 until 1973 .
 Use of force in time of peace by U.S. naval personnel against another nation is illegal except as an act of self-defense . The use of use of force is illegal against anyone within the territories of any nation .
 The right of self-defense may arise in order to counter the use of force or an immediate threat of force . Self-defense is a form of form of defense in the U.S. State of the State of Defense .
 The conditions calling for the application of the right of self-defense cannot be precisely defined beforehand, but must be left to the sound judgement of naval personnel . Self-defense must be exercised only as a last resort, and then only to the extent which is absolutely necessary to accomplish the end
 Force must never be used with a view to inflict punishment for acts already committed. Force must not be used to punish people who commit crimes, says the PM . Force must be used only to punish those who commit the crime, says PM .
 A hostile act is actual use of force--~employment of weapons--against a Navy ship . The Navy ship was attacked by the U.S. Navy .
 Use of force is always authorized for selfdefense when a hostile act is committed . Self-defense is authorized in the U.S. State of the State of Nevada .
 The 1981 U.S. Navy confrontation with Libyan forces in the Gulf of Sidra illustrates these rules of engagement provisions in action . Demonstration of hostile intent activates the principle of anticipatory self-defense, which authorizes first use of weapons .
 Sixth Fleet battle force built around the carriers USS Forrestal and USS Nimitz commenced a freedom of navigation exercise in the Gulf of Sidra, on orders from the President .
 Execution of rules provided that if we were to fire at any enemy target in self-defense, we intended to hit that target . Execution of these rules provided . If we were . to fire on any enemy . target in . self-defence, we . intended to . hit that
 The next day, during an intercept of two Libyan Su-22 Fitters by two U.S. Navy F-14s, one of the Libyan planes fired an air-to-air missile at the Navy jets . The Libyan plane fired the missile the next day .
 At the same time the shoot-down occurred, two other intercepts were in progress . Two intercepts are in progress at the time of the shooting .
 All flight leaders were able to monitor the engagement on their radios, but no one else sought to engage the Libyans with whom they were in contact . There had been no provocation, and there was no provocation .
 The rules of engagement called only for engagement in self-defense, where firing had actually occurred . The rules were set out to protect the public from harm .
 This Libyan dncident demonstrates the superb discipline of our naval aviators, says David Cameron . It refutes the notion that we are “trigggt happy gunmen"" on the lookout to start an incident .
 At the time of this attack, ten other Libyan fighters were in or near the exercise area . At the . time of the attack, 10 other Libyan . fighters were also in or around the exercise . area .
 The rules of engagement authorized him to fire, the task force commander elected not to do so . The task force was attacked by the Taliban in Afghanistan in 2009 .
 Gadhafi would have turned the loss of a missile patrol boat and a dozen fighters into a ""victory"" by a martyred David against a bullying Goliath, writes Peter Bergen .
 When U.S. units needed to use force in self-defense, they had authority to do so . The United States has authority to defend itself in the United States, the author says .
 The onscene commander adhered to the spirit of the rules, which is to use the minimum amount of force necessary for selfdefense . The rules authorized much greater force than was actually employed, the officer says .
 Rules of engagement do not always function as effectively as they did in the Gulf of Sidra in 1981 . Rules are not always as effective as they were in 1981, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A vulnerability failure is caused by rules of engagement that are excessively restrictive, ambiguous, or complex and confusing . Rules of engagement can be excessively restrictive or ambiguous, ambiguous or complex .
 In a vulnerability failure the on-scene commander is unable to take effective action in selfdefense, resulting in a successful attacks on his forces that otherwise could have been defeated . In a failure to take self-defense, the commander is not able to take appropriate action .
 In an escalatory failure, the on-scene commander uses excessive force on grounds of self-defense, causing escalation of the scope or intensity of violence beyond that viewed as desirable by national leaders . In an escalation failure the on the scene commander uses . excessive force .
 Both failure modes have political as well as military consequences . Rules of engagement are excessively ambiguous, or complex and confusing . Rules can result from rules of engagement that are too ambiguous or complex .
 It was a vulnerability failure caused by rules of engagement that were excessively ambiguous and restrictive . Rules of engagement were too restrictive and too ambiguous to be able to use .
 Commission that investigated the disaster concluded that poorly written rules of engagement were a major factor in the disastrous airport bombing .
 The Marines were unprepared to counter the suicide truck bomb attack that destroyed their quarters . Consequently, the Marines at the airport were unprepared for counter-attack .
 A hostile act activating the right of selfdefense and hostile intent activating the . right of | anticipatory self-defense . The rules of engagement provision is somewhat broader in scope than the other .
 Colonel Hadd, initial commander of the Marine landing force in Lebanon in 1958, had pointed out the importance of staying abreast of a rapidly changing local political environment .
 The authority to MeGinre a force hostile is reserved for senior operational commanders . The criteria for declaring a force . hostile are quite strict and the authority to do so is reserved .
 This is not a provision that can't be used to circumvent the intent of the incidentspecific rules . Thus, this is not the law, it's not a matter of lawmaking .
 The provision provides additional tactical flexibility in circumstances of immediate, continuing danger to U.S. Navy ships . It is not a provision that provides additional flexibility, it is a provision of flexibility .
 In June 1967, the Commander of the Sixth Fleet declared a force hostile in response to reports from USS Liberty that she was under attack by unidentified planes and torpedo boats . Vice Admiral William I Martin declared the force hostile .
 IAW {In accordance with] CINCUSNAVEUR [Commander in Chief U.S. Naval Forces Europe] INST P03120.5B forces attacking Liberty are declared hostile . CINCUVEUR: Forces attacking Liberty "are declared hostile"
 "You are authorized to use force including destruction as necessary to control the situation," says the commander of the troops . "We will not be able to leave the country until the end of the day"
 Do not fly between Liberty and shoreline except as required to carry out provisions para {paragraph] 2 above .
 Brief fighter cover that any attacks on attack aircraft, Liberty, or they themselves is hostijg act and para (paragraph) two above applies applies .
 Sixth Fleet Commander emphasized pilots do not repeat do ae fly over ligne . This episode illustrates three points .
 A fleet commander declares an unknown force attacking a U.S. Navy ship to be hostile . The video shows a fleet commander exercising his authority .
 The pilots sent to defend Liberty were not required to make further judgements concerning hostile intent or the identity of the attackers .
 A commander exercising prudence by imposing limits on the planes, he says . The limits are to not ei, ones land and to avoid Egyptian airspace .
 Third, it shows a commander upholding the distinction between self-defense and reprisals . It also shows that a commander upholds a distinction between the two sides of the line .
 The planes could sngaoe any force threatening Liberty, but were not permitted to pursue attackers in retaliation . The planes were not allowed to pursue attacks in retaliation against them .
 U.S. Navy operational units receive training on standing rules of engagement on a routine basis and intense training in special rules of . engagement before . operations .
 This training ids scenario-based, requiring commanding officers and watch efficers be. aandne trate their ability to interpret and . interpret the rules of engagement in various situations . Commanding officers must be able to . interpret and appiy their ability .
 Training includes exercises in which rules of engagenent situations are simulated, using U.S. Navy units to portray hostile forces . Rules of Engagement are simulated to provide a more realistic perspective on how threatening situations develop .
 The training recognizes that not every possible Situation calling for a decision on the use of force can be anticipated . The purpose is to develop the skills of tactical decisicnmakers at interpreting the rules of engagement in unfamiliar circumstances .
 The rules of engagement are not an obscure document that must be hurriedly retrieved from a safe and dusted off when threat of attack becomes imminent . Rules of engagement is not a document that needs to be hurried to a safe, but an important document must be kept in place .
 Rules of engagement are an ever-present element in Navy tactical training . Rules are an important part of the Navy's training program .
 He must first determine whether or not the use of force is authorized under the specific circumstances he faces . He must also decide whether to use force in specific circumstances, he says .
 He must then determine the type of defensive response authorized under the circumstances . He must decide if use of force is authorized, he must then decide what response is appropriate .
 Four factors--identity of threatening unit, identity of target, existence of hostile intent, and appropriate defensive response--are the fundamental elements of rules of engagement .
 When a threatening force has committed a hostile act, there is no requirement that the identity of the national attacker be established prior to using force in self-defense, the law says .
 The situation is more complex when a determination of hostile intent must be made . However, it is more complicated when a decision is made on hostile intent .
 United States rules of engagement do not necessarily treat the forces of all geteutiaily hostile nations as being equally threatening . Rules of engagement don't necessarily treat all forces of hostile nations equally threatening, says U.S. official .
 A second, and equally important, consideration is to avoid firing on unarmed civilian vessels and aircraft operating in the vicinity of hostilities . The U.S. should not fire on unarmed civilians and aircraft in the area of hostilities, it says .
 The intentions and behavior of Soviet ships and aircraft are well-known, and under peacetime conditions they are not an immediate threat to U.S. forces . Under normal peacetime .
 "United States Helicopters Sink 3 Iranian Gunboats in Persian Gulf,"" Washington Post, October 9, 1987, Pp. " United States Helicopter Sink Three Iranian Gunboat in Persian Persian Gulf"
 Rules of engagement can be tailored to avoid undesirable incidents with the forces of one country, while allowing early and effective defensive action against more threatening forces of another country .
 Rules of engagement often specify the certainty of identification required before a determination of hostile intent may be made . Rules of Engagement often specify that identification is necessary before a threat is made .
 Often more than one indicator present, which can increase certainty of identification . Often more often times there are multiple indicators present .
 These indicators can be supplemented with intelligence on military vessels and planes known to be in the area .
 Geography can also aid identification by allowing elimination of forces fee, eeineeied far removed from the area . Geography also aids identification by eliminating forces fee and allowing for identification .
 The most important distinction drawn in rules of engagement is whether or not visual identification is required prior to using force in anticipatory self-defense . The distinction is between visual identification and visual identification .
 One purpose of rules of engagement is to avoid inadvertenly using force against noncombatant civilian ships and aircraft . As was pointed out above, one purpose of Rules of Engagement is not to use force against civilian ships .
 At the time of the incident Vincennes and another United States ship had been engaged in a gun battle with Iranian small craft that had attacked a Norwegian ship and fired on a U.S. helicopter .
 Vincennes sent repeated Warnings over international radio channels for the plane to identify itself and state its intentions . The plane flew directly at the U.S. warship, all of which were missed .
 Vincennes misidentified the plane as an Iranian Air Force F-14 jet fighter . The ship shot it down with two surface-to-air missiles . The plane was shot down by the ship .
 Para are acting cautiously under rules of engagement designed to prevent such incidents . Para say they are 'acting cautiously' under rules to prevent further incidents .
 The higher the level of identification that 4s required, the more difficult it is for Navy ships to take timely defensive measures when threatened . Generally, the higher the . level of . identification that . requires, the . more difficult . identification is required .
 In a high contact-density environment, the need for positive identification to avoid unwanted incidents is greatest . The identification problem is exacerbated, increasing the danger to Navy ships and the possibility that neutral military forces or civilian vessels or aircraft might be engaged .
 Rules of engagement vary depending upon the identity of the vessel ois aircraft being attacked or threatened with attack . Rules are different depending upon which aircraft is being attacked .
 Navy units are always allowed to defend against threats to U.S. military forces and United States . Under most circumstances, they can defend United States civilian ships .
 Allied military forces can be defended under circumstances defined by arrangements worked out under defense treaties . Allies can defend under arrangements defined by defense treaties, such as defense agreements .
 Problems can arise in a rapidly changing political environment, when a belligerent suddenly changes the scope of targets he is attacking and rules of engagement lag behind the expanded threat . Problems can also arise ina changing politicalmilitary environment, such as changing political circumstances .
 A distinction is drawn between hostile acts and hostile intent . As noted before, a distinction is made between hostile intent and hostile acts .
 Deception tactics include simulating the behavior of non-hostile aircraft and ships, such as by staying within air lanes or sea lanes while in transit, and responding to radio challenges with a civilian identity .
 Such tactics are particularly effective in a high contact-density environment, say experts . Such tactics create very difficult rules of engagement problems for tactical decisionmakers, they say .
 Many indicators of hostile intent can be generated by routine peacetime evolutions, as well as by actual hostile actions . An additional, and even greater, problem is that many indicators of hostility can be created by peacetime and actual hostile acts .
 Spurious indicators of hostile intent can be found during training exercises, weapons testing, and combat systems maintenance . The U.S. military says it will not reveal hostile intent .
 Communications and electronic emissions during routine surveillance can also resemble targeting and attack indicators . Certain communications and electronic . emissions during . routine surveillance may also resemble . targeting .
 All these activities are essential for maintaining a high level of operational readiness, the authors say . They generate indicators of hostile intent toward the simulated enemy .
 The problem is that such adeno of hostile intent may also be detected by units of another country, who may or may not know about the exercise .
 The Soviet penchant for conducting simulated attacks on U.S. naval forces is a highly dangerous practice . Complicating the problem of ambiguous indicators of hostile intent is the Soviet tendency to conduct simulated attacks .
 U.S. naval forces have frequently been targets for simulated attacks by Soviet forces . In some of these incidents only the professionalism and forbearance of commanding officers prevented a clash .
 The worst tactical situation 1166 viet simulated attacks will be discussed in Chapter V . Two examples will illustrate the nature of such incidents .
 A Soviet simulated attack or other weapons training could be mistaken by the U.S. ships as an impending attack by the third party . The third party could also be mistaken for an impending Soviet attack . The United States ships could be confused by the training .
 Such situations easily arise in such perennial hot spots as the Eastern Mediterranean, Persian Gulf, and Sea of Japan . Such situations can easily arise, such as such situations in such places as Eastern Mediterranean and Persian Gulf .
 First, suppression of valid indicators through deception can leave ships vulnerable to attack when they would have been authorized to use force in anticipatory selfdefense . Second, suppression is a form of deception that leaves ships vulnerable .
 Second, detection of valid indicators generated by non-hostile activity can result in force being used when it is not, in fact, needed . Third and fourth reasons for force to be used when not needed .
 Problems usually arise with the definition of hostile intent, even the concept of hostile act can be troublesome . Problems arise with definition of hostility intent .
 The term self-defense can encompass a wide range of defensive actions, some of which may be directed . Self-defense may include directed actions that are mandatory when threatened, others prohibited .
 Measures through are not always required, but may be specified depending on the level of danger to U.S. Navy units and the likelihood of undesirable incidents . Measures through may not always need to be specified, but can be specified .
 Even when specified in the rules of engagement, employment of measures can be a function of the time available to execute them before the danger of attack is acute . Employment of measures through can be an issue of time available for execution .
 Rules of engagement do not bar the use of force in self-defense when there is insufficient time to send Warnings or take other passive measures . This time constraint is recognized in the rules of engagement, which do not . The rules are known as the rules for engagement .
 Authority to order the use of nuclear and chemical weapons rests with the President, and not pre-delegated in peacetime . Authority to use nuclear and . chemical weapons is not . pre-Delegated, it is not pre . delegated .
 The decision to launch retaliatory attacks for attacks on U.S. Navy units in peacetime is also a matter of national policy, not a tactical decision covered by rules of engagement . The decision is also not covered in rules of engagements .
 If pursuit of attacking units is authorized under the rules of engagement, it is because they represent a further immediate threat to U.S. forces . If pursuit is authorized, it's because they are a further threat to the United States, says the author of the rules .
 The on-scene commander must determine whether or not the military action he is contemplating will support the political and military objectives and intentions of the President . In effect, the commander must decide if the actions he is considering support the President's objectives .
 This requirement is inherent in the twostage decision process of the rules of engagement system . Rules of engagement are required to be part of the rule of engagement .
 The political-military context of an incident includes geographic considerations, the political environment, and the overall military situation . The political and military context of a military incident is considered in the context of the incident .
 The rules of engagement can vary from strenuous efforts to avoid a military incident at almost any cost, to a hair-trigger readiness to deliver a sharp response to the slightest military provocation .
 The burden on the on-scene commander is to interpret the intent of the rules of engagement in the specific circumstances at hand, the commander says . The burden of the commander on the scene commander will be to interpret .
 Geographic considerations include proximity of Navy units to the scene of a conflict or crisis, the proxinity of hostile territory, and the proximity of the conflict to the United States or allied territory .
 Rules of engagement attempt to account for geographic factors by issuing special rules of engagement when it can be anticipated that a ship will be operating in a high-threat or politically sensitive area . Rules are issued when a ship can be expected to be in a politically sensitive region .
 Incident occurs while ships are operating under standing rules of engagement . On-scene commander must take geography into account, commander says .
 A demonstration of hostile intent far removed from the scene of any conflicts is likely to have much different motives than one committed in the midst of acrisis . A demonstrator of hostile intentions far from scene of conflict would have different motives, says the author .
 The indicator could have much more serious implications in the midst of a military confrontaticn.n.
 The political environment includes the overall climate of relations between the United States and the nation whose forces are the potential threat, the stated objectives of the potentially threatening nation, and United States diplomatic objectives in the conflict .
 Other crises or on-going conflicts, whether or not related to the incident at hand, are also an important part of the political environment .
 World opinion toward the crisis and the United States role in the crisis can be a factor depending on the apparent responsiveness of the U.S. government to such concerns . The United States' response to the crisis will be a key factor in world opinion .
 Domestic political opinion--particularly the mood of Congress-~can be a factor in on-scene decision-making if emphasized in background briefings . Similarly, domestic political opinion .
 World and domestic opinion are among the least significant political influences in rules of engagement decisions . Normally, however, world and domestic opinions are not significant political factors .
 Status of readiness, specific alerts, movements of forces, and other incidents are additional major elements the overall military situation . The status of readiness in the Soviet Union and other nations involved in the crisis is also important .
 The tactical situation on-scene is the final element in the overall military situation . The situation is the "final element" in the military situation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The tactical situation on-scene is defined by the local balance of military forces, the apparent combat readiness of potentially hostile forces, and the movement of those forces into position for further attacks . The situation is defined as the apparent readiness of potential hostile forces .
 Assessment of the military situation is used to distinguish an isolated hostile act (perhaps inadvertent or unauthorized), best answered by a restrained response to ease tensions, from a deliberate provocation or escalation, requiring a sharp response to deter fm ihasiten attacks .
 Soviet reconnaissance planes overflying U.S. Navy ships in the open ocean under peacetime conditions are not fired on . To illustrate the role of the political-military context in the making of rules of engagement decisions, Soviet aircraft overflying US Navy ships would not be fired on.
 An accurate and comprehensive understanding of the political-military context of an incident is vital to making rules of engagement decisions that support national policy . Problems for U.S. forces on-scene can't be generated by not informing them of significant military and diplomatic moves .
 Military forces are deployed to the scene of a crisis without a clear mission, only rules of engagement to govern their behavior . Rules of engagement can be used as a substitute for strategy . This problem can be particularly acute when military forces deploy to a crisis with no clear mission or clear mission .
 U.S. rules of engagement toward Iran, see the sources in footnote 107 . For example, a higher DEFCON can be set 1195), United States rules are set by the United States .
 If the onscene commander and the tactical decision-makers under him are not aware of such military actions, the threat to onscene forces may be perceived as either higher or lower than it actually is . The threat may be seen as higher than it is perceived by the commander .
 The rules of engagement may not support national policy--inadvertently sending conflicting signals to the target nation . Thus, their interpretation of the rules of . engagement may . not support . national policy .
 Secret communications and ""back-channel” negotiations are essential part of diplomacy and statecraft, but they need to be accompanied by appropriate efforts to keep the chain of command informed of the political-military context within which operational Gecisions are made .
 The on-scene commander must interpret the intent of the rules of engagement in the specific tactical circumstances at hand . As has already been pointed out, the rules must be interpreted in specific circumstances .
 Rules of engagement can still be misinterpreted, producing decisions on the use of force that do not support national policy . However, the rules of engagement are still being misinterpreted by the rules .
 These are not igeticul decisions made in deliberate violation of the rules of engagement, which is a separate-~and exceedingly rare--category of problem . This is not a deliberate violation, it's a separate and exceedingly rare category of problems .
 Misinterpretation of the rules of engagement occurs when a tactical decision-maker has an understanding of their intent that is different from the intent of the higher authorities who drafted the rules . The rules were drafted by the higher authority who drafted them, say officials .
 U.S. Navy training goes to great lengths to prevent this from happening, but the possibility of misinterpretation cannot be completely excluded .
 Misinterpretation of the rules of engagement can arise from three sources . Misinterpretations of the rule of engagement may arise from a number of sources, such as the law .
 verbal orders intended only to emphasize particular operational details can be misinterpreted as a modification to the rules of engagement . First, verbal orders only intended to emphasize specific operational details are misinterpreted . Second, verbal instructions intended only for operational details should not be interpreted as modifications .
 A warning that an unusually high number of non-hostile air contacts can be expected could be construed as a requiring greater than normal caution before engaging threatening aircraft .
 Operational environment can induce routinized patterns of behavior that impinge on rules of engagement . Complacency is the most common example of complacency, of which is most common .
 A psychological environment can develop that affects threat assessments so as to produce rules of engagement decisions Gifferent than intended by the chain of command . Third, a psychological environment . can also affect threat assessments .
 The constant tension of operating near hostilities can put nerves on edge and generate an intense desire to ""do something” rather than continue to be a passive observer or the target of harassment . The tension of working in the U.S. military can lead to a desire to "do something
 A feeling that the Navy ships are not needed in the situation (wasting their time) or are impotent to act can lead to complacency and passivity . On the other hand, a feeling of not being needed can also lead to passivity, writes CNN.com's
 An overly aggressive or cautious tactical decision-maker may provide his own interpretation of the rules of engagement . Personalities can also have an impact on the outcome of an engagement .
 The professionalism of U.S. Navy officers and their high state of training gett eaeN Abie are sufficient to prevent misinterpretation of the rules of engagement . The onscene commander and the chain of command needs to be alert for indications of these problems .
 Operations with allies raise further rules of engagement problems . Operations with Allies raise further Rules of Engagement problems . Operation with allies raises further rules for engagement problems.
 Each NATO member has its own national rules of engagement, which are the rules in effect in peacetime . The rules are the same as that of the U.S. and NATO .
 National peacetime rules of engagement may differ among NATO members . NATO members are divided on peacetime and military terms .
 This is because threat perceptions, foreign policy objectives, and domestic political constraints can vary considerably among allies . The U.S. has been criticized for its lack of transparency in foreign policy .
 An unambiguous threat from the Soviet Union would undoubtedly be met with a unified response . But a wide range of lesser threats raise political difficulties for the U.S.
 Some observers have concluded that diversity in peacetime rules of engagement can interfere with the ability of forces from different NATO members to respond in a consistent and coordinated manner in acrisis .
 Differences could create difficulties coordinating NATO forces in a sudden crisis . Such differences could create problems coordinating NATO's forces in such a crisis .
 Rules of engagement are orders issued to define the circumstances in which the U.S. armed forces are authorized to use their weapons for defense against hostile forces in peacetime . The scope and level of violence of combat operations in wartime is defined by the rules of engagement .
 Peacetime rules of engagement prohibit U.S. military commanders from shooting first in peacetime unless absolutely necessary for self-defense . The rules prohibit the use of first-strike forces in the United States of any time .
 United States Navy ships and aircraft, like all U.S. forces, have an inherent right of self-defense under international law . They may use their weapons to defend themselves if a hostile act of violence is committed .
 An on-scene commander must make two determinations prior to using force in self-defense . The decision was made by the on-site commander of the scene .
 He must then determine the type of defensive response authorized under the circumstances . He must also decide what type of response he will respond to the situation .
 Making these determinations can be crucially dependent on the political context of the operation, which includes geographic considerations, the political environment, and the overall military situation .
 The on-scene commander must consider whether or not the military action he is contemplating will support the political and military objectives of the President . The commander of the scene must also consider if he is considering a military action .
 This makes it critical that on-scene commanders be kept informed of the overall political military situation . On-site commanders must also be aware of the political situation in the region .
 Ina failure the on-scene commander is unable to take effective action in selfdefense, resulting in a successful attack on his forces~-an attack that might otherwise have been defeated . Ina vulnerability failure the commander is . unable to . take effective actions in self defense .
 An escalatory failure is caused by rules that are excessively permissive, ambiguous, or complex and confusing . Rules of engagement are often permissive or ambiguous, ambiguous or complex .
 Either type of failure can result from an on-scene commander misinterpreting his rules of engagement . Failure can also result from a commander misreading his rule of engagement.
 Misinterpretation of the rules occurs when a tactical decision-maker has an understanding of their intent that is different from the intent of the higher authorities who drafted the rules . The rules were drafted by higher authorities in order to protect the players' interests .
 The first objective of this chapter was to explain how delegation and control are exercised in the U.S. military command system . Conclusion: Delegation and control of the United States command system is a key component of the system .
 The previous three sections examined the principles, methods and mechanisms of command and control . This section includes the previous sections examining the principles and methods of command, control . The previous section examined the methods, methods, and mechanisms to control .
 Forces can be rapidly shifted from one method to another as the situation warrants . Certain of the methods of control can be used in conjunction, and forces can be quickly shifted .
 Commanders can exercise indirect control of subordinates even after having delegated them substantial autonomy . Commanders may exercise direct control even after delegating subordinates substantial autonomy to subordinates .
 The second objective of this chapter was to to set the U.S. military command system in the context of organization and management theories on delegation and control in organizations .
 Organization and eadateceent studies show that significant delegation of decisionmaking authority is common in large organizations . Delegation of decision-making authority in organizations is common, studies show .
 Delegation of decisionmaking is driven by the limits on decisionmaking, which cause decision-making by top-level officials to deteriorate as the size and complexity of the acacwivation increase . Delegating of decision making is driven .
 The military chain of command is founded on the principle of delegating control while retaining command . These observations apply particularly well to the military, which is based on delegating command .
 As organization theory predicts, delegation of control in the military command system is primarily due to constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations .
 As before, these findings apply particularly well to the U.S. military .
 Pressures toward decentralized control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level pdiectities to effectively control tactical operations, and by the advantages gained by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative . Pressures to decentralize control driven by constraints on ability to effectively
 Organization and management studies show delegation of decisionmaking can range from being highly rulegoverned, for standard, repetitive situations, to highly discretionary, for situations that cannot be anticipated, studies show .
 Toward the tight end of the spectrum are positive direct control, and direct control by negation . Toward a tight end is positive direct direct control .
 In military command and control, tighter forms of control are more appropriate for standard situations that are easily anticipated, while looser forms are appropriate for an environment marked by uncertainty and ambiguity, in which specific decisionmaking situations are difficult to anticipate . In public administration and business management, such as in
 The mechanisms of indirect control--the alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency plans, and rules of engagement~-~-are all hierarchical controls . The alert system and standing orders are among the mechanisms of direct control .
 They relieve the burden of having to closely monitor the details of military operations, a burden that can quickly exceed their information processing and decisionmaking capabilities when large~scale operations are being conducted in a fast-paced political-military environment .
 Hierarchical controls serve similar functions in public and business organizations . Hierarchicals are similar to those of the U.S. government and business leaders .
 Collegial and nonhierarchical controls have not been discussed, but are more prominent in military organizations than in any other organization .
 Collegial control is provided by the professionalism of the officer corps, which is highly developed and stressed in the training of officers . The professionalism is stressed in training of the officers .
 They are most visible in elite military units, such as the Army Special Forces and the Marine Corps .
 Members of elite units are indoctrinated that their elite status requires that they meet superior standards of performance . Members of these units have discipline, endurance, aggressive-ness and fighting skill-unique to their organizations .
 Similar nonhierarchical controls are used throughout the armed forces to complement and reinforce military professionalism . Similar controls are also used in the United States military .
 On the one hand, controls such as discipline, loyalty, and respect for the chain of command are essential for delegated command . The mechanisms of indirect control to function at all are necessary to allow delegated command to function, the author says .
 Professional experience and judgement can be Crucial for correctly interpreting ambiguous orders and Carrying out general guidance under rapidly changing circumstances .
 The ultimate test of professional experience and judgement is knowing when to disregard inappropriate orders in order to take action that better supports the national interest . The test of judgement and experience will be to know when to ignore inappropriate orders and take action .
 On the other hand, collegial and nonhierarchical controls can generate commitment to particular operational doctrines or procedures . On the one hand, they can also generate resistance to operations custom-designed for crisis management purposes .
 This is the phenomenon emphasized in the organizational process and bureaucratic politics models . The phenomenon is often emphasized in organizational processes and bureaucratic processes .
 A further weakness of those models, then, is that they do not address the full impact of collegial and nonheirarchical controls, he says .
 In large organizations, optimum performance is achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate--primarily collegial and nonheirarchical--controls . Studies of public administration and business management repeatedly show that .
 The strength and weaknesses of the methods of control and mechanisms of indirect control were discussed . The focus was on how military command and control function in principle .
 Many things can go wrong in the stress and confusion of crisis military operations . There are inherent limits on the ability of any methods or mechanisms of control to ensure that decisions made at one level are those that are most appropriate for the situation at another level .
 The optimum degree of centralization or decentralization can vary widely depending on the nature of the military operation being conducted and the political-military context of the operation . It can be difficult to determine whether centralization is necessary or not .
 National leaders can exercise close control of military operations in a variety of ways . National leaders control military operations by exercising close control .
 This is the approach commonly referred to in the crisis management literature . The approach is commonly known as the approach to crisis management in crisis management .
 This style of direct control has its costs, and can even impede effective crisis management . It can be costly to have direct control of crisis management, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Direct control can quickly overload information processing and decisionmaking . Unless the scope of military operations is very small and simple, direct control can overwhelm information processing .
 National leaders typically focus on selectec aspects of the operations, which may not be the most important or dangerous evolutions taking place . National leaders often focus on selected aspects of operations, rather than the most dangerous .
 The need for close control must be weighed against the constraints on the ability of national leaders to exercise effective direct control of military operations . The need to close control thus needs to be weighed up against the severe constraints on national leaders .
 A second approach to maintaining close control of crisis military operations is through the mechanisms of indirect control . The U.S. should use indirect control to maintain close control over crisis operations, writes David Cameron .
 As was also true with methods of control, excessive tightness in the mechanisms of indirect control can be counterproductive . The on-scene commander needs the flexibility he needs to adapt to rapidly changing circumstances, experts say .
 "The optimum tightness of control lies somewhere between absolute control and absolute autonomy," says the author of the book . "The best tightness lies between absolute tightness and autonomy," he says .
 Establishing precisely where the optimum balance between control and delegation lies is one of the inherent tensions in crisis management . It is difficult to determine exactly where an optimum balance is best placed .
 United States military command and control procedures allow ample opportunity for stratified interaction to occur in crises . U.S. military command procedures allow plenty of opportunity for interaction to be stratified .
 The U.S. armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control that emphasizes delegation of authority and providing on-scene commanders with freedom of action . The United States relies heavily on the flexibility of direct or delegated control .
 Monitored delegated control is the method of control preferred by military commanders . When direct control is necessary, control by negation preferred over positive control .
 Primary emphasis is placed on use of mechanisms of indirect control rather cheats on the exercise of direct control . Primary emphasis placed on . use of mechanism of indirect . control rather . than cheats .
 These preferences are strongest | in the Navy, which has a long tradition of operational autonomy . The Navy accords ""absolute"" authority to commanding officers .
 On-scene commanders are delegated substantial decisionmaking authority . Even in crises, there is a tendency for high-level military commanders to centralize control over operations .
 The next chapter will explore the range of such incidents that Riie occurred in the past, and could well occur during a future crisis . Riie will be featured in the next chapter of this book .
 Military incidents generate tactical level military interactions with the forces of the other side in a crisis . Interactions decoupled from efforts by national leaders to manage the crisis, experts say .
 Little has been said about exactly what types of interactions can occur at the tactical level . Thus far, sz little has said about the tactical interactions between players and coaches .
 It will be useful to explore the nature of tactical-lewel interactions prior to commencing the case studies, so as to identify the types of military actions that are of interest .
 The purposes of this chapter are to define the scope of tactical-level interactions that can occur in a crisis . The purpose of the chapter is to define analytical categories of crisis military actions . This chapter is titled, "Crisis of Crisis"
 In the remainder of this introduction to the chapter the military actions that can produce tactical-level interactions will be classified, based on the perspective of political-level decisionmakers, as deliberate military actions .
 The concluding section will explain why inadvertent military incidents are relatively rare in crises . The conclusion of this article will be the conclusion of the entire series .
 Mgatiodl-vev~2 interactions will be categorized from the perspective of political-level decisionmakers . The interactions are expected to be viewed by a range of decision-makers .
 Studies of international crises have observed that national leaders generally seek to maintain close control of crisis military operations . Studies have also observed that . .
 The ideal condition that national leaders want to achieve is for no military actions to occur other than the ones they direct, he says . He says the ideal condition for national leaders is that no military action occurs other than those they direct .
 National leaders make an implicit distinction between military actions they initiated deliberately and those they did not order but which occurred anyway . The distinction is often made between military action taken deliberately and not deliberately ordered .
 Deliberate military actions are ordered by politicallevel decisionmakers, says President Obama . Deliberately military action is ordered by politicians, says Obama administration .
 National leaders either issue a direct command for a specific action to be executed, or anticipate the action would occur as a result of an order given previously . National leaders often issue direct orders for specific actions to be taken .
 Deliberate military actions can occur under delegated as well as direct control . Military actions can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control and direct control, such as over real-time communications .
 Inadvertent military incidents are military actions that affect the development of a crisis, but which are not specifically ordered or anticipated by national leaders . Inadvertential military incidents occur when military action is not specifically planned by leaders .
 The problem is likely to be particularly acute if military forces are in close proximity to those of the opponent . Military forces are likely to have a problem if they are close to each other .
 Military forces are not an ideal instrument in situations demanding an enormous degree of caution and restraint . Trained specifically for warfare, military forces not ideal instruments for warfare .
 A clash between opposing forces resulting from the actions of an over-zealous military commander cannot be discounted entirely . Although it is highly improbable that hostilities would be initiated without explicit orders, it is also possible that a clash would result from a military commander's actions .
 Policy-makers could find themselves losing control over a crisis because of the actions of subordinates . The U.S. government could lose control of a crisis if it does not control its own policies .
 This may be even more of a problem when geographical distance is added to the organizational distance between those who formulate and those who execute policy .
 Questions of how and why inadvertent military incidents occur and what effect they have on crisis management efforts have not been addressed in the literature on crisis .
 Williams: Military forces operating in close proximity to those of the opponent and at great geographical distance from policymakers . Williams: Two factors mentioned by Williams are a good description of typical naval operations in crises .
 In planning military operations commanders attempt to allow for mistakes, accidents, and other unforeseen circumstances . Commanders must allow for accidents to occur during military operations .
 Clausewitz described as “friction” in war -- the myriad things that tend to interfere with the smooth accomplishment of military operations . Such problems constitute "friction" in war, Clausewitz said .
 One of the principles of war-simplicity--is followed by military planners because friction tends to increase with the size and complexity of an operation . The principle is followed by planners because of its simplicity and simplicity .
 Friction begins to arise as soon as military Operations are launched--well before the enemy is engaged . Frictions begin to arise when military operations are launched --well before they are launched .
 It is reasonable to expect friction--things going wrong--will occur in crisis military operations, as well as in wartime military operations . The U.S. military says friction is likely to occur in both crisis and wartime operations .
 Recent studies of crisis management have shown that inadvertent military incidents are inherent in the use of military forces as a political instrument in crises .
 Cohen argues that accidents, misperceptions, and the like are not likely to cause crises to escalate to wars . Cohen says that despite this, accidents are unlikely to lead to war .
 Cohen and McNamara point out the limitations and dangers of Crisis management . But they do not provide an understanding of the role of inadvertent military incidents in international crises .
 There is a need to take a closer look at such incidents and the impact they can have on crisis management . There is also a need for a closer examination of the impact of such incidents .
 ""Murphy's Law""--which states that if something can go wrong, it will--was originated by a military officer in 1949 .
 The next three sections of this chapter will discuss these three types of incidents . The next section will discuss the three incidents in this chapter .
 Attention will be focused on incidents involving United States forces . Examples of accidents involving forces of other countries will also be presented .
 This will be done to illustrate that both sides in a crisis can experience inadvertent incidents involving their military forces . Both sides will be shown how they experience accidental incidents involving military forces in the event of a crisis .
 Incidents at sea include various forms of harassment, other dangerous interactions between Soviet and American naval forces . Incidents include harassment and other dangerous interaction .
 They may be initiated deliberately on direct or standing orders from national leaders . Or may occur inadvertently--that is, without having been ordered by national leaders.
 Such actions are taken by on-scene commanders in response to events or tactical conditions that national leaders did not anticipate, are not aware of, or do not understand . National leaders are not always aware of or aware of the events or conditions that they are responding to .
 Such actions are authorized, in that they are taken in compliance with guidance contained in one of the mechanisms of indirect control, such as the alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency plans, or rules of engagement .
 National leaders did not directly order the specific action or anticipate that it would result from guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated control . But they are unanticipated, in the sense that national leaders didn't directly order or anticipate specific action .
 National leaders can only react to an unanticipated authorized action and try to manage its impact on the crisis . National leaders are only able to manage the impact of the crisis, CNN.com reports .
 The most common phenomenon appears to be that national leaders order a military operation without understanding the full range of specific military actions that military commanders have to take in order to carry out that operation .
 Ambiguous orders, operations initiated without specific military objectives to guide decisionmaking, are prone to cause unanticipated authorized actions . Open-ended military operations (those that drag on without a definitive conclusion) are particularly prone to causing unanticipated actions .
 But such actions can also occur when tighter methods of control are being exercised, say officials .
 National leaders exercising control by negation could approve a military action without understanding what that action entails . National leaders exercise control by . negation power by negating power .
 This could also occur when positive direct control is being exercised, but it is more accurate to describe the consequences of the action, rather than the action itself, as unanticipated .
 Misperceptions on the part of on-scene military commanders are another possible cause of unanticipated authorized actions . Misperception is also possible cause for unanticipated unauthorized actions .
 This could occur when a military commander misperceives the political-military context of his local tactical situation . This could be when he misperceive the political and military context of the situation in the region .
 He might misperceive aggressive enemy military moves as indicating that friendly forces are in imminent danger of attack or even that war had started . For example, he might mispeak aggressive enemy moves .
 The commander of the U.S. military in the event of an attack is imminent or war has started, he says . The commander would then take military actions that would be authorized if one of these situations existed .
 The possibility of misperceptions underscores the danger inherent in simulating attacks on an adversary’s 3 forces during a crisis . The Soviet Navy conducted against the U.S. Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean while United States forces were at DEFCON 3 in the 1973 Middle East War
 Contingency plans can be a source of unanticipated authorized actions . National leaders do not fully understand the operational implications of the plans or do not have the time or inclination to carefully review the content of a plan before ordering it executed .
 U.S. military contingency plans contain a broad range of options for the employment of military forces . But civilian policy-makers tend to view most predefined military options as inappropriate because they are designed for a crisis scenario different than the one at hand .
 The possibility of a contingency plan setting in motion military operations that top-level political leaders had not anticipated can't be excluded entirely .
 The alert system can also be a source of unanticipated authorized actions, officials say . Alert system can be used to alert the public to respond to unanticipated actions .
 The best example of this was the May 1960 ""unintended"" DEFCON 3 alert, initiated by an ambiguous message from Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates, who was in France with President Eisenhower .
 The message directed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ""quietly order a high state of command readiness," but did not specify a DEFCON level or give sufficient detail .
 The result was a much greater level of highly visible military activity than had been desired . The result of this was the result of a lack of transparency in the United States .
 The most important potential source of unanticipated authorized actions is operational decisions made by tactical level military commanders on the basis of guidance contained in standing orders or mission orders .
 Operational commanders usually have sufficient authority to take actions that could significantly affect the development of a crisis . Even when under direct control by top-level political authorities, operational commanders often have enough power to take action .
 The first example concerns two instances of clashes between U.S. and Soviet forces during the Korean War . The second example is a clash between Soviet forces and United States forces .
 Two serious engagements between U.S. Navy aircraft and Soviet aircraft took place during the war . Despite the stringent measures that had been imposed on air operations, two serious engagements took place between the two sides .
 U.S. Navy jet fighters intercepted two Soviet twin-engined bombers approaching a United States carrier task force . When one of the bombers fired on the fighters it was was shot down .
 The body of one of the bomber’s crewmen was recovered, confirming that the plane had been Soviet . Body of the plane's crewman was recovered confirming the plane was Soviet .
 The second example occurred in July 1953, when six ships under the command of Vice Admiral Walter G Schindler were dispatched to search for survivors from a U.S. Air Force RB-50 reconnaissance plane shot down by Soviet fighters over the Sea of Japan .
 Vice Admiral Schindler's orders did not specify how close to the Soviet coast he was allowed to search, so he sent the following message to his superiors stating “I intend to take my ships as close to Russian territory as is necessary to recover the airmen from the crashed aircraft
 None of Vice Admiral Schindler's ships entered Soviet territorial waters, and there was no harassment of his force by Soviet ships or planes . The survivor was found in international waters .
 Rear Admiral Daniel V Gallery, The Pueblo Incident , 57; Vice Admiral Walter G Schindler, letter to author, March 19, 1988 . Rear Admiral Schindlers was killed in the Holocaust in 1944 in the Second World War .
 Chinese fighters shot down British airliners en route from Singapore to Hong Kong . Two days earlier Chinese fighters had shot down a British air liner in Singapore .
 China has apologized for the incident, but harassed U.S. ships and planes engaged in the search for survivors . China has never apologized for what happened .
 The United States moved a task group built around carriers USS Hornet and USS Philippine Sea into the Tonkin Gulf in a show of force . The U.S. moved the ships in response .
 On July 26, two Chinese fighters attempting to attack search planes were Ance down by Navy fighters flying combat air patrol for the 12 search effort .
 Sixth Fleet movements on the first day of the War--a signal to the poade of American intentions--resulted from a decision made on-scene not related to 12.6 .
 Fleet movements unanticipated by national leaders could complicate crisis management efforts by sending unintended political signals to the adversary . In other circumstances, however, fleet movements could complicate crises management .
 Unanticipated authorized actions have not created crisis management problems for U.S. leaders . Similar low-level decisions could be more troublesome under other circumstances, authors say .
 Military Accidents are military accidents not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command . Military accidents are actions not ordered, deliberately initiated, initiated by any level of command.
 Military accidents are troublesome because decision-makers may fail to realize they are unauthorized and perceive them as a deliberate provocation, signal of hostile intent, or escalation . Military accidents may be seen as deliberate provocation .
 The problem is compounded by modern communications systems, which in theory give national leaders the capability for detailed control of military operations and ordering 14 specific tactical actions . Modern communications systems can give leaders the ability to order military operations .
 The Liberty incident is a case study of the Liberty incident . See the case study in Chapter VIII of this study .
 The possibility of an accident being misperceived as a deliberate provocation or attack is heightened . Assessment of a military accident must be made in the fog of a crisis, with possibly incomplete information coming in from the scene .
 U.S. and Soviet leaders have used communications with each other to clarify whether incidents were accidents or provocations . United States, Soviet leaders used communications to clarify if incidents were accidental or provoked .
 One tactic is to assume (at least for diplomatic purposes) that an isolated incident was an accident, but warn that further such incidents would be viewed as deliberate provocations or attacxs .
 In the 1967 Middle East War the U.S. informed the Soviet Union of its military response to the attack on the Liberty, and in the 1973 Mideast War the . Soviet Union protested the sinking of a Soviet merchant ship during an Israeli raid on a Syrian harbor .
 The 1973 Middle East War incident is a case study of communications between the U.S. and the Arab world .
 National leaders or on-scene military commanders on the side that was the victim of a military accident perceive that they do not have time for communications with the other side before taking a military response to an apparent deliberate attack . Situations could arise, however, in which national leaders or military commanders
 An almost infinite variety of military accidents conceivably could occur during international crises . "Almost infinite variety" could happen during crises .
 As will be seen in Chapter VII, military accidents rarely occur in crises . Military accidents rarely happen in crises, says the author .
 Accidents that seetieewa under noncrisis peacetime conditions and in limited war situations will therefore be used to illustrate the range of military accidents that could possibly occur during a crisis .
 The reasons why military accidents are rare in crises will be addressed in the final section of this chapter . The final section will address the reasons why they are rare .
 U.S. military aircraft occasionally have strayed into unfriendly airspace, provoking reactions ranging from diplomatic protests to use of force to down planes .
 The first such incident after World War II occurred on September 9, 1946 . A United States C-47 transport that had strayed over Yugoslavia was forced to land in Yugoslavia .
 On June 8, 1951, two U.S. Air Force F-80 jet fighters got lost over Germany and landed in Czechoslovakia . They were the first to land in the country .
 The Czechs returned the planes and their pilots a month later . 18an6 examples of airspace violations and midair collisions all appear to have been inadvertent .
 The crashes all appear to have been accidents, rather than caused by hostile action . The crashes that will be discussed also appear to be accidents rather than causes .
 The list is based on published and unclassified sources, and therefore probably is not comprehensive . It is conceivable, however, that a deliberate downing of an aircraft could be portrayed as an accident .
 Not all airspace violations are reported in the press or protested by the country whose airspace was violated . The country's airspace is not always reported by the media .
 Any additional incidents were probably very minor and would not affect the findings of this chapter . However, any additional incidents would probably be very minor, says author .
 Two U.S. Navy attack planes were attacked by Czech jet fighters on March 12, 1954, close to or inside Czech airspace . Czech fighters attacked the planes close or inside the Czech air space .
 On June 8 an unarmed U.S. Army helicopter strayed over East Germany and was forced to make an emergency landing . The incident occurred on June 8 .
 East Germany seized the nine crewmen and passengers, but released them a month later . East Germany later released them after a month of imprisonment .
 On June 27 a U.S. Air Force C-118 cargo plane that strayed over Soviet Armenia was fired on but managed to crash land . The plane was shot down by Soviet Armenia, but was able to land safely in Armenia .
 The nine crewmen and passengers were released by the Soviets twelve days later . The Soviets released the nine crew members and passengers .
 U.S. Air Force C-130 transport with 17 men aboard strayed over Soviet Union and was shot down . The transport was a United States Air Force transport with seventeen men aboard .
 On May 17, 1963, a U.S. Army helo patrolling the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea strayed into North Korean airspace and was shot down . The helo managed to make a 4a crash landing in North Korea .
 On January 28, 1964, a U.S. Air Force T-39 jet trainer was shot down by Soviet fighters after straying into East German airspace . All three pilots aboard the plane were killed in the incident .
 On February 18, 1968, two U.S. Navy jets got lost in bad weather and flew over North Korean territory . The incident prompted a Giplomatic protest from the North Korea .
 On July 14, 1977, an unarmed U.S. Army CH-47 transport helicopter strayed north over the DMZ into North Korean airspace and was shot down . The helicopter was an unarmed United States Army helicopter that strayed into North Korea .
 Navy jets were again the culprits on April 4, 1983, when six of them accidently overflew Zeleny Island in the Kurile chain .
 The Soviets responded by placing their air defense forces in the Far East on alert, filing a diplomatic protest, and overflying the Aleutians with long-range reconnaissance bombers . The Soviets placed their air defenses on alert and filed a diplomatic complaint .
 A U.S. Army AH-1S helicopter was fired on by Czech jets on April 20, 1984 . The helicopter was on a routine patrol of the West German border .
 One other incident illustrates the many ways in which such incidents can occur . The incident occurred in the U.S. State of Columbia .
 Pilot of U.S. U-2 apparently passed out while flying over Caribbean from Shreveport, Louisiana . Pilot was flying south over the Caribbean .
 The U-2 continued southward on autopilot until it ran out of fuel and crashed in Bolivia . After flying over Panama, Columbia, Peru and Brazil, the plane crashed .
 Twelve of the incidents occurred between 1946 and 1968--the period of Soviet-American cold war tensions . Twelve of these incidents occurred during the Cold War period .
 Only three incidents occurred after the advent of detente in the early 1970s . Only three of the incidents occurred during that period .
 Seven of the incidents occurred in the airspace of Eastern European countries, five occurred in Soviet airspace, and three occurred in North Korean airspace . Three of the most recent incidents were in North Korea airspace .
 United States Air Force planes involved in eight of the incidents . United States Army helos were involved in four incidents, United States Navy planes involved three incidents .
 Two of the incidents (September 2, 1958, and April 4, 1983) significantly increased Soviet~American tensions, though without provoking crises . The incidents occurred in 1958 and 1983 .
 Soviet Premier Khrushchev warned that the incident could have been viewed as prelude to an American attack . The incident may have been the result of a U.S. attack on the Soviet Union .
 The findings suggest that inadvertent violations of hostile airspace by U.S. aircraft are not a particularly great threat to crisis management, although they can exacerbate tensions . The findings were published in the U.N. journal Aviation Security Council .
 Soviet and Warsaw Pact military aircraft have frequently violated NATO airspace in Western Europe since the 1950s . NATO airspace has been violated by Soviet and Polish military aircraft in the past . NATO air traffic has been restricted since the 1960s .
 In a sensational case, a Bulgarian Mig-17 photographic reconnaissance jet crashed in northern Italy on January 20, 1962 . The plane was a Bulgarian military plane that crashed in 1962 .
 The Italian Defense Ministry suspected the plane was attempting to photograph a nearby NATO medium-range ballistic missile base . The pilot requested political asylun, claiming that he had flown to Italy in order to defect . The Bulgarian Government claimed the pilot had gotten lost and lefeenened to land
 On July 14, 1966, an armed Soviet helo entered West German airspace and forced an unarmed U.S. Army helo to land . The incident occurred in West Germany's airspace in 1966 .
 The Soviet helo was driven off when a West German border patrol fired flares at it . The aircraft was driven away when it was fired off by the border patrol in West Germany .
 Commander in Chief of U.S. Forces Europe protested the incident to the Conweniice of the Group of Soviet Forces Germany . The incident occurred during the Second World War .
 On March 15, 1963, two Soviet Tu-95 Bear reconnaissance bombers violated U.S. airspace over Alaska . Two Soviet bombers violated United States airspace over Alaskan airspace over the region .
 Soviet viore diene of United States airspace have been rare since the 1960s . U.S. airspace has been monitored by the Soviet Union since 1968 .
 On April 5, 1983, two Soviet Tu-95 reconnaissance bombers entered U.S. airspace over the Aleutian Islands . Soviet planes normally avoid United States airspace . The planes entered the airspace on April 5 .
 Soviet reconnaissance planes also frequently violate Japanese airspace . Soviet aircraft also violate Japan's airspace .
 On December 9, 1987, for the first time since the end of World war II, Japanese interceptors fired warning shots at a Soviet plane that had entered Japanese airspace . The incident occurred in 1987 .
 The U.S. Air Force scrambled about 1,750 times a year to identify commercial and private planes that inadvertently entered the United States ADIZ without prior notification .
 Midair collisions are infrequent, but happen often enough enough to warrant attention . Midair collision is infrequent but infrequent .
 At least three such incidents have occurred between Soviet and U.S. or NATO planes since 1970 . At least one such incident has occurred in the past .
 On March 31, 1970, a United States Navy F-4 jet fighter from USS Franklin D Roosevelt "brushed" a Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bomber over the Mediterranean Sea, causing minor damage to both .
 On September 13, 1987, a Soviet Su-27 jet fighter struck a Norwegian P-3 patrol plane over the Barents Sea, causing the plane to lose an engine . The plane was hit by a Soviet jet fighter, which struck the plane . The incident occurred in the B
 In all three incidents both planes involved in the collision landed safely . The planes involved landed safely in the three incidents .
 In a crisis, a midair collision could well be viewed as a signal of hostile intent, a coercive threat, or an attempt to intimidate . The collision could also be seen as an attempt by the U.S. to intimidate or threaten .
 If one of the aircraft involved in a midair collision crashed, the side that lost it might think that its plane had been shot down by the other side . Even worse, if one plane involved in an air collision crashes, the losing side might think its plane was shot down . The
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union have observed each other's aircraft crash in accidents on several occasions over the past forty years .
 On May 25, 1968, a Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bomber crashed in the Norwegian Sea . It was conducting low altitude surveillance of the USS Essex ASW carrier group .
 A Department of Defense spokesman was quick to state that U.S. ships and planes ""in no way interfered with, hampered, or threatened the Soviet aircraft at any time or 27 . Both sides recognized that the crashes were accidents .
 The side that lost a plane in a crash at sea might think that its plane had been shot down by the other side, exacerbating tensions . Ina crisis, however, the side that loses a plane might think it was shot down might think its plane is shot down . In a
 The study does not address civil aircraft incidents per se, they could exacerbate tensions in a crisis, it says .
 Civil aircraft have also strayed over hostile airspace and been forced to land or shoot down . Civil planes have also been shot down by aircraft in hostile airspace in the past .
 On April 5, 1948, a British airliner crashed in Berlin after a midair collision with a Soviet fighter . The crash occurred before the Berlin Crisis erupted in June .
 On April 29, 1952, Soviet fighters fired on an Air France airliner over East Germany . The plane was shot down by Soviet fighters over the border in East Germany.
 On July 23, 1954, Chinese fighters shot down a British Cathay Pacific airliner over the Pacific . The plane was shot down by Chinese fighters over the same day .
 On February 21, 1973, Israeli fighters shot down a Libyan airliner over the Israeli-occupied Sinai Peninsula . The Libyan airliner was shot down by Israeli fighters over the Sinai Peninsula in 1973 .
 On April 20, 1978, Soviet fighters fired on a Korean Air Lines airliner over the Kola Peninsula, forcing it to crash land . The plane was shot down by Soviet fighters over the same area .
 Incidents involving civilian airliners are not considered to be tactical-level military interaction for the purposes of this study . They can have political effects similar to those of inadvertent military incidents .
 Two sensational civil aircraft incidents--each involving one of the superpowers--have occurred in recent years . The incidents occurred in the 1980s and '90s .
 Vincennes sent repeated warnings over international radio channels for the plane to identify itself and state its intentions . The plane was missed or ignored by the U.S. warship as it flew toward the United States .
 Vincennes misidentified the plane as an Iranian Air Force F-14 jet fighter and shot it down . The plane was shot down by a U.S. Air Force jet fighter, which was mistaken for a fighter jet .
 It is clear from statements made by Admiral William J Crowe, Jr., that the Commanding Officer of the Vincennes complied with the rules of engagement issued to United States forces operating in the Persian Gulf .
 Civilian aircraft, by being misidentified as military aircraft or viewed as on a military mission despite civilian markings, could inadvertently become the target of military action .
 This discussion will be limited to accidents, primarily collisions, involving naval ships and submarines . Many, perhaps most, incidents are accidents, but others, particularly incidents between Soviet and American naval vessels, are ree eeeee .
 There will be some overlap in the two incidents at sea discussions because collisions can be deliberate and in some instances it is not clear if the collisions were deliberate or accidental . Deliberate incidents will be discussed later in the section on 30 .
 Accidental collisions can occur during deliberate harassment, such as deliberate harassment . Furthermore, accidental collisions can also occur when deliberate harassment occurs .
 The focus of this discussion will be on apparent accidental collisions . We will discuss the impact of these collisions in the future .
 Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road and near collisions with U.S. naval vessels became a serious problem in 1960 . Soviet violations became a problem in the 1960s .
 The Soviet Navy had been very small and limited its operations to coastal waters and adjacent seas . Prior to then, the Soviet Navy was very small .
 The term ""incidents at sea" is used by the United States Navy to cover all incidents involving U.S. and Soviet naval vessels and aircraft . One of first near collisions occurred on April 26, 1960, when the Soviet intelligence collection ship 30n .
 The Navy term is used in this study in order to provide an indication of the types of Soviet behavior to which U.S. Navy commanders object . The study was conducted by the United States Navy .
 U.S. civilian authorities have not shown an awareness of what exactly is going on at sea when they order naval forces to the scene of a crisis, and have not understood the dangers that can arise from deliberate Soviet harassment . This is important because, as will be seen in Chapter VII
 This is a good example of an accidental collision nearly resulting from deliberate behavior . This is an extremely aggressive intelligence collection effort, the author says .
 The United States responded to this and several similar incidents over the next twelve years with numerous diplomatic protests, all of which were rejected by the Soviet Union . The U.S. responded to these protests with diplomatic protests over the years .
 The first and second collisions occurred in the Sea of Japan in 2011 . Almost a year later the second and third collisions occurred, also in the sea .
 On May 10, 1967, the destroyer USS Walker (DD 517) was struck by a Soviet destroyer that had been 31y ss. The USS Walker was participating in an anti-submarine warfare exercise in the Soviet Union .
 The next day, May 11, a second Soviet destroyer collided with the Walker, again with only minor damage to both ships . Both ships collided with each other with minor damage .
 The United States delivered strongly-worded diplomatic protests after each incident . The U.S. has delivered strongly worded protests against both incidents .
 The Soviet Union blamed the collisions on U.S. “provocative maneuvers” in the Sea of Japan . The United States responded, blaming the Soviet Union .
 Some U.S. officials speculated that the two collisions had been deliberate, perhaps as a political Signal of Soviet displeasure with United States involvement in the Vietnam War . The Captain of the Walker stated that the collisions appeared to have been accidental .
 The cause in each case was Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road and dangerous maneuvers close to uinNSe naval vessels . The cause of each case is Soviet violations .
 The Banner and Walker incidents were probably cases of accidental collisions during deliberate harassment . They were probably accidental collisions, not deliberate collisions .
 Some U.S. officials perceived the Walker incident as deliberate harassment for purposes of political signalling . The Walker incident illustrates the potential political impact of accidents at sea .
 Incidents at Sea Agreement between U.S. and Soviet naval vessels was signed in 1972 . Incidents between the two countries have been reduced since the agreement was signed .
 There have been as many accidental collisions since the agreement was signed as there had been before the agreement . In fact, there have been more accidents since then than before before .
 On August 28, 1976, a Soviet Echo II nuclear-powered guided missile submarine collided with the frigate USS Voge in the Mediterranean Sea . The Echo II was the first to collide with the U.S. warship in 1976 .
 The collision was caused by the Soviet submarine, which had been surfaced and on a parallel course with Voge, suddenly turning into the U.S. ship's port side . The Soviet submarine had surfaced and turned into the United States ship .
 Voge suffered serious damage to her propeller and had to be towed into port for repairs . The Soviet submarine was damaged but left the scene under its own oeeerer . Voge was towed to port for repair .
 The United States filed an Incidents at Sea Agreement protest over the incident . The U.S. filed a protest against the incident at sea .
 On March 21, 1984, the carrier USS Kittyhawk collided with a Soviet Victor-class nuclear-powered attack submarine in the Sea of Japan . The crash occurred in the early 1980s .
 The collision was caused by the Soviet submarine surfacing directly ahead of the carrier at short range . The collision occurred at night, apparently caused by a Soviet submarine .
 Soviet naval vessels have also collided with the ships of other Western navies . Soviet naval ships have collided with other Western naval vessels .
 On November 9, 1970, a Soviet Kotlin-class destroyer that had been harassing the British aircraft carrier Ark Royal struck the side of the carrier's bow . The ship was hit by the destroyer after a dangerous maneuver across the ship's bow in the eastern Mediterranean .
 Before the agreement two of three collisions occurred during deliberate Soviet harassment of U.S. naval vessels, before the agreement only one of three occurred during Soviet harassment . After the agreement, after the agreement three of four collisions occurred with the Soviet Union .
 There were no collisions between ships and submarines before the agreement, there were two such collisions after the agreement . Second, whereas there were no . collisions between . ships and . submarines before . agreement, two such . collisions after . agreement occurred .
 Both of the ship-submarine collisions apparently were caused by poor seamanship on the part of Soviet submarine captains . The collisions were apparently caused by seamanship .
 Despite the agreement's merits, it has not been sufficient to prevent accidental collisions . statistical analysis tells us little because of the small number of cases, says author .
 A single accidental collision in 1988 would lower the postagreement rate to equal the pre-agreement rates . The rate would be lower if a single accident occurred in 1988 .
 Allegations of additional undersea submarine collisions have also been reported . None of these incidents can be confirmed, they suggest an addition type of naval incident .
 Interactions between U.S. and Soviet submarines while submerged are regulated only by policies established by their respective navies, and by the caution and prudence of their commanding officers . Interactions are thus regulated by the policies of the respective countries .
 The very fact that accidental collisions are relatively rare would make one occurring during a future crisis automatically suspect, particularly if the ship that is the victim of the collision suffered much greater damage than the ship which caused the collision .
 Khrushchev might well have viewed the collision as deliberate U.S. retaliation for the shooting down of an American U-2 that same day . The U.2 was shot down by the U.K. in the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Such a hypothetical incident might not have prevented resolution of the crisis short of war next day . But certainly would not have made that resolution any easier .
 Collisions also occur between naval ships or submarines and civilian vessels . Collisions are also known as collisions between military ships and submarines .
 On February 1, 1968, the United States destroyer USS Rowan collided with the soviet merchant ship Kapitan Vislobokov in the Sea of Japan . The ship collided with a Soviet ship in the same year .
 On April 9, 1981, USS George Washington collided with Japanese merchant ship Nissho Maru in the East China Sea, sinking the ship and killing two of its crewmen . The collision killed two of the ship's crewmen and killed two .
 This was one of at least eight collisions between U.S. submarines and me) civilian merchant ships from 1965 to 1982 . This was the only one in which the merchant ship was sunk .
 On September 21, 1984, a Soviet Victor-class SSN collided with a Soviet merchant ship in the Strait of Gibralter, seriously damaging the submarine and apparently sinking the merchant ship . The submarine was seriously damaged and apparently sunk .
 If a naval vessel sinks and the cause is not immediately known, the side that lost the ship could well suspect hostile action by the adversary . First, if the cause of the ship's sinking is not known, it could be a motive for hostile action .
 Merchant ship was carrying military supplies or other critical materials to an ally directly involved in fighting . Second, if the ship was sunk or seriously damaged, it could well suspect that the collision was a deliberate attempt to prevent delivery of its cargo .
 There have also been two reported instances of Soviet submarines colliding with ‘Soviet surface combatants on the high seas’
 Tpestroyers and frigates are relatively small vessels that can be seriously damaged by large merchant vessels . Small vessels can be damaged by larger merchant vessels such as large ships .
 On June 6, 1971, the Soviet tanker Busharov collided with the French frigate Surcouf in the Mediterranean .
 Weapons accidents can also be a collateral result of other emergencies, such as an aircraft jettisoning ordnance to lower its weight after losing power or a ship's fire .
 Jettisoned weapons normally do not cause as much damage as deliberately launched weapons . But can still cause substantial damage to ships Or aircraft .
 Tactical missiles are particularly accident-prone, and have gone astray after being deliberately launched . Tactical missiles have been accidently launched or went astray in the wrong direction .
 On August 12, 1968, a Navy missile hit a civilian oil survey vessel off the coast of California, setting it afire and injuring three crewmen . On July 29, 1986, a civilian tanker was hit by a . Navy missile off the . coast of Virginia .
 A Navy Bulpup air-to-surface missile accidently hit a Navy rescue craft off the coast of California, sinking the vessel . Anti-ship cruise missiles have also been involved in accidents .
 On July 14, 1981, the U.S. Navy guided missile destroyer USS Coontz accidently launched a Harpoon missile in the Caribbean Sea during routine system testing .
 The missile crashed into the sea at the end of its flight without striking anything . The missile is believed to have been launched in the early hours of the morning .
 On December 28, 1984, an unarmed Soviet SS-N~-3 missile launched during an exercise in the Barents Sea went astray, flew over northern Norway, and attacked . The missile was launched during a military exercise in northern Norway . It was launched by a Soviet SS
 Accidents with tactical missiles have potential to cause an incident . Both the United States and the Soviet Union routinely monitor the other side's naval exercises with ships and aircraft . The Soviet Government apologized for 40 accidents .
 Although greater caution is shown during crises, the possibility of an incident with a tactical missile cannot be eliminated . The possibility of such an incident is not eliminated, experts say .
 Strategic nuclear missiles--intercontinental ballistic missiles--are the safest of all missiles because of their greater safeguards against accidental launch . Long-range land-attack cruise missiles are not immune to accidents, but are not always immune to accidental launches .
 On January 4, 1967, an unarmed U.S. Air Force Mace land attack cruise missile went astray, flew over Cuba, and crashed in the Caribbean . On September 12, 1967 an unarmed United States Army Pershing tactical ballistic missile went off course during a test flight and crashed
 An accident involving an operational strategic nuclear missile could have catastrophic consequences during an international erisis . The probability of such an incident appears to be extremely low due to the safeguards against accidental or unauthorized launch of strategic missiles .
 An accident during a strategic missile test flight probably would not be misperceived as a deliberate attack because the superpowers carefully monitor each other's test flights . Additionally, an accident during an attack could not be seen as an accident .
 The remaining types of peacetime weapons accidents-naval gunfire accidents and torpedo accidents--rarely have consequences as serious as tactical missile accidents . The remaining weapons accidents could still exacerbate tensions in a crisis, CNN's John Sutter says .
 On March 8, 1963, and February 5, 1979, shells fired by U.S. Navy ships during training exercises fell in the vicinity of Soviet vessels that were near or inside publicly announced training areas .
 On April 23, 1958, the destroyer USS Yarnall was etruck by a torpedo fired during an exercise . On December 19, 1983, the frigate USS Jack Williams accidently launched a torpedo that landed on the pier next to the ship but did not explode .
 A more dangerous incident occurred on October 7, 1973, when a Soviet Kanin-class destroyer that had been shadowing a British aircraft carrier launched a torpedo in the midst of a NATO naval exercise . The incident was the first time such a torpedo was launched by a Soviet vessel .
 A naval gunfire or torpedo incident at the height of a crisis could well be misperceived as an act of War--particularly if the shells or torpedo struck a warship belonging to the other side . Although it was clear in this case that the torpedo launch was not a deliberate hostile act
 Once shooting starts, the probability of serious accidents greatly increases, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . "Once shooting starts," he says .
 During the Korean War U.S. planes were forbidden from flying over Chinese or Soviet territory, but occasionally strayed over both countries . During the war, planes were allowed to fly over China or Russia .
 On at least two occasions United States planes accidently attacked targets in China . The U.S. aircrafts were attacked in China on several occasions .
 The most serious incident occurred on October 8, 1950, when two U.S. Air Force F-80 jet fighters strayed over the border and strafed a Soviet airfiela .
 At least eight United States planes were shot down and one pilot captured by the Chinese . There were no reported instances of U.S. planes attacking ground targets in China .
 Two serious cases of U.S. planes attacking United States and allied naval vessels occurred during the Vietnam War . Two serious attacks were carried out during the war .
 The second incident occurred on April 16, 1972, when a United States plane inadvertently fired a Shrike antiradar missile at the USS Worden . Inadvertent attacks by United States forces against other U.S. forces dramatically illustrate the dangers inherent in limited war situations .
 Two U.S. F-105 fighter-bombers on a raid over North Vietnam accidently attacked the Soviet freighter Turkestan in a North Vietnamese port . On June 2, 1967, two United States Air Force F.105s were on a mission over Vietnam .
 Vietnamese Navy gunboats fired on Soviet intelligence collection ship allegedly in South Vietnamese waters near Danang . The ship was believed to be in the area of the Danang region .
 Israel expressed regret for sinking the Soviet ship and claimed that its forces had orders not to attack civilian vessels . Israel said it had no orders to attack civilians .
 Most common examples are sinkings of Soviet submarines, which are notoriously accident-prone . The most common examples of sinkings are those from Soviet submarines .
 On October 7, 1986 a Soviet Yankee-class SSBN on patrol in the Atlantic suffered an explosion and fire in its missile compartment .
 The submarine was able to surface, but sank three days later while under tow . The submarine sank while it was under tow, sinking in the early hours of December 31 .
 On August 19, 1970, a Soviet AGI that had been monitoring a NATO naval exercise in the North Sea capsized . The AGI was part of a NATO exercise in North Sea .
 In September 1974, the Soviet Kashin-class guided missile destroyer Otvazhny exploded, burned, and sank in the Black 52 Sea, with the loss of almost the entire crew . The ship was the first to explode, burned and sank, in September 1974 .
 U.S. Navy units in the area were suspected by the Soviets of complicity in the unexplained loss of the vessel . Incidents like these could cause serious tensions during a crisis if the Soviet ship or submarine sank without survivors .
 Major explosions at shore bases could also cause crisis management problems . Major explosions could also lead to crisis management issues .
 U.S. forces would attack air defense sites and operational forces before ordnance storage sites . A single, isolated attack would be highly unlikely .
 The two sides are on the brink of war and military commanders on both sides focusing on worst-case scenarios . But in an acute crisis, rational analysis could succumb to the effects of tension and stress .
 The probability of an accident at an etttaee storage site is directly proportional to their level of activity, and that preparations for war during an acute crisis include delivery of ammunition to operational forces . The contention can be made that an accident like this is more likely to occur during a crisis
 Electronic warfare measures have in the past inadvertently degraded other countries’ weapons systems . jamming of radars or communications, commonly conducted for training or maintenance, is a common practice .
 Chaff, a cloud of metal particles used to confuse radars, has on occasion drifted astray, interfering with civilian air traffic control radars and even causing power outages . Chaff has been used in the past to confuse radar and interfere with civilian radars .
 On at least one occasion Soviet Tu-95 Bear reconnaissance bombers operating off the east coast of the United States used chaff to interfere with United States air defense reaatas* Other common electromagnetic emissions, such as high-powered radio and fire control radar transmissions, can interfere with other
 Such electromagnetic interference incidents could easily appear to be deliberate hostile acts in an acute crisis, experts say . It could be a deliberate hostile act in a crisis, they say .
 Military accidents are military accidents not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command . In summary, military accidents are actions not ordered .
 Accidents are troublesome from a crisis management perspective . Decision makers may fail to realize that the accidents were unauthorized and perceive them as deliberate provocations or signals of hostile intent .
 In practice, national lester guaae military commanders attempt to distinguish accidents Aeon deliberate provocations or attacks .
 These types of military accidents do not often occur during crises, but happen often enough under other conditions that they merit being a concern in crises . Military accidents are not uncommon, but often occur under other circumstances .
 Unauthorized jewibetate actions are ordered or executed by tactical-level military commanders in violation of orders issued directly by national leaders . Unauthorized Deliberate Actions are orders or execution by tactical level military commanders . These actions violate operational guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control .
 An unauthorized deliberate action can occur when a military commander stretches the limits on what he knows to be the spirit of those orders . A military commander can stretch the limits of the actions he is authorized to take, he says .
 This type of action is especially likely when orders given to military forces are vague or ambiguous, leaving ample room for an on-scene commander to rationalize his actions . This type ST \uneutlicns yea action is often likely when the orders given .
 Only a few such incidents involving U.S. forces have occurred since World War II, in every case during limited wars .
 Not all unauthorized deliberate actions are harmful to crisis management efforts, says CNN iReporter . CNN iReport: Unauthorized deliberate actions may be harmful to efforts to contain the crisis .
 A constructive unauthorized action is taken in the belief that actions called for in existing orders are inappropriate under the circumstances, and that the | unauthorized action would better support the national objectives in the crisis . The action would be taken in a constructive unauthorized way .
 A well-intentioned action could seriously complicate crisis management efforts . Whether or not the outcome is eueecictive is a different matter, and it could complicate efforts .
 The mark of a constructive unauthorized action is an effort to inform the chain of command as soon as possible of the action taken and the reasons for taking it, the author says .
 The author knows of no cases, other than certain wartime battlefield atrocities, in which insanity caused an unauthorized deliberate action . See Chapter IV for a complete description of this incident .
 The mark of a malicious unauthorized action is an effort to conceal the action from higher authority . A malicious unauthorized act is a concealment of higher authority, the author says .
 The most common type of malicious unauthorized action in U.S. military history since World War II has been deliberate killings of non-combatant civilians by troops in the field . The killings are in violation of orders to avoid civilian casualties .
 Such battlefield incidents are a product of the stress and emotion of ground combat, thus telling us little about how military commanders behave in crises . Such incidents were particularly intense in the guerrilla war fought in Vietnam, writes John Sutter .
 Three examples of malicious unauthorized actions will serve to illustrate the nature of most such incidents . Three examples will serve as an example of the malicious actions .
 The first example arose from dissatisfaction with political constraints on the conduct of wartime air operations over hostile territory . The second example arose in the aftermath of World War II .
 During the Korean War, the United States ‘placed strict limits on air operations near the Chinese and Soviet borders with North Korea in order to avoid incidents with China and the Soviet Union’
 A requirement for bombers to fly parallel to the border while bombing the Yalu bridges was deliberately violated by an Air Force flight commander . In his history of the Korean War, Joseph C Goulden reports .
 The flight commander ordered his planes to approach perpendicular to the border . After concluding that the parallel approach was ineffective and unnecessarily endangered the pilots, the plane was ordered to fly parallel . The plane's approach was deemed ineffective .
 This resulted in them penetrating b Arena miles into Chinese airspace after dropping bombs . The bombs were dropped into the country's airspace after being dropped .
 The second example of a malicious unauthorized action arose from ill-considered thrill-seeking, but essentially involved disrespect for the chain of command . These violations of the bombing restrictions were successfully kept secret until long after the yates were released .
 On June 13, 1957, USS Hornet was conducting routine flight training in the South China Sea after a port visit to Hong Kong .
 Their actions were a clear and deliberate violation of restrictions against entering Chinese airspace . Their motive was simple thrill-seeking (often referred to as ""flat-hatting” or ""skylarking""’s”’
 Chinese anti-aircraft guns fired on the planes, causing minor damage to a few of them, and China protested the incident . The incident was protested by China, and the planes were damaged .
 The responsible pilots initially tried to keep their action secret, but the bullet holes in some of their planes exposed their guilt . Some of the responsible pilots tried to hide their actions .
 The pilots were reprimanded and the Vice Admiral responsible for the Hornet task group was relieved of command of the Seventh Fleet's carrier task force . The pilots have since been reprimanded .
 Air Force General John D Lavelle directed the secret bombing of unauthorized targets in North Vietnam between November 1971 and March 1972 . Rules of engagement were strictly limiting the anti-aircraft sites that could be attacked .
 General Lavelle directed attacks on anti-aircraft sites not authorized under the rules of engagement . He submitted false reports listing authorized targets, he said . Lavelles said he was directing attacks on sites that were not authorized .
 General Lavelle was relieved of his command by General John D Ryan, Air 60 Force Chief of Staff . The unauthorized bombings were discovered .
 Admiral Thomas H Moorer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time of the incident, said the chain of command had not-taciously or otherwise--authorized the bombings .
 Admiral Moorer emphasized that General Lavelle was relieved of command for lying to his superiors about the targets he was attacking . He said he lied to superiors about what he was doing .
 The dual reporting of targets used by General Lavelle to keep the unauthorized bombings secret strongly resembles the dual reporting used to hide the bombing of Cambodia from March 1969 to June 1970 . The bombings had been conducted by planes not under General Levelle’s command .
 The bombing of Cambodia was ordered by President Nixon and kept secret for reasons of international and domestic politics . President Nixon ordered the bombing and kept it secret for political reasons .
 Given the Nixon Administration's obsession with secrecy and penchant for covert action, the case is an exceedingly poor example of military evasion of civilian control .
 Bro concealing his actions from his superiors marks this case as a malicious unauthorized action, even though he was motivated by legitimate concern over the safety of his pilots . Bro conceal his actions marks his actions as an attempt to conceal his superiors from his bosses .
 The pattern suggested by the malicious unauthorized actions that occurred in the Korean War and Vietnam War is that political restrictions on air operations over hostile territory tend to provoke unauthorized actions . Political restrictions on operations over . hostile territory often provoke unauthorized . actions, such as unauthorized actions, may have led to unauthorized
 Unauthorized actions occur because restrictions are perceived as unnecessarily endangering the lives of pilots flying missions over hostile territory . The restrictions are motivated primarily by a desire to accomplish the mission with as few pilots shot down as possible . Unauthorized action occurs because of the restrictions .
 CNN.com will feature iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . The gallery is dedicated to CNN iReport.com . Submit your photos of the gallery at CNNimages.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 This is an example of acute tension between political and military considerations . The U.S. military says it will not be allowed to engage in the fight in Afghanistan .
 If political leaders and military commanders are not sensitive to each other's needs, unauthorized actions are likely to occur . Political leaders should be sensitive to their needs, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The unauthorized actions do not represent military evasion of civilian control so much as a breakdown in communications between civilian and military leaders, says author . Such unauthorized actions represent a resulting inability to find an acceptable compromise for managing the tensions between political and military considerations .
 The most dangerous incidents at sea are accidental and deliberate collisions . Most dangerous incidents are accidental or deliberate collisions, experts say .
 On June 24, 1966, the Soviet AGI Anemometer collided with the intelligence collection ship USS Banner in the Sea of Japan . On May 10 and 11, 1967, the destroyer USS Walker was struck by two different Soviet destroyers that had been harassing a United States task group .
 The first collision resulted from aggressive intelligence collection by the Soviet AGI, the second incident occurred inadvertently during asi berave harassment, and the third was caused by carelessness on the part of the Soviet tug .
 In all three incidents, Soviet vessels violated the nautical rules of the road . The Soviet ships violated the rules, violating the rules on the road.
 Dangerous maneuvering by Soviet naval vessels and naval-associated auxiliary vessels (AGIs, supply ships, tankers, etc.) was the most common type of incident at sea .
 The most common incidents were dangerous maneuvers by Soviet AGIs and warships conducting aggressive surveillance and intelligence collection against U.S. Navy operations .
 Most of the maneuvers fit a pattern of using such maneuvers for deliberate harassment of U.S. Navy ships . Some of the dangerous maneuvers may have been inadvertent, but most of them were deliberate .
 In some cases such harassment appears to have had no objective other than to demonstrate Soviet contempt for the U.S. Navy . It was a pattern of behavior analogous to Khrushchev's attempts to intimidate the West with strategic weapons .
 Soviet harassment was specifically intended to target U.S. naval operations . In most cases, it was aimed at exercises, missile tests, and oceanographic survey operations .
 In 1960 Soviet naval and merchant vessels began harassing and maneuvering dangerously close to U.S. naval vessels on a regular basis . The incident occurred in 1960 when Soviet ships began to maneuver dangerously close .
 From 1960 to 1972 there were scores of serious incidents and hundreds of instances of Minor harassment . Minor incidents occurred between 1960 and 1972, including serious incidents of sexual harassment .
 The first reported serious incident occurred on April i1, 1960, when a Soviet trawler made radical maneuvers extremely close to the oceanographic survey ship USS Michelson in the Norwegian Sea, fouling the United States ship's towed survey gear .
 A brief review of six of the serious incidents that occurred over the next twelve years will illustrate the nature of incidents at sea . A review of the six serious incidents will illustrate how serious incidents occurred .
 The Soviet ship Polostsk cut across the bow of the USS Duxbury Bay in the Red Sea in 1964 . The ship was attacked by the Soviet Union in Red Sea on April 9 .
 On January 10, 1965, the Soviet ship Kotelnikov interfered with underway refueling operations between the carrier USS Saratoga and the oiler USS Neosho in the Mediterranean . The incident occurred in the early 1960s .
 A Soviet Kashin-class destroyer and Mirka-class corvette harassed the USS America task group in the Mediterranean, almost colliding with the destroyer USS Lawe and the America . On June 7-8, 1967, during the Middle East War, a Soviet Kashins-class
 USS Sims (DE 1059) and USS Pratt were trailing a 61 Soviet submarine in the Mediterranean . On March 31, 1972, a Soviet Kotlin-class destroyer harassed the two ships .
 The pattern in these incidents was deliberate Soviet harassment intended to disrupt U.S. naval operations, deliberate Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road, and dangerous maneuvering at close quarters frequently resulting in near collisions .
 The Soviets occasionally protested alleged incidents by United States Navy ships . The Soviets were particularly sensitive about United States patrol planes making low passes over Soviet ships .
 References also describe twelve other serious incidents similar to those summarized above . These references also describe 12 other serious cases similar to these .
 The United States responded to these protests by stating that the U.S. Navy ships fully complied with the rules of the road while maneuvering to identify the Soviet vessels .
 The Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed May 25, 1972, during the first Nixon-Brezhnev summit . The agreement was signed by Nixon and Brezhnevs in 1972 .
 The agreement committed both sides to respect the international rules of the road for preventing collisions at sea . It also provided guidance for situations unique to naval forces (such as formations of ships) that were not adequately covered by international rules .
 At the first annual review, held in May 1973, a protocol to the agreement 63 was signed that expanded its provisions . The protocol was signed in 1973, and it has since been updated .
 The provisions of the agreement were strengthened by a 1972 revision to the international rules of the road . It explicitly recognized vessels launching or recovering aircraft and vessels engaged in underway replenishment as “restricted in their ability to maneuver"
 The number of incidents in which there was a ""potential for danger” declined from over one hundred per year in the 1960s to about forty per year . In 1982-1983, the number of incidents in which there was a potential for danger declared
 Serious incidents continue to occur at a rate sufficient to warrant concern . On the other hand, serious incidents are still occurring at a high rate .
 On August 1976, a Soviet Echo II-class nuclearpowered guided missile submarine collided with the frigate USS Voge in the Mediterranean . On March 1984, the carrier USS Kittyhawk collided with a Soviet Victor-class submarine in the Sea of Japan .
 The Soviet ships carefully maneuvered to scrape the sides of the United States ships, causing only minor damage to themselves and the U.S. ships .
 The two U.S. ships were exercising the right of innocent passage through Soviet territorial waters off the Crimean Peninsula in the Black Sea . They were exercising their right to innocent passage . The two United States ships were exercises the right to free passage .
 There were a total of five accidental and deliberate collisions between 1972 and 1987-compared with only three between 1960 and 1972 . There were five accidental or deliberate collisions from 1972 to 1987 .
 The total number of collisions and rate at which they occur have thus been greater since the Incidents at Sea Agreement than they were before the atermmenite . The rate of collisions has also increased since the agreement was reached .
 "C6 ucoviets Bump United States ships in Black Sea,"" Washington Post, February 13, 1988, .
 Soviet behavior at sea improved after the Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed . Soviets were still willing to engage in deliberate harassment of U.S. maval operations .
 Threatening actions and simulated attacks have not been eliminated by the Incidents at Sea Agreement . The agreement was reached in 2007, but it has not been implemented .
 Most serious incident occurred during the 1973 Middle East war, after the agreement was signed . In fact, the most serious incident of this type occurred in the 1973 war .
 The anti-carrier exercise consisted of simulated coordinated anti-ship missile and naval gunfire attacks against the United States task groups . The exercise was part of a U.S. Navy exercise in support of President Obama .
 U.S. Navy commanders were unable to Gistinguish the simulated attacks from real attacks until the Soviet ships pulled away without having launched missiles or fired guns .
 Soviet ships and sub-marines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles were constantly within range of the U.S. carriers . The exercise was probably intended as a signal that the Soviet Navy was prepared to counter the Sixth Fleet .
 This tense situation at sea lasted for over a week after the ArabIsraeli cease-fire took hold and tensions in the Middle East eased .
 T2mne Sixth Fleet may have had intelligence indicating that the Soviets were conducting an exercise . Soviets may have deliberately ensured that the U.S. received that intelligence in order to avoid misunderstandings .
 An inadvertent launching of an anti-ship missile could well have been misperceived as an operational deception . However, an exercise can be used as cover for a preemptive attack, an expert says .
 On September 12, 1975, Soviet Kresta II-class cruiser trained its missile launchers and fire control radars on the carrier USS John F Kennedy in the Mediterranean .
 On September 30 and October 1, 1982, Soviet bombers simulated anti-ship missile strikes against the carriers USS Enterprise and USS Midway in the northern Pacific near the Aluetians .
 A Soviet jet fighter fired its cannon into the wake of USS David R Ray during a simulated attack . A Soviet helicopter passed within thirty feet of the destroyer while photographing it . The incident occurred in February 1984 .
 Soviet aircraft carrier Minsk fired eight flares at the frigate USS Harold E Holt on April 2 . The frigate was struck by three of the flares fired at the carrier .
 The Soviet action was extremely dangerous and prohibited under the Incidents at Sea Agreement . The U.S. frigate was not without blame in the incident .
 On balance, however, the Soviet Union has elected to comply with the agreement . The Soviet Union says it will comply with it .
 Incidents between aircraft and mie have also continued to occur despite the Incidents at Sea Agreement . Incidents continue to occur, despite the agreement .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 Normally ship surveillance and intercept operations take place without incident, but the Soviets occasionally violate the Incidents at Sea Agreement . The U.S. regularly violates the agreement .
 On September 29 and 30, 1987, Soviet missile range instrumentation ship Chukotka illuminated U.S. Navy and Air Force patrol planes with a laser . The laser caused temporary blindness in an Air Force pilot's eyes for about ten minutes .
 A wide range of dangerous interactions can occur when U.S. and Soviet naval forces are operating in close proximity . First, a number of dangers can occur if the two nations are operating close-up .
 Incidents at sea have the potential to exacerbate superpower tensions during an acute crisis . Certain incidents could provoke an outbreak of fighting if misperceived as indications of an imminent preemptive attack .
 Incidents at Sea Agreement has reduced the number of serious incidents at sea . But it has not totally eliminated incidents at at sea, says CNN.com .
 The primary reason for this has been lax Soviet compliance with the agreement with the U.S. It has been a problem with Soviet compliance .
 There are grounds for concern that incidents between Soviet and U.S. naval forces could seriously complicate crisis management efforts .
 Military action is ordered by political-level Jecisionmakers . Deliberate military actions are ordered by politicians, not necessarily military leaders .
 They can occur under delegated as well as direct control, and can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control and direct control . They can also be ordered directly over real-time communications links .
 Inadvertent military incidents are military actions that may affect the development of a crisis, but which are not specifically ordered or anticipated by national leaders . Inadvertential military incidents occur when military action is not specifically planned .
 Inadvertent military incidents are troublesome because decisionmakers may fail to realize they are unauthorized and perceive them as a deliberate provocation, signal of hostile intent, or escalation of a crisis .
 This chapter used examples of inadvertent military incidents that occurred under conditions ranging from peacetime to wartime in order to define the range of incidents that could occur in a crisis . This chapter uses examples of accidental military incidents .
 Chapter VII: Military accidents occur infrequently in international crises . As will be seen in Chapter VII, however, military accidents are infrequently seen in the U.S.
 The military chain of command normally cancels most military exercises affecting forces committed to or on standby for the crisis . The move reduces the possibility of international incidents arising from exercise-related accidents .
 The primary reason why exercises are cancelled is that the forces are needed for crisis operations, but exercises have also been cancelled to avoid potential political complications .
 The military chain of command usually advises its on-scene commanders to act with caution and to avoid provocative actions . The second reason for the rarity of crisis incidents is that the military chain advises on scene commanders to stay cautious, not provocative .
 Military prudence is occasionally violated by top-level political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters . But on other eccasions, U.S. leaders have been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting in a local conflict .
 Three factors counteract other factors--increased tempo of operations and adversary forces in close proximity--that contribute to the occurrence of inadvertent military incidents .
 The final task to be accomplished before commencing the case studies is to examine the unique features of naval operations and the perspectives that the U.S. Navy holds .
 This is necessary to understand the role of naval forces in crises and to assess the generality of the findings . This is needed to assess whether the findings are true or not .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 The misperception dilemma can be particularly difficult to cope with when naval forces are used as a political instrument . It can be especially difficult to deal with when they're used as political instruments .
 Tensions between political and military considerations can be exacerbated due to the nature of crisis naval operations . Tensions may be exacerbated if a crisis naval operation occurs .
 The crisis security dilemma is especially acute in the naval warfare environment due to weapons technology, tactical doctrines, and the tactical Situation created by crisis naval operations . Crisis security dilemmas are particularly acute in naval warfare environments .
 The first step in researching the theory of stratified interaction will be to explore how the theory and related concepts presented in the previous two chapters apply to the use of naval force as a political instrument in crises .
 Second, the impact of naval forces on crisis stability will be explored, focusing on their impact on the security dilemma and the misperception dilemma . Third and fourth will be the impact on naval forces in crisis stability . Fourth and third will focus on their role in crisis situations .
 Third, the tensions between political and military considerations that arise in crises will be examined in the context of crisis naval operations . Fourth, the tension between political, military and political considerations will also be examined .
 U.S. Navy leaders have had much to say about the peacetime role of the Navy since the end of World War II . The Navy has been in decline since the early 1970s, particularly since the 1970s .
 Understanding the Navy‘s view of its peaie tdige missions is important . Understanding the doctrinal context within which peacetime Naval missions are carried out is important for understanding the doctrine .
 This doctrinal context can be described as a particular bureaucratic perspective on the use of force, but it reflects the lessons the Navy has learned over the years on the efficient and effective operation of naval forces in peacetime . The Navy's perception of the principles and dynamics of naval warfare that would
 The Navy has an organizational philosophy or ideology which shapes and organizes the attitudes, perceptions, and thought processes of its members . The Navy, like every large organization, has an organization philosophy . The U.S. Navy is one of the largest organizations in the world .
 This produces a wide range of formal guidance covering all aspects of military operations . This includes strategy to the smallest details of tactics .
 Given that the Navy has significant missions to perform in peacetime, the formulation of standing orders for peacetime operations is to be expected . The U.S. Navy has a significant number of missions to carry out in the peacetime .
 An understanding of the Navy's views of its missions will provide insight on how forces performing those missions are employed . Thus, understanding of Navy's view of missions can provide insight into how forces are used .
 Prior to the early 1970s, the U.S. Navy did not conceive of peacetime missions as a category separate and distinct from wartime missions .
 That the Navy had peacetime roles to perform was recognized, but, with the exception of naval diplomacy, those roles were viewed as being derived from wartime missions or as preparatory to execution of Wartime missions .
 Rear Admiral John D Chase in 1969 listed the functions of the Navy, in order of their historical development, as being coastal defense, commerce raiding, enforcing respect for U.S. interests .
 Enforcing respect for U.S. interests entails use of force to defend against attacks on merchant shipping, diplomatic outposts, and citizens abroad . Use of force is necessary to enforce respect for American interests .
 Being an instrument of foreign policy includes ""showing the flag” in port visits to other countries and voyages abroad . Being an instruments of foreign . policy includes visiting other countries, and showing the flag .
 Strategic deterrence is provided primarily by submarine launched ballistic missiles and nuclear-armed sea launched cruise missiles . Carrier aircraft can also contribute to the mission .
 The remaining five functions are wartime missions, their peacetime impact is that the Navy strives to maintain readiness to perform these missions in wartime . The remaining functions are still important to the Navy .
 This is important, because serious conflicts can arise between performance of the peacetime Savawveus and maintaining readiness for Cleans functions .
 The tension between peacetime missions and readiness for wartime missions is one of the most significant interactions between political and military factors affecting the use of naval forces as a political instrument . As will be seen later, this tension is a key factor in the development of the naval force .
 The objectives of sea control are ""denying the enemy the right to use some seas at some times," says the U.S. Navy . The objectives are to deny the enemy a right to control some seas, and assert our own right to use some seas .
 Projection of power is the use of naval force against land forces . It can take three forms, gunfire bombardment, strikes by carrier aircraft or sea launched cruise missiles, and amphibious assault .
 Strategic deterrence aims to deter all-out attack on the U.S. and its allies, to deter lesser attacks with threat of unacceptable risks . The goal is to maintain a stable political environment in which the threat of aggression or coercion against the United States or its allies is minimized .
 Naval presence as defined by Admiral Turner encompasses the ""instrument of foreign policy"" function described by Admiral Chase . Naval presence is defined as the "instrument of foreign policy" function . Admiral Chase described the role of the naval presence as the 'instrument for foreign policy'
 The naval presence concept was the first effort by the Navy to clarify its peacetime role as a political instrument . It continues to be important in Navy thinking today, says Navy historian .
 Commander James F McNulty, then an instructor at the Naval War College, in 1974 provided a detailed analysis of the various political-military purposes served by naval presence .
 Of particular interest is that the requirements emphasize employment of highly capable forces--high value, powerful, multi-mission, high endurance, high connectivity assets . The requirements are intended to employ high-value, powerful forces .
 This approach to naval presence raises a host of potential tensions between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform warfighting missions . The U.S. Navy has been criticized for its lack of presence in peacetime .
 From 1972 to 1978 the Navy made only minor revisions to its mission descriptions . The Navy made a series of minor changes to the Navy's mission description .
 The primary significance of the ""two-mission”"" approach for this discussion is that it reveals an element in Navy thinking that contributes to the inherent tension between performance of peacetime missions and readiness for wartime missions .
 Historically, navies which have lost sight of this principle have turned out to be ineffective in wartime . The essential, fundamental purposes of a navy are to successfully carry out its combat missions in wartime and, by extension, to maintain readiness for wartime .
 Treating peacetime missions as derivative of wartime missions is an attempt to resolve the tension between the two categories of missions in favor of readiness to perform wartime missions . Treating wartime missions in peacetime is a way to resolve tension between peacetime and wartime missions, such as the ability to
 In 1979, the U.S. Navy began emphasizing principles of naval strategy when describing its contribution to the nation's aesende .
 Admiral Hayward's shift toward strategic principles was preceded by the Navy's Sea Plan 2000 study, completed in March 1978 .
 Admiral Hayward initiated a renaissance in U.S. Navy strategic thinking . Admiral Hayward led the Navy to a new era of strategic thinking.
 The principles he first outlined in his 1979 posture statement to Congress became the basis for the Maritime Strategy . The Maritime Strategy was formally issued in 1982 .
 Maritime Strategy is the overall strategic framework guiding U.S. Navy strategic and operational planning . The Maritime Strategy guides the Navy's overall strategy for the future .
 In the event of war with the Soviet Union, the strategy calls for offensive forward operations, seizing the initiative in the war at sea to destroy the Soviet navy and carry out the war .
 The first phase of wartime naval operations cence WS . WS as a Soviet-American crisis begins escalating toward war . WS is the first stage of WWI naval operations .
 Aggressive forward Geployment of U.S. naval forces would commence on a global basis in order to be ready for wartime operations in strategic waters, to put the Soviet Navy on the defensive, selective use of force .
 Maritime Strategy addresses the employment of naval forces as a political instrument with greater sophistication than any previous formulation of U.S. Navy missions . The Maritime Strategy is the first of its kind .
 The three non-wartime naval functions encompassed by the strategy are deterrence, forward presence, and crisis response . The strategy is based on deterrence and forward presence for the U.S. Navy .
 The Maritime Strategy is on deterrence by denial--altering the aggressor's estimate of the probability of gaining his objectives . Using Snyder's analytical scheme, emphasis in the Maritime Strategy was on denial . The strategy is on denial by denial .
 Naval forces deployed to convey denial-type deterrent threats can have an impact on perceptions much stronger than had been anticipated . They can be confronted with conflicts between immediate tasking and the demands of the warfighting operations they would have to conduct .
 Forward presence contributes to the credibility of the U.S. deterrent posture by demonstrating denial capabilities . Forward presence is a key component of the United States' deterrent posture .
 Forward presence is also intended to further international stability by demonstrating support for U.S. allies and other friendly countries, thus maintaining regional balances of power . Forward presence will also demonstrate support for the United States allies .
 Forward presence is oriented toward likely trouble spots in order to have forces readily available if fighting flares up . In practice, forward presence is aimed at likely trouble spot areas, as well as to deter hostilities .
 Naval forces contribute to U.S. diplomatic objectives by showing the flag in port visits . An additional benefit is that naval forces contribute .
 The third peacetime element of the Maritime Strategy is crisis response, defined as employment of naval forces to achieve specific objectives while limiting the scope of the conflict and terminating military action as soon as possible . Crisis response is employed to achieve objectives but limit the scope and terminate military action .
 Crisis response serves primarily to control escalation of a conflict by deterring Soviet intervention . Crisis response is designed to deter Soviet intervention and escalatory actions by other participants. Crisis response also deterred Soviet intervention by other members of the Soviet Union .
 The objective of crisis response is to dominate escalation--to prevail over any threats that may arise with precise use of force, so as 2Oatkins, ""Posture Statement FY-87,"" 1095-1100 .
 National objectives are achieved through the political impact, and, if necessary, the direct military impact, of warfighting capabilities brought to bear at the scene of a crisis . National objectives can be achieved through political and military impact .
 The Navy's description of its peacetime roles and missions changed significantly in the early 1970s and early 1980s . But there are strong continuities in the perspectives underlying these changing mission formulations .
 Five views consistently expressed by Navy leaders are particularly important for this study . The study was conducted by the U.S. Navy Department .
 First, warfighting capabilities are the foundation for performance of peacetime missions . First, the U.S. needs to be able to defend itself in peacetime, the Pentagon says .
 The ability ee forces to deter, persuade, or impress is derived from their ability to fight, the author says .
 Deterrence by denial applies to deterring Soviet military intervention in crises, as well as to detering adversaries in crises from aggression or escaation . Deterrence is also applied to deter adversaries from aggression in crises .
 Fourth, purposes of forward presence (presence for specific or routine political signaling) are to demonstrate denial capabilities for deterrence, and to place forces where they are available to conduct missions for denial should deterrence fail .
 Fifth, the two objectives of crisis management and escalation control are achieved by employing forces capable of demonstrating deterrence by denial, and, should it become necessary, defeating the enemy in battle .
 The theme underlying these five views is that combat or warfighting capabilities are the basis for conducting peacetime political missions . Be Be Be . Be .
 The raison d'etre of navies is to win battles at sea, says Navy leader . That Navy leaders should espouse this view is no surprise, it's no surprise .
 This perspective is not unique to the Navy, similar views are held by all armed forces . This is not only the Navy but other armed forces have similar views of the Navy .
 There is merit in military leaders focusing on readiness to perform warfighting missions . Coercive threats are by definition threats that force will be used . Beyond this, military leaders should focus on readiness for warfighting .
 The key point is that military leaders and political leaders may be using the same terms with much different meanings, and viewing the same military actions as having much different purposes, in de lacey eicns .
 Naval forces tend to be more susceptible to crisis stability problems than other types of forces . Characteristics of naval forces that make them the preferred type of force for use as a political instrument in crises also tend to make them relatively more susceptible than other forces .
 Modern naval warfare places a premium on firing didi t in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response . Second, the nature of modern naval warfare .
 Naval warfare may be more escalation-prone than other forms of Warfare . Third, naval warfare may also be more escalating-prone than other forms of Warfare.
 The first naval crisis stability problem is that the political signals sent by naval forces are especially vulnerable to misperception . The political signals from naval forces can be particularly vulnerable, making the misperceptions particularly acute .
 The danger of the signals sent by naval forces being misperceived by the target nation or third parties . Virtually every study of naval diplomacy has noted the danger .
 Admiral Turner pointed out that perceptions of the country to be influenced are a factor in selecting forces for naval presence . Admiral Turner in his article .
 First, warships, being implements of war, are inherently coercive, even when used for positive, supportive, influence-building purposes . Second, warships are coercive even when they are used to build influence in the world .
 The signals naval forces send have coercive connotations that can serve as ""noise"" complicating reception of the intended signal . Thus, the signals sent by naval forces are considered coercive .
 The flexibility of naval forces, which makes them so valued by national leaders for political signaling, also makes the signals they convey inherently ambiguous . Second, the flexibility of . naval forces also makes them . also makes signals they conveying inherently ambiguous.
 naval forces send highly visible signals which can be received by a large number of countries . As Nathan and Oliver observe, because naval forces can he withdrawn as easily as deployed, they can signal uncertainty and ei of 24 Third .
 The Nature of modern naval warfare places a premium on firing first in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response . The second naval crisis stability .
 The hature of naval warfare is that the platforms--ships, submarines and aircraft--are fragile relative to the destructiveness of the weapons — against them . The platforms -- ships, submarines, aircraft and aircraft -- are fragile . They are fragile, but the weapons -- against them — are
 This began during the era in which guns were the main armament of ships . This was the era of the era when guns were main armaments of ships.
 This led to emphasis on unilateral attrition--being able to fire on the enemy without suffering his return fire-achieved through longer-range guns and such tactical measures as surprise and maneuver . The U.S. Army's emphasis was to be able to attack without suffering return fire .
 Anti-ship missiles can be difficult to defend against, making destruction of the launch platform the most effective defense against them . Destruction of a launch platform is the best defense against such missiles, experts say .
 The technology and tactical doctrines of modern naval warfare provide conditions for crisis stability problems to arise in a crisis . Modern naval warfare provides conditions for crises to arise, say experts .
 Crisis stability exists when neither side has an incentive to strike the first blow, but in modern naval warfare both sides have strong tactical incentives to strike first blow . Crisis stability occurs when neither team has an opportunity to strike out first blow.
 The technology and tactical doctrines of modern wave warfare almost unavoidably give rise to the crisis security dilemma . Both sides employ naval forces as a political instrument in crises, creating tactical-level interaction at the scene of the crisis .
 United Scates and Soviet naval tactical doctrines emphasize the offensive and striking first in naval combat . The doctrines emphasize striking first and the offensive in naval warfare .
 The stratified crisis security Gilemma is that, in a crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war .
 When Soviet and American naval forces are deployed to the scene of an acute crisis, the security dilenma is likely to arise at the tactical level of interaction . This is regardless of the threat perceptions held by national leaders .
 The third naval crisis stability problem is that escalation control may be more difficult in naval warfare than in other types of warfare . escalation control is more difficult for naval warfare that in other forms of warfare.
 An attack on an American ship on the high sees is bound to set off skyrockets and the ‘Star Spangled Banners,’and ‘Hail to the chief' and everything else .
 The possibility of nuclear war at sea must be regarded as at least as likely as the occurrence of muclear war in other theaters, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Several important factors that make it likely that any Major conflict at sea would escalate,to a strategic nuclear exchange relatively quickly . Further, there are several important factors .
 Luttwak suggests tension between ae and military objectives can arise in a crisis . The tension is a manifestation of an issue in civil-military relations inherent in war as well as peace .
 Enterprise while in the Bay of Bengal was under the guns and missiles of two Soviet anticarrier warfare groups capable of destroying her by a barrage of surface-to-surface missiles before a plane could have been launched . Enterprise was under two Soviet anti-aircraft warfare groups .
 To national decision-makers that was not an element of the political problem and, therefore, was not the point. To the national . decision-maker that was . not the . point .
 The tension was between the self-defense needs of the naval forces on-scene, and the political objective of having those forces in a highly visible position for political signaling . In this case the tension was .
 The trade-off made was to pursue Signaling at the cost of extreme vulnerability of the ships on-scene . The deal-off was made with the decision to pursue the technology at the risk of being compromised .
 Military contingency Plans are often inappropriate for the particular crisis at hand . Meairing last-minute revision prior to being executed is a sign of tension between political and military considerations .
 Contingency plans may be inappropriate for military as well as political reasons . But even in this case their military weaknesses are likely to be the result of the manner in which the crisis developed politically . Contingencies plans may not be appropriate for military reasons, but political reasons, say experts
 Operational crisis management requirements include limiting the size and composition of the naval force employed, placing eid forces close to or in the midst of fighting as a visible signal, limiting the actions that naval forces can take in self-defense .
 The second tension is between the need for top-level control of military options in a crisis . The need for tactical flexibility and instantaneous decisionmaking at the scene of the crisis, the author says . The tension is also between top level military control and tactical flexibility .
 Studies of naval diplomacy and naval command and control have recognized that maintaining control of naval operations is important in aocrisis . Naval forces are used as a political instrument in a political activity in a crisis .
 There is a strong belief-particularly among naval officers--that the on-scene commander must be delegated as much authority and freedom of action as possible . Senior military commanders recognize the need for a certain degree of direct control by political authorities .
 Top-level decisionmakers can be overwhelmed by information overload, have insufficient time to effectively control multiple operations, and have their attention diverted .
 The White House does not understand the complexities of modern warfare, which can make even a smallscale operation impossible to effectively control from the White House . They do not understand modern warfare .
 His information about the current tactical situation is inherently superior that of his superiors . His information should be superior to his superiors, he says .
 The on-scene commander requires initiative and flexibility to effectively cope with a rapidly changing tactical situation . On-scene commanders must be flexible and take initiative and adapt quickly .
 Only the on-scene commander can effectively adapt to the inevitable “friction” in military operations . Only the commander can adapt to . the multitude of problems that shape the execution of military plans .
 Centralized control of military operations can stifle initiative, weaken morale, erode authority, and cause diffusion of responsibility, says President Obama . Centralization control of operations can weaken morale and erode leadership authority, he says .
 Senior naval commanders generally favor granting the onscene commander as much freedom of action as possible . These are the reasons why senior naval commanders tend to favor this type of action . This is why they favor giving the on scene commander more freedom to action .
 It is important for the task force commander to know exactly what lines the opponent cannot cross and what the appropriate responses should be if the lines are crossed, says the commander .
 Left to themselves in a particular situation, the former might be likely to respond too strongly and at an earlier point in developing events . The latter is likely to prefer more restraint thap, a rapidly heating crisis environment may tolerate .
 The tactical situation can appear much different to the onscene commander, operating under the guns of the adversary, than it does to top-level political leaders, negotiating a way out of the crisis with that same adversary .
 The political-military dynamics of the two levels of interaction can also be quite different, with a non-violent test of Capabilities being played out on-scene as an element in a political strategy of coercive diplomacy . The test of capabilities can be played out as a result of a non
 The third tension is between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform wartime missions . The tension between peacetime and wartime missions is between readiness and readiness .
 When naval presence is exercised in an area of acute military tension, political demonstration purposes blend into preparations for warfare . Martin observed that when naval presence was exercised in a region of acute tension, it could be used to prepare for war .
 Naval forces deployed to the scene of a crisis to lend credibility to a deterrent threat are also S3uccruther, 10.30 .
 The tension between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform wartime missions is inherent in crises . Its impact on decision-making is a function of the specific organizational perspectives of the armed forces involved in the crisis .
 In all instances, our naval forces are organized and optimized toward one or more of the other three roles . commitment to the presence mission in any given case must frequently conflict with their readiness to perform tasks in support of what is almost inevitably perceived as their primary mission .
 This perspective was clearly evident in the Navy's own descriptions of its missions, reviewed in the previous section . This perspective, that wartime missions have priority over and are the foundation for peacetime missions, was also clearly evident .
 This view has been consistent and strongly held for over forty years, and remains central to Navy thinking today . This view is strongly held by the U.S. Navy, which is central to the Navy .
 The Maritime Strategy refers to as wartime naval operations would commence if a Soviet~-American crisis begins to escalate toward war .
 This phase of operations is intended to be executed (and, if possible, completed) before war erupts . If possible, it would be completed before the end of the war . This phase is intended for war .
 The emphasis is on deterrence by denial, deterring the Soviets by making it clear that they cannot achieve their wartime aims . Again, the emphasis was on .
 When this prewar deployment phase of operations commences, the tension between peacetime operations and readiness for wartime operations is resolved . The tension is resolved in favor of readiness for war operations .
 In all likelihood, though this is not stated explicitly, the two phases of the strategy would proceed simultaneously . The two phases are likely to proceed simultaneously, though not explicitly .
 Crisis management and escalation control entail much more than deterrence by denial and escalation dominance, the Maritime Strategy says . Crisis management is the central strategic concepts of the Maritime strategy, the Strategy .
 The President could well decide upon a crisis management strategy in which he is willing to accept greater risks to U.S. naval forces than are envisioned in the Maritime Strategy .
 This could preclude execution of the strategy in the manner preferred by the Navy . This could mean the Navy will not be able to execute the strategy .
 Navy forces might not be immediately responsive to unanticipated ad hoc operational requirements created by the President’s crisis management strategy . Conversely, naval forces organized, trained, and positioned for execution of the Maritime Strategy may not be ready to respond immediately .
 The decision to shift from crisis response to the first phase of wartime operations would undoubtedly be a momentous and difficult one for the President .
 He can be expected to put off making this decision for as long as possible while —_— a negotiated solution to the crisis is negotiated .
 President would order the first phase of wartime operations incrementally, to use the forward deployments as further Signals of resolve and to convey increasingly strong coercive threats . Equally likely is the probability that the President would use the . forward deployments to use as further signals of resolve .
 Navy leaders say delayed or incremental execution of wartime operations could seriously threaten the ability of the Navy to achieve its wartime objectives . Delays or incremental operations could threaten the Navy's ability to achieve objectives, they say .
 Keys to the success of both the initial phase and the strategy as a whole are speed and decisiveness in national decisionmaking . Key to success of the strategy is speed and Decisiveness, the government says .
 The U.S. must be in position to deter the Soviets' ""battle of the first salvo"" or deal with that if it comes . The United States must be ready for the battle, the U.N. says .
 A substantial fraction of the fleet is forward deployed in peacetime . Prompt decisions are needed to permit rapid forward deployment of additional forces in crisis .
 Admiral Watkins was arguing, in effect, for the decision to commence the first phase of wartime operations to be made earlier in a crisis rather than later .
 This illustrates the tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions . This clearly illustrates the nature of the tension . The tension between the performance of crises missions and wartime missions is a tension .
 Early and decisive execution of prewar naval deployments are viewed by Navy leaders as crucial to the success of the Maritime Strategy . But could well be viewed by the President as a serious threat to crisis management .
 This tension is not unique to the Maritime Strategy--it is inherent in the use of military forces in crises . The tension between military forces and diplomacy is not new to the strategy, it's inherent in military forces .
 Our specific rules of engagement, although classified and dependent on the given situation, generally require us to assume a ""defensive position"" and to react to a hostile act . Our rules of engagement are classified and dependent on given situation .
 This, of course, is not all bad, for a different type of rules might result in a miscalculation which could have catastrophic consequences . This, however, may not be all bad .
 Our rules of engagement put us at a disadvantage because our unit commanders and individual commanding officers are forced to think defensively prior to taking offensive action . Even so, our rules ofengagement put us in a disadvantage, says the author .
 Our present rules put us in a very unpalatable situation in that the enemy can start the war at the time and place of his choosing . Moreover, our present rules give us in an unalatable state of war, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The rules of engagement give the Soviet Navy a tremendous advantage, author says . Within the context of the ""battle of the first salvo,” so important in Soviet military thinking, the rules were important in the Soviet thinking, he says .
 The U.S. Navy can ill-afford to absorb a massive, coordinated afgack prior to being able to take offensive action . The United States Navy is not ready to take on a massive military operation .
 The possibility that a crisis could erupt in war exacerbates the tension between political and military considerations inherent in rules of engagement . The possibility of a crisis in the U.S. could trigger a crisis that could erupt into war .
 Soviet-American hostilities have risen to the point that wartime options must start receiving consideration . In a severe crisis, the tensions between political and military objectives becomes acute .
 Political missions are prone to put naval forces in locations other than where contingency plans would have them . Peacetime political missions can employ forces of a bint and composition other than would be optimum for wartime operations .
 First, the naval force carrying out the political mission may not be suitable or available for immediate employment in wartime operations should war break out . Second, the Navy may not have been able to carry out the mission in wartime .
 It could well be sunk in the first seconds of the war, its position being well known and its presence being an aggravation . It is well-known and its position is well known, so it could be a major problem .
 Second, the ability of the fleets from which the units were drawn to conduct preplanned wartime operations can be degraded by the absence of the units . Third, the effectiveness of the fleet fleets can be reduced by the presence of units in the war .
 Efforts to minimize the impact of these effects can entail actions which may not be compatible with the political objectives of national leaders and the diplomatic initiatives being taken to resolve the crisis . Efforts may be counterproductive to national leaders' objectives, experts say .
 Using a naval force suitable for wartime operations for a political mission could cause the same misperception as using it for a military mission . Using it for political purposes could cause a misperperception .
 Failure to maintain readiness of naval forces for wartime missions could be misperceived as a lack of resolve . It could erode credibility, undercutting the nation's bargaining position, and debilitating efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis .
 This chapter has reviewed the United States Navy's view of its role as a political instrument . It has examined the impact of naval forces on crisis stability and discussed the tensions between political and military considerations that arise in crisis naval operations .
 Five views consistently expressed by U.S. Navy leaders are particularly important for understanding their perceptions of the role of naval forces in crises . The views are important to understanding the views of Navy leaders .
 First, warfighting capabilities are viewed as the foundation for performance of peacetime missions . Second, warfighters are considered to be the foundation of performance in peacetime . First, the U.S. military says it will focus on its ability to conduct peacetime operations .
 Navy leaders strongly believe peacetime missions must entail maintaining readiness to perform warfighting missions, particularly in crises . Second, and closely related, Navy leaders believe that peacetime must also be prepared for crises .
 The purposes of forward presence are viewed as demonstrating denial capabilities for deterrence at placing forces where they are available to conduct warfighting missions should deterrence fail .
 The two objectives of crisis response--crisis management and escalation control--are viewed as best achieved through employing forces capable of threatening deterrence by denial . This is best achieved by employing forces that threaten deterrence by denying .
 The theme underlying these five views is that combat oer warfighting capabilities are the basis for conducting peacetime political missions . The themes of these views are that the U.S. needs to focus on peacetime politics .
 Navy leaders should espouse this view, as the raison d'etre of navies being to win battles at sea . Navy leaders say it is not surprising that Navy leaders espouse such views .
 The key point is that political leaders and military commanders may be using the same terms with much different meanings, and viewing the same military actions as having much different purposes . The same military action as having different purposes may have different purposes, military leaders say .
 Civilian leaders could authorize prewar naval deployments as a signal of resolve . Pre-war deployments could increase readiness for wartime operations .
 Civilian leaders focus on political considerations, military leaders on military considerations . Such differences in perspective can give rise to tensions between political and military considerations, says CNN's John Sutter .
 These differences in perspective are not a problem so long as the deplyments succeed in acheiving their political objectives, that is . That's so long if the other side refrains from escalation . The other side should also refrain from escalating .
 Two problems could arise, however, if fighting does erupt -- which could result from some sort of inadvertent incident as well as from a deliberate decision by the adversary .
 Military contingency plans authorize U.S. forces to conduct combat operations under certain circumstances, such as in self-defense or anticipatory self-defence . Civilian leaders may not understand that by executing military contingency plans, they are authorizing United States forces to do combat operations .
 Contingency deplyments in support of allies involved in a crisis can exacerbate the problem . U.S. forces are authorized to use force against an ally in order to protect themselves .
 civilian leaders could unknowingly be limiting their future options a narrow range of military operations once fighting erupts . Second, civilian leaders may unknowingly limit their military options in the event of fighting .
 Military leaders always have contingency responses, but focus is on protecting their forces and ensuring victory in any engagement might arise . The intensity and scope of combat operations they envision could well exceed what civilian leaders would have desired had they participated in planning .
 Differences in perspective can have serious latent implications that may not become apparent until an unanticipated incident occurs . Differences of perspective can thus have serious implications that could not be realized until an unexpected incident occurs, such as an incident .
 The RiamabteE Sati cs of maval forces that make them the preferred type of force for use as a political instrument in crises also tend to make them relatively more susceptible to crisis stability problems than other types of forces .
 Political Signals sent by naval forces are especially vulnerable to misperception . Signals are particularly acute in naval crisis response . Political signals are particularly vulnerable in naval crises, especially in the US .
 Modern naval warfare places a premium on firing first in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response . Second, the nature of modern naval warfare .
 Discussion of these topics was necessary to develop specific concepts for operationalizing the theory of stratified interaction . Discussion was necessary for developing specific concepts .
 With that task completed, the second phase of the research design can now commence . The second phase can now begin to design the next generation of the technology .
 The second phase consists of four case studies of crisis naval operations . The next chapter is presented in the next chapter of the book .
 Savon Fah 14 0s Mod S* -P s ‘ 0. 0. ' : , ‘, ‘ sos e Vm el yh ‘ aes . 3 Por A o* : ° 4 ' beep. rabeerh, GM
 Se ‘os *e Ae Lear & 5 oe 2 ae, oe ma Pumse he gatps erases at hi yy ae ee z ot Ys yo . Se “os *o Ae Lear’s ‘5 oe
 Wan. aR a sam. dacatiane ds ' ' oo wees Sa otaingr gt ater ig ea oo “SA, i8add € ou Oh es 0 Lae Lae TAs eh Eis. a
 MCMC Iisa Benth Op y Ofe4y tie 8, me Br hs a Weng 8 opis Rivvate, Tr ‘se ""an oan mens te. ‘ ’ sah % 9 ¢ 7 eth ote Sy a
 Mein £4 Ten’, PE Awa ter 1 koe eee . of, ae aes J + ftw : werd Sr. nk. Mein .
 LT RASS. 4 ee . es ees bag es ene bei cre eR LF, Tay 29% Rag fa MU eRe eNe Oasys PERS e mn ne hs SEPA lela Reh ET” LAS » CES S
 BAT i eS FRESCO BIW Hts ee Ad ~ Sate a a ot UR anes . ' i’ eek is lire nt ANA) BING whew.
 YBa 3 ata Xt Li it Ja ri ade tO a Ce wt ie A q ’ e ry a ry’ A ry RO ao ao Ae wr ene  ia ia PR oe .
 EAE se rarees oa Baty vee Gtk Fe eee eeeas el Yexe ane retie s4, Ve Fite Vt. Pup ttn e, wdn 0%4 EAE is rarees rarees .
 Sane eon gt Bs ae pb Fig ow ow ow Oh, wee i 4p seh a a Wane. A bare ie tag. Sane iF MEST AE A bare iF bare ie tags . Sane  gt bs a
 A 242"" . rt bbe ae apt erie eaten bt Pia he is Piss ecese Lal ae * 3 Pape ot ef .
 The criteria for case selection were significant U.S. naval operations were conducted and influenced the outcome of the crisis . There was a possibility of fighting erupting between the United States and the other side .
 Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory of stratified interaction will be addressed in each case study .
 This question addresses the second corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that the security dilemma can become stratified in crises . The security dilemma becomes stratified when it comes to a crisis, the author says .
 This question addresses the third corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that ‘escalation dynamics can be stratified in a crisis.’
 Research was done to identify Guedtions which may have inhibited escalation dynamics from occurring . None of the cases escalated to war-~research was done .
 All three tensions arise from the requirements of crisis management, the author says . The essence of this is placing political constraints on military operations, he says .
 Each case study opens with an overview of the background crisis and its context, followed by a description of objectives and strategies of each side . The case study examines the background of the crisis and the context of each crisis .
 U.S. naval operations during the crisis are discussed in a review of the command and control methods that were used . The review is also discussed in the United States naval operations .
 Each case closes with a summary of findings on the eight research questions . Each case concludes with the answers to the eight questions .
 The United States responded by announcing a commitment to the defense of Quemoy and assisting the Nationalists in breaking the blockade .
 The crisis tapered off in October 1958, after the Chinese Communists announced that they would not shell Quemoy on even days, allowing supplies to reach the island .
 The United States Navy played a prominent role in the crisis . The U.S. Navy escorted convoys to Quemoy and patrolling in the Taiwan Strait .
 Clashes between Nationalist and Communist forces occurred during the war and intensified afterwards despite U.S. efforts at mediating between the two sides . Clashes occurred between Nationalists and Communists .
 The Nationalists and Communists were irreconcilable because both sides claimed to be the only legitimate government of all China . The Communists and the Nationalists claimed to have the right to the throne of China . Both sides claimed that they were only legitimate .
 The Communists proclaimed the goal of reuniting Taiwan with the mainland under Communist rule . The Nationalists proclaimed the . goal of returning to the mainland to place it under Nationalist rule .
 Nationalist Chinese and Communist Chinese clash in Taiwan Straits . Nationalist China and Communist China are at odds with each other in Taiwan .
 The United States remained committed to the Nationalists and refused to recognize the People's Republic of China . The U.S. refused to accept China's sovereignty .
 When North Korea invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950, one of the first actions taken by the U.S. was to send the Seventh Fleet to protect Taiwan .
 The PRC signed a thirtyyear friendship treaty with the Soviet Union on February 14, 1950, and the ROC signed a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with the United States on February 9, 1951 . Nationalist-Communist confrontation became embedded in the Soviet-American cold war .
 The Nationalists occupied several islands off the coast of mainland China as they fled to Taiwan . The islands were occupied by the Nationalists during their flight to Taiwan from China .
 The offshore islands had little value for the defense of Taiwan, but were useful as bases for military raids and intelligence missions against the mainland . The islands were useful for military missions against mainland .
 The offshore islands also had important symbolic value to the Nationalists . They were also important symbolic values .
 The Nationalists returned fire and four days later began launching large-scale air attacks against the mainland . Four days later, the Nationalists began launching air attacks on the mainland again .
 The United States responded by ordering the Seventh Fleet to resume its patrol of the Taiwan Straits . The U.S. responded immediately .
 By February 1955 the Nationalist position on the Tachen Islands had become untenable, and the United States convinced the ROC to withdraw its garrison with Seventh Fleet support . The U.S. convinced the Chinese Nationalist to withdraw from the islands .
 The withdrawal was conducted successfully without interference from the PRC . The PRC declared a ceasefire in the area two days before the evacuation . The withdrawal is conducted successfully .
 The crisis tapered off after this as the PRC adopted a less ola Cane line toward Taiwan and the U.S. Cane. line . Cane .
 This policy was first apparent at the April 1955 Bandung Conference of African and Asian nations . It called for peaceful liberation of Taiwan, and lasted until July 1958 . This policy, first apparent in 1955, was called for peace in Taiwan .
 The United States signed a Mutual Defense Treaty with the ROC on December 2, 1954, and Congress passed the Formosa Resolution in January 1955 .
 The Eisenhower Administration was breaking an earlier promise to make a public commitment . The private commitment-better described as informal assurance--was intended only to resolve the crisis .
 President Eisenhower would later interpret the Formosa Resolution narrowly 06 to mean that the U.S. could not defend the offshore islands unless their loss would threaten the defense of Taiwan .
 Between 1954 and 1957 the Nationalists increased the Quemoy garrison from 30,00 to 86,100 troops-~almost onethird of their ground forces . The garrison increased the Nationalist's ground forces to almost 80,000 troops .
 Sea Power and Global Politics in the Missile Age (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), 170), 170. Sea Power .
 Chiang may have deployed troops to Quemoy so as to be able to rapidly exploit political upheaval on the mainland . Chiang also had not abandoned the option of someday taking offensive action against the mainland, and may also have deployed the troops .
 Tension in the Taiwan Straits remained at a relatively low level from April 1955 to July 1958 . Tension was low in 1955 to 1958 .
 The Nationalists used the offshore islands for limited political and military Operations, such as infiltration of agents into the mainland and broadcasting propaganda over loudspeakers .
 Communist Chinese occasionally shelled the offshore islands or buzzed them with aircraft . The Communist Chinese sometimes buzzed the islands with aircraft.
 Neither side increased the intensity of such operations prior to late August 1958 . The U.S. and the Soviet Union did not increase such operations .
 Ambassadorial talks with the United States in Poland had failed to yield any American concessions on the Taiwan issue . The U.S. ambassador to Taiwan had been in Poland for talks .
 On August 23, 1958, the Communist Chinese commenced an intense artillery bombardment of Quemoy, firing over 40,000 shells in two hours . Nationalist Epokesrien said the bombardment was a two-hour bombardment .
 Two studies disagree as to whether or not Nationalist military activities on the offshore islands contributed to precipitating the crisis .
 Gurtov and Huang contend that, Nationalist activities during the first half of 1958 were a serious provocation . They say Nationalist activity in China during the early 1950s was a real provocation .
 Halperin contends that the level of Nationalist activities had actually declined in 1958 . He argues that the Nationalist activity in 1958 was much less provocatory in 1958 than in earlier years . Halperins says that the activities of the Nationalists had declined .
 The low level of Nationalist military operations that were being conducted from the offshore islands were probably still an annoyance to the Communist Chinese .
 The first objective was to deter the Nationalists from using the offshore islands for harassment of the mainland, or as a base for a future invasion . The first . objective was . deterring the Nationalist from using offshore islands .
 This would reduce the annoyance of Nationalist military activities from the offshore islands . This would perhaps lead to a reduction in the Nationalist garrison on the islands .
 The second objective was to force the Nationalists to withdraw form Quemoy, similar to the manner in which they had been force“ to abandon the Tachen Islands in 1955 . The Nationalists had also been forced to withdraw from the islands .
 The blockade of Quemoy appears to be designed to cause logistical problems similar to those that forced evacuation of the Tachens . The blockade appears to have been designed to create logistical problems .
 The third objective was to avoid war with the United States, which could well result in United States atomic attacks on the mainland .
 The advantage of a blockade over an outright invasion was that it was less likely to provoke the United States into attacking the mainland in support of the Nationalists . The advantage was that the U.S. would not be likely to attack the mainland .
 The fourth objective was to discredit the American commitment to the Nationalists and weaken U.S.-ROC relations . The U.N. was trying to discredit America's commitment to China's Nationalists .
 This could have been the outcome if the U.S. did not intervene to break the blockade and the Nationalists were forced to evacuate Quemoy . The United States intervened in the fight against the blockade, and the blockade was successful .
 Weakening U.S.-ROC relations might make the Nationalists more amenable to negotiations and even weaken the defense of Taiwan . Weakening relations might lead to negotiations between Taiwan's Nationalists and the United States, writes Andrew Hammond .
 If none of the other objectives were achieved, negotiations would offer an opportunity to gain American and Nationalist concessions in the Taiwan Strait .
 Tang Tsou has pointed out that the Chinese Communists shifted to the United States the decision as to whether there would be a direct encounter between American and Communist Chinese forces in Asia . The decision was made by the U.S. to avoid a direct confrontation between Communist China and American forces in
 The strategy employed by the Communist Chinese in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis is an example of the approach to use of force they employed from 1950 onward . The strategy was an example from 1950 to 1958 .
 Communists made an attempt to seize Tung Ting Island, a tiny Nationalistoccupied island eighteen miles southwest of Quemoy . The Communists attempted to seize the island in August .
 The eatidmabiote repelled the invasion force and there were no further Communist attempts to invade any of the islands in the Quemoy group .
 It is likely that Tung Ting was the only island that the Communist Chinese intended to invade at the outset . The island was likely to be the only one intended to be invaded at the start .
 Tung Ting would have ‘ene psychological impact’ of its loss on the Nationalists, the government says . However, the primary reason for seizing Tung ting would be its loss of power, he says .
 Loss of the island might have demoralized the Nationalists and led the Communists to believe that Quemoy was also indefensible . The Communists may have hoped, perhaps, led the Nationalist to think that Quamoy was indefensible.
 Seizure of a single, tiny island would be a low-level test of the U.S. commitment to the defense of the offshore islands . seizing a single island would also be a test the United States commitment to defense .
 If seizing Tung Ting did not evoke a strong U.S. response, other small islands in the Quemoy group probably would have been seized as part of a protracted campaign against the islanders .
 Strains had begun to develop in the StmG2sovilet alliance in 1956 and 1957 . Both sides were still trying to forestall the rupture that would occur later in 1958 .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev states that his government supported Chinese military aid requests for the upcoming operation . In the memoirs he states that he supported China's request for military aid .
 The Soviets were circumspect in their propaganda support until the Chinese bombardment of Quemoy began . However, once the bombardment began, they remained circumspect .
 As long as the crisis did not result in war, the costs would be small~-some military aid, propaganda support, and deterrent threats to the U.S. The costs of the crisis would be very small, as long as it did not end in war .
 The second Soviet objective was to avoid being dragged into war with the United States by the actions of Communist China . The U.S. would not want to engage in war with China .
 The first objective was to prevent Guemoy from falling into Communist hands . The first aim was to stop the fall of the city from being taken over by the Soviets .
 Analysts are divided on whether Moscow and Peking agreed or disagreed on the level and type of support the Soviets would provide . Analysts say Moscow and Beijing did not agree on level or type support they would provide.
 One view is that the Soviets provided much less support than they had led the Chinese to expect . The Soviets provided little support than the Chinese had led them to expect, say experts .
 The Chinese made this accusation in a bitter 1963 denunciation of the Soviets . It was made after the Sino-Soviet split had erupted in public acrimony .
 A second view is that Mao and Khrushchev were in agreement on the level of support the Soviets would provide . A third view says the Soviets agreed to provide support for the Soviet Union .
 A third view is that Mao and Khrusuchev did not discuss the issue at all . The anticipated level of Soviet support was not a major factor in Chinese decisionmaking, it is said .
 The second objective was to prevent the crisis from involving the United States in a war with Communist China and the Soviet Union . The U.S. also wanted to prevent a war between China and Russia .
 The objective required that the United States restrain the actions taken by the Nationalists against the mainland and limit the role of United States forces in the conflict . This objective required the U.S. restraint of the actions .
 Peking had adopted the limited probe strategy in order to force the decision to escalate on the United States. Apparently assuming that the Nationalists and Americans would not be able to break the blockade without attacks on the mainland, Peking adopted the strategy .
 By adopting a limited response, the U.S. passed “the onerous burden of deciding whether to accept the existing situation or to escalate” back to the Chinese Communists . The United States passed the burden on the Chinese Communist Party back to them .
 The Chinese Communists had in effect written the rules for the military contest that was to follow, and those rules were highly unfavorable for the American strategy . The U.S. strategy was highly unfavorable .
 If the strategy succeeds, as it did in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the expected outcome is reversed without escalation of the conflict . If it succeeds, it will reverse the outcome of the 1958 crisis .
 Using the categories of crises presented in Chapter II, for the United States it was an indirect crisis . For the U.S. it was a direct and indirect crisis, the crisis was not direct or indirect .
 The United States was brought into the confrontation through its alliance with the Nationalists on Taiwan . The U.S. was brought in the confrontation by the alliance with Taiwan .
 'The United States also had to be concerned with the behavior of its Nationalist allies, lest they provoke a war with Communist China. This meant that, in addition to controlling the actions or its own forces, ‘the U.S. also had . to be . concerned with
 The 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis was a limited probe by Communist China against the Nationalist-held offshore islands, countered by a United States strategy of engaging in a test of capabilities under restrictive ground rules .
 Both sides sought to achieve limited political objectives while preventing the crisis from escalating to war . Both sides were trying to avoid war but failed to achieve political objectives .
 U.S. naval operations conducted in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis . Review of command structure that existed at the time of the crisis .
 The 1958 defense reorganization, which removed the Joint Chiefs of Staff from the operational chain of command, had not yet been implemented . The 1958 reorganization was not yet implemented .
 The JCS used a system of designating one of the service chiefs to act as the ""executive agent” for the JCS in controlling a particular Operation . The J CS used to name one of its service chiefs as the ‘executive agents’
 A single commander was responsible for detailed management of the operation at the JCS level . This ensured that a single commander, rather than a committee, was responsible . The operation was overseen by a single JCS commander .
 The JCS executive agent was responsible to the JCS, but was normally accorded substantial authority . The executive agent could work directly with the Secretary of Defense so long as he kept JCS informed .
 The next level in the chain of command was the Commander in Chief Pacific . Admiral Admiral Harry D Felt was the unified commander for all U.S. forces in the Pacific theater .
 "I'd send in something and, unless otherwise directed, I'm going to do this or that," I'd send it in . I'm not sure what I'll do next .
 Under CINCPACFLT were two operational commands (the First Seventh Fleets), eight administrative commands (for training and readiness of specific types of forces, such as aircraft or destroyers), and six area commands . Commander Seventh Fleet was responsible for naval operations in the Western Pacific,
 During the Taiwan Strait Crisis, COMSEVENTHFLT was Vice Admiral Wallace M Beakley . Vice Admiral Frederick N Kivette was relieved on October 1, 1958, by Vice Admiral Beakeley .
 Task Force 72, the Formosa Patrol Force, Task Force 73, the Logistic Support Force; Task Force 77, the Attack Carrier Striking Force; and Task Force 70.4, the ASW Hunter-Killer Group . units assigned to these task forces changed as ships and
 The Formosa Patrol Force originated during the Korean War, when President Truman ordered the Seventh Fleet to guard Taiwan against Communist attack .
 The Navy ships and patrol planes assigned to patrol the Formosa Strait were designated a separate task force on August 24, 1950 . The task force was designated as a new task force .
 Task Force 72 became the Formosa Patrol Force in 1953, reflecting the nature of its duties, and was renamed the Taiwan Patrol Force in 1957 . Force 72 was formed from Formosa in 1953 .
 Rear Admiral Paul P Blackburn, Jr., was Commander of the Taiwan Patrol Force in 1958 . Rear Admiral Blackburn was Rear Admiral Blackburn's commander of Taiwan's Patrol Force .
 During the crisis, the force consisted of a cruiser, approximately twelve destroyers, two patrol plane squadrons, and two seaplane tenders . One of which served as the force flagship, was the force's flagship .
 From establishment of the command until February 1957, the Commander of the Seventh Fleet was “dual hatted’ as Commander of Formosa Defense Command .
 The commander still does not have operational control of United States forces defending Taiwan . This upgraded the status of the command and allowed more effective planning and coordination .
 On September 11, 1958, the United States Taiwan Defense Command became a true unified command with the commander having operational control of all United States forces committed to the defense of Taiwan .
 Existing communications systems had been created well before the unified command system was established and thus were not designed to support it . Existing communication systems had not been designed for such systems .
 Washington could not establish direct radio communications with naval forces at sea . Excessive time delays precluded real-time control of forces on Taiwan .
 The primary communications channels between commanders ashore were telegraph and teletype lines . Teletype lines were used to send messages to commanders .
 Washington did not provide detailed operational guidance to Navy commanders in the Far East . Washington provided detailed guidance to operational commanders .
 Vice Admiral Alexander Heyward, Director of the PoliticoMilitary Affairs Division of the CNO's staff during the crisis, states that “civilian authorities did not attempt to exercise detailed control over those Ronee Navy commanders were delegated substantial decisionmaking authority .
 COMUSTDC and COMSEVENTHFLT originated and planned virtually 32 all of the operations that were conducted . They planned and planned the entire operation .
 Admiral Alexander S Heyward, Jr., Jr., letter to author, May 27, 1988 . Sluice Admiral Alexander Heyward Jr. wrote to author .
 The United States did not have contingency plans for assisting the Nationalists with the resupply of Quemoy, Taiwan Patrol Force says . First, the U.S. had no contingency plans, including the United States Taiwan Defense Command .
 Plans for resupply and convoy escort were not completed until September 3 (ten days erWer the Communist artillery barrage started) and the first convoy was not ready to sail until three days later .
 Under Eisenhower Administration's strategy of “massive retaliation,” primary emphasis in war planning had been on plans calling for use of nuclear weapons from the onset of a conflict .
 Planning, training, and logistical preparations for extended conventional operations had been neglected, particularly in the Air Force . The Air Force had neglected to prepare for long-term operations .
 Some U.S. commanders in the Pacific expected that if a decision were made to defend Quemoy, it would be with nuclear weapons . The Taiwan Strait Crisis erupted in 1958 .
 Eisenhower Administration directed that planning proceed on the basis that only conventional weapons would be used . The Eisenhower Administration was not enthusiastic about defending the offshore islands .
 CINCPAC, the JCS, and the Eisenhower Administration paid close attention to the authority delegated to operational commanders . The Eisenhower administration paid close . attention to authority delegated by commanders .
 President Eisenhower states in his memoirs that he "saw no need to delegate to any subordinates my authority as Commander-in-Chief to commit United States forces to action" and that he therefore retained this authority himself .
 Use of atomic weapons and U.S. air attack in support of CHINAT Air Force in 3 above [air strikes against mainland to defend offshore islands], only as approved by the President . Only as necessary, only as OK'd by President. Use of nuclear weapons and United States
 JCS gave careful consideration to the authority they delegated to subordinate commanders . JCS struck a balance between delegation and control, striking a balance .
 Rules of engagement authorized U.S. ships and aircraft to use force in self-defense, but prohibited them from taking offensive action against the mainland . The rules of engagement are limited to the use of force against mainland .
 Commander Seventh Fleet authorized use of force to protect Nationalist ships under attack by Communist ships, aircraft, or submarines . U.S. forces were not to provoke fire from Communist shore batteries or engage in gunfire duels with them other than selfdefense .
 American fighters on Taiwan were only permitted to fire on hostile aircraft entering Taiwan’s airspace . U.S. fighters were not permitted hot pursuit in international airspace .
 U.S. combat air patrols were required to remain east of the ‘Davis Line,’ which ran approximately down the center of the Taiwan Strait . The line was required to be east of Taiwan Strait, which is about half the length of the line .
 The U.S. Air Force commander on Taiwan convinced CINCPAC and the JCS that these rules would cripple air defense efforts in the event of concerted Communist air strikes against Taiwan .
 The distinction between hot pursuit (which was authorized in self-defense) and retaliation (which required approval of the oe had been proposed by the National Security Council .
 By August 1956 this distinction had been incorporated into all rules of stiA amar ianE issued to U.S. forces .
 The distinction between hot pursuit and retaliation was applied by the Eisenhower Administration to the rules of engagement for the air defense of Taiwan . The Eisenhower Administration applied the distinction .
 If Communist Chinese aircraft threatened U.S. forces, Nationalist forces outside of three miles from the mainland, or Taiwan and the Pescadores, those planes could be pursued by United States fighters . The Comminst planes could also be pursued .
 If necessary, hot pursuit could continue into Communist Chinese airspace and even over the mainland . Hot pursuit could be into Communist China airspace .
 Attacks by U.S. forces against mainland airfields from which Communist Chinese planes operated were defined to be retaliation, and had to be approved by the President . Attacks by United States forces against Chinese planes were defined as retaliation, but only approved by President Nixon .
 Heavy reliance had to be placed on mechanisms of indirect control and the good judgement of the on-scene commanders . Heavy reliance on indirect control was placed on them .
 The President and the JCS gave careful consideration to the authority they granted to subordinate commanders, striking a balance between delegation and control . President and JCS struck a balance struck between delegation .
 For operations approved by the President, such as escorting convoys to Quemoy, Navy commanders were delegated substantial decisionmaking authority and given relatively broad freedom of action . For operations .
 Washington did not provide detailed guidance on the conduct of operations to Navy commanders in the Far East . The U.S. Navy has not provided detailed guidance to commanders in Asia .
 Communist China's deploying jet fighters to previously unoccupied coastal airfields in Fukien Province was a major concern to the Nationalists . The Nationalists were concerned about the deployment of the jet fighters .
 The United States buildup emphasized air defense of Taiwan and the capacity to strike Communist airfields . The U.S. buildup emphasized the ability to strike communist airfields in Taiwan .
 On August 5, the CNO directed that an attack Carrier group remain in the Taiwan area and that a twodestroyer patrol be maintained continuously . The attack carrier group remains in the area .
 On August 17 the Strategic Air Command placed five Guam-based B-47 jet bombers on alert . The Strategic Air command placed five of the planes on alert in Guam .
 The General Emergency Operations Plan was the forerunner to the Defense Condition of Readiness alert system . The plan was instituted in November 1959 .
 GEOP alert that had been declared on July 14 was partially relaxed on August 7 . U.S. forces in the Pacific were still at a high state of readiness when the shelling of Quemoy started on August 23 .
 Taiwan Patrol Force had two destroyers on patrol in the Taiwan Strait and two in port Kaohsiung, Taiwan .
 Most of the Seventh Fleet's amphibious force was in Buckner Bay, Okinawa . A four-ship amphibious group with a Marine BLT embarked was in port Singapore .
 A dozen destroyers of Destroyer Flotilla One were scattered around 46 63-5 . A dozen of Destroyer destroyers were scattered .
 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force ordered two destroyers to proceed to Tung Ting Island . Nationalists had reported as being invaded by the Nationalists .
 Destroyers withdrew on finding no Communist Chinese activity in the area . The destroyers withdrew after finding no communist activity .
 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force also ordered USS Hopewell to proceed to the assistance of a Nationalist tank landing ship under attack by Communist torpedo boats . Commander Taiwan patrol force also ordered . Hopewells to remain clear .
 Communist FT boats circled Hopewell as she approached, but departed without firing on the American ship . Communist boats circled the ship, but left without firing .
 The Gaanedatng Officer of Hopewell, adhering to the rules of wnebassune in a tense and dangerous situation, refrained from firing .
 Commander Seventh Fleet ordered Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to station three destroyers twelve miles east of Quemoy in the Straits . Hancock readied to commence combat air patrols over the straits and air strikes if directed by the President . Lexington and Princeton to proceed to stations northeast of Taiwan at
 Commander Seventh Fleet also issued rules of engagement for the Taiwan Strait . U.S. Navy aircraft ordered to remain at least twenty miles off the coast of the mainland .
 This JCS directive authorized reinforcement of U.S. air defense forces on Taiwan . Preparations to assume total responsibility for the air defense of Taiwan . Plans to escort and protect Nationalist resupply convoys to offshore islands .
 The message stated that initially only conventional weapons will be authorized, but prepare to use atomic weapons to extend deeper into Chinese Communist kesEetomy if 30 . Operations and preparations carried out by United States forces throughout the crisis .
 Use of atomic weapons required specific authorization from the President of the U.S. Use of such a weapon was required by President Nixon . Use of nuclear weapons required authorization from President Nixon's administration .
 On August 26, Commander Seventh Fleet ordered the attack carrier Shangri-La to proceed to Taiwan, and arranged for Marine Air Group Elaven to be transferred from Japan to Taiwan . Three fighter squadrons were transferred to Taiwan from Japan, with three squadrons .
 Midway and her escorts were to immediately depart Pearl Harbor for the Western Pacific . The heavy cruiser USS Los Angeles was to depart Long Beach for Pearl Harbor that day . Seventh Fleet was to halt normal rotation of ships back to the U.S. until reinforcements arrived .
 Essex joined them on September 16, allowing Hancock, which had been extended past its normal rotation date, to return to the U.S. Hancock returned to the United States on September 17 .
 Commander Seventh Fleet also ordered naCl calthon Yacatronens and a cruiser added to the Taiwan Patrol Force . The move raises the force's strength from four destroyers to twelve destroyers .
 Seventh Fleet included four attack carriers, one ASW carrier, three cruisers, 41 destroyers and destroyer escorts, and seven attack pitilabaaiedl .
 Day and night combat air patrols over the Taiwan Strait commenced on August 25 . They remained outside of twenty miles from Communist territory .
 The Taiwan Patrol Force.increased the number of destroyers on patrol in the Straits from two to four . Added a heavy cruiser to the patrol, armed with depth charges and torpedoes .
 On August 26 CINCPACFLT directed Commander Seventh Fleet to prepare for conventional air attacks against coastal targets and nuclear strikes against inland targets if directed by the President .
 Seventh Fleet Cruiser-Destroyer Force prepared to bombard Communist artillery positions on the mainland in support of Nationalist convoys to Quemoy . The Seventh Fleet was preparing to bomb Communist artillery .
 JCS authorized escort of Nationalist convoys iff the Nationalist navy could not do so . Also authorized the United States Taiwan Defense Command to assume responsibility for the air defense of Taiwan so that Nationalist planes would be free to defend offshore islands .
 The Commander of the United States Taiwan Defense Command was delegated authority to make the determination as to whether or not United States escort of Nationalist convoys was needed . U.S. commander of the Taiwan defense command was delegated .
 One Nationalist LST was sunk and second damaged on August 24 while evacuating wounded from Quemoy . One of the LSTs was sunk, one was damaged during the evacuation of wounded .
 On September 2 the Nationalists denied a Communist claim that the supply line to Quemoy had been cut . The Nationalists admitted that they could not get sufficient supplies to the island to keep pace with consumption .
 Ammunition was the critical item (particularly artillery shells), but fuel was also a serious concern . Fuel was also an important concern for the soldiers .
 Three of the last four LSTs sent to Quemoy had been forced to leave before they completed unloading supplies . Nationalist sources stated on September 5 that three of the . last four . LSTS were forced to . leave before . they completed . unloading . supplies
 Nationalist attempts to resupply Quemoy with LSTs were turned back by Communist artillery fire and PT boats . U.S. records indicate that all five attempts by the Nationalists were turned down .
 Many U.S. Navy emadiiders and civilian officials believed that the Nationalists were not making a concerted effort to resupply Quemoy .
 Chiang Kai-shek asked for U.S. concurrence on air’ strikes against the mainland . President Eisenhower turned down the request .
 The convoy escort option was a compromise between doing nothing, which might have eroded Nationalist morale, and attacking the mainland, which risked a direct Clash between Communist and American forces .
 On August 25 President Eisenhower approved a JCS directive authorizing preparations to escort and protect convoys to the offshore islands . The Nationalist resupply convoys were escorted to the islands .
 On August 26 CINCPACFLT directed Commander Seventh Fleet to prepare to escort and Baemact Rationalist resupply convoys to the offshore islands while they were in international waters . On August 27 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force was directed to commence planning for convoy escorts .
 Commander Seventh Fleet authorized Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to commence escort operations . The most important issue in the decision to escort convoys was how close U.S. navy ships would be allowed to go to Quemoy .
 In his oral history then-CNO Admiral Arleigh Burke states that President Eisenhower initially wanted the escorts to remain twelve miles offshore . Burke recommended they go in to three miles, instead of twelve miles .
 Chiang Kai-shek requested that the U.S. escort to the beach . Rear Admiral Smoot and United States Ambassador Drumright supported his request .
 The arguments against going within three miles of Quemoy were that it implied an intent to directly defend the island (as opposed to assisting resupply) The three mile limit kept United States ships out of range of almost all Communist artillery .
 The August 29 JCS directive specified that convoy escorts and fighter air cover were to remain in international waters and airspace . That means outside of Communist China’s three-mile territorial limit and no closer than three miles to Quemoy .
 Convoy escorts were advised to avoid known Communist shore batteries that could reach them in international waters . Convoys were also advised to stay away from known shore batteries .
 The Nationalist Chinese were informed on September 3 that the U.S. would commence escorting their convoys . The Chinese were told by the United States that the convoys would be escorting .
 Taiwan Defense Command completed its plans for escort operations . That same day the U.S. Taiwan Defense command completed its escorts operations .
 The small-scale night convoy escort operations conducted September 4-6 were not revealed to the press until after the first daylight convoy on September 7 .
 Night convoys delivered only a very Small amount of supplies to Quemoy . These night convoys deliver only a few small amounts of supplies .
 The initial small-scale escort operations provided a test of the Communist reaction . In addition to training the Nationalist and U.S. navies in operating together, the initial operations provided an important test of Communist reaction.
 Convoy consisted of two Nationalist medium landing ships escorted by two patrol boats and two corvettes . Convoy was escorted by 2 patrol boats, 2 corvettes, and 2 corvesters .
 The United States escort consisted of four destroyers and two cruisers, including USS Helena . Commander Seventh Fleet was aboard .
 The Communists did not interfere wien the United States escorts or the unloading of supplies . The unloading effort was hampered by poor organization and training on the beach .
 Two Nationalist merchant ships delivered supplies to Matsu without Communist interference . Also on September 7, two Nationalist merchants delivered supplies .
 Chinese Gemmuniieed artillery opened fire on the two Nationalist LSMs two hours after they reached the beach at Quemoy, damaging one and forcing them to withdraw . One of the LSMs was damaged and forced to withdraw from the beach .
 One LSM had unloaded only a small amount of supplies, while the other had not started unloading . One of the two LSMs had not yet unloaded any of the supplies .
 The next two Lightning convoys, on September 11 and 13, experienced a similar fate, unloading negligible amounts of supplies . One LSM was destroyed and one LSM damaged, and another damaged .
 The fifth Lightning convoy, on September 14, sarked the first use of tracked landing vehicles launched from LSTs, for carrying supplies to the beach .
 The eightinch howitzers were capable of firing shells with atomic warheads . They were far superior to Communist artillery shelling Quemoy . In addition to being powerful conventional weapons, they were also capable of launching atomic shells .
 Catamcount successfully delivered three more eight-inch howitzers to Quemoy the night of 20 September . Catam Count successfully delivered the three more 8-inch guns .
 The success of this resupply method further reinforced the belief that the Communist blockade had been broken . It was the first time the blockade had broken .
 Great caution was exercised during the Quemoy resupply operations to avoid clashes with Communist Chinese forces . The operation took place during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Only one destroyer was to be positioned within view of Quemoy and the mainland while convoys were unloading supplies . The rest of the escorts were to remain over the horizon ready to respond in the event of a Communist PT boat attack .
 This restriction was lifted on September 10 by Commander Seventh Fett in response to Communist shelling of the second convoy, but on-scene commanders remained cautious . The restriction on the convoy was lifted in September .
 U.S. Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1976), 527; Blackburn, letter to author, May 30, 1988 . Blackburn, author, wrote a letter to the author on May 30 .
 JCS directive allowed ships to approach as close as three miles . This limit was probably set by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to avoid Communist artillery .
 JCS authorized use of U.S. Navy LSDs in resupply effort . CNO specified they remain at least three miles offshore from Quemoy .
 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force increased this distance to 12 miles on October 8 . The distance has now been increased by 12 miles .
 Early Nationalist resupply efforts were largely ineffective due to their lack of experience with unloading supplies over the beach rather than in port . Nationalists had no experience unloading their supplies on the beach instead of port .
 United States Navy assistance led to the shift from beaching LSMs and unloading them by hand, which had proven disastrous under fire, to LVTs from LSTs offshore .
 Another Navy technique taught to the Nationalists was launching landing craft from an LSD offshore . Another technique was launched by the U.S. Navy .
 This resupply method required United States participation because the Nationalists did not have LSDs of their own . Nationalists had to rely on U.S. participation because they had no LSDs .
 U.S.-Nationalist amphibious landing exercise, code-named “Land Ho,” was held on Taiwan on September 8 . The exercise is a joint military exercise between the two countries .
 The exercise is a signal of the U.S. defense relationship with Taiwan . The exercise was publicized to make it a signal .
 A radar picket destroyer provided air control and navigation services for Nationalist transport aircraft dropping supplies to Quemoy by parachute . Nationalist aircraft dropped supplies by parachute by parachute during the war .
 The attack carriers around Taiwan maintained a combat air patrol over the Taiwan Strait from August 25 to September 6 . The patrol was cancelled due to the low level of Communist air activity and the buildup of aircraft on Taiwan .
 Navy fighters made highaltitude, high-speed dashes up and down the strait to ensure that Communist radar operators knew that the latest U.S. fighter jets were on-scene .
 The Taiwan Patrol Force kept at least four destroyers on patrol in the Straits from August 25 to October 29 .
 Taiwan Patrol Force planes kept a close watch on the mainland coast . Patrol planes of the Taiwan Patrol force kept close watch .
 U.S. Navy ships and aircraft conducted electronic intelligence collection against Communist Chinese radar sites, an important preparation in the event that air strikes had been . The operation sent a strong deterrent signal to Communist China .
 "I guess we do forget to tell them each change of course for each ship at times," says crew member . "We don't know what we're doing when we're changing course," she says .
 "My CVA [attack carrier] group commanders were a little too enthusiastic," he says . "We had 4 bad crashes and lost 3 pilots before I got them slowed down," he adds .
 "I have to get some of these carriers off the line pretty soon or we'll have breakdowns in more ways than one," says President Obama . CNN.com's John Sutter says he has a lot of work to do to fix the problem .
 Taiwan has all the forces that they need at present on the island itself, and with CVA back-up, we should relax the rest of us . I believe Taiwan has got all the . forces that . they need to be on the . island itself .
 "I think we could take the heart out of ChiCom air without much trouble," says Terence Moore . Moore: "We could take out the heart" of the air without trouble .
 X think they know we mean business and are not going to iet Quemoy and the Matsus starve . I think if the ChiNats [Chinese Nationalists] would slow down now on provocative actions that the situation would quiet down .
 Third, he expresses the view that the situation would quiet down if the Nationalists would “slow down on provocative actions,” a sentiment similar to those expressed by Rear Admiral Smoot and Vice Admiral Riley .
 The final step in this review of U.S. Navy operations is to examine the interactions with Communist Chinese forces that could have occurred during the crisis . The review will look at interactions between the U.N. and Communist China forces that occurred .
 Communist artillery fires on United States ships, pEGepting counterbattery fire . Communist planes, PT boats, or submarines attack U.S. ships, prompting return fire or an air battle . Communist fighters attack United States fighters or patrol planes over the Straits, prompting an air
 The high level of U.S. Navy forces in the waters around Taiwan provides grounds for expecting that there was ample opportunity for inadvertent military incidents to occur .
 Any of these incidents could have triggered a clash between the U.S. and Communist China . And, givea the high level of tension in the Taiwan Straits, any such a clash could have occurred .
 There was, in fact, very little tactical-level interaction between U.S. and Communist Chinese forces . Despite the intensity of United States Navy operations close to the coast of the mainland, there was very little interaction .
 Communist planes and PT boats were sometimes seen in the vicinity of Quemoy . They never challenged United States navy units . During convoy escort operations, they never challenged U.S. units .
 There were no reported instances of U.S. ships on patrol in the Straits encountering Chinese Communist naval vessels or submarines .
 Communist fighters did not venture out over the Straits to challenge U.S. combat air patrols . They did engage in several air battles with the Nationalist Air Force .
 Communist aircraft were occasionally detected over the Taiwan Straits, but stayed to the west of the Davis Line that marked the limit of the Taiwan air defense intercept zone . According to a U.S. radar picket destroyer, Communist aircraft occasionally detected .
 The U.S. Navy was careful to keep its fighters at least twenty miles off the coast of the mainland .
 The closest U.S. and Communist China came to a clash during the crisis was the standoff between the United States destroyer Hopewell and Communist PT boats on August 24 .
 No shots were exchanged in this or any other incident during the crisis . No shots exchanged during the incident .
 USS McGinty was patrolling southwest of Quemoy when a Nationalist patrol craft was taken under fire by Communist shore batteries . The ship was attacked by the Communist Coast Guard in the early 1950s .
 McGinty closed the PC at 24 knots to cover its withdrawal with a smoke screen . The Nationalist PC fled seaward at best speed . The PC was closed in at least 24 knots .
 Six rounds of Communist artillery fire landed astern of McGinty Serine the PC . Neither the United States nor the Nationalist ship were damaged . The Communists ceased firing as soon as the PC arrived .
 The United States Navy lost at least four jet fighters in flying accidents . None of these incidents caused or resulted from interaction with Communist forces . They were caused by maintaining an excessively high tempo of operations .
 There was one incident in which Nationalist Air Force planes attacked Nationalist Navy ships in the Taiwan Straits, but the correct identities of the attackers and victims were established before United States forces became involved .
 Commander Taiwan Patrol force investigated the allegation and determined that the plane had not approached Communist territory closer that thirty miles . Commander Taiwan patrol force investigated .
 Communist Chinese claim U.S. destroyers had invaded their territorial waters . U.N. Navy destroyers were attacked by the Communist Chinese on October 9 .
 Commander Taiwan Defense Comuand later determined that one leg of the patrol could have taken them close to Communist waters . The ships initially denied the charge .
 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force changed the patrol route to open the closest approach to Communist Reililters . No further incidents occurred after the change of route .
 The United States ceased escorting Nationalist convoys on October 8 and never resumed the escorts . The U.S. stopped escorting convoys after October 8 .
 On October 12 Peking extended the ceasefire, but then resumed the shelling, claiming that U.S. ships had escorted a Nationalist convoy on October 19 . On October 20 Peking claimed that United States ships escorted a convoy on Oct 19 .
 There was a Nationalist convoy on October 19, but Taiwan Patrol Force did not escort it . There was an escort of the convoy, but it was not escorted by the Nationalist .
 A United States LSD, with United States escorts, had conducted a resupply mission off of Quemoy, remaining 12 miles off the island . However, the mission was conducted 12 miles from the island, with U.S escorts .
 There had also been LSD resupply operations the evenings of October 8, 12, and 13 without protest from the Communists, making it doubtful that the October 19 convoy was the primary reason why the Communists decided to resume shelling .
 The most likely cause of the renewed shelling was the visit of U.S. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles to Taiwan, the most likely .
 Dulles arrived in Taipei on October 20 for discussions with Chiang Kai-shek . Dulles visited Taipei for talks with the late leader of the country .
 The Communist Chinese shelling was probably intended to disrupt the Chiang-Dulles talks, perhaps increasing U.S. pressure on Chiang to make concessions on the offshore islands, and to signal continuing dissatisfaction with the status quo .
 U.S. forces in the seas around Taiwan provided the President with a wide range of military options for dealing with the Communist Chinese probe of the offshore islands .
 Taiwan Patrol Force provided escorts crucial for the test of capabilities strategy that the President adopted in the crisis . Navy attack carriers provided a potent deterrent threat, says President Obama .
 Navy commanders imposed restrictions on their forces to avoid clashes with the Communists . Navy commanders exercised restraint when in potentially dangerous situations .
 This section will review the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis to answer the eight research questions . Findings are based on the 1958 crisis in the Taiwan Strait Strait .
 Eisenhower Administration was concerned about the danger of events getting out of control in the Taiwan Straits . Eisenhower administration was concerned that events could get out of hand .
 The position paper approved by the President on September 4 noted that because U.S. destroyers would be operating up to three miles from the mainland, there is a possibility of a deliberate or accidental hit by the Chicoms .
 U.S. Navy commanders in the Pacific had significant authority to conduct operations as they saw fit . They exercised that authority to its limits, the President and the JCS .
 The only detailed instructions provided by the JCS concerned rules of engagement and the limit on how close ships could approach Quemoy and the mainland .
 Commander Taiwan Defense Force and Commander Taiwan Patrol Force were keeping their ships twelve miles away from the mainland and offshore islanas . Although there would later be pressure to allow U.S. ships to go right up to the beach in Quemoy, when the crisis erupted there would be
 Throughout the crisis Washington was ill-informed of the status of operations currently in progress, which precluded American leaders from exercising close control of the operations . Washington was not able to exercise close control over the operations, writes CNN.com .
 Eisenhower exploited the flexibility of the U.S. command system for crisis management purposes . The overall picture emerges is of the Eisenhower Administration exploiting the flexibility, the author says .
 Operational decisions that held the greatest risk of escalation were 8lamaiwan Patrol Force Review,” Enclosure 1, 1; . Blackburn, lettér to author, 1988 .
 Decisions on the details of executing operations previously approved by the President were delegated to on-scene commanders . On the other hand, decisions were made by on-site commanders .
 Both sides appear to have good intelligence concerning the other side’s forces and operations . Both sides appeared to be having good intelligence regarding each other's operations .
 The pattern of Communist Chinese shelling suggested that they had good intelligence on the convoys . Taiwan Defense Command observed that the pattern of Chinese shelling suggests that they have good intelligence .
 U.S. on-scene commanders had similarly good information on Communist military activities . United States on-site commanders had similar good information .
 Taiwan Patrol Force maintained intensive patrol and surveillance of the mainland coast . Taiwan Patrol force maintained intensive patrols and surveillance .
 However, detection of actions by the other side did not automatically ‘generate tactical reactions’ ‘‘’t automatically generate tactical reactions,’ says the BBC . ‘But detection of the other team’s actions does not automatically trigger tactical reactions .
 When United States and Communist forces came into contact, as in the Hopewell and McGinty episodes, they disengaged rather than fighting . U.S., Communist forces disengage rather than fight .
 The intelligence requirement for tight coupling of the two sides' forces was met, but tactical reactions tended to be @ampened by measures taken to avoid clashes . Thus, although the intelligence required for tight cooperation was met .
 Both Communist China and the United States were using their forces for political purposes as well as military purposes . The United States and Communist China used their forces to fight for political and military purposes, according to the U.S.
 Communist China was conducting a limited probe of an ambiguous U.S. commitment to the offshore islands . China exerts carefully controlled pressure on the Nationalists and the United States .
 The U.S. accepted a test of capabilities under the ground rules established by the Chinese Communists . The test was backed by a massive concentration of maval and air power in the Straits to convey a strong deterrent threat .
 Chinese backed down and salvaged as much as they could politically . Faced with a choice between escalating the confrontation or accepting an unfavorable outcome, they backed down . The Chinese were forced to back down and back down .
 Interactions occurred at the tactical level that were not directly controlled by U.S. leaders . Interactions took place at the level of tactical level, not directly controlling by American leaders .
 President Bisenhower had no control over the actions of the destroyer Hopewell on August 24 . For example, President Bisshower had not control of the actions .
 The findings of this case suggest that stratification is not an absolute concept . The findings suggest that there can be degrees of stratification, however, in the case .
 Measures taken by both sides to prevent confrontations between their forces can greatly reduce opportunities for tactical-level interaction to occur . Measures taken to prevent confrontation between forces will greatly reduce chances for tactical interaction, say officials .
 President suspended convoy escort operations on October 6 in response to Communist unilateral ceasefire announcement . Order was not received by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force until after two more Nationalist convoys had been escorted on October 8 .
 Commander of the U.S. Taiwan Defense Command initially responded to the Communist ceasefire by informing his forces on October 6 that it did not change their orders . The Commander initially told his forces that they would not change orders .
 The impact of a fast-paced tactical environment and ambiguous orders were most apparent on August 24, the first full day of the crisis .
 It would be August 26 before the onscene commanders received the first JCS directive on the crisis . Commanders had to respond immediately to a Communist Chinese threat of unknown proportions .
 In the early hours of the crisis it was not clear whether the Communists intended to attack Taiwan, invade Quemoy or neighboring islands . It is unclear whether the Communist Party intended to invade Taiwan or just harass the offshore islands .
 Nationalists appealing for assistance to repel an invasion of one of the islands . The Nationalists were appealing for help repel the invasion .
 Eisenhower Administration policy toward defense of offshore islands was ambiguous . Eisenhower administration policy was ambiguous on defense of the offshore islands . Eisenhower's policy was unclear on the issue .
 U.S. military commanders in the Pacific had sought Clarification on the offshore islands earlier in August as tensions rose in the Straits . President was unwilling to state a definitive policy until September 6 .
 Commander Seventh Fleet and the Chief of Staff at CINCPAC would later complain about this lack of guidance from Washington . Left to their own devices, commanders took actions on August 24 and 25-sending United States destroyers to the assistance of Nationalist forces defending the offshore islands .
 This appears not to have been a significant problem in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . This appears to be a significant issue in the 1950s .
 The entire chain of command, from the eteieent down to commanding officers at sea in the Straits, appear to be aware of the danger of incidents with Communist Chinese forces .
 The emphasis in JCS operational directives was on avoiding clashes with the Communists, and —– commanders took similar measures on their own initiative .
 These steps had the effect of S4eiiey, ""Reminiscences,"" 630; Halperin, ""The 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis,"" 133. These steps were taken in the wake of the Taiwan Strait crisis .
 Vice Admiral Blackburn also states that he was not kept informed of United States political objectives and diplomatic initiatives during the crisis . He also says he did not know about U.S. political objectives or diplomatic initiatives .
 Some commanders in the Far East may have wanted to take more vigorous action against Communist China . But they did not perceive a significantly greater threat to U.S. forces than did officials in Washington .
 In 1958 Taiwan ae ea, when decoupling occurred it did not produce tactical-level escalation . In the 1958 Taiwan Ae-e-a-ea, decoupled occurred it didn't produce tactical escalation .
 When U.S. and Communist forces did come in contact, they quickly disengaged . Instead, interactions remained at a relatively low intensity .
 U.S. on-scene commanders exercised caution in the absence of guidance from higher authority . First, they exercised caution .
 Commander Taiwan Defense Command and Commander Taiwan Patrol Force initially ordered ships to remain twelve miles from the mainland and aircraft to remain twenty miles . The policy was more restrictive than that approved by President later .
 Maimticesipling occurred, preventing escalation even when actions took place that the President had not ordered . This tacticallevel prudence compensated for lack of operational guidance, says President .
 Ground rules included no Communist attacks on United States forces, no U.S. attacks on Chinese forces except in self-defense . Ground rules also included no attacks on the Chinese mainland . No United States attacks on China except self-defence .
 "As this situation generated, we sort of abided by rules of the other side," he says . "We sort of . abided ... and they abided . by our rules. As this situation . unfolded, the situation generated," he said .
 They were very careful never to come out of sea, beyond their own coastline . They were also careful to never come out to sea, not far from the coast .
 We were careful not to go beyond their coastline, too, so that we sort.of had an unofficial agreement and nothing happened . "We're not going to go further than the coast, too. We're going to try to get the best of the situation," she says .
 Kalicki arGuts that a Sino-American ""crisis system"" evolved during the 1950s . Kalickis claims that a Chinese crisis system evolved in 1950s during China's "crisis"
 In this system, “the life cycle of.each crisis became increasingly self-regulated” and 85y Ss.s. and 85s. “became increasingly self regulated’s. crisis cycle,” the authors say .
 Kalicki: U.S. and Communist China had evolved tacit rules of crisis behavior . He argues that American and Chinese leaders improved their skills as crisis managers . Study of tactical-level military interactions in the 1958 crisis supports his view .
 This appears not to have been a serious problem during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . This appears to be not a serious issue during the crisis .
 The military moves taken by each side were carefully designed to signal their intentions . Each side's military moves were designed to send signals of intent .
 Eisenhower Administration attempted to resolve this dilemma with a calculated policy of ambiguity . The Eisenhower Administration's policy only prompted the Communist probe of the American commitment and subsequent efforts by the Nationalists .
 The problem was not that the Communists and Nationalists misperceived United States intentions, but rather that they correctly perceived the ambivalence in U.S. policy . The problem is not that they misperceive the United States .
 Tension arose in the restrictions placed on the support that could be provided for the Quemoy resupply effort . Tension between political considerations and military considerations arose .
 The most efficient way of resupplying the Nationalist garrison would have been to carry their supplies in United States amphibious ships escorted right up to the beach by United States warships .
 This would have been a serious provocation to the Communists, who might not have refrained from shelling the American vessels . However, this would have led to the Communist Party shelling of the American ships .
 The political restrictions on the resupply operation were thus prudent from a crisis management perspective, even if they required the United States and Nationalist navies to improvise ways to get supplies ashore under fire .
 Tension arose between need for top-level control and need for on-scene flexibility and initiative . Overall a workable balance appears to have been struck, but overall, a balance was struck .
 President Eisenhower implies in his memoirs that he was satisfied with command arrangements during the crisis . Eisenhower implies that he is satisfied with the command arrangements in the aftermath .
 Efforts by officials in Washington to manage the crisis were hampered by lack of information bt the field . CNO increased reporting requirements and sent several queries to commanders in the Far East .
 Rear Admiral Smoot made several requests for authority to make decisions himself rather than refer them to Washington . Smoot requested authority to take decisions himself, some of which were granted .
 Tensions arose between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions . The U.S. Air Force was deployed to the Middle East in 2007, when the U.E. was deployed .
 The President was warned that the U.S. must undertake operations which bring action to a halt quickly . The PoliticoMilitary Policy Division of the CNO's staff prepared a position paper .
 The CNO refused to authorize similar-actions that would have further drawn down Atlantic Fleet strength .
 Of the three types of political-military tensions, this one was the most serious during the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis . The incident occurred during the 1950s during the Taiwan Strait crisis .
 The United States responded by demanding that the missiles be withdrawn, imposing a naval quarantine of offensive arms shipments to Cuba . The U.S. also demanded that the missile be withdrawn from Cuba . Cuba was then preparing to launch air strikes and an invasion of Cuba .
 Vice Admiral Beakley, Commander Seventh Fleet, expressed concern in the letter quoted previously that the attack carriers off Taiwan would start breaking down if kept on the line for too long without maintenance .
 The U.S. Navy played a prominent role in enforcing the quarantine and carrying out a wide range of operations in support of President Kennedy's strategy .
 Soviet-American relations had begun to improve in 1959, marked by the “spirit of Camp David"" engendered during Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev's September visit to the U.S.
 This tentative thaw in the cold war ended in May 1960 when Khrushchev walked out of the — Four-Power summit meeting meeting . This was the first thaw since the Cold War ended in 1960 .
 Khrushchev had demanded that the U.S. apclogize for violating Soviet airspace with the U-2 that the Soviets had shot down on May 1, 1960 . The U.2 was shot down by the Soviets in 1960 .
 When President Eisenhower refused, Khrushchev scuttled the summit meeting . Eisenhower refused to meet with the Soviet Union leader .
 Khrushchev had announced a commitment to support ‘wars of national liberation’ in the Third World . This came two weeks after Khrushvic had announced support for ‘national liberation' in the world .
 The ideological and political confrontation between the superpowers would continue in the new Administration . Thus, the ideological and . political confrontation . would continue .
 The Kennedy Administration soon discovered that there was no missile gap with the Soviet Union . The U.S. held a lead in strategic nuclear forces .
 Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara revealed that there was no missile gap on February 8, 1961 . McNamara: "There were no missile gaps in the system"
 Khrushchev's ICBMs claims were largely a bluff . The Soviets were producing them at a low rate and had few IBM missiles . The ICBM claims were a bluff, and the ICBM production rate was low .
 American relations with Cuba had been deteriorating since Fidel Castro overthrew the Batista dictatorship in January 1959 . U.S.-Cuba relations have been on the decline since the Castro regime took over in 1959 .
 Castro imposed a Communist dictatorship on Cuba and turned to the Soviet bloc for political support and economic and military aid . Pressure grew in the United States to take action against him .
 This led to the CIA plan to mount an invasion by anti-Castro exiles, which was well along when Kennedy came into office . The CIA plan for the invasion by exiles was already underway when Kennedy was in office .
 The attempted invasion failed, with most of the exile force killed or captured, producing a propaganda triumph for Castro . Most of the exiled force was captured or killed . Castro's regime was overthrown in Cuba .
 President Kennedy admitted United States complicity in the invasion accepted iiddveadibility for the disaster . Kennedy admitted U.S. involvement in the war in Vietnam .
 This did not mark the end of U.S. opposition to Castro, but it did not, however, mark the beginning of the Castro era .
 CIA launched “Operation Mongoose,"" a series of guerrilla raids by Cuban exiles . The CIA launched Operation Mongoose in Cuba in 1961 .
 Joint Chiefs directed to prepare contingency plans for air strikes and invasion of Cuba . Joint Chiefs also told to prepare plans for a possible air strike .
 The Soviets cut off rail and road access to Berlin in June 1948 . It was in response to Britain, France and the U.S. unifying West Germany . The Soviets viewed it as a first step toward a separate peace with Germany .
 The blockade was broken by the Berlin airlift and was lifted in May 1949 . Berlin airlifts lifted the Berlin blockade in 1949 .
 In November 1958 Khrushchev had given the West six months to withdraw from Berlin and sign a German peace treaty . The West withdrew from Berlin in November 1958 and signed a peace treaty with Germany .
 The Western powers rejected the Soviet demand, which was dropped during Khrushchev's May 1959 visit to the U.S. The Western nations rejected the request . The Western countries rejected the proposal, and it was dropped .
 Khrushchev took a hard line on Berlin when he met Kennedy in Vienna in June 1961 . On July 8, 1961, he demanded that the Western powers withdraw from Berlin .
 The Soviets and East Germans began erecting the Berlin Wall around the Western occupation sectors of the city in August . The West refused, and in August the Soviets and the East Germans started erecting it around the West .
 The crisis tapered off without resolution of the issues that had provoked it . The crisis then tapereded off without resolving the issues .
 In January, the United States persuaded the OAS to declare its opposition to Cuban revolutionary activity in Latin America . The U.S. persuaded the Organization of American States to do so .
 On February 4, 1962, President Kennedy declared an embargo on all trade with Cuba other than medical supplies . Kennedy declared the embargo in 1962 . The embargo was imposed on Cuba in February 1962 .
 Cuban Minister of Public Works, Osmoni Cienfuegos, Raul Castro, Defense, and Che Guevara, Minister of Finance, visited Moscow in late August . Che also visited Russia in April .
 These visits produced Soviet pledges of economic and military assistance . Soviet pledges were made to the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In mid-July ships carrying arms destined for Cuba began leaving Soviet ports . The Cuban military build-up has been a major problem for the country .
 Four to six passenger ships arrived per month in July, August and September, each carrying hundreds of Soviet technicians, troops, and support personnel .
 U.S. intelligence estimates were that the Soviets had 3,000-5,000 personnel in Cuba by the end of September . United States intelligence estimated that the Soviet Union had 3-5 million personnel .
 The Soviets supplied the Cubans with Mig-21 jet fighters, tanks, radar-controlled anti-aircraft guns, Mt. rane conventional tactical ballistic missiles, coastal defense anti-ship cruise missiles . Komar~-class fast attack craft armed with SS-N-2 anti
 On August 29 U-2 photographs confirmed SA-2 Guideline surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba . U.S. photographs confirmed the missile sites .
 In eariy August the United States stepped up dts surveillance of Cuba and Soviet bloc shipping to the dsland .
 U-2 flights over Cuba were used to spy on Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba . The U.S. intelligence collection ship USS Oxford was assigned to monitor the island .
 The CIA and NSC prepared detailed studies of the intentions and implications of the build-up . In late August the CIA began issuing daily intelligence reports on Soviet arms shipments to Cuba .
 Offensive weapons were those that could strike U.S. territory from Cuba . Surface-to-surface missiles and bombers were among the weapons .
 All other weapons, including the surface-to-air missiles and anti-ship cruise missiles, were considered defensive .
 President Kennedy made public statements on September 4 and 13 describing the buildup of defensive arms in Cuba . President Kennedy warned that the United States would not tolerate offensive arms there .
 Khrushchev would later claim that Soviet missiles were deployed in Cuba to defend the island against the threat of U.S. invasion .
 Khrushchev apparently proposed the idea of deploying offensive missiles to Cuba sometime between late April and late May of 1962 . The idea was put forward between April and May 1962 .
 By early July Cuba had agreed to allow missiles on its soil . Plans for the deployment had been completed, and launch sites had been dented .
 The Soviets rained initially to deploy 24 launchers for S£-4 Sandal 1,100-mile range MRBMs with two missiles per launcher . 16 launchers for SS-5 Skean 2,200-mile-range IRBMs were deployed . The Soviets initially deployed 24
 Of this missile force, only 42 MRBMs were actually deployed to Cuba before the U.S. imposed the quarantine on effensive weapons .
 The Soviets deployed 42 IL104 28 Beagle twin-engine light bombers to Cuba . The Soviets also deployed 42 Beagle light bombers .
 There are a wide range of estimates as to when the decision was made . These were L03nnere are estimates as far back as possible .
 Nikita S. Khrushchev Remembers, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott , 493. See Nikita Krushchev's book "Krushchev Remembers" for details .
 In late July Cuba began evacuating residents from ports at which missiles would arrive . In early August the Soviets began establishing their own security zones at those ports, including security zones .
 In mid-August equipment for construction of the launch sites began arriving in Cuba and in late August Clearing of roads and launch areas started at the Sagua la Grande MRBM sites . Clearing and clearing of roads began in mid August .
 MRBM and IRBM associated equipment began arriving in Cuba in early September . IRBM and MRBM equipment arrived at Cuban ports in September . In early September MRBM, IRBM equipment began to arrive in Cuba .
 Cuban residents were evicted from what would become the San Cristobal MRBM sites . Also in early September construction began at the Guanajay IRBM sites in Cuba . Residents of the sites have been evicted .
 In midSeptember construction began at one of the two Remedios IRBM sites and clearing of roads and launch areas started at the San Cristobal MRBM sites . Construction began in midSeptember at the Remedio IRBM site .
 Hilsman states construction started at Sagua la Grande in late September . The National Indications Center report states it started in late August . The one serious disagreement among these accounts is that construction started in September .
 The United States was slow in coming to the realization that the Soviet Union was deploying offensive missiles in Cuba . The U.S. was slow to come to the conclusion that the Soviets had deployed offensive missiles .
 A few officials concluded as early as July 1962 that the build-up of defensive forces in Cuba was for the defense of offensive weapons to be introduced later . The consensus among the President's advisors and intelligence officials in the CIA and State Department was that ene Soviets would not put offensive missiles
 Robert Kennedy and Roger Hilsman contend McCone never expressed his concern to the President . Robert Kennedy says McCone expressed his concerns to President Kennedy .
 Robert Kennedy apparently anticipated in April 1961 and September 1962 that the Soviets might put offensive missiles in Cuba . Robert Kennedy was concerned about the possibility of putting offensive missiles on Cuba . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1962 .
 Robert Kennedy wrote in his memoir of the crisis that “No one had expected or anticipated that the Russians would deploy surface-to-surface missiles in cuba.” Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy said in his book that ‘No one . had expected’ or anticipated�
 Roger Hilsman contends that the U.S. did not have accurate and reliable intelligence on the Soviet missiles until the October 14 U-2 photographs . Hilsmann: The United States had no reliable intelligence until the photos were taken .
 The opposing argument is that there were numerous indicators of the Soviet move . USES analysts, working under an erroneous conception of Soviet behavior and perceptions, iienewed or at eawaneied evidence .
 The two sides agree, however, that the Kennedy Administration was taken by surprise and caught unprepared when the Soviet missiles were discovered . The U.S. may not have had accurate and reliable intelligence .
 The Kennedy Administration did anticipate the possibility that offensive weapons might be placed in Cuba and initiated actions to prepare for that possibility .
 The pattern was a gradual accumulation of ambiguous intelligence that the arms build-up in Cuba could pose an offensive threat to the U.S. It was accompanied by a search for confirmation that offensive weapons were being deployed in Cuba .
 This pattern-gradual accumulation of intelligence, search for confirmation, and low-level preparations for action-strongly influenced the manner in which the crisis was handled after the discovery of MRBMs on October 14 .
 In late August 1962, the United States began receiving reports a of Cuba on construction and preparations for installation,of MRBMs . The U.S. received reports that Cuba was preparing for the installation of the missiles .
 The reports were assessed as related to the build-up of defensive arms . The reports lacked details positively linking the activities with offensive missiles .
 Allegations have been made that reports from Cuban exiles and agents in Cuba--ignored or given little credence at the time-- provided significant evidence that offensive missiles were in Cuba .
 President directed on September 10 that U-2 flights not be conducted over known SAM sites in western Cuba . President had directed that U.2 flight not be carried over known sites in Cuba .
 COMOR recommends that the ban on flights over SAM sites be rescinded . U-2 flights are banned from Cuba .
 On October 9 this recommendation was taken to the President of Cuba, who approved flights over western Cuba .
 SA. intelligence on offensive missiles that was received in August and September failed to sway the President's advisors from their belief that the Soviets would not deploy offensive weapons .
 Intelligence analysts concluded by the end of September that the Soviet Union 'would soon deploy offensive missiles in Cuba'
 He contends Colonel Wright presented photographs from the September 26 and 29 U-2 flights of construction at the Sagua la Grande MRBM site and Remedios IRBM site .
 McNamara and the Joint Chiefs did commence a wide range of low-level actions to increase United States readiness for military action against Cuba . Vice Admiral Riley suggests that forceful action was not taken immediately .
 U-2 photographs taken prior to October 14 did not reveal the presence of MRBM sites . CIA Director of the CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center in 1962, Arthur C Lundahl, states that U.2 photographs prior to that date did not show MRBM .
 Colonel Wright probably presented to the JCS the same briefing he would give to the COMOR three days later . Colonel Wright's briefing was probably the same as he would present to the ComOR .
 The pattern of SA~2 SAM deployments in the San Cristobal area seen in U-2 photographs taken September 5 resembled the pattern seen around MRBM/IRBM sites in the Soviet Union .
 Hilsman contends that “Shipping intelligence did not reveal the contents of the ships,"" and that the significance of ships with hatches large enough to accommodate MRBMs arriving in Cuba riding high in the water was not realized until after the MRBM were discovered in Cuba .
 There is persuasive evidence that shipping intelligence did in fact provide important clues that offensive missiles were en route to Cuba . However, there is no evidence that this was true .
 OPNAV (the CNO's staff) as a whole, or rather the pertinent parts (as opposed to individuals such as myself) became overtly suspicious of Russian intentions in about the middle of July 1962 .
 The presence of construction equipment as deck cargo indicated large-scale construction to be contemplated .
 The Navy's top leadership was being appraised on a regular basis of suspicions and evidence that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles to Cuba . Thus, the Navy's . top . leadership was appraised regularly of suspicions .
 Navy suspicions are based largely on evidence gained through shipping intelligence . Navy suspicions were based on information from shipping intelligence, sources .
 Photographs by patrol planes showed large cylindrical objects on the decks of several ships en route to Cuba . Photographs were taken by planes flying over Cuba .
 Though the objects were covered with tarpaulins, it was easy to see what they were . The objects are covered in a large amount of tarp .
 The operation had been mounted so hastily there was not time to camouflage the cargoes properly, or they did not care, assuming we would find out very soon by some means anyway . I never did decide whether the Russians wished us to know what they were doing .
 Admiral Griffin and Vice Admiral Caldwell were convinced by the photographs, the evidence was probably viewed as ambiguous at the time . The evidence was thought to be ambiguous .
 United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, December 1975), 553. (OAT) Oral History of the U.S. Navy . Oral History: "The Battle of the Cold War"
 Admiral Alfred G Ward, Commander Second Fleet during the crisis, states that two of the Soviet ships initially designated for intercept were selected because of the photographs showing the missile cases along the deck .
 One Navy flag officer says he and his Air Force counterpart spent a total of five or six hours briefing Chiefs during weekly JCS meetings in August and September on evidence that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles .
 They supported their arguments with photographs of possible MRSMs or IRBMs on the decks of Soviet ships .
 JCS Chairman General Maxwell D Taylor did not pass their warnings on to McNamara or the 124, oe Admiral William D Houser .
 The confirmation was probably probably the SAM site photographs used by Colonel Wright to brief JCS and COMOR on the possibility of MRBM sites in western Cuba .
 Navy photos of Soviet deck cargo did not reveal evidence of missile equipment, Hilsman says . Hilman: Images of Soviet ship cargo were taken by the Navy in 1963 .
 Navy shipping intelligence convinced many in the Navy that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles to Cuba . But outside the Navy it was not regarded as sufficiently unambiguous to warrant taking action against the Soviets .
 Signals intelligence consists of communications intelligence on emissions from enemy radio and other telecommunications systems . Grexiue intelligence focuses on enemy radars, radars and other non-communications emissions .
 I verified that he held the position he described, attended JCS meetings in the August-September period, and worked with the Air Force officer he named .
 Admiral Moorer thus indicates that SIGINT collected by Oxford played an improtant role in discovery of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba . The discovery was made by the Soviet Union .
 It cannot be determined exactly when Oxford first gained indications of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba or what it was that Oxford learned about .
 The last week in September was the most likely period, based on the timing of U.S. surveillance and military moved directed against Cuba . The last few weeks of September is the likely period . The timing of the move is likely to be based on a recent intelligence report .
 SIGINT could have been used to buttress Colonel Wright's conclusion that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles in Cuba . Colonel Wright presented the conclusion to the JCS on October 1 and October 4 .
 Question naturally arise as to the clarity and reliability of the intelligence collected by Oxford . Question naturally arises as to whether the intelligence is reliable and accurate . Oxford University has been accused of colluding with the CIA in the past .
 The apparent lack of a significant U.S. reaction to intelligence on Soviet offensive missiles is puzzling . Since intelligence professionals generally place great confidence in SIGINT, the apparent lack is puzzling. Since SIGINT .
 A clear indication of Soviet MRBM deployments in late September should have enabled the the U.S. to take decisive action three weeks earlier than it did . The United States should have taken action sooner than they did .
 U.2 photographs of clearly identifiable missile sites were needed . Further confirmation of the sites was needed .
 Second, the source of the intelligence had to be protected by providing an alternative source for the knowledge--again meaning U-2 photographs . Third, the U.S. had to provide the information to protect the intelligence, the author says .
 Under these conditions SIGINT would not have led to immediate and decisive U.S. action against the missiles, the author says . The author says SIGINT wouldn't have led the United States to act immediately .
 The most important factors determining the Kennedy Administration reacted to intelligence on Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba were President Kennedy's determination not to take action until he had incontrovertible evidence that offensive missiles were in fact being deployed in Cuba .
 President Kennedy set an extremely high standard of Senco indi aputabive photographic confirmation of’ offensive missiles--as the requirement for taking action against Cuba or the Soviet Union .
 Intelligence on offensive weapons in Cuba could build pressure for military action . Leaks of such intelligence could also build pressure in Congress and the public to take forceful action .
 Internal and external pressures could narrow the President's options, force him to take action before he was convinced it was warranted, and even provoke a crisis that might have been avoided .
 On October 11, the President directed that intelligence on offensive weapons in Cuba be strictly limited to specific individuals on an eyes only basis . The day after Republican Senator Kenneth Keating made his sensational allegations on Soviet IRBMs in Cuba .
 This appears to have contributed to different commands arriving at different conclusions on whether or not there were offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The first actions taken, in early August 1962, were to increase surveillance of Cuba and Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba . peSindtac in late August the CIA, NSC and State Department conducted a series of studies on the Cuban military build-up and policy options .
 An analysis should be prepared of the probable military, political and psychological impact of the establishment in Cuba of either surface-to-air missiles or missiles which could reach the United States . 6.6.6 .
 A study should be made of the advantages and disadvantages of making a statement that the U.S. would not tolerate the establishment of military forces which might launch a nuclear attack from Cuba against the United States . The U.K. should not tolerate a military force which might attack the United
 These tasks were assigned to specific agencies, who were directed to report the names of the action officers working on these studies . The task was assigned to the agencies who were working on the studies .
 A meeting with the President is scheduled for September 1 to review progress on these studies .
 Schlei: International law would permit use of extreme measures, including various forms and degrees of force, for the purpose of terminating or preventing the realization of such a threat to the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere .
 In September the Kennedy Administration began taking preliminary steps to respond to the Cuban military buildup .
 The President made public statements on the build-up on September 4 and 13 . He noted its apparent defensive nature and warning against installation of offensive missiles .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk met with Latin American ambassadors on September 5 concerning Cuba . Rusk proposed that a closed Organization of American States meeting be held in early October .
 Meeting was held October 2 and included a U.S. briefing on the Cuban military build-up . That meeting included a United States briefing .
 The meetings laid groundwork for the possibility that the OAS might have to take concerted action against Cuba in the future . Cuba is a major ally of the U.S. in Latin America .
 On September 20 the Senate passed a Joint ResoluEPs ron Cuba authorizing the President to use force to defend against Cuban aggression and prevent the creation of an external military capability in Cuba .
 By early October the Kennedy Administration had taken several political and diplomatic steps to prepare for the possibility of action against Cuba . The House passed this resolution on | September 26 and the President signed it on October 3,139 .
 On September 7, the President requested from Congress authority to call up 150,000 reservists . The President requested that the request was granted by Congress .
 On September 18, the Air Force began extensive training exercises for air strikes against Cuba . The exercises include simulated combat missions against mock Soviet SAM sites .
 On September 19 a detachment of Navy F8U Corsair jet fighters were transferred to Key West in order to bolster the base's air defense . The move is part of a larger effort to bolster Key West's air defenses .
 Joint Staff and CINCLANT updated Cuban contingency plans in September . Joint Staff updated Cuban contingencies during the month of the month .
 In response to NSAM-181, the Air Force, Navy, and Joint Staff studied air strike options for dealing with offensive missiles . The Air Force and Navy studied air strikes options .
 The delivery of IL-28s and the briefing by Colonel Wright, which warned that an offensive missile site was likely to be built in the San Cristobal area, had a significant impact on the Joint Chiefs and Secretary of Defense .
 McNamara directed the Chiefs to intensify contingency planning for for military action against Cuba . He directed the chiefs to increase the readiness of United States forces for Cuban contingencies .
 President Nixon met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 1, 1962, on Cuba . He asked about contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary and toward which our military planMing should be oriented, he said .
 Navy patrol planes first photographed a Soviet ship carrying suspected IL-28 crates on September 16 . U.S. Navy planes first spotted the Soviet ship with suspected crates .
 Over the next two weeks two additional ships carrying suspected IL-28 crates were discovered . Two more ships were also found to be carrying suspected crates . The IL28 crates are believed to have been transported by the IL28 .
 IL-28s arrived in Cuba in early October as a cause for concern as well as the possibility of offensive missiles . During early October the confirmed arrival in Cuba seems to have been at least as great a cause of concern as the possible offensive missiles.
 Johns contends McNamara ordered execution of the Cuban contingency plans . Johns contends that during this meeting, McNamara executed the plans .
 Admiral Anderson denies that McNamara gave such an order . However, there is no evidence to support this and there's no evidence of it .
 Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response . Calls for Western response indicating among other actions a blockade of Communist or other shipping to Cuba .
 Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of offensive weapons systems on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors . Evidence of the presence of bloc weapons systems in Cuba is not clear .
 Ce An attack against the Guantanamo base, Or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . Or against U.S. planes and vessels outside Cuba's airspace or waters. An attack on Guantanamo base .
 The operational plans considered appropriate . The preparatory actions which should now and progressively be taken to improve United States readiness to execute these . The consequences availability of forces and deal with threats in other Southeast Asia, etc. plans .
 Second, McNamara emphasized planning for the worst case-forcible removal of the Castro regime . McNamara: "Planning for worst case scenario is planning for worst-case removal"
 The Chiefs were planning for large-scale air attacks and invasion of the island, rather than toward planning for a strictly abaioea use of force, such as a quarantine .
 By making initial preparations for air strikes and invasion, the JCS increased the range of military options available to the President on short notice . On the other hand, by . making initial . preparations for . air strikes, invasion and . invasion, JCS said .
 S91 October 1 memo was that in focusing on the overthrow of Castro it inadvertently excluded JCS attention to limited operations, such as the Sener tinal . S91 memo said JCS should have focused on limited operations such as Sener .
 Military preparations for action against Cuba rapidly gained momentum from October 1 onward . The U.S. military is preparing for military action against the island nation .
 On October 1 CINCLANT notified his Navy and Air Force commanders responsible for tactical air operations “to take all feasible measures necessary to assure maximum readiness” to execute the contingency plan .
 Navy and Tactical Air Command fighters and attack planes placed on six, twelve, and 24 hour alerts for the air strike contingency . The U.S. Navy has placed six, 12 and 24-hour alerts .
 The October 20 deadline to complete preparations for air strikes against Cuba appears to have been set by McNamara at the October 1 JCS meeting and passed to CINCLANT that day .
 McNamara mentioned the October 20 target date in the October 16 morning and evening meetings with the President . McNamara said the target date for the President was October 20 . The President is expected to be in office on October 16 .
 This OPORD was for a total blockade of Cuba and included the option of mining Cuban ports . S34 was for the option to mine Cuban ports in an attempt to block Cuba from entering Cuba .
 Designated Army airborne forces, Marine landing forces, and Navy amphibious forces were directed to begin prepositioning for invasion of Cuba . The U.S. Army, Marine and Navy were ordered to prepare for the invasion .
 Prepositioning of bulk supplies, such as fuel and ammunition, also commenced . Prepositionalists also began prepositioning bulk supplies of ammunition and ammunition .
 Plans were made to deploy the Fifth Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton, California to the Caribbean . Plans were also made for deployment to the region .
 On October 8 a squadron of Navy F4H Phantom jet fighters were moved to Key West . They were placed under Continental Air Defense Command control .
 On October 10 CINCLANT suggested further preparations to JCS . JCS recommended that cover and deception be used to hide invasion preparations .
 $55 target date for action against Cuba is $55 . President was kept informed of the actions being taken by the military . The President was thus being kept informed .
 Carrier USS Independence and four escorts left port and proceeded to a contingency station northeast of Cuba in order to be within air strike range of Cuba on October 20 (a mission planned and ordered well before the attack).
 The photographic confirmation requirement implicitly denigrated other intelligence and led to action not being taken until some Soviet missiles were close to being operational . These were prudent policies, but they were not taken until the missiles were operational .
 McNamara inadvertently diverted attention from limited operations designed to achieve lesser objectives-operations that would be selected by the President .
 Disagreements exist over which of these motives was most important to the Soviets, but are irrelevant to this study . Disagreement exists over which motives were the most important .
 Some American officials thought the Soviet venture in Cuba was related to Berlin . Some thought the venture was connected to the Berlin invasion .
 Khrushchev's mention of Soviet standing among Communist nations appears to be a veiled allusion to Soviet relations with Communist China . Relations with China were strained in 1962 due to, among other things, accusations that the Soviets were overly accommodating with the imperialist camp .
 The Soviet strategy at the time the decision was made to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba was to achieve a fait accompli . The decision to deploy the missiles was made in order to achieve the Soviet strategy, the author says .
 The Soviets took the game approach in reaction to the December 1979 NATO decision to deploy American Pershing II MRBMs and Ground Launched Cruise Missiles in Western Europe commencing in 1983 . NATO decided to deploy the missiles in 1979 .
 See Caldwell, letter to author, March 14, 1988; Pachter, 10; Quester, 235. See Caldwell's letter to writer, March 15, 1988 .
 This view is contradicted by the efforts the Soviets made to conceal delivery of the missiles, such as convoying the missiles only at night, and by Soviet diplomatic deception efforts . The view is contrary to the view that the Soviets tried to conceal the delivery of missiles .
 First, the Soviet plan emphasized speed rather than stealth--objectives that are often mutually exclusive .
 This appears to have been a deliberate decision, perhaps driven by a deadline for making the missiles operational . This is the first time the missiles have been made operational in the US .
 Second, the operation was mounted in a rush, with minimum advance planning . Third and fourth reasons for the operation to be mounted in the rush .
 Concealment measures were included in the plan, but appear not to have covered all requirements necessary to be effective . The plan was approved by the U.S. government, but appears not to be covered by all requirements .
 SAM sites at San Cristobal show an easily identified trapezoidal pattern of SAM sites . This would explain the easily identified pattern of the SAM sites in the area . SAM sites have been found in the region of Mexico .
 SAMs were deployed to provide the standard interlocking field of fire around the target to be defended, without an effort to avoid a previously used pattern . The SAMs provided an interlocking pattern of fire that was designed to protect the target .
 Third, the Soviets did not have a sufficient number of large hatch ships to carry all of the missiles to Cuba below decks in the desired time frame . The Soviets had not been able to carry the missiles below decks .
 Some of the missiles and their bulky support equipment had to be shipped on deck to expedite delivery . The missiles and support equipment were needed to be delivered to the ship .
 The Soviet Union appears not to have been able to formulate an overall political-military strategy from Octoter 22 onward . The U.S. appears to be unable to formulate a political and military strategy .
 The Soviets were placed in a position of reacting to U.S. initiatives, which effectively precitded them from pursuing a strategy of their own . The Soviets reacted to American initiatives, effectively preying on their own strategy .
 The initial Soviet response was belligerent denouncement of Bac quarantine accompanied by an effort to expedite completion of the missile sites . Bac quarantine was accompanied by a effort to speed up completion of missile sites, according to the Soviets .
 The Soviets did not place their nuclear or conventional forces at a high state of alert in an effort to coerce the U.S. However, the Soviets ordered their ships carrying weapons to Cuba to turn back rather than contest the quarantine .
 A U.S. invasion of Cuba would have threatened one of his primary objectives for sending the missiles to Cuba in the first place . A United States invasion would have been his primary objective .
 American concessions compensated for the political-military setback suffered by the Soviet Union . However, these American concessions were not enough to compensate for the loss .
 In his first meeting with advisors on the Giscovery of MRBMs, held the morning of October 16, made clear his view that the missiles had to be eliminated, by force if necessary .
 President Obama announced the Cuban quarantine on October 22 . Both objectives were expressed in the President’s televised speech . President Obama said the quarantine was necessary to quarantine Cuba .
 President remained firm that the United States objective was removing the Soviet missiles from Cuba . Later in the crisis, advisors would express support for additional objectives, such as removing Castro from power .
 McNamara believed that the missiles had little impact on the strategic nuclear balance . Other advisors perceived a serious military threat from the missiles . McNamara thought the missiles would have little impact .
 Lendete perceived that vital national interests were at stake and that those interests had to be protected . But they also perceived that United States objectives in the crisis had been limited in order to avoid a confrontation with the Soviet Union .
 President, Secretary McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and others were deeply concerned that an armed clash with the Soviet Union could escalate to war . On the other hand, the President was deeply concerned .
 The President's advisors were aware of this warning and apparently conSidered it in formulating a course of action .
 Alexander George has described the President as following a ""try and see" approach, in which improvisation was the key feature . The diplomatic communications and limited military actions initiated during this period were based on certain principles in the minds of U.S. policymakers .
 The first consideration was that the U.S. had to seize the initiative by keeping knowledge of the Soviet missiles secret until ready to announce a course of action .
 This precluded Soviet diplomatic efforts to forestall an American attempt to force removal of the missiles . It enabled the United States, rather than the Soviet Union, to define the political context and significance of the crisis, the U.S. says .
 After initial success, the U.S. started losing momentum . The quarantine was quarantined by the Soviet Union . The United States was losing momentum.
 President avoided taking action that might have committed the United States to an armed confrontation with the Soviet Union . By starting with the quarantine, the President avoided the most violent and provocative military options .
 The blockade option was subdivided into an initial quarantine on offensive arms, an expanded quarantine that would include POL and perhaps other strategic commodities, and a total blockade of shipping in and out of Cuba . The blockade would include a total quarantine of offensive arms .
 The air strike option was conceptually subdivided into small-scale, ""titfor-tat™ attacks on SAM sites or anti-aircraft guns that fired on U.S. planes . Large-scale air strikes against the Cuban air defense system, and full-scale
 The President could execute these options incrementally in order to progessively increase coercion in support of diplomatic bargaining . President could use these options to increase coercion to support diplomatic negotiations .
 Khrushchev agreed on October 28 to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . This is shown by uncertainty over what the President's next step would have been had Khrushchchev not agreed to dismantle them .
 Practical operational problems with employing some of the military options (such as the smallscale air strike option) were probably the major reasons for the lack of even a tentative plan for using the options .
 EXCOMM was distracted by operational details, but was distracted from operational details . ExCOMM says it is not the first time it has had a problem with operational details in the past .
 The EXCOMM discussed military operations in great detail . Certain military operations, such as the intercept and boarding of Soviet ships, were closely controlled .
 On October 23 the President gave some sort of order for the quarantine force to delay its initial boardings of Soviet ships . The order was intended to give Khrushchev more time to react to the quarantine .
 EXCOMM attention to military operations was uneven and focused on a few specific areas . ExCOMM: Attention to the military operations in Iraq was uneven .
 The President had read Barbara W Tuchman's The Guns of August and was influenced by her description of Europe's leaders losing control of events in the summer of 1914 .
 What was missing was detailed consideration of how to effectively control military operations . What is missing is a discussion of how military operations can be controlled by the president .
 No thought was given to the practical operational problems that would arise from attempting to control large-scale military operations directly from the White House . The White House has been criticized for trying to take control of the military .
 McNamara and his assistants. did not understand the military command system and had little respect for it. McNamara . McNamara's assistants. didn't understand the . military command . system .
 Admiral Tazewell T Shepard, Jr., Jr., interview by author, February 10, 1988 . Adm. Shepard: "The optimism (military men called it 1725 ear ear ear) is the reason for optimism .
 McNamara and his assistants appeared to believe they could run a better military operation the same way they could write a better defense budget . McNamara believed he could run the military operation with a better budget .
 Their approach to military command and control was intuitive and impulsive, rather than reasoned and planned . However, their approach to command was intuitive, impulsive and planned, not planned .
 The military was caught off-guard by their sudden intrusion into Operational matters . They had not worked with the military prior to the crisis to develop and refine methods and procedures .
 U.S. Naval Institute, Oral History Progran, August 1975), 421. United States Naval Institute. Progran . Progran was interviewed by the U.N. Navy .
 Lack of attention to the organizational, procedural, and operational requirements for effectively exercising direct control is discussed in detail in the following section on command and control .
 This consideration derived from the objective of avoiding war with the Soviet Union, discussed above . This consideration was also considered to avoid war with Soviet Union .
 The implication of this consideration was that if the Soviet Union could not be compelled to remove the missiles by coercive pressure alone, the U.S. would have to offer concessions in diplomatic bargaining . The implication was that the United States would offer concessions .
 President Kennedy and some of his advisors recognized from the start that concessions might have to be made . Kennedy and others recognized that concessions may have been made . President Kennedy's administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The President seems to have been willing, as a last resort, to offer to remove United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in order to avoid military action against Cuba .
 President did not formulate a negotiating strategy other than his insistence that no concession would be offered until after U.S. resolve had been impressed upon the Soviets .
 The obvious offers, a Turkey-Cuba deal or withdrawal of U.S. forces from Guantanamo, were quickly rejected . The obvious deal was a withdrawal from Guantanamo .
 Khrushchev proposed a pledge not to invade Cuba in his October 26 letter . The key concession that produced the settlement was an American pledge to not invade Cuba~-a key concession .
 The President delivered an ultimatum to the Soviets via his brother Bobby--threatening that military action would be taken against Cuba unless a commitment to remove the missiles was received the next day . The threat of further action at some future date was not having a sufficiently coercive effect .
 Adlai Stevenson had proposed offering Guantanamo as a bargaining chip, which the President quickly rejected . President Obama rejected the idea .
 Command procedures actually used did not adhere to the chain of command established by that reorganization . However, the command procedures actually adhere to that .
 Under the 1958 reorganization the chain of command ran from the President, to the Secretary of Defense, and then to the appropriate unified or specified commander . The chain began with the President and the Secretary-of-Defense .
 The JCS was to function as an advisory body to the President and as an executive agent for the Secretary of Defense, eather than as a separate level in the chain of command .
 The National Military Command Center should have been the Secretary of Defense's operational control center . The center should be the secretary of defense's operational center .
 In actuality, the chain of command was structured essentially as it had been prior to the 1958 reorganization . The chain was structured as it was before the reorganization in 1958 .
 Admiral Anderson was not just a conduit for orders from the President, he was deeply involved in planning and execution of the opera178 tions . It is important to note that .
 Sharp, Deputy CNO for Plans and Policy during the crisis, letter to author, February 24, 1988 . Carmichael, Houser, Shepard, Griffin, and Carmichael interview by author, March 8, 1988; .
 Vice Admiral Chew states that McNamara ""paid very little attention” to the Joint Staff during the crisis . Vice Adm. Chew says McNamara “paid verylittle attention’ to Joint Staff during the crisis’s .
 Admiral Anderson insisted on this at the time, remarking to thenCaptain Houser that “this is a Navy show, we're going to show them how it's done’
 U.S. Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1983), 551. §56 a@ifferent than had been envisioned when the 1958 reorganization was enacted .
 The JCS executive agent system presupposed that commanders in the field or at sea had substantial autonomy and need only be given an objective and overall guidelines for their operations . The system was designed to allow commanders to have autonomy in their own operations .
 It was not a system for facilitating close control of operations by the White House, it was not . The White House has been accused of allowing close control over operations by Obama administration .
 There is no evidence that McNamara attempted to modify JCS command procedures prior to the crisis . McNamara is accused of trying to change the JCS procedures .
 This stands in stark contrast to the changes he made in the Defense Department's administrative organization and management procedures . The changes emphasized centralization of decisionmaking authority .
 During the crisis, McNamara's interventions in the command system were impulsive and lacked planning or prior coordination with the military . McNamara made hurried, ad hoc changes in support of the President's desire to maintain control of events .
 In effect, the President and McNamara were attempting to exercise centralized control through a command system designed for decentralized control . The President tried to exercise central control through the command system .
 The President had complete and timely information on all Navy units participating in the quarantine and all related operations in the Atlantic and Caribbean .
 Man of the Sea , 96; Commander Gerry M McCabe, Assistant Naval Aide to the President and Director of the White House Situation Room during the Crisis, interview by author, February 22, 1988 .
 The Situation Room was later transferred to the National Security Council Staff . Responsibility for the Situation Room has been later moved to the NSC Staff .
 It contained extensive communications equipment, large wall charts of the world's oceans, and separate conference and briefing rooms .
 Flag Plot was declared a Top Secret area and additional Marine guards were posted . All of Flag Plot has been declared a 'Top Secret' area .
 Flag Plot maintained a ship locator for all U.S. Navy ships or any special interest ship . Flag Plot was used to locate all United States Navy ships and any special interests ships .
 Admiral Anderson kept a complete picture of forces location as possible as possible .
 Every evening during the crisis McNamara was briefed at 10:00m. in Flag Plot on the status of the quarantine and CINCLANT forces alerted for Cuban contingencies .
 McNamara showed detailed knowledge of the movements of U.S. and Soviet ships in EXCOMM meetings and quizzed Admiral Anderson on the positions of Navy ships .
 The next level in the Chain of Command was CINCLANT, Admiral Dennison, headquartered in Norfolk, Virginia . The next step in the chain of command was the next level of command .
 In mid-1961, CINCLANT was tacked oe JCS to prepare contingency plans for military operations against Cuba . In 1961, the JCS was preparing contingency plans to prepare military operations .
 Commander Second Fleet was designated Commander JTF-122 . Army, Air Force, and Navy component commanders were also designated . Commander SecondFlew was designated commander Second Fleet .
 In response, CINCLANT disestablished JTF-122 and assumed command of all Cuban contingency operations . In response to the disestablishment, Cinclant assumed command over Cuba .
 Admiral Dennison was CINCLANTFLT as part of the unified command staff . The CinCLANTELT staff was integrated into the CINCLAANT unified command team .
 Vice Admiral Wallace M Beakley, Deputy Commander in Chief Atlantic, was in charge of CINCLANTFLT functions .
 A separate Quarantine Plot headed by Rear Admiral Reynold D Hogle was established in the CINCLANT OPCON Center . A separate quarantine plot was also established to facilitate control of quarantine operations .
 Quarantine Plot maintained the tactical picture at sea for Admiral Dennison and Vice Admiral Beakley . Quarantine plot was the result of a quarantine plot in the early stages of WWII .
 The Air Force component commander, Commander in Chief Air Force Atlantic , was Commander Tactical Air Command . General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., was headquartered at . General Sweeney's headquarters .
 The Army component commander, Commander in Chief Army Atlantic , was Commanding General Continental Army Command . General Herbert B Powell was headquartered at Fort Monroe, Virginia .
 CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT set up Forward Command Post at Homestead Air Force Base, Florida .
 Two of these (TF 81 and TF 83) were standing Task Forces operational prior to the crisis . The other two were contingency Task Forces activated for the crisis.
 The Army and Air Force component commanders were designated on October 20 . The Army, Air Force and Joint Base Commander Commanders are designated .
 The command structure for the Navy forces assigned to Cuban contingencies was thus highly complex due to the size and scope of the forces involved . It was a complex command structure .
 The Army and Air Force had two primary Task Forces for Cuban contingency operations . The Cuban military had two main Task Forces .
 The Army Task Force for the invasion of Cuba was commanded by Commanding General Eighteenth Airborne Corps . Under the Army component commander, CINCARLANT, was the Army task force .
 CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT had additional Task Forces for other operations related to Cuba . CINCFLANT was also involved in other operations .
 The final Task Force under CINCLANT was the Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force Atlantic . It was formed from Army Special Forces, Navy SEALs, and Air Force Air Commando units .
 United States communications capabilities had made significant advances since 1958, allowing a greater degree of direct control over naval operations than had ever been possible .
 CINCLANT, Flag Plot, NMCC, and the White House Siedation Room all had the ability to communicate directly with ships at sea over voice radio, if they so desired .
 This allowed discussion of classified information without risk of Soviet interception . Discussion of classified material was allowed to be freely discussed . This allowed discussions of classified info without risking Russian interception .
 HF/SSB radio allowed commanders ashore to speak directly with forces afloat . It was a crucial capability for exercising direct control of naval operations . It allowed commanders to exercise direct control over naval operations.
 The CNO had established a Composite Fleet SSB Command Net and CINCLANT had two SSB nets of his own . The C NO had established an SSB command net .
 Third, Navy had long-range HF Fleet Radioteletype Broad-casts with on-line encryption for message communications between shore stations and ships at sea .
 This system greatly expedited the flow of information by eliminating slow manual encryption and transmission of messages . This system was used to eliminate the manual encryption of messages.
 Telephone and telegraph lines were also used extensively for communications among shore commands . Phone lines were used extensively in World War II .
 The Defense Communications Agency, created only the year before, managed this overall system . The agency was created only a year before .
 The first U.S. radio-relay communications satellite, Samos II, had been launched in January 1961, but satellite communications were still essentially experimental .
 Modern communications equipment, especially HF/SSB voice communications with ships at sea, were perceived by civilian leaders as providing capabilities they needed to exercise close control of naval operations during the crisis .
 This attitude was a natural corollary to their desire to maintain control of events in the crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "This attitude is a natural . Corollary"
 "There was a steady flow of instructions from Washington to CINCLANT which required rapid dissemination to the operating forces," says President Eisenhower .
 The CW [radioteletype and radiotelegraph] communications were generally fast and good, but the requirement for expediting matters requigted extensive use of the single sideband voice radio .
 The President's determination to maintain control of events in the crisis led to highly centralized control of naval operations, which in turn generated the demands placed on the communications system . Thus, the President's determined to maintain .
 He makes no suggestion that the President was ever on the radio or that any of the Presidents advisors ever issued erders to ships at sea over voice radio .
 Admiral Anderson, Admiral Griffin, Admiral Rivero, Vice Admiral Hayward and Vice Admiral Stroh all state that there were no such communications . Captain Robert J Wissman (Operations Officer on the staff of Commander Carrier Division 18, commander of the USS Essex HUK Group, which was
 Anderson, Griffin, Rivero and Wylie all wrote letters to author in 1988 . Captain Wissman, Vice Admiral John Hayward and Vice Admiral Hayward all wrote to author .
 Admiral Chew, Admiral Sharp, and Admiral Ward make no mention of such communications in their oral histories . Adm. Chew and Admiral Sharp make no reference to such communications .
 This would account for Admiral Dennison's remarks about telling Washington stations to get off his net as well as many Navy ontieaes that the President never talked on the HF/SSB net .
 If this interpretation is accurate, it means that the President voluntarily denied himself a powerful communications tool that was literally at his fingertips . Perhaps because he realized the disruption and animosity it would cause in the chain of command, it would have been disruptive .
 Direct HF/SSB communications from ships at sea to Washington appear to have been used only in two situations . NMCC, Flag Plot, and White House Situation Room monitoring net .
 The second situation was during the trailing of known Soviet submarines . The second time was when the Soviets were trailing known submarines .
 Captain George L Dickey, Jr., Jr., Commanding Officer of USS Lawe (DD 763) during the crisis, states that while trailing a Soviet submarine he was directed to come up on the voice net for direct communications with Flag Plot .
 Captain Robert J Wissman, Operations Officer for Commander Carrier Division Eighteen, states that USS Essex did the same thing, but carried it one step further . USS Essex also carried out the same feat, but took it further, with USS Essex .
 President Kennedy did not attempt to control other operations while they were actually in progress . It is unlikely he would have monitored ASW operations, which can drag on for days .
 Situation Room staff had the capability of using reports coming over HF/SSB voice radio to keep their charts updated with the latest information on Soviet submarines . On the other hand, the Situation Room used reports coming from the Soviet submarine .
 The CINCLANT history of the crisis concludes that overall the Defense system performed well, demonstrating tremendous flexibility and rapid expansion of capability, but that it did experience problems .
 Problems included lack of telephone and telegraph lines in the Southeastern U.S. to accommodate the build-up of forces there . Lack of communication equipment, insufficient portable communications equipment, lack of compatibility between the communications equipment of the three services, and lack of frequency coordination .
 It appears that message situation reports, rather than voice radio reports, were the principle source of information . Message situation reports were used to report situation situations .
 CINCLANT provides a mixed view of how well the Navy communications system performed . The Navy's communications system was criticized for its performance .
 Fleet Radioteletype Broadcast system was in the midst of converting to faster teletypes . Traffic backlogs created as messages had to be transmitted on separate broadcasts for old and new teleypes .
 The number of messages per month during the crisis was more than three times greater than the pre-crisis average . A large number of excessively long messages, which were difficult to transmit, were hard to transmit .
 The total volume of traffic exceeded the capacity of the Fleet Radioteletype Broadcast, requiring an additional broadcast be initiated for broadcasting to major afloat commands .
 An inordinate proportion of messages were given high transmission precedence--an — to expedite timecritical orders that backfired . Backfired, creating a backlog of high precedence messages .
 An unusually high proportion of messages were classified Secret or Top Secret . This created backlogs due to the requirement for on-line encryption of such traffic .
 A shortage of radiomen could only be partially alleviated by borrowing personnel from other commands . Problems are generated by centralized control of large-scale naval operations .
 On at least one occasion a commander afloat did not receive a crucial message from a commander . On one occasion, a commander in the U.S. Navy didn't receive the message .
 At the start of the crisis Rear Admiral Ernest E Christiansen was embarked in the ASW carrier USS Essex . He was conducting air operations training at sea off Guantanamo when the crisis began .
 These problems persisted until Late November, when United States forces began standing down . U.S. forces were standing down in late November .
 The highest priority traffic was taking up to 48 hours to go from usd to usd . These are the type of originator to addressees."" communications problems that give rise to decoupling and degrade crisis management .
 Not all of the ships had received the new HF/SSB equipment when the crisis erupted .
 CINCLANT reported a shortfall of 45 HF/SSB units that could not be alleviated during the crisis . The shortfall was reported by the agency .
 Flag Plot and the Situation Room could not monitor every merchant ship intercept and submarine prosecution “real-time” because not every Navy ship had HF/SSB equipment . A few ships suffered casualties to their equipment .
 The three HF/SSB nets in use during the crisis were often overloaded due to too many stations attempting to use a circuit . Too many stations attempted to use the circuit, excessively long and detailed reporting requirements, and excessively long transmissions by higher authorities .
 At times USS Essex had to relay HF/SSB voice transmissions between CINCLANT and Admiral Ward due to HF propagation problems . USS Essex relay voice transmissions due to problems with HF propagation .
 Admiral Ward noted that communications within the line and on other circuits were not good due to poor radio frequency frequency . The key propagation in the atmosphere was the key propagation of the atmosphere .
 Military men understand this irony | through their operational experience . Military men experience this irony through their experience .
 Military communications procedures emphasize brevity of transmissions . Military command procedures emphasize delegation of control . Communications procedures emphasize short communications .
 Sending a brief message executing a plan already held by recipients or simply stating the objective to be achieved is much more efficient than sending detailed plans specifying every aspect of an operation . Sending a plan executing a message is better than sending a detailed plan with details .
 The need for direct control oo balanced against the harmful effects of overloading communications channels . The need to direct control of communications channels balanced against overloading channels .
 The President's Science Advisor, Jerome B Weisner, was appointed to head an inter-departmental review of the problem . During the first EXCOMM meeting on October 23, the ""problem of effective communications"" was discussed and the President's science Advisor was appointed .
 Weisner presented an initial briefing on the communicants situation at the October 24 morning EXCOMM meeting and the. October 24 meeting .
 President “directed that most urgent action be taken by State, Defense and CIA to improve communications worldwide, but particularly in the Caribbean area’s .
 The problems did not abate until after the crisis peaked and U.S. forces began to stand down . As the previous discussion of communications problems revealed, that effort was unsuccessful .
 In some instances it took longer to transmit messages to commanders off the coast of the U.S. in 1962 than in 1958 . In 1958, it took more time to send messages in the Taiwan Strait than it took to send in 1962 .
 This demonstrates conclusively that command and control capabilities are not directly, or even primarily, a function of technology . This is not only a result of technology, it is also a reflection of the power of the U.S. military .
 Variance in crisis outcomes is not accounted for by variation in command and control technology, experts say . National leaders maintain control of events and prevent inadvertent escalation, they say .
 In other words, better radios do not guarantee better crisis management . Better radios don't guarantee better crises management, says CNN.com .
 There are other variables that affect how effectively military operations are controlled in a crisis . There are additional variables that can affect how effective military operations can be .
 Emphasis on direct control was not accompanied by consideration of the implications this might have for the effective conduct of military operations . Emphasis was also not considered for the effectiveness of the operations, it was said .
 There was a lack of appreciation for the organizational, procedural, and operational requirements for effectively éxereising direct control. There was also a 'lack of appreciation' for the organization, procedural and operational needs for effectively .
 As has shown, impulsive efforts to exercise direct control generated communications problems that degraded the effectiveness of direct control . As has been shown, . impulsive . efforts to . exercise direct . control generated . communications problems .
 President Kennedy's desire to maintain control of events was implemented impulsively during the crisis . This reflects the novelty and complexity of the situation and the need for improvisation to meet the President's objectives .
 No attempt was made to formulate a comprehensive command and control doctrine that designated methods of control for specific operations, what decision-~ making authority would be delegated and what would be reserved for the President .
 These issues were addressed on an ad hoc basis in response to concerns over the implications of particular operations . These issues have been addressed on a 'ad hoc basis'
 The implicit objective was to exercise direct control of all military and naval operations . It was the implicit objective of exercising direct control over all military operations .
 The President and his top advisors were forced by the immense scale of operations being conducted to focus their attention on particular operations . The President was forced to focus his attention on specific operations .
 Navy quarantine operations, particularly the intercept and boarding of Soviet bloc ships, received first priority for White House attention and control . U.S. Navy quarantines were intercepted and boarded Soviet-blamed ships .
 Whenever Navy ships trailing Soviet vessels approached the coast of Cuba, their movements were closely monitored . Cuban Navy ships were trailing Soviet ships .
 The areas that received close attention were quarantine operations, reconnaissance flights over Cuba, the SAC DEFCON 2 alert, civil defense, invasion and air strike preparations, and operations near Cuba .
 The focus of attention appears to have occurred without a deliberate decision as to which military operations warranted the President's direct attention . What is striking is that this focusing of attention .
 The President apparently desired to control the operations with greatest likelihood of involving United States forces in an incident with Soviet or Cuban forces .
 Concern for incidents also should have led to close control of Navy ASW operations, Navy says . ASW operation generated the most intense interactions with Soviet forces during the crisis . Concerns for incidents should have been closed down, Navy officials say .
 President was aware of the danger of a confrontation with Soviet submarines . However, he made no effort to exercise direct control while submarines were being trailed .
 The White House would pay little attention to a particular operation, tacitly delegating control of it, then suddenly intervene and attempt to exercise close control over it . Obama administration has a history of trying to delegate control of military operations .
 Just as suddenly, the White House would move on to other problems, leaving the chain of command in the dark as to the extent of their authority, White House says . Just as quickly, the administration moves on with other problems .
 This inconsistency--impulsively seizing control of tactical operations--appears to have been what annoyed military commanders the most . This inconsistency appears to have annoyed military leaders the most.
 A fundamental principle of military command, often called “unity of command, is that a commander must always know from whom he is receiving orders,’s a commander . The principle of unity of command is to always know who is getting orders from . A commander must also know from
 The U.S. armed forces use formal procedures to designate commanders and transfer control or operations among them in order to avoid ambiguity and conflicts over who is authorized to give orders . The United States uses formal procedures .
 Navy uses formal ‘CHOP’ (Change of Operational Commander) procedures to designate the precise time at which control over a unit shifts from one commander to another . For example, CHOP (CHOP) is used to designate when a unit is taken over from a commander
 The procedures for transferring control are formal, but flexible and rapid, they are also flexible, rapid . Although these procedures are formal they are formal and rapid .
 Transferring control of a unit or operation can be done by written message or instantaneously over voice radio . Transferring a unit is possible to do by writing a message or by instantaneously using a voice radio.
 Military standing orders specify procedures to avoid ambiguity of control . But even this situation, military standing orders say procedures must be taken to prevent ambiguity .
 The military had concepts and procedures for shifting operational control that could have been adapted to meet the needs of the President . President. President.
 The White House did not implement formal procedures for for designating which operations the President wished to control or for transferring control of specific operations up and down the chain of command .
 Navy commanders never knew when the White House might suddenly intervene in their operations or botnenenmed orders they had given . Navy commander: "I'm not sure what's going to happen when I'm in charge"
 Simple procedures would have enhanced the President's ability to control military operations while avoiding ambiguity of command . Simple, rapid procedures for designating when the White House was exercising direct control would have been helpful, the authors say .
 There is no evidence that the need for such procedures were even considered . There is not evidence that such procedures have been considered in the past .
 This hits a failure not only cf the President's civilian advisors, but also of the Joint Chiefs--particularly the Chairman--especially the Chairman . This hits not only  but also the civilian advisors who had virtually no experience with military operations .
 During the crisis General Taylor was the only JCS member who routinely met with the President, attended EXCOMM meetings, and received orders from the Secretary of Defense . General Taylor is the only member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who regularly meets with President .
 He was in the perfect position to address the command and control implications of the President's approach to managing the crisis, but apparently never made an effort to do so .
 Second, that there was to be a firm impediment by the higher authorities of the Navy for any direct control or interference by our civilian authorities to our operating forces . Third and fourth, that would be to be an impediment to any direct . control of the . Navy .
 Anderson and Dennison reacted as they did not because direct White House control of operations affronted their professional sensibilities . The White House sought to exercise direct control of the White House of operations .
 McNamara implemented on an ad hoc basis what was in effect a major change in U.S. command and control doctrine .
 The objective was to exercise positive direct control, in which communications links with operational forces were used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis . The objective is to exercise direct direct control of the military .
 The White House was not able to exercise positive direct control over all military operations due to limitations in communications systems and the vast scale of the operations being conducted .
 The President and his advisors focused their attention on specific operations and made de facto delegations of authority in other operational areas, tacitly relying on methods of delegated control . The President's advisors focus their attention .
 Eisenhower Administration did the same thing in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis . Employing a combination of direct and delegated control is not unusual .
 The Kennedy Administration's reluctance to admit that it could not possibly exercise positive direct control over all military operations in progress was unusual . The administration's reliance on de facto rather than formal delegation of authority was unusual, he says .
 As part of their effort to maintain control over Military operations, the President and his advisors paid close attention to the mechanisms of indirect control .
 The procedures contained in the mission orders were changed very little from those contained in Navy standing orders, but the President had ascertained that the quarantine would be conducted in a manner that supported his political objectives .
 The manner in which contingency plans were used during the crisis is particularly interesting . The way they were used in the crisis was particularly interesting, say experts .
 In mid-1961, not long after the Bay of Pigs affair, President directed the Joint Chiefs to commence contingency planning for 214nne eriginal plans for a limited blockade .
 The CNO briefed the President on Navy quarantine plans the afternoon of October 21 . McNamara approved the quarantine orders that evening . The quarantine orders were approved by McNamara .
 Admiral Anderson and Admiral Griffin state the procedures were basically the same as those in Navy tactical publications .
 Anderson interview by author, January 25, 1988; Griffin, letter to author, April 6, 1988 . Anderson, Griffin, Anderson and Griffin wrote letters to each other .
 Vice Admiral Caldwell drafted the instructions for the quarantine . The only change was to delete POL from the initial list of prohibited items .
 JCS assigned responsibility for these plans to CINCLANT because Cuba was in his area of responsibility . Cuba was Cuba's focus for the JCS .
 Later in the year JCS directed CINCLANT to prepare an alternative invasion contingency plan, which was ready by 1962 and designated OPLAN 31662 . The plan was prepared by the end of the year 1962 .
 All three CINCLANT OPLANs were reviewed and updated continuously through October 1962 . All three were reviewed by the same time .
 As the Soviets modernized and expanded Cuba's air defenses it became apparent that this plan would not be adequate . The Cuban air force was eventually forced to withdraw from Cuba in order to protect itself .
 On September 7, 1962, the Tactical Air Command began woniiine on an entirely — plan — plan . The plan was designed to protect the U.S. Air Force from the weather .
 It provided the option of smallscale air strikes for retaliatory or demonstrative purposes . The option was provided by the U.S. for small scale air strikes .
 The third option, code named ""Scabbards 312," provided for destruction of all Cuban defenses in preparation for invasion . The option was code named Scabbard 312 .
 The Navy role was limited to defense of Guantanamo and pre-landing air strikes in amphibious areas . The U.S. Navy was in charge of defense of the Guantanamo Bay area .
 On October 23 JCS directed that the code name ""“Scabbards" be used to cover all operations related to Soviet deployment of offensive weapons in Cuba, thus covering the quarantine as well . The code name was also used for the quarantine .
 Joint Task Force, JTF-122, consisted of the Eighteenth Airborne Corps, Nineteenth Air Force, Second Marine Expeditionary Force, Serious Force Atlantic, Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force Atlantic .
 The plan contained an option, designated ""314 Golf,"" for execution of the invasion on four days notice . The plan also included an option for execution on four-day notice of invasion .
 The Navy had two attack carrier air groups afloat (about fourteen fighter and attack squadrons) and one air group ashore . About six Navy and Marine squadrons ashore in Guantanamo and Puerto Rico designated for air strikes .
 The Tactical Air Command was assigned two attack carrier air groups ashore (about twelve squadrons) and a Marine air group for air strikes against Cuba . It was assigned to two attack carriers and two Marine air groups .
 The remainder of the invasion force was to be landed no later than eighteen days after the order was given . The rest of the remaining force was ordered to land within eighteen days of the order given .
 On October 17 the interval from decision to initial assault was increased to seven days . This allowed more forces to be landed in the initial assault . The interval between initial assault and landing of reinforcements was also increased .
 Fifth Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton added to initial assault . Army's First Armored Division was added to the forces to be landed later . The Fifth Marine expeditionary Brigade was added .
 Total Marine Corps forces included a total of nine battalion landing teams, roughly 28,000 troops . Total Marine force includes nine landing teams . Total force includes 28,500 troops .
 Follow-on Army forces included the Second Infantry Division, the First Armored Division, three artillery battalions and two artillery groups, two tank battalions, and a tank battalion .
 Army tactical nuclear weapon units-equipped with Honest John, Long John, and Davy Crockett rockets--were placed in an “on-call” status in the United States rather than included in the invasion force .
 In addition to these three contingency plans, the Navy had two additional contingency plans . The Navy also had two more contingency plans for the Iraq War .
 The evacuation and reinforcement portions of this OPORD were carried out during the crisis, but no Cuban threat to the base developed . No Cuban threat developed, so the combat operations contained in the OOPORD were not executed .
 This OPORD was used to conduct the quarantine, with minor revisions (primarily renaming it a quarantine) issued on Getowee 22 and 23 .
 Commander Second Fleet OPORD 1-62 issued by Admiral Ward on October 22 . Recollections vary as to how much the President and McNamara knew about the CINCLANT contingency plans prior to October .
 Vice Admiral —e states that while Deputy Secretary of Defense Galiipewedte probably was aware of the plans, he probably was not briefed on them “until it was needed,"" which would have been in early October . Vice Admiral . —e says he was probably not
 McNamara directed the Chiefs to commence general preparations to execute them . Vice Admiral Blouin, Secretary to the Joint Chiefs, suggested that Robert Kennedy probably reviewed the contingency ase s
 On October 4 McNamara sent the President a memorandum assessing the Soviet SAM sites in Cuba, but also responding to a Presidential inquiry as to the impact of the SAMs on the Cuban contingency plans . McNamara wrote the memo to the President .
 The President was aware of the need to commence preparations for an invasion of Cuba, he said . The President directed that such preparations proceed, the President said .
 The President approved specific invasion and air strike preparations individually, which required that Operational commanders write separate orders for those actions, rather than simply implementing guidance contained in the contingency plans .
 He appears to have been deeply concerned that he would become trapped by execution of the contingency plans, just as Europe's leaders had been trapped by executing their war plans in 1914 .
 Serious logistical problems were encountered during the invasion preparations, particularly by the Army, but they were primarily the result of inadequate transportation resources .
 There were not sufficient numbers of transport planes, amphibious ships, or railroad cars to move all the men and equipment called for in the plan in the allotted time .
 The decks of one ship designated to carry the First Armored Division to Cuba were not far enough apart to carry tanks . The decks were too far apart for tanks to be carried on .
 The most severe crisis management problem encountered during the crisis was the overloading of communications channels . The manner in which the President elected to manage the crisis created the problem, he says .
 The President's objective of maintaining control of events was sound, but the means he employed to pursue that objective degraded his ability to control events . President Obama's objective was to maintain control of the events, but his means of controlling events were compromised .
 This is an example of a tension between political and military considerations in crisis management, one that was not anticipated by the President or his civilian advisors . This is a tension of political, military and political considerations, the President says .
 When special rules of engagement were issued, they generally reiterated the guidance contained in standing peacetime rules .
 McNamara directed the CNO to prepare plans for a limited blockade on offensive arms to Cuba . Captain Caldwell commenced ae detailed blockade procedures, including rules of engagement, on Friday .
 The CNO presented McNamara McNamara with the CNO the next day . Captain Caldwell completed the project the following day .
 McNamara approved the final plans--including the rules of engagement--that evening . McNamara briefed the President and his advisors on oo for the quarantine on Sunday, October 21 .
 It included the rules of engagement, drafted by Captain Caldwell, with virtually no changes . The one exception was protection of reconnaissance flights over Cuba .
 Vice Admiral Caldwell says the only change made to his rules for quarantine was the deletion of POL (petroleum, oil and lubricants) from the list of prohibited items .
 In stopping ships to be visited, use all/any available communications to signify intent, including such means as international code signals, flashing light, radio, or loud speakers .
 If these means fail, warning shots shall be fired across the bow, or, in the case of submarines, equivalent warning action, will be fired . If these methods fail, warnings may be fired from the bow or from submarines .
 Attempt, if possible, to damage only non-vital parts, such as the rudder, and attempt to avoid injuries or loss of life .
 Assistance to maximum extent permitted by operational conditions should be furnished . Assistance should be provided to the maximum amount permitted by operations conditions . The U.S. State Department should provide assistance to the extent permitted .
 This was essentially the same as guidance contained in Navy tactical publications . This is the same advice from the Navy .
 According to Vice Admiral Caldwell, the chief difference was stress on caution . The chief difference between the two countries was stress of caution .
 Any ships, including surface warships, armed merchant ships or submarines, or any aircraft, which take actions which can reasonably be considered as threatening a United States ship engaged in visit and search may be subjected to attack .
 These rules are not a change from standing peacetime naval rules of engagement, which always allow a ship to use force in self defense .
 The quarantine rules of engagement thus served to reiterate the guidance contained in standing peacetime rules . It is not the first time the quarantine rules have been issued in peacetime .
 The CNO, the CNO's deputy for fleet operations, both of the attack Carrier group commanders, and two ASW HUK group commanders all said the rules of engagement were basically similar to standing peacetime rules .
 Gayler, Commander Carrier Division Twenty during the crisis, wrote to author, March 22, 1988 . Gayler was commander of carrier division Twenty during crisis .
 Several ship commanding officers made similar comments, and no one offered comments to the contrary . The ship's commanding officer made the comments .
 The quarantine rules of engagement is that they specifically authorized use of force against submarines in self-defense or anticipatory selfdefense . The interesting point is that the quarantine rules were specifically authorized by the rules .
 It cannot be demonstrated conclusively that the President fully understood the implications of the quarantine rules of engagement . The quarantine rules have been quarantined in the United States .
 McNamara and the President authorized these rules strongly suggests that they appreciated the Navy's concern for the Soviet submarine threat . However, McNamara did not want to unnecessarily endanger Navy ships .
 U.S. ships were authorized to use force against Soviet submarines in self-defense . He may have been concerned not imminent on October 24 because he did not know what a Soviet submarine captain might do .
 Rules of engagement were also issued for encounters with Cuban air and naval forces . Rules were issued to Cuban forces .
 Captain Donald L Lassell, Deputy Commander of the Key West Force, states that his ships had orders to return fire if fired upon, but not to initiate an action without clearing it first with me .
 Captain Lassell could do this effectively because he was near the scene of action and in direct communications with his ships . Lassell was able to do this because of his position in direct communication with ships .
 Anticipatory self defense was authorized because Cuba had recently received Soviet-built Komar-class fast attack craft armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles . The Komar class is armed with anti-sail cruise missiles, Cuba says .
 Captain Robert E Brady, Commanding 241) assell, letter to author, May 11, 1988 .
 The rules of engagement were basically those of selfpreservation--fire if fired upon--if fired upon . The rules were basically that of self-preservation .
 We were to fire if it became obvious that we were about to be fired upon . The exception was that we would fire if we were to be shot upon . We were not allowed to fire in the open-fire zone .
 This was apparently a concession to the missile threat, but it was not really carte blanche, because we were in constant communication with COMKWESTFOR, and CINCLANT would jump in quickly if there was any hint of trouble . The U.S. would jump
 United States Navy ships were authorized to use force in anticipatory self-defense due to the Cuban Komar threat . Operational commanders closely monitored the tactical situation in order to maintain control over engagments .
 President Kennedy approved anticipatory self-defense against Cuban Komar missile boats . It is not known if President Kennedy personally approved the move .
 The principle of anticipatory self-defense had been approved by the JCS and the President in 1953 and adopted by the the Navy in 1958 . Navy commanders could authorize anticipatory Self-defense on their own authority .
 The President would have had to specifically deny this option to the Navy . The President's office would have to have specifically denied this option .
 The President may have been briefed on the threat from Cuban Komars and the proposed rules of engagement for dealing with them . But it is also possible that the issue was never raised at his level .
 "I was prepared to engage any threat as I perceived it to the Task Force and instructed all hands to that effect. They (the rules of engagement) were not significantly different (from peacetime rules), but I was prepared for any threat," he said .
 In that respect I guess they were different from the normal rules in existence at that time . "In that respect, I guess [the rules] were different," he said .
 I would have fired on any Cuban planes approaching the Task force, so instructed my people to do so . I would not have fired at any Cuban aircraft approaching the task force, he said .
 I can assure you we would have fired and intercepted any plane inbound for the Task Force. We would have shot at any of the planes inbound, he said .
 The Komar patrol boats were the biggest danger at night at night and I couldn’t let anyone get into missile range because of this . Komar patrols boats are the biggest dangers at night, he says . He says .
 If a Komar had a Styx missile aboard, I certainly wasn't going to delay destoying it . The Komar was the last Komar to have a missile on board .
 Vice Admiral Hayward had ample authority under peacetime rules of engagement to take all of the actions he describes . Hayward had plenty of authority to take such actions, the Navy says .
 The primary difference from peacetime rules that he identifies is the emphasis on anticipatory self defense-firing before being fired on . He identifies the difference between peacetime and peacetime .
 Anti-ship cruise missiles have never been opposed by anti-ship missiles . Prior to that they had never been opposition to such missiles, they were never opposed by cruise missiles .
 Vice Admiral Hayward'‘‘s concern over the threat from Cuban Komar missile boats was typical of the concerns felt by Navy officers . Concerns generated the emphasis on anticipatory self defense in the U.S.
 The United States revealed the essence of its rules of engagement for Cuban forces . The U.S. also revealed other aspects of the rule of engagement .
 The Kennedy Administration also launched a study of the rules of engagement that would be appropriate if fighting erupts at sea . The study was launched in response to the threat posed by the quarantine .
 The key point is that the EXCOMM was trying to anticipate the rules of engagement that would be needed for expanded hostilities, the official says . The key issue is that it is not clear what the rules will need to be used in expanded hostilities .
 The rules of engagement over which the White House exercised the closest control were those for engaging Cuban air defenses . The White House exercises control over Cuba's air defense .
 The basic question was what U.S. forces would respond to Soviet SA-2 SAMs firing on high altitude photographic reconnaissance flights, or cuban antiaircraft guns or Mig fighters .
 The U-2s that flew the high altitude flights were all unarmed . The Navy F8U-1P Corsairs and Air Force RF-101 Voodoos flew the low altitude flights . The U.2s were the U.S. Air Force F8-1
 Corsairs and Voodoos were only defense was evasive maneuvering and speed . Corsairs were the only defense in the battle against the Voodoo brothers .
 The President will be informed through SAC/DOD channels, and it is expected that if there is clear indication that the incident is the result of hostile action, the recommendation will be for immediate retaliation .
 It was, in effect, an order not to return fire when fired upon until the President, or the Secretary of Defense, ordered return fire . The order was an order to not return fire until the president or the secretary of defense ordered it .
 He and McNamara were clearly aware of the danger that this could result in more U.S. planes being shot down and more pilots being killed .
 The President's rationale in not ordering retaliation was to give Khrushchev an opportunity to respond to the letter the U.S. sent that day proposing a a aa letter . If there were further attacks on United States reconnaissance planes, the President probably would have ordered limited air strikes on
 In retrospect, the President's decision was a wise one-probably one of the most important of the entire crisis, writes David Frum .
 If his account is correct, he did not necessarily mean to imply that the U.S. would attack the offensive missile sites . However, if his account of the conversation was correct, it did not mean that the United States would attack .
 Robert Kennedy attended EXCOMM meeting at which the President and McNamara had discussed retaliation against Cuban air defenses . Kennedy knew that this was imminent if there were further attacks on United States planes .
 Robert Kennedy also would have known that the President had not yet decided whether the next U.S. move would be a blockade of POL shipments to Cuba or air strikes against Soviet offensive missiles .
 Rules of engagement are intended to serve as a mechanism of indirect control . They provide on-scene commanders with decisionmaking guidance for situations in which direct control is not feasible . Rules of Engagement is intended to provide guidance for commanders .
 Issuing rules of engagement presupposes that military pe have been delegated ‘authority to make tactical decisions based on those rules’ ‘Authority’ should be made by those who have the authority to make such decisions .
 If the President or other high-level commanders do not wish to delegate certain operational decisions, that should be spelled out in the guidance issued to on-scene commanders . If you want to delegate some operational decisions to your commander, that's what the President wants .
 This was only done formally in the case of retaliatory strikes on Cuban air defenses . The U.S. struck on Cuba's air defenses in the 1980s .
 In every other area of operations, mechanisms of indirect control were used in parallel with direct control over telephone lines and HF/SSB voice radio . In all other areas, mechanisms were used to control telephone lines .
 Using mechanisms of indirect control in parallel with methods direct control was not novel . Using mechanisms such as indirect control is not novel, the author says .
 The military chain of command does this routinely when it delegates certain operational decisions to subordinates while retaining other decisions for superiors . Military chain-command delegates some of the most important decisions .
 When the military chain of command does this, it is careful to specify exactly what authority has been delegated and what has not . It is careful not to delegate authority to the military .
 These principles avoid confusion over delegation of authority, but were not applied in the Cuban crisis . These principles avoided confusion over delegating authority .
 On-scene commanders may have believed that they had authority that the President and McNamara did not intend to delegate to them . They may have thought that they have authority that they intended to delegate .
 President and McNamara may have believed that they had control over decisions that would not have been referred up the chain of command to them . On the other hand, the President may have thought that he had control .
 President and McNamara attempted to exercise direct control over certain naval operations . They still relied heavily on the prudence and judgement of on-scene commanders .
 As the military build-up on Cuba gained momentum in the summer of 1962, Navy planners on the CNO's staff and at CINCLANTFLT began preparing plans for a total blockade .
 A total blockade or a “visit and search” blockade, similar to that imposed by the U.S. on the eve of World War II, would be appropriate response to Soviet introduction of offensive missiles in Cuba . Justice Department Counsel Norbert A Schlei submitted a
 Opinion in the EXCOMM bagan shifting in favor of a limited blockade . On Thursday, October 18, opinion in EXCOMm bagan shifted to a limited blockade .
 On the morning of October 20, the EXCOMM slightly favored the blockade option over the air strike option . The Joint Chiefs still advocated large-scale air strikes .
 Navy planning for a limited blockade of Cuba began Thursday evening, October 18, in response to a memorandum from Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric to the JCS requesting information on the blockade option .
 Adm. Anderson designated Admiral Anderson its executive agent for CINCLANT operations against Cuba .
 That evening Secretary of Defense McNamara directed the CNO to prepare plans for a limited blockade on offensive arms to Cuba . That evening, McNamara ordered a limited embargo on offensive weapons to Cuba.
 The operational planning was delegated to Admiral Dennison and his staff in Norfolk . Certain policy issues, such as intercept and boarding procedures, were handled by the CNO's staff .
 Saturday morning, October 20, McNamara directed the CNO to prepare ""position and policy papers, scenario, and implementing instructions” for a limited blockade . The CNO was tasked with preparing a scenario for a possible blockade .
 Taylor took the plans to the White House for the Saturday afternoon meeting in which the President initially approved the limited blockade option . The President initially agreed to the proposal .
 The CNO briefed the President and his advisors on Navy plans for the limited blockade on Sunday, October 21 . McNamara approved the final plans that evening .
 The only major change to the Navy's plan for the limited blockade was to ae He POL from the list of prohibited items . Only major change was the removal of the banned items .
 TG 136. consisted of two ensures escorted by four destroyers, and chelve destroyers on the quarantine line . TG 136 was escorted by two destroyers and four others .
 TG 136. originally consisted of USS Essex, USS Essex and six escorting destroyers . TG 136 was formed from USS Essex to six other ships .
 The Elokomin (AO 55) consisted of three oilers and an ammunition ship, with four destroyers as escorts . Four destroyers were escorts, and four oilers were armed with .
 As the quarantine progressed, other units relieved these ships so that they could be rotated into port for repairs and crew rest .
 This provided enough ships on station as of Monday, October 22, to guard the shipping lanes to Cuba . The ships were on station for more than a week .
 The rationale for placing the blockade line that far out was to keep Navy ships out of Cuban aircraft range . The rationale was to protect the Navy from Cuban aircraft .
 The blockade line distance was discussed at length during the evening October 20 JCS meeting . The meeting also discussed the distance of the blockade line .
 The others were operating independently of the quarantine line and one was not even in TF 136 . One of the others was not in the quarantines .
 Ship's locations prior to about 9:00 A.M. on October 24 are irrelevant because the ships were still en route to their stations from United States ports . Second, ship's location prior to 9:30 a.m. on Oct. 24 is irrelevant because ships were en
 Quarantine line ships were routinely out of station for refueling, trailing Soviet ships, and other tasking . Third, the positions from October 24 onward are suspect because quarantine line ships .
 The President gave McNamara a clear and specific order to immediately move the quarantine line closer to Cuba, as recounted by Robert Kennedy, but the CNO refused to carry out the order . The first possibility is that McNamara gave the President a specific order .
 It is inconceivable that McNamara or the President would have tolerated such insubordination . McNamara would not have tolerated the insubordinate behavior, he says .
 Allison incorrectly contends that the Soviet tanker Vinnitsa and other Soviet ships were allowed through the quarantine line . Allison says that the ships were not allowed through quarantine . Allison also incorrectly says that all Soviet ships from the Soviet Union were allowed though . Allison incorrectly argues that the . tanker V
 CIA report says no Soviet ships have entered the zone since it was established . CIA report for October 25 states that no Soviet vessels have entered it . CIA: No Soviet ships entered it since October 25 .
 The positions of the Navy ships were plotted on the charts in the White House Situation Room . The positions were closely monitored by the President .
 McNamara visited Flag Plot at least once a day, sometimes morning and evening, for briefings on Navy operations and Soviet shipping . McNamara was also briefed on Soviet shipping and naval operations .
 Charts in Flag Plot showed the locations of all Navy ships involved in Cuban operations .
 That would have greatly complicated Navy logistics, particularly refueling the ships . It would have required a greater number of ships to cover a larger ocean area . The U.S. Navy would have needed to refuel the ships, especially refueling .
 There are grounds for suspecting that Robert Kennedy was wrong when he stated that the President gave an order to move the quarantine line in . However, there are grounds .
 Given that he erred on the distance of the quarantine line, Robert Kennedy also may not have understood exactly what the President wanted seni with the quarantine .
 Robert Kennedy made similar errors concerning other orders the President allegedly gave /*’* The President may not have given McNamara an order, but rather a suggestion that the quarantine line be moved in or a request that McNamara investigate the feasibility of moving it in.° 274, opert
 Robert Kennedy states that the President gave an order for the Jupiter missiles in Turkey to be removed from Turkey . Robert Kennedy says that the order was given to remove the missiles .
 In fact, however, the President had only directed that the issue be studied, he said . The issue was only a matter of study .
 There are grounds for suspecting that Robert Kennedy misinterpreted a Presidential request or suggestion as an order . Robert Kennedy may have misjudged a request from President Richard Nixon .
 The President probably requested that McNamara find some way of delaying the initial boardings of Soviet ships~-perhaps suggesting that moving the quarantine line as a way of doing it .
 President Kennedy directed McNamara to delay the initial boardings of Soviet ships . He suggested that moving the quarantine line closer to Cuba would be a means of achieving that .
 Also see ""CINCLANT Historical Account,” 104; anerson, ""Reminiscences,"" 546 .
 McNamara stated that there was not a boundary line drawn where the Navy would start patrolling in the Atlantic, which suggests intercepts could occur outside the quarantine line . McNamara: There was no boundary line .
 This probably would have happened if he had not directed McNamara to delay the first boardings . McNamara ordered the delay .
 The one modification that must be made to Sagan's interpretation is to draw a distinction between intercept and boarding, he says .
 When so specified by COMSECONDFLT, intercept also included hailing the Soviet ship and asking its cargo and destination . Intercept also included asking its destination and cargo .
 This was probably unclear to the President when he called McNamara the evening of October 23 . McNamara was the subject of a White House investigation .
 If this had been Admiral Ward's intention to begin with, no further orders would have been required . Admiral Ward has been criticised for his actions in the past .
 This explanation supports Sagan's interpretation of the overall effect of the President's October 23 order . Sagan: "This explains the effect of this order on the President"
 The President approved a CNO recommendation not to move the quarantine line in until the Cuban air threat could be assessed .
 President's concern with avoiding incidents with Soviet and Cuban forces was probably responsive to arguments for keeping the quarantine ships away from Cuba .
 This met the President's objective of providing Khrushchev more time to react . The CNO's objective was to keep the quarantine ships beyond the range of Cuban planes .
 The Navy had mounted intensive surveillance of Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba since early August . The U.S. Navy was monitoring Soviet-blamed shipping from Cuba since August .
 When the -President announced the quarantine on October 22, the Navy already had a complete list of the Soviet bloc ships en route to Cuba .
 Twenty-five Soviet and two other Soviet bloc ships en route to Cuba . On October 23 there were tenty-five . in” Soviet and . two other . Soviet blocs en route . to Cuba, including nineteen Soviet freighters . and six Soviet tankers .
 The Soviet freighter Leninsky Komsomol, carrying IL~28 bombers, arrived in Cuba October 24 . The freighter was carrying IL28 bombers .
 It was one of two Soviet ships, along with the tanker Vinnitsa, that was well inside the quarantine line when it went into effect .
 The Soviet freighter Belovodsk transferred probable military cargo at night to a ship returning to the Soviet Union . The freighter then proceeded on to Cuba .
 The Soviet freighter Emelyan Pugachev was in the Pacific when the quarantine was announced . The freighter was boarded and searched by a United States Navy officer as it transited the Panama Canal on November 3 .
 CIA, Memorandun, “Soviet Bloc Shipping To Cuba,"" October 23, 1962, 1 (Declassified) CIA: Soviet Bloc shipping to Cuba from 1962 .
 Navy patrol planes searching for Soviet ships were armed with five-inch rockets and ASW torpedoes . The U.S. Navy launched a fleet of planes armed with torpedoes and five inch rockets .
 Navy ships moved into position to halt the flow of offensive arms to Cuba . CINCLANT had made an effort to provide Russian language interpreters for all the ships .
 On patrol plane weapons, see Captain Sidney Edelman, Commanding Officer of VP-24, letter to author, March 25, 1988 . See Captain Edelman's letter on weapons .
 Two Commanding Officers of ships on the quarantine line stated they did not have interpreters embarked . Commanding officers of ships said they had no interpreters on board .
 Dickey, Foust and Foust wrote letters to each other in 1988 . Dickey wrote to Foust on behalf of Foust . Foust died of a heart attack in 1986 .
 The Commanding Officer of USS Canberra stated that seven Russian interpreters reported aboard his ship on October 22 for distribution to the rest of the quarantine force . The commanding officer of the USS Canberra said the interpreters were reported aboard October 22 .
 Ships which after being intercepted signal their intention to proceed to non-Cuban ports may be released without visit or search . Ships which are intercepted signal they intend to proceed . Ships intercepted signal that they want to go to other countries may not be searched .
 The Commander of the intercepting ship may prescribe courses for the intercepted ship to follow . The Commander may also prescribe courses to the intercepted vessel .
 Any ship which fails to proceed as elected or directed, or which attempts to proceed to a Cuban port, will be stopped and boarded, says the Cuban government .
 If a satisfactory explanation is not forthcoming, the ship will be diverted to Ft. Ft. George Island .
 Any ship which is determined by the Commander of the intercepting ship to be carrying no prohibited material shall be permitted to proceed to Cuba . Any ship that is determined . to be . determined by . Commander of intercepting ships will not be allowed to proceed .
 Visit and search of a stopped ship shall consist of examining the manifest and inspecting the cargo . Visit and . search of stopped ships shall consist . of examining and . inspecting the manifest, inspecting the . cargo .
 Operation may be necessary. Forceful boarding and control of the ship may be needed . Operation may also be necessary .
 If boarding meets with organized resistance, the ship will be destroyed . The ship will also be destroyed if it meets resistance, says the captain .
 Ships believed to be carrying prohibited material will be directed to proceed to such non-Cuban port as her owners or master may elect . Ships with prohibited material are directed to go to such ports as owners or masters elect .
 The commander of the intercepting ship may designate courses to be followed . The commander may designate a course of course to follow .
 Any ship which fails to proceed to @ non-Cuban port will be handled IAW para 2 above . Any ship that fails to . proceed to non-Cuba port will . be handled by IAW .
 If a ship is visited but search is refused, the Commander of the intercepting ship will take the intercepted ship into custody if he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that it is carrying prohibited material .
 USS Essex was assigned to stop and board Gagarin, a suspected arms carrier . USS Essex stopped and boarded the suspected Russian carrier . The Essex, a Navy ship, was assigned the mission .
 USS Newport News and her escorts were assigned to intercept Poltava, a large hatch ship suspected of carrying missiles . The ship was deployed to intercept the ship believed to be carrying missiles from Russia . The Russian ship is believed to have carried missiles .
 Kimovsk, another suspected arms carrier, was also targeted for intercept and boarding . The Russian state is believed to have intercepted and boarded the Russian-held carrier .
 CINCLANT had recommended, and the White House had approved, that these ships be boarded . The ships would be the first suspected arms carriers to reach the quarantine line .
 The three Soviet ships did not reach the quarantine line at their estimated arrival times . None of the ships had been intercepted so far .
 Robert Kennedy's account of the situation at sea that Wednesday morning is erroneous . Robert Kennedy: "Robert Kennedy was not in danger" Robert Kennedy was in the middle of the night when the plane went down .
 There was no Soviet ship named Komiles, probably referring to Kimovsk . Komiles was probably the name of the Soviet ship Komiles .
 Rear Admiral Christiansen has stated USS Essex was not informed of or tasked to prosecute any Soviet submarines in the vicinity of Gagarin . He said USS Essex did not have been tasked with prosecuting any Soviet submarine .
 President personally authorized the initial boardings of Soviet ships . President knew that the first Soviet ships were to be boarded immediately .
 By Wednesday morning, all of the Soviet ships en route to Cuba, including tankers and freighters carrying non-military cargoes, had already turned back .
 Moscow had HF radio links with its merchant fleet and used them to control ships en route to Cuba . Moscow used the links to control its merchant ships in Cuba .
 There appears to have been a pattern to the movements of the Soviet ships . The Soviet ships were captured in the early 1950s .
 All freighters suspected of carrying weapons or equipment on the prohibited list were ordered to reverse course and return to the Soviet Union . All of the freighters that the U.S. suspected of being carrying weapons returned to the USSR .
 The ships turned around well before President Kennedy signed the proclamation establishing a quarantine zone around Cuba . The Soviets had thus made a decision not to challenge the quarantine even while declaring their refusal to recognize it .
 The Welch and Blight interpretation of the Soviet decision not to challenge the quarantine is misleading in this regard . It is misleading to say that the quarantine was quarantined in Soviet Russia .
 By October 23--two days before U Thant's request-~-Khrushchev had already ordered his ships not to enter the quarantine zone . It is clear that by October 23, however, that by that day, Krushchev's ships were under quarantine .
 This delay resulted in no Soviet ships passing through the quarantine line until October 25 . No Soviet ships were allowed to pass through the quarantine line until that date .
 By mid-morning Wednesday the information was solid enough to pass on to the President . The President has been briefed on the information .
 Initial estimates of how many Soviet ships had halted or turned back varied widely . Initial estimates vary widely .
 Navy and Air Force reconnaissance planes were able to verify that the Soviet ships had halted or turned back .
 By midafternoon the President could clearly see that Khrushchev was not going to challenge the quarantine . The President was not in doubt about the decision to quarantine .
 President had approved a list of ships to be boarded, specified when the boardings would commence . Boardings began at midday Wednesday . The boardings are expected to take place on Wednesday .
 From midday Wednesday onward, the White House closely controlled which ships were to be stopped and boarded . The White House tightly controlled what ships were stopped, boarded .
 Lengthy discussions were held on the merits and dangers of boarding every Soviet bloc ship that approached the quarantine line .
 Foust, Dickey, Foust and Dickey wrote letters to each other in 1988 . Foust wrote to Dickey on March 10, 1988, April 20, 1988; Dickey later wrote to author .
 Neither the President nor the Secretary of Defense ever gave orders directly to Navy commanders at sea . The President or Secretary-of-Defense never gave orders to commanders .
 Presidential orders were relayed via McNamara to General Taylor or Admiral Anderson, then from the CNO to CINCLANT . The orders were then relayed to Admiral Warda, who was in charge of the U.S.
 None of the quarantine force participants contacted by the author, including the Commanding Officers of the two destroyers that boarded Marucla, could recall hearing the President, Secretary of Defense, or CNO on the HF/SSB radio circuit . None . of the . participants contacted contacted
 Admiral Dennison and Vice Admiral Ward controlled the intercept and trailing of Soviet bloc ships . All routine movements of the quarantine force were controlled by the two officers .
 Commanding Officers of quarantine force ships report that their operations were not closely controlled . Commanding officers report that they had adequate authority to operate their ships as they felt best .
 Captain Edelman, Commanding Officer of VP-24, a Navy patrol plane squadron, states that he had adequate authority to conduct ocean surveillance operations as he chose .
 President personally controlled which ships would be boarded . Neither he nor his advisors controlled how the boardings were to be conducted .
 CINCLANTFLT specified that the boarding procedures contained in the Navy publication Law of Naval Warfare would be use .
 This would have been the publication that Admiral Anderson was trying to show McNamara during their infamous encounter in Flag Plot the evening of October 24 .
 Accounts that have the CNO waving the ""Manual of Naval Regulations” are nonsensical . Accounts that . have the . CNO waved the . manual of Naval . Regulations are nonsensical, says CNO .
 United States Navy Regulations, 1948 contained no guidance at all on blockades, and mentions quarantines only in the sense of quarantine . The Navy Regulations were published in 1948 .
 U.S. navy ships complying with routine customs or medical quarantine . Navy ships comply with customs or quarantine .
 The McNamara-Anderson argument was not over substantial policy issues, it was over policy issues . McNamara and Anderson argued over a number of issues, not over policy .
 The two men were at odds primarily because each felt he was being treated contemptuously by the other . Each felt they were treated contemptively by each other .
 The Quarantine Force thus used standard Nevy boarding procedures, modified for peacetime application, rather than special procedures drafted in the White House . The procedure was used in peacetime applications .
 The boarding of the Soviet-chartered Lebanese freighter Marucla on October 26 shows how boarding operations were conducted . The boarding operation was conducted at the request of the crew .
 USS John R Pierce provided real-time reports on the progress of the boarding to Admiral Ward and CINCLANT on the EHF/SSB voice radio net . The White House Situation Room and Flag Plot were also being monitored in Flag Plot and the Situation Room .
 Captain Foust states he received no guidance from higher authority on how to conduct the boarding while it was in progress . Foust says he was not given guidance by higher authority regarding boarding .
 The remainder of the operations conducted during the quarantine were uneventful . The quarantine took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Several ships were intercepted and trailed, but no other ships were stopped and boarded at sea . No other ships stopped at sea and boarded .
 Khrushchev on October 28 agreed to remove Soviet offensive missiles from Cuba . President suspended boarding of Soviet ships .
 Direct no rpt no forceful action against any shipping including boarding until further orders . No forceful action needed to be taken against any ship .
 If any difficulties encountered report to me immediately info [notify the information purposes] JCS/CNO prior taking any further action . Report to the JCS and CNO.
 On October 30, after it was determined that there was little threat of Cuban air attack, the quarantine line was moved closer to Cuba . The quarantine line has been moved to Cuba since October 30 . There has been little threat to Cuban air attacks .
 The Chestnut line contained eight stations clustered at the sealanes through and around the Bahamas . It was located at the Sealanes around the world .
 Ships were frequently detached from the Chestnut line to trail Soviet ships removing missiles . The line remained in effect until the quarantine was lifted on November pO .
 CINCLANTFLT used the aaa name ""Scotch Tape" to designate high-interest Soviet bloc shipping . The name was used by the Soviet bloc to refer to high interest shipping .
 The mee important operation was the inspection of Soviet ships removing MRBMs from Cuba . The operation was an important operation for the Soviet Union .
 The United States had insisted upon inspections to verify removal of missiles, but Castro refused to allow inspections on Cuban soil . The U.S. had insisted on inspections, but Cuba refused .
 A compromise was reached on November 7 when the United States agreed to inspect the missiles on the decks of Soviet ships . The U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to allow the inspections .
 The Soviet ships did not adhere to this plan--taking different courses and not carrying the designated number of missiles~-requiring an intensive Navy search effort to locate them and count the missiles . However, the Soviet ships didn't carry the designated missiles .
 The nine Soviet ships carrying the missiles from Cuba were inspected between November 8 and 11 . All 42 missiles known to be in Cuba were counted .
 In early December Navy ships and planes verified removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba . All 42 bombers on the decks of three Soviet ships were counted .
 Relations at sea between the superpowers were proper--Soviet and American ship captains behaved as professional seamen--and esuatny was amicable .
 Some Soviet ship captains were reluctant to comply with the procedures for the MRBM inspections, but they all complied eventually . The inspections were carried out in Soviet ships .
 Senior Navy officers would later stress the scope and intensity of the ASW operations conducted during the crisis . The crisis was the first time the U.S. Navy had been involved in an ASW operation .
 The Navy investigated the charges against USS Blandy and conciuded that the ship had not made any threats . The Navy said the ship did not make any threats against the ship .
 The Navy began detecting signs of increased Soviet submarine activity in the Atlantic as early as October 13 . The Navy increased the readiness of its ASW forces accordingly .
 On October 17 the Soviet submarine replenishment ship Terek was spotted in the area . The ship was seen in the early October .
 On October 22 a Sovict Zulu-class diesel-electric attack submarine was photographed on the surface refueling from Terek near the Azores . The submarine was armed with only with torpedoes, no missiles .
 The Zulu submarine was at the end of its patrol and returned to the Soviet Union after refueling, thus playing no role in the crisis . The submarine was refueled and did not participate in the Soviet-Russian crisis .
 At least three known Soviet submarines were operating in the Atlantic and could reach the quarantine zone in a few days . On October 24 CINCLANTFLT . Admiral Ward advised Admiral Ward that at least three . Soviet submarines could reach quarantine zone .
 Task Force 83 consisted of four ASW HUK groups and approximately 24 destroyers and destroyer escorts in Atlantic and Caribbean pick-up stations . Task force 83 was formed from four ASWs HUK Groups, four destroyers, and 24 escorts . Task
 On October 24 17 ASW patrol planes and ten submarines were tasked to establish the ""Argentia Sub-Air Barrier"" in the North Altantic . The barrier was established by Argentinian submarines .
 This ASW barrier went into effect October 27 on a southeasterly bearing from Argentia, Newfoundland . The barrier remained in operation Sere § enna 13 .
 No Soviet submarines were detectea attempting to penetrate the barrier . No Soviet submarine was detected .
 The Navy also considered activating the Greenland-IcelandUnited Kingdom ASW Barrier, but did not do so .
 For contact to be evaluated as confirmed, it either had ta be photographed or sighted by several observers well-trained on in submarine recognition . For contact, contact must be photographed, sighted, or photographed .
 All but one or two of the probable contacts can be dismissed as additional detections of the confirmed submarines or very realistic false contacts . All of the contacts are likely to have been detected by the U.S. Navy .
 President Kennedy and his advisors were concerned about Soviet submarines from their first meetings after Soviet offensive missiles were discovered in Cuba . Only the five confirmed contacts will be discussed further .
 First, they were concerned that submarines would be used to bring nuclear warheads into Cuba for the Soviet missiles . The Cuban government was concerned about submarines being used for nuclear warheads .
 President Kennedy raised this issue during the October 16 morning meeting with his advisors . Kennedy raised the issue during a morning meeting of his advisors.
 For sources that state there were six Soviet submarines, see “CINCLANT Historical Account,” 11; Abel, 155; . Robert Kennedy, 77; . Anderson, ""Cuban Crisis,"" 85; and Dennison, “Reminiscences,
 ASW experts determined that C-20 and C-26 were the same submarine . After almost a year of careful analysis, experts say they are the same sub .
 During the crisis not all of these contacts were accepted as confirmed as confirmed . Not all of the contacts have been accepted as confirmed .
 C-21 was never photographed, and originally was Classified as only being a possible Soviet submarine . One of them, C-20, never photographed and was classified as only a possible submarine .
 There had been concerns about this well before the crisis, particularly that a fishing port being built by the Soviets at Mariel would be used as a submarine base . There had also been concerns that the fishing port was being built as a base .
 Khrushchev warned American businessman William Knox that Soviet submarines would sink any American ship that forced a Soviet ship to stop . The threat was made to Knox on October 24, 1962 .
 The Kennedy Administration included Soviet submarines in the quarantine of Cuba . The quarantine was in response to concerns that Soviet submarines would bring nuclear warheads into Cuba .
 The quarantine would be extended to other types of carriers, including aircraft and submarines . The President did not state this explicitly in his October 22 speech, but he did state that the quarantine would extend to all ships .
 Quarantine Proclamation signed by the President October 23 stated that ""any vessel or craft"" could be stopped and séarched .
 Concerns of Task Force commanders were expressed to the author in Rivero, letter to author, March 10, 1988; Stroh, February 18, 1988 . Hayward, St. Stroh and Hayward wrote letters to author in 1988 .
 Soviet submarines were an explicit target of the quarantine, and could be stopped and searched if proceeding to Cuba . The quarantine was imposed on Soviet submarines in Cuba .
 The greatest difficulty in enforcing a quarantine against submarines is signalling them to surface for identification and search . It is difficult to enforce a quarantine because of the lack of communication with submarines .
 Admiral Anderson was in a JCS meeting, but his Deputy for fleet operations, Vice Admiral Griffin, was available . Admiral Griffin was one of three Admirals deputized by the CNO to act during the crisis .
 McNamara asked Vice Admiral Griffin how Navy ships could signal a Soviet submarine to surface . McNamara: "I'm sure it's a good thing to see a submarine surface"
 McNamara knew from previous ASW briefings that this was not anormal peacetime procedure for the Navy . McNamara also knew that this is not an acceptable peacetime practice for the navy .
 The Secretary of Defense has today issued the following submarine surfacing and identification procedures when in contact with United States quarantine forces in the general vicinity of Cuba .
 Sonar signal normally made on underwater communications equipment in the 8 ke frequency range . This sonar signal is normally made by underwater communication equipment .
 These special signals may have been provided to Moscow on October 24, the day before the Notice to Mariners was broadcast . Moscow may have provided these signals to the Kremlin on that day .
 Robert Kennedy misconstrued how the signals were used in the 1960s . The signals were described by Robert Kennedy, although he misinterpreted how they were used .
 Sonar and explosive charge signals could be used interchangeably, rather than sequentially as described by Kennedy . The sonar and explosives signals could use interchangeably .
 These procedures were not a normal part of peacetime Navy ASW procedures . They were created specifically for the quarantine of Cuba .
 The Navy had procedures for signaling unidentified submerged submarines . Their only purpose was to determine if a contact was a U.S. submarine .
 McNamara tailored Navy ASW procedures to meet the President's political objectives . McNamara's ASW policy was tailored to meet his political objectives.
 The Soviet Union had to make a deliberate decision whether or not to inform its submarines of the signals . The Soviets had to decide whether to inform their submarines .
 The code mentioned in the Notice to Mariners is the international Morse code, vice the maritime signal code . The code is used to communicate with the world's Morse code .
 By October 25 the Kennedy Administration had publicly warned the Soviets that the quarantine applied to their submarines as well as their merchant ships, and had tailored ASW procedures to support that policy .
 President Kennedy may have used ASW operations as an additional means of demonstrating American resolve and applying coercive pressure on the Soviets . There are indications--far from conclusive--that President Kennedy used Navy ASW to demonstrate American resolve .
 In 1973 he stated that ASW operations were ""of immense psychological significance to emphasize to the USSR that any confrontation with the United States 32lay. 32lay" in 1973 .
 ASW operations were used to reinforce political signals being sent by quarantine, invasion preparations, and invasion preparations . ASW missions were used in the 1950s and '60s .
 ASW was not one of President Kennedy's top priorities during the crisis . ASW did not become a priority for President Kennedy during the Korean War .
 Available EXCOMM records do not reveal Navy ASW operations to be a frequent topic of conversation . Vice Admiral Houser indicates that ASW was primarily a primary focus .
 The special surfacing signal was a more aggressive measure than Navy ships were normally allowed to take in peacetime . In peacetime, the special signal was more aggressive than the usual measure .
 It is not known if the President ordered | ASW aircraft to carry live eaapence, or even knew that .
 Navy eins Sea wiae had the authority to we take this action on their own initiative, so there was no need for the President to have ordered it, says the President .
 The White House did not attempt to exercise direct control over ASW operations . The operation was conducted by the White House .
 In his oral history Admiral Ward describes reporting a submarine contact to the White House, and being told not to take offensive action against Meee . The CNO, Secretary of Defense, or President could have intervened .
 The special "Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures" were used several times during the crisis . The special procedures were used during the war .
 Special signals apparently were used on at least two of the five confirmed Soviet submarines . Morse code signal and explosive charge signal were used .
 PDC€s were small explosive charges routinely used by the Navy in peacetime for an echo $31 yard . ""Reminiscences,"" 194. "PDC€€s" were small explosives charges used in the Navy .
 Captain Dickey gescribed an ASW prosecution being monitored by Flag Plot on the HF/SSB net . Flag Plot was monitoring the ASW for the duration of the time .
 Captain Wissman recalled the Navy chain of command paying Close attention to ASW prosecution . Captain WISSman recalled how the U.S. Navy paid close attention to the case .
 Wissman, Dickey, Dinwiddie and Dinwidie wrote letters to author in 1988 . Author's letters include letters from author to author .
 Every time that the explosive charge signal was sent by surface ships, they dropped hand eee ida ae . The Navy readily adapted to a civilian-inspired modification to its ASW procedures .
 The type of PDCs used by ASW aircraft are shown in a photograph in Gallagher, 103.5 . The type is shown in the photograph .
 The fact that MK 64 PDCs were routinely used in exercises with United States submarines indicates that the Navy believed they were a safe signaling method (MK 64 charges were phased out in about 1980)
 Hand grenades had about the same explosive charge as MK 64 PDCs. 33> though this observation illustrates a weakness in the organizational process model, it does not disprove the model. 33>.
 There were no reported instances of a Soviet submarine immediately surfacing upon hearing the signals . The Navy did not literally “force” any Soviet submarines to surface .
 Soviet submarines surfaced because they needed to replenish air and batteries, or because they had some kind of mechanical problem that had to be repaired on the surface . Submarine submarines surfaced in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Navy claims it forced Soviet submarines to surface in the presence of U.S. ships-a humiliation for a submarine captain . The Navy can claim, however, that it forced . Soviet submarines .
 The Soviet submarines did not react to the signals with other than normal efforts at evasion . On the other hand, the Soviet submarines didn't react with normal efforts to evasion .
 The Soviet submarines attempted to evade being tracked, sometimes successfully, but their efforts were sporadic . The Soviets attempted to avoid being tracked by their submarines .
 At least three of the contacts surfaced on an easterly heading, as specified in the United States Notice to Mariners . The U.S. notice to Mariners is required to report contacts .
 There are no clear cases of Soviet submarines making a large course change specifically to surface on an easterly heading .
 Normally, a submarine need only expose its snorkel to recharge its batteries and replenish it air . Normally, it needs to be exposed to the surface in order to recharge .
 All five Soviet submarines fully surfaced, sometimes repeatedly, rather than just snorkeling . It was unusual, and striking to experienced ASW operators, that all five fully surfaced .
 This led some Navy Officers to conclude that submarines were ordered to surface and identify themselves if challenged by the U.S. Navy . This led to some Navy officers concluding that submarines had to surface .
 The Soviet Government appears to have directed its submarines to comply with the U.S. Svarructions . The evidence is not conclusive .
 These two Soviet submarines appear to have been on routine Caribbean patrols .
 One of them was operating near Guantanamo in the Windward Passage--a strategic location for monitoring U.S. Navy movements--when first detected .
 The other three confirmed Soviet submarines (C-18, C-19, and C-20/26) operated in the Atlantic east and northeast of the Bahamas .
 They were detected moving toward the quarantine zone shortly before the quarantine went into effect . The quarantine went in effect on Monday .
 Some accounts have described these three submarines . as escorting Soviet merchant ships carrying offensive arms to Cuba . Some accounts say they were escorting the Soviet ships with offensive arms .
 In fact, their locations and movements were unrelated to those of the merchant ships . The ships' movements and locations are unrelated to that of the ships .
 The Soviet freighters were scattered across the Atlantic, rather than being in a convoy or following a common track toward Cuba . The freighters had been scattered around the Atlantic .
 Soviet submarines were scattered over a large area, rather than concentrated around a particular ship or group of snips . Additionally, the Soviet subs were scattered around a larger area, not concentrated around one particular ship .
 If this is correct, the Soviets could well have decided to recall their submarines as early as October 23 . The same day they ordered their merchant ships to halt or return home . The Soviets could have recalled their submarines the same day as ordering their ships to stop .
 The most likely scenario is that Soviets decided to recall their submarines on October 25, after the U.S. revealed its "Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures" and warned that force would be used against submarines that failed to comply .
 The possibility cannot be dismissed that the Soviets may have decided to recall their submarines in the Atlantic . The Soviet Union may have recalled their submarines, according to reports .
 Aggressive ASW operations may have inadvertently delayed recall order by one or two submarines .
 There were no near collisions with submerged or surfaced Soviet submarines . No near collisions occurred with submarines or submarines .
 Navy ships and planes practiced ASW tactics while tracking submerged Soviet aubmarines . U.S. Navy ships, planes and planes used to practice ASW techniques .
 It is extremely unlikely that the Soviets would have ignored and not protested a serious incident involving one of their submarines . The incident occurred in the early 1980s .
 Christiansen, Morrison, Morgan, Rozier and Rozier interview by author, 1988 . Edelman and Edelman interviewed by author in 1988 . Christiansen and Morrison interviewed in 1988; Rozier interviews by author .
 The fifth confirmed contact was prosecuted by ASW aircraft from VP-56 and VS-26 . The aircraft made contact with the Soviet Union in the early 1990s .
 The commanders of those two squadrons could not be located . Navy records indicate that no weapons were used in the prosecution of contact C-23 .
 As Sagan suggests, the charges undoubtedly were hand grenades or PDCs, which were authorized, and were dropped in order to send the special signals approved by McNamara . Sagan suggests the charges were probably hand grenades .
 Weapons were never employed against Soviet submarines . There was a remote possibility that the explosive charge signals could damage a submarine .
 In both cases, crewmen were observed on deck apparently making repairs to hatches or the hul1.1 .
 Admiral pentiaen attributed the casualty to some sort of machinery failure . The problems experienced by C-18 probably were not caused by PDCs .
 Kennedy emiaweeeanden included Soviet submarines in the quarantine of Cuba .
 Standard Navy peacetime ASW | procedures were modified specifically to support the President's political objectives . Standard Navy . peacetime . ASW . procedures were . modified specifically for support of the President . objectives .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara approved special signals devised by the Navy for signalling submarines to surface for identification . The signals were devised for identification purposes by McNamara .
 The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine specifically addressed when force coule Be used against submarines .
 When informed that Soviet submarines were moving into the quarantine area, the President directed the Navy to launch a maximum ASW effort . The President of the Soviet Union was informed that the U.S. Navy was launching an ASW .
 The Soviet Union was warned that force would be used against submarines that failed to comply with the requirements . Force was warned of the 'Submarine Surfacing and Identification'
 ASW was viewed in ae ; oe. ee mammal mammal mammal “ the EXCOMM as a supporting operation, rather than as one of en NR TOES the central operations in the crisis’s crisis .
 ASW operations do not appear to have received as much attention as other areas, BtsGité says . ASW ops genereate the most intense interactions with Soviet forces . The most intense interaction with the Soviet forces was with the Soviets .
 The President may not have fully understood the operational implications of Navy ASW operations . ASW planes and helicopters were carrying live ordnance while they trailed Soviet submarines . President may have been unaware of the implications .
 The President and McNamara chose not to exercise direct control over ASW operations . The President was kept abreast of the operations .
 The Situation Room displayed all but the most sensitive information on the tactical situation at sea . McNamara was briefed in detail once daily in Flag Plot .
 President apparently chose not to monitor ASW operations over voice radio . He or ticNeiara could have intervened if they felt that things were getting out of hand .
 United States Navy ASW forces complied with their rules of engagement and the ASW procedures specified for the quarantine .
 They used special signals and did not fire any weapons against Soviet submarines . They used the special signals to communicate with Soviet subs .
 There were no incidents between U.S. ASW forces and Soviet submarines despite the intense ASW operations that were conducted Guring the crisis .
 President had directed the Navy to launch a maximum ASW effort . First, the President had been informed the previous day that Soviet submarines were moving into the area .
 President was told during the Wednesday morning EXCOMM meeting that USS Essex had been tasked to > prosecute the Soviet submarine .
 First positive contact between Navy ASW units and Soviet submarine did not occur until 3:29m. Third, the first positive contact with Soviet submarine was made between 3:30m. and 3:28m.
 Nathan asserts, with no apparent evidence, that the President was ""horrified"" when he found out that the Navy intended to surface Soviet submarines . Nathan asserts with no evidence, with . no evidence that he was .horrified" when he learned of the Navy's intention to surface .
 Nathan's interpretation seriously distorts Robert Kennedy's account, and is proven false by the evidence in this study . Nathan: "Nathan's interpretation of the Kennedy story is wrong by this study"
 The Navy was not just following standard operating procedures, it was following guidelines reviewed by the President and approved by McNamara . Soviet submarines had explicitly been included in the quarantine by guidance reviewed by President McNamara.
 McNamara visited a specific destroyer from the Essex HUK Group was trailing a Soviet submarine (contact C-18) The action was authorized by McNamara .
 Allison's interpretation of ASW operations during the crisis has no validity . Allison's interpretations of the crisis thus have no validity, he says . Allison: "ASW operations in the war zone during the war"
 The U.S. Navy pursued Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic as a normal operational measure in support of the large United States naval deployment establishing the blockade . Until well into the crisis, however, it escaped that the United States Navy would pursue Soviet submarines .
 "The naval commanders, with ample operational authority, chose to pursue this mission very aggressively from the outset," he says . "In fact, the naval commanders chose to ... pursue this aggressively," he adds .
 The only accurate statement is that Navy commanders had ample operational authority (unless it was . specifically denied) to conduct ASW in the North Atlantic .
 The President and McNamara knew by at least October 21 that the Navy would be pursuing Soviet submarines in support of the quarantine . First, the President and . McNamara . knew by October 21, the Navy . would pursue Soviet submarines .
 McNamara included submarines among the vessels that the Navy was permitted to stop and board . McNamara had explicitly included submarines as part of the plan .
 The President and McNamara appear to have shared Navy concern that Soviet submarines might attack Navy quarantine ships . McNamara was generally supportive of Navy ASW objectives .
 McNamara undoubtedly and the President probably knew about Navy ASW operations in the Atlantic outside the quarantine area . Second, McNamara probably knew of ASW in the area .
 The Argentia ASW barrier, ordered on October 24 and established on October 27, was displayed on the charts in Flag Plot . It would have been seen by McNamara during his daily briefings .
 The CNO would have had to make an extraordinary effort to prevent McNamara from learning about the barrier .
 Atlantic during the crisis were the three Foxtrot-class torpedo-~armed attack submarines that entered the quarantine area . Atlantic during . the crisis during the . crisis were . the three attack submarines .
 The only Soviet submarine-launched cruise missile credited with a land attack Capability in 1962 was the size of a jet fighter and had to be carried in very large tubes outside the hull .
 The Soviets had no cruise missiles that could be launched from torpedo tubes, excluding the Foxtrots from the strategic nuclear deterrence role . The Foxtrots were used as part of a strategic nuclear deterrent .
 Navy ASW operations did not constitute "extremely strong coercion," says Steinbruner . The Navy did not say that . The reason given was not for the reason .
 Fourth, the Navy conducted its ASW operations essentially in the manner that the President desired . The President ordered the operation to be conducted in accordance with his wishes .
 This list is not comprehensive, but does provide an indication of the many ways in which violent incidents could have occurred during the crisis . This list does not provide a comprehensive list of the ways violent incidents occurred .
 Cuban Komar missile boats or coastal defense missile sites accidently firing an anti-ship cruise missile during testing or training . A wide range of accidents could have occurred, including United States Navy ships or planes firing a weapon near a Soviet submarine or merchant ship .
 Any of these incidents could have triggered a clash between U.S. forces and Soviet or Cuban forces . Given the high level of tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union, any such a clash could have occurred .
 There were, in fact, significant tactical-level interactions during the crisis, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "There were ... significant tactical interactions"
 Most important were the bg asiiions between the United States Quarantine Force and Soviet merchant ships, and between United States ASW forces SeaMcousIe .
 Low-intensity interactions between U.S. reconnaissance planes and Cuban air defenses . Cuban anti-aircraft guns fired on United States planes . Cuban naval units and United States Navy ships and patrol planes in Florida Strait .
 Cuban Komar missile boats were active in Cuban waters during the crisis . They occasionally ventured into the Florida Strait at night at night .
 U.S. Navy patrol planes make contact with Cuban vessels . They retreat to Cuban waters when illuminated by Navy planes . They did not take threatening actions toward United States vessels .
 U.S. Navy ships and patrol planes frequently spotted Cuban naval vessels and planes . There were no close encounters with Cuban naval ships or planes . United States Navy ships operated three nautical miles from Cuban coast .
 Khrushchev's decision to recall the freighters carrying arms and the three submarines operating in the Atlantic limited interactions with Soviet merchant ships and submarines .
 The only Soviet ships that entered the quarantine zone were those that the U.S. would have no reason to take into custody . The United States would not have a reason to arrest any of the ships .
 The three Soviet submarines that were of greatest concern had all reversed course and were headed home by the time the U.S. Navy ASW forces were able to locate and prosecute them . The three of the Soviet submarines were heading home .
 Had Khrushchev directed the freighters and submarines to continue toward Cuba, the intensity of tactical-level interactions at sea would have been much more severe .
 Interactions with Cuban forces constrained by an apparent decision by Castro not to provoke a confrontation with the U.S. Interactions were constrained by the apparent decision to avoid confrontation .
 The Cuban Captain William C Magee, Commanding Officer of USS Claud Jones, wrote to author, May 12, 1988 . Magee was the Cuban captain of the Cuban ship, Claud Jones .
 Cuban anti-aircraft guns fired on low-level photographic reconnaissance planes on October 27, but were not hit . U.S. Navy lowlevel reconnaissance planes were fired on by Cuban aircraft, but did not hit.
 Captain William B Ecker, Commanding Officer of VFP-62, wrote a letter to author, March 19, 1988 .
 The anti-aircraft fire on October 27 was the only exception to this pattern of caution, but appears to have been an isolated incident . There was no further U.S. aircraft fire against United States planes after that incident .
 If Castro had decided to demonstrate defiance of the U.S. with military actions, there probably would have been a version of the Tonkin Gulf Incident . Castro had a chance to back up his inflammatory rhetoric with military action . The incident is likely to have been similar to that of the
 Once an initial Cuban attack had taken place, United States forces would have been at hair trigger readiness for further attacks . U.S. forces were at hair-trigger readiness for possible further attacks on Cuba .
 Eiebeted Cuban provocations, particularly a successful Cuban attack on a U.S. ship, probably would have led the President to order destruction of the Cuban navy and air force, he says .
 Khrushchev's early decision not to challenge the U.S. quarantine meant that President Kennedy and the Navy commanders at sea were never confronted with a situation in which they had to decide whether or not to use force against Soviet ships or submarines .
 At the time, however, this was not clear to the President or the chain of command . The President and the President were not aware of this .
 Khrushchev did not announce his actions, the U.S. had to infer them from the movements of Soviet ships and submarines . The United States had to rely on movements of the Soviet vessels and subs .
 As late as Saturday, October 27, it still was not clear to U.S. leaders that Khrushchev would refrain from challenging the quarantine . Several Soviet ships suspected of carrying arms had turned back .
 The danger of an armed confrontation with Soviet or Cuban forces appeared to be much greater at the time than it does in retrospect . The danger was much greater than it did in retrospect, the author says .
 USS Holder collided with USS Wasp while refueling at sea on November 14 . Damage to the ships was slight, but damage to USS Holder was slight .
 The USS William C Lawe was forced aground by heavy seas in the mouth of San Juan harbor, Puerto Kivco, on November 17, suffering damage sufficient to keep it oe of further quarantine operations .
 The Navy lost an F8U that crashed during a catapult launch and an A4D that caught fire in flight . The Navy also lost two other aircraft that crashed in the past .
 USS Essex lost two new SH-3 ASW-helicopters due to an electrical malfunction . The problem prompted the Navy to ground all of its SH3s until the problem was corrected .
 An ASW torpedo was dropped on the flight deck of USS Essex while being loaded onto an aircraft, but did not explode . It was dropped by the USS Essex, but didn't explode .
 One of the Navy F8U-1P photographic reconnaissance planes was damaged when it struck an Albatross in flight . The plane was damaged by the collision of the Albatoss .
 Navy F4H Phantoms intercepted an Air Force U-2 as it approached the USS Enterprise (CVAN 65) carrier group after flying over Cuba . U.2 was approaching the U.S. carrier group in Cuba .
 Four Marines were injured, two when they accidently entered a U.S. minefield . Two were wounded when they failed to respond properly to a sentry'’s challenge . Two of the injured were injured when they entered a minefield accidently .
 The accident that created the greatest danger of a confrontation with Cuban forces occurred on November 6, when two Marines accidently crashed a pickup truck through the Guantanamo security fence and 20 feet into Cuban territory .
 The operations that had the most immediate impact on resolution of the crisis were the quarantine and ASW operations . The quarantine operation was the most important operation to resolve the crisis .
 Both operations were conducted largely in accordance with standard Navy procedures, but with certain key modifications to ensure that the supported the President's political objectives .
 The White House and chain of command closely monitored quarantine and ASW operations when they involved encounters with Soviet ships or submarines . White House did not exercise direct real-time control over operations at sea .
 The Navy conducted these operations in the manner prescribed by the President and there were no incidents with Soviet ships or submarines . No incidents were reported during the operations .
 The Kennedy Administration was clearly concerned about the danger of an incident with Soviet ships or submarines . The Kennedy administration was clearly worried about an incident .
 The President and McNamara exercised a greater degree of control over U.S. Navy operations than had ever been attempted in the past . The President exercised greater control over the Navy .
 They controlled naval Operations through mechanisms of indirect control, particularly mission orders and rules of engagement, rather than through direct control . However, they primarily controlled naval operations through .
 The President and McNamara retained authority certain crucial decisions, including retaliation against Cuban air defenses and the boarding of ships . The decision was made by McNamara and the President .
 The President could monitor operations at sea on HF/SSB radio in the White House Situation Room . He could intervene if he felt an encounter was getting out of hand .
 EXCOMM was an advisory body for the President--it was not in the chain of command . ExCOMM is only advisory body of the President, not chain-command .
 The EXCOMM and its study groups discussed military and naval Operations in numbing detail . President and McNamara did not attempt to control all of those details in the actual conduct of operations . The President and his predecessor did not .
 Overall answer is yes, yes, but the coupling was not as tight as might be expected given the seriousness of the crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The tightest coupling was between United States Navy ASW forces and Soviet submarines, followed closely by coupling between the Quarantine force and Soviet merchant ships .
 The Soviet submarines were not attempting to force their way through U.S. naval forces to get to Cuba . They were attempting to return home unmolested . The Soviet submarine was not trying to force its way through the United States .
 The only Soviet ships — approached the quarantine line were those that the U.S. would have no reason to take into custody . Only Soviet ships that approached the line were ones that the United States would not be able to arrest .
 As Admiral Dennison relates in his oral history, the quarantine was a success without ever having been tested . The quarantine was never tested .
 President Kennedy was using the U.S. armed forces to convey political signals to Khrushchev during the crisis . President Kennedy clearly used the United States armed forces as a political signal .
 The President and McNamara actively sought ae ways to reinforce the signals being sent to the Soviets, such as by modifying Navy ASW procedures to support the political objectives .
 Khrushchev, on the other hand, may have used military forces for political signalling, but did not do so as clearly as President Kennedy . Kennedy may not use military forces as a political signal, but he did so as well .
 Khrushchev was probably avoiding ae have of hostile intent by not placing Soviet forces at full alert, recalling freighters carrying arms, and recalling three submarines in the Atlantic .
 There is insufficient evidence to establish this conclusively. However, there is not enough evidence to do so .
 Shooting down an American U~2 over Cuba on October 27 sent the wrong signal to the U.S. The action may not have been authorized in the Fremlin .
 Cuba placed its armed forces on alert, but avoided provocatory actions during the crisis . Cuba's armed forces were placed on alert during the incident .
 This was probably intended to avoid giving the U.S. a pretext for invading the island . The island was invaded by the Soviet Union in 1941 .
 All three of the participants in the crisis used their military forces for political signalling . Thus, all three of them used military forces to political signalling.
 Although the President sought to maintain close control of military operations he relied heavily on methods of delegated control . Communications problems constrained his ability to effectively exercise direct control .
 In certain operations there was tight coupling between the forces of the two sides . In some operations, the forces were tight coupling .
 Both sides used their forces as a political instrument under conditions of acute crisis . Both sides are using their forces to use as political instruments under acute crisis conditions .
 Navy forces encountered Cuban forces on several occasions without the President or McNamara controlling the interactions . McNamara controlled the interactions with Cuban forces .
 "The President's attention was focused on a very small portion of the overall operations that were in progress," the President said .
 The potential cause of decoupling that was most prominent in the crisis was communications problems, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Despite the advances in communications technology, the effort to exercise close control over largescale operations seriously overloaded and degraded U.S. communications systems . Despite advances that had been made, the efforts were still to be overwhelmed .
 Communications problems did not cause serious decoupling because only a very small portion of U.S. forces were in contact with adversary forces . The guidance contained mechanisms of indirect control, so that United States forces would act as the President desired .
 An Air Force U-2 strayed over the Soviet Union on October 27, prompting the Soviets and Americans to scramble fighters . The incident decoupled from Presidential control .
 If the Air Force transmitted its readiness reports for the DEFCON 2 alert in the clear without the President and McNamara knowing what they were doing, that would have been another instance of decoupling .
 ASW operations -- the most dangerous Soviet-American tactical interactions during the crisis--are particularly slow and tedious, providing ample opportunity for disengagement . ASW ops are particularly slow, tedious, and provide ample opportunity to disengagement, author says .
 The intercept and boarding of merchant ships takes place at a leisurely pace and is relatively easy to control . Similarly, the intercept and . boarding of . merchant ships take place at an easy pace and relatively easy . control .
 Fast-paced engagements, such as air combat and sea battles fought with tactical aircraft and cruise missiles, never arose . The U.S. never fought in air combat, sea battles and air combat .
 In retrospect this appears to have been a key factor in the success of the President's crisis management efforts--opening with operations that were inherently slowpaced . In retrospect, the President appeared to have had a low-key success .
 The President probably knew intuitively that this Was an advantage of a blockade, but it was not an explicit consideration in the decision .
 This is a striking contrast with the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis, when the Navy did not have Clear guidance on whether or not it could defend the offshore islands when the crisis erupted .
 President and McNamara avoided the problem of inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control . By tailoring certain key guidance contained in mission orders and rules of engagement to support the President's political objectives, they avoided inappropriate guidance .
 The most important innovation, the special submarine surfacing signals, were devised in conjunction with the Navy . They were devised by the Navy and developed the submarine's special signals .
 President and McNamara largely avoided the problem of tactically inappropriate orders . By not attempting to exercise positive direct control of operations while they were in progress, McNamara avoided a problem .
 The method of control they used--control by negation--only required that orders be given if a Navy commander embarked on a course of action that éley opposed . The method was used to control the Navy .
 The final potential cause of decoupling, unauthorized actions by military commanders, did not occur during the crisis, military officials say .
 Navy ASW operations were not conducted without the President's knowledge and authority, and did not violate the spirit of EXCOMM policy . Contrary to the prevailing myth, ASW missions were conducted without President's approval .
 The fact that no unauthorized actions occurred was even somewhat surprising, the fact that it was even more surprising .
 There was resentment among many Navy Officers to the close attention that the President and McNamara paid to military operations . As will be discussed below, there will be much more to be done with the Navy .
 The various potential causes of decoupling either were not present during the crisis or did not have a serious adverse effect on the President's ability to manage the crisis . Thus, in summary, in . summary, the various potential . causes of . decouplings either were . not present
 The JCS remained committed to the air strike option as its preferred course of action until Khrushchev agreed on October 28 to remove Soviet offensive missiles from Cuba . This does not reflect differences in threat perceptions, says JCS .
 It reflects differences of opinion over whether or not the quarantine would be sufficient to compel Khrushchev to remove the missiles that were already in Cuba . Rather, it reflects differences .
 Even President Kennedy was skeptical that it would work, but decided to give it a try before resorting to force . President Kennedy decided to try it out, but was skeptical about it .
 Navy commanders at sea were more concerned about the Soviet submarine threat than were senior military and civilian leaders in Washington . The U.S. Navy commander at sea was at sea more concerned with the threat than Washington .
 President and McNamara were also concerned about the Soviet submarine threat . Griffin, Houser, Caldwell, Caldwell and Shepard stated there was not great concern for the Soviet sub threat in Washington .
 Admiral Anderson, Admiral Sharp, and rear Admiral Wylie state that there were such concerns . However, Admiral Anderson and Admiral Sharp said there were no concerns .
 Griffin, Sharp, Houser, Shepard, Shepard and Anderson interview by author, 1988 . Wylie, Sharp and Shepard interview with author . Griffin, letter to author, April 6, 1988; .
 Cuban air and naval threat to U.S. Navy ships was stratified . Cuban air, naval threat was also stratified, according to the report .
 Perceptions of the threat from Cuban aircraft were mixed, not following any pattern . Cuban aircraft not following pattern .
 Admiral Anderson and Admiral Dennison appear to have been most concerned about the Cuban air threat . Admiral Ward was not overly concerned about it, Admiral Anderson said .
 Admiral Ward says the CNO was flexible on this point during the October 20 JCS eeeee . He says he was not concerned about the Soviet submarine threat . Admiral Ward: "The CNO is flexible"
 Task Force and Task Group Commanders at sea were concerned about the Soviet submarine threat . Admiral Rivero, Vice Admiral Houser and Vice Admiral Caldwell were concerned .
 While perceptions of the Cuban air and naval threat were mixed, they were not stratified . Thus, perceptions of Cuban air, naval threat in Cuba were mixed .
 The decoupling that did occur was minor and did not generate sustained interaction sequences beyond Presidential control . "The decouplings did occur, but did not pose sustained interaction with the President," the president said .
 President Kennedy's decision to open with relatively slow-paced naval operations, Khrushchev's early decision not to enaiiengs the quarantine, and Castro's . Castro's decision . not to provoke the United States were the factors that determined the nature of the tactical-level interactions .
 Cuban anti-aircraft guns fired at Navy reconnaissance jets on October 27 . The unarmed Navy planes simply left the area after the attack .
 ASW forces trailed Soviet submarines for days without escalation by either side . U.S. Navy ASW force trailed Soviet submarine for days, but did not engage .
 In effect, then, escalation was avoided by the tactical environment having been structured in such a manner as to prevent clashes from occurring in the first place . The tactical environment had been structured such a way to avoid clashes .
 Although the Soviet Government filed protests over these incidents, it did not interpret them as deliberate indications of hostile intentions on the part of the United States . The Soviet Government did not believe these were indications of the U.S. intentions .
 This apparently annoyed Khrushchev, who complained about the incident to President Kennedy, but otherwise did not have a major impact on the crisis . The incident occurred in the early 1950s and '60s .
 There were no serious inadvertent military incidents involving naval forces . No serious accidental military incidents were reported in recent weeks .
 There is a remote possibility that a Navy PDC might have contributed to the problems that kept two of the Soviet submarines on the surface, but the Soviets never filed a protest claiming that such an incident had occurred .
 The lack of incidents is somewhat surprising, given the scope of U.S. military operations during the crisis . It may not be a reliable indicator of what to expect in future crises, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 This was an important incident that caused apprehensions concerning Khrushchev's motives and willingness to resolve the crisis peacefully . This was the first time the crisis had been resolved .
 Khrushchev's October 28 letter accepting President Kennedy's terms for ending the crisis . The incident probably would have had a greater impact on U.S. policy than it did were it not for the letter . The letter was accepted by President Kennedy in October .
 The availability of formal and informal communications channels between the two superpowers appears to have moderated the use of military forces for political signaling . This allows diplomatic rather than military responses to military incidents .
 Tensions arose from the decision to impose a quarantine on offensive arms rather than immediately launch an air strike against the Soviet missiles sites or invade Cuba . Tensions between political considerations and military considerations arose .
 Had men in fact died as a result, had ships sunk or airplanes fallen by the score, the crisis in civil-military relations would have taken a more dramatic turn . Civil leaders would have accommodated commanders far more than they actually gid .
 This captures the essence of the problem, but must be qualified by three observations . It is not the only way to solve it, but it is the only solution to the problem .
 The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine were not significantly different from normal peacetime rules . The quarantine did not infringe upon a commander's right of self-defense, the commander said .
 The only operational area in which the President deliberately denied the military any authority to take action in self defense was in the case of Cuban air defenses firing on U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 The distinction between self defense and retaliation is well-established in U.S. rules of engagement . The distinction was well established in the United States .
 President Kennedy defined attacks on Cuban air defenses to be an act of retaliation that he would control, rather than self defense . The attacks were not self-defense attacks that the military could not control .
 President Eisenhower had done the same thing in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis, allowing hot pursuit of Communist Chinese aircraft but not attacks on their mainland bases .
 President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara were sympathetic to the military's concern with protecting its men . Third, records of EXCOMM meetings reveal that President Kennedy was sympathetic with the military .
 After a U-2 was shot down on October 27, the danger of further attacks and the loss of additional pilots was discussed . The danger was discussed after the attack on the U.2 was discussed in a meeting .
 The President and McNamara tried to understand the implications of their interventions in military operations . They weighed potential military costs against political objectives they sought .
 Preclude simultaneous, . reinforcement of either CINCEUR (Commander in Chief United States Forces Europe] or CINCPAC using troop carrier or MATS (Military Air Transport Service) aircraft . Preclude . simultaneous, , reinforcement, using troop . carrier or aircraft .
 Preparations for invasion of Cuba degraded the ability of the U.S. to respond to Soviet moves in Europe, particularly against Berlin . The U.K. responded poorly to Soviet plans to invade Cuba .
 The only reason that this did not generate severe tensions was that the political-military situation in other theaters, including Europe, was relatively quiet . Europe's political and military situation in the region was relatively calm .
 During World War II and the Korean War there was military command only, no control. During World . II and . Korean War . Korea War . During World. II and Korean War, there were military . command only .
 McNamara wanted to know in detail how each function was to be accomplished . McNamara asked McNamara to explain each function in detail. McNamara: "I want to know how it was done"
 For example, wanting ships to be at certain places at certain times at a time when their max speed would not permit . This is when they are in certain areas, such as where they are at certain speeds .
 The second half of this assessment reflects a widespread attitude toward McNamara, that he was incompetent at controlling military operations . McNamara was a poor leader of the Army, but he was not incompetent .
 McNamara was trying to run naval operations the way he would manage a Ford assembly line, admirals say . He was running operations without the experience necessary to do so and with no respect for those who did have the requisite experience, they say .
 Navy admirals commonly referred to them as “Junior Field Marshals" and a variety of less polite expressions . Navy admiral referred them to "junior field marshals"
 Even General Taylor was suspect because he had been brought out of retirement to serve as JCS Chairman . General Taylor had also been brought back from retirement to be chairman .
 One admiral who worked closely with General Taylor described him as a “boot licking sycophant"" and a ‘yes man"" for the Kennedy Administration . General Taylor was a "yes man" for Kennedy administration .
 The records of EXCOMM meetings reveal that this is not a fair assessment, but it was their perceptions that mattered . The records show that this was not the case .
 The Admiral's only complaint was that officials in Washington tried to use his already overloaded radio circuits . The Admiral complained about the use of his overloaded circuits .
 Everything that we did we reported directly by voice telephone , sometimes through scrambler, to the Pentagon, sometimes through a scrambler . The Pentagon was monitored also in the White House war room .
 For the first time we asked instructions on whether or not we should stop a Soviet ship known to be headed our way . The decision was made at the political level because it was a political decision rather than a military one .
 Navy commanders who did not have to work directly with McNamara felt less resentment and better understood the aaa atndson . But this was an exceptional situation, more political than military in abicemee .
 This largely explains the infamous argument between McNamara and Admiral Anderson the evening of October 24 . The argument is likely to have occurred during the night of that night .
 Admiral Anderson had thrown down the gauntlet the previous day with his memorandum to McNamara stating there would be no more interference with the commanders at sea . The next day, the U.S. military commander at sea would meet with his commanders .
 McNamara was tasked by the President to closely monitor the quarantine operations . McNamara had spent the day in a tense EXCOMM meeting .
 Their argument reveals more about personalities clashing under the stress of a crisis than it does about organizational processes . However, their argument reveals much more about personality clashes under stress of crisis .
 Admiral Anderson did not disobey or attempt ta circumvent any orders from the President or McNamara during the crisis . Admiral Anderson was not ordered to disobey orders from McNamara .
 The CNO objected strongly to some of the tHeir decisions and to what he viewed as unwarranted intrusion into naval matters . He did not defy their authority, but did .
 "That was so tightly held--maybe they gave it to Taylor and he didn't pass it on down," she says . "Maybe they gave [Taylor] the gun," she adds .
 "There was a inadequacy, in my opinion, in that flow of information 3 to the chiefs. But there was an inadequacy," he said. "That was a lack of information, in our opinion, to the chief."
 The important point is that by not informing the JCS of political-diplomatic efforts at resolving the crisis, the President risked defeating his efforts to ensure that military operations supported his political objectives .
 The 07 07 \idetson, ""Reminiscences,"" 549. 3906 i ffin, “Reminicsences,” 555.3906 . The 07  The 07
 Vice Admiral Houser and Captain Carmichael both stated that the Chiefs did not appear to understand the President's political strategy or the escalation concerns of civilian leaders . The chiefs did not seem to understand President Obama's strategy, the two said .
 Such an understanding might have helped them anticipate operational problems that could have interfered with the President's crisis management strategy . Such a knowledge of the crisis might have led to a better understanding .
 Despite the scale of U.S. military and naval operations and the intensity of tactical-level interactions at sea, there were no serious instances of decoupled interactions involving naval forces . The U.N. Navy says it has never seen a similar level of interaction .
 There were no serious incidents between U.S. naval forces and Soviet or Cuban forces . No serious incidents were reported between the two countries .
 Most serious political-military tension was over centralized control of naval operations . The most serious political tensions was over central control of the navy .
 The United States sought to remain neutral in the conflict . The U.S. sought to avert Soviet intervention on behalf of the Arab nations .
 The war was over in only six days after a string of successful Israeli offensives . The war ended in just six days, with Israeli forces taking control .
 The United States Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean Sea was used to deter Soviet intervention in the conflict . The U.S. Sixth Fleet was used in the fight against Soviet intervention .
 Israel and neighboring Arab countries had been rising for years due to the Syrian-Jordanian effort to divert Jordan river water away from Israel . Beieedinian terrorist attacks on Israel have led to Israeli reprisal raids into Jordan and Syria .
 Israel struck early on 5 June with devastating air strikes on Egyptian air fields, followed by attacks on Syrian, Jordanian and Iraqi air fields . These moves appeared to confirm Israeli fears of imminent attack and Israel decided to ore-dnder .
 Israeli army units invaded the Sinai the morning of 5 June, reaching the Suez canal three days later . Israeli forces invaded Sinai on 5 June and reached Suez Canal three days after .
 Israel attacked Jordan in June, occupying all of Jerusalem and the West Bank in two days . Israel occupied Jordan in the days leading up to the attack, occupying Jerusalem and West Bank . Israel says it will never again attack Jordan again .
 Action on the Syrian front was limited to artillery duels and three small Syrian probes . Israel decided late on 7 June to attack the Golan Heights but then delayed the assault due to Arab acceptance of the United Nations ceasefire . Action on Syrian front limited to two small skirmishes .
 By the morning of 8 June Egyptian defenses in the Sinai had collapsed and Jordan had been knocked out of the war . Jordan was knocked out by the collapse of Egyptian defenses .
 There had been only sporadic fighting on the Syrian front during the first four days of the war .
 The United States strategy during the Six Day War was to act through the United Nations Security Council to achieve an early cease-~ fire . The U.S. strategy was to pressure Israel to accept the ceasefire and limit its . military objectives .
 The United States attempted to portray a neutral stance without officially declaring itself to be neutral . The U.S. has not officially declared itself as neutral .
 Arab nations have declared an embargo on oil shipments to the United States . This failed to placate the Arab nations, which declared an oil embargo on the U.S.
 United States diplomatic efforts favored Israel, but were not a grant of unlimited support . U.S. diplomatic efforts helped Israel but did not guarantee unlimited support for Israel . Israel was a major ally in the Middle East .
 The United States supported the United Nations ceasefire . The U.S. supported the U.N. ceasefire .
 President Johnson used the Soviet-American ""hot line" to communicate with Soviet leaders during the crisis . The system was the first use of the system for its intended purpose . The line was used by President Johnson during the Cold War .
 Soviet objectives in the crisis were to prevent its clients in the Middle East from suffering catastrophic defeats and expand its influence among Arab nations at the expense of the United States .
 As it became apparent that Israel was scoring a major triumph, the Soviet objective shifted to limiting the extent of Arab defeats and reducing the potential erosion of Soviet prestige in the Middle East .
 There are indications that the Soviets may even have helped provoke the war-by spreading rumors of imminent Israeli attacks . The Soviets may have helped spark the war by spreading rumors that Israel was about to attack .
 Soviet strategy during the war was to provide strong diplomatic support for the Arab nations . The Soviet strategy was to support Arab nations in the fight against the Nazis .
 When war broke out the Soviet Government immediately condemned Israeli ""aggression"" and demanded that Israeli forces withdraw from Arab territory as a condition for a ceasefire . The Soviet Government demanded that Israel withdraws its forces from Arab territories as a condition for a ceasefire.
 As the extent of the Arab losses became apparent, the Soviets dropped the weneeeyammasnind and supported an unconditional immediate ceasefire in order to forestall further Arab defeats . The Soviets also supported an immediate immediate ceasefire .
 The Soviets also sent a blunt warning to Israel, which Saat revealed in the U.N. Security Council .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union had limited objectives in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Both superpowers limited their roles primarily to political and diplomatic activities .
 Both superpowers used their naval forces in the Mediterranean for political signalling, as Will discuss below . Will be discussed below .
 In a direct superpower crisis the primary confrontation is between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The United States and Soviet Union are at odds in the world's first superpower crisis .
 In indirect superpower crisis the primary confrontation is between allies or clients of the U.S. and the Soviet Union . In an indirect crisis, the primary conflict is between the United States and its allies .
 By 1967 the military chain of command ran from the President to the Secretary of Defense, to the unified and specified commanders . Command and Control was the first major reorganization of the defense system .
 USCINCEUR was <a Pseuaone Allied Commander Europe commanding all NATO forces in and immediately around Europe . USCinceur was the Allied Commander of Europe .
 The Navy component commander under USCINCEUR was Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe , Admiral John S McCain, Jr., headquartered in London . Admiral McCain Jr. was the commander in charge of the Navy component .
 Commander Naval Forces Southern Europe is responsible for ASW operations in the Mediterranean . Commander Middle East Force was responsible for U.S. naval forces in the Persian Gulf . Commander Mideast Force was based in Naples, Italy .
 Of these commands, the Sixth Fleet played the most important role in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 Initially, this force was small, consisting aRryor two destroyer squadrons and some amphibious and support ships . Initially, it was a small force, consisting of two destroyers, two destroyer squadsrons, some support ships and some troops .
 In August 1946 the force was expanded and included the nearly constant presence of at least one attack carrier group . The force expanded in August 1946 .
 In the spring of 1967 TF 60 was commanded by Rear Admiral Laurence R Geis, embarked in USS America (CVA 66) TF 60 consisted of two Task Groups . TF 60 is now called TF 60 .
 Task Group 60. consisted of the USS America and six escorting destroyers . Task group 60. comprised six ships, six destroyers, six ships and six ships . Task Group was formed by USS America .
 Task Group 60. consisted of the USS Saratoga, the cruiser USS Galveston and four destroyers . Task group 60. comprised of the ships Saratog and four other ships . The task group was formed from the United States Navy .
 Sixth Fleet Task Force had a role in the crisis . Amphibious Force consisted of an amphibious ready group with an embarked Marine battalion landing team . Some 1,800 troops were on board .
 U.S. communications capabilities in 1967 had . improved over 1962, but still did not enable the President to directly control ships at sea . The President of the United States was still in control of the Navy .
 The primary communications links to the Sixth Fleet were the fleet's radioteletype broadcast and other HF channels from communications stations around the Mediterranean . The fleet's primary communications link was to the fleet fleet's fleet radio .
 Satellite communications had been introduced into the fleet on an eeeimengal basis in 1963 . The Sixth Fleet was still relying on HF communications . S including limited operational use in the Vietnam war).
 The Sixth Fleet had HF/SSB voice radio communications with local communications stations and shore-based headquarters in southern Europe . But had no capability to speak directly with the Pentagon or the White House .
 President Johnson and McNamara did not attempt to give orders directly to ships at sea . President Johnson did not .
 The White House Situation Room was unable to monitor Sixth Fleet operations real-time . The Sixth Fleet was deployed to the Persian Gulf in February .
 Wylie, Deputy Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe during the crisis, wrote to author, March 28, 1988 . Thomas H Moorer, Commander in . Chief of the . U.S. Naval . Forces Europe .
 Sixth Fleet movements were used on at least three occasions to send specific political signals to the Soviet Union . Admiral Horacio Rivero, Vice CNO during the crisis, states there was close control .
 Sixth Fleet movements geanerally were not under positive direct control . However, Sixth Fleet movement was not under direct control of the Sixth Fleet .
 There appear to be no instances in which the President countermanded an order given by Vice Admiral Martin . Rather, general geographic limits were placed on on the fleet's movements and control by negation was exercised .
 The President and Secretary of Defense did not use the mechanisms of indirect control to issue detailed operational guidance to the Sixth Fleet, the Pentagon says .
 Vice Admiral Donald D Engen, Commanding Officer of USS America during the crisis, said the carriers' movements and operations were not closely controlled from Washington . Engen said that the carriers operated in the vicinity of specific points rather than being allowed to roam freely .
 The restriction appears to have been imposed by the Navy chain of command in order to facilitate control of the carriers' movements in response to White House signalling efforts .
 The rules of engagement guidance refers to the standing CINCUSNAVEUR rules issued prior to the crisis . Rules of engagement were issued before the crisis began .
 See COMSIXTHFLT 0813202 JUN 67, naval message, June 6, 1967 (Unclassified) See COMFORT: "Navy News" for more details of the events .
 COMSIXTHFLT 081339Z JUN 67, naval message, June 6, 1967 (Declassified 1988. Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Washington, DC) COMSENDER: The message was sent to the U.S. Navy on June 6
 The 1967 June War was a watershed in the evolution of Soviet naval diplomacy, says Anthony Wells . As Anthony Wells observed, ""The 1967 June war was the beginning of the Russian naval diplomacy. As a result, the June 1967 war was a 'waterspinning' for the Soviet Union
 From mid-1964 onward the Soviet navy maintained a continuous presence in the Mediterranean . The Soviet navy was active in the mid-1960s and mid-1980s .
 The average daily force level rose from five ships in 1964 to fifteen ships in 1966 . In 1966, the number of ships in the fleet was 15 ships .
 The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron was not unusually active . It spent most time at anchor or in small-scale training exercises .
 The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron conducted close surveillance and aggressive intelligence collection against the Sixth Fleet . The squadron conducted ASW exercises in which simulated United States Polaris submarines were hunted down .
 The Soviets also began using their navy more frequently for political purposes, making port visits to friendly countries and moving ships to the vicinity of hot spots .
 In early May 1967 the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron was conducting routine operations and was at a normal 4125 Mm. In May 1967 it was at an altitude of 4125m .
 This was probably a routine deployment, perhaps a training cruise for cadets or recruits . This is probably the first time the U.S. military has been deployed to the Middle East .
 By May 22, however, Turkey had received notification from the Soviet Union that an additional ten ships would be passing through the Turkish Straits into the Mediterranean . The Soviet Union had also notified Turkey that ten more ships would pass through the Straits .
 Two or three Soviet attack submarines also thought to be in the Mediterranean . Soviet submarines are thought to have been in the area .
 There is no information available on Soviet submarine deployments during the crisis .
 Dismukes argues that it is reasonable to assume that the number of Soviet submarines in the Mediterranean would have increased proportional to the increase in surface combatants, but there is no evidence that this in fact occurred . Dismukes says it is possible to assume it would have occurred proportionately to increase in
 The central Mediterranean extends from the Strait of Sicily to the southern tip of Greece, including the Ionian and Adriatic Seas . The central part of the Mediterranean extends to the south end of Greece . The Ionian, Adratic and Ionian Seas are also included in the I
 The Sixth Fleet was directed to remain west of a line drawn from eastern Libya to the eastern end of Crete . Over two hundred miles from western Egypt, over four hundred . miles from the Suez Canal, and over six hundred miles . from Syria, the fleet was directed west of
 Sixth Fleet amphibious group was sailed from Naples to Malta for a port visit . Sixth Fleet was sailed to Malta in May .
 The amphibious group was standing by to evacuate U.S. citizens from the Middle East if the need arose . It was also capable of landing the Marines it carried .
 The Sixth Fleet is readied for a non-combat deterrence role in the event of war in the Middle East . On May 27 the JCS directed the Sixth Fleet to prepare for the role .
 The Navy's Middle East Force normally consisted of two destroyers and the flagship, a seaplane tender . The Middle East force was normally made up of destroyers .
 In mid-May the Navy had used the normal rotation of ships to reinforce the Middle East Force by delaying the departure of the destroyer .
 Commander Middle East Force was directed to move his four ships into the Red Sea . On May 23 he was directed by the commander to move four ships . The move was ordered by the Middle East force .
 Mediterranean extends from the southern tip of Greece eastward, including the Sea of Crete and the Aegean Sea . Mediterranean extends eastward to include Sea of Cyprus, Sea of Greece and Sea of France .
 Soviet-American Rivalry in the Middle East in the Mideast . Wylie, a former CIA operative, wrote a letter to author on March 28, 1988 .
 On June 3, the destroyer USS Dyess transited the Suez canal into the Red Sea . The ship transits the canal in a transiting moment .
 This was a routine rotation of ships, but resulted in further reinforcement of the Middle East Force . This was the first time the ships had been deployed to the Middle Eastern Force .
 There were no interactions between U.S. and Soviet naval units in the Red Sea during the Six Day war .
 The Soviet navy closely monitored Sixth Fleet move-~ ments on the eve of the crisis . The Soviet Navy closely monitored the situation .
 On about May 23 a Soviet intelligence collection ship began shadowing Saratoga . The ship was shadowed by the Soviet intelligence ship .
 On May 28 a Riga-class frigate began trailing America as she moved into the eastern Mediterranean .
 On June 4, a Kashin-class DDG took over trailing America and remained with the carrier through the start of the war . The ship was the first to take over the U.S. on June 4 .
 Two Soviet minesweepers were monitoring the British carrier HMS Victorious at Malta . The minesweeper was monitoring the carrier's carrier HMS Victory .
 America, accompanied by Little Rock, moved to a position south of Crete, leaving Saratoga north of the island . That night America and Little Rock were able to move to Crete . Little Rock was the last American to leave the island in 1945 .
 These were the dispositions of United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean when war erupted on June 5 . U.S. and Soviet forces were based in the eastern Mediterranean .
 When war broke out on June 5 the two U.S. carriers were operating in the vicinity of Crete .
 The Sixth Fleet remained in the Eastern Mediterranean to deter Soviet intervention, but kept readily discerned .
 Intrepid has been ordered to remain in the Mediterranean to reinforce the Sixth Fleet . The U.S. press reported on May 31 that the ship was ordered to stay .
 The United States Navy unit closest to the fighting on June 5 was a lone Navy carrier-based reconnaissance plane on a routine flight one hundred nautical miles off the coast of Egypt .
 The Sixth Fleet initially was ordered to remain at least one hundred nautical miles from the Syrian coast, but did not approach closer than about four hundred . nautical . miles .
 Carrier aircraft ordered to stay at least two hundred nautical miles from Egyptian and Israeli coasts . Carrier aircraft were ordered to remain at least 2.5 miles from Egypt and Israel coasts .
 The U.S. carriers were placed at an increased condition of readiness, which included doubling the number of aircraft ready for immediate launch and arming strike aircraft .
 The ships of the Sixth Fleet were ordered to readiness condition three, an internal Navy readiness designation unrelated to the JCS worldwide DEFCON system . The ships will be in readiness condition condition three .
 Navy ships were normally at ""Condition IV,"" defined as normal peacetime steaming . Navy ships would normally be at "Condition IV" Navy ships normally at condition IV .
 Vice Admiral Engen, Commanding Officer of America during the crisis, stated that "We used the embarked press corps to provide safety from misrepresentation" Vice Adm. Engen said that the press corps was used to protect the American from misrepresentations .
 The emphasis in Sixth Fleet operations was on demonstrating the United States intention to avoid involvement in the fighting . That was a United States tactic, ""427 Thus, the emphasis in sixth Fleet operations .
 On June 5 and 6 the two U.S. carrier groups steamed to the southeast .
 The only exception to the policy of continuing routine ports visits was that the JCS on May 27 cancelled all port visits for the two U.S. aircraft carriers .
 America remained at sea from May 22 to June 21--the longest the carrier had been at sea continuously since commissioning . The carrier was at sea for the longest time since it was commissioned in May .
 The White House took advantage of the repositioning as a means of showing the Russians, who were tailing the task forces, that the U.S. would not be intjoidated although it earnestly sought a UN solution .
 This episode illustrates that the White House was not exercising positive direct control over the movements of the carriers . The White House did not exercise any direct control of the carrier movements .
 The movement supported the President's political objectives, it was publicized and allowed to continue . Instead, because of the movement, the movement was publicized . The movement was allowed to be publicized and continue .
 Egypt claimed that U.S. and British carrier aircraft had assisted Israel in its initial air strikes on Egyptian airfields on June 6 . On June 6 Egypt claimed United States and British aircraft assisted Israel . Egypt said the aircraft were involved in the initial strikes .
 Egyptian President Nasser would later admit that no U.S. planes had attacked Egypt . Nasser later admitted that no United States planes attacked Egypt in Egypt .
 The U.S. carriers continued moving westward through June 8 . They reached a position southwest of Crete, Crete .
 On June 7 a suspected Soviet submarine was detected in the vicinity of the America task group . U.S. destroyers, ASW helicopters, and patrol planes tracked the suspected submarine .
 This incident could well have been sparked by the U.S. prosecution of a suspected Soviet submarine near the America task group . The incident could have been triggered by the United States prosecution of the suspected submarine .
 Vice Admiral Martin sent a message to the Soviet destroyer, warning it to clear the U.S. formation . In response to the incident, Vice Adm. Martin sent the message to Soviet destroyer .
 The America task group experienced the most severe Soviet harassment of the crisis of the 1950s . On June 1, 1950s, the task group was harassed by the Soviet Union .
 The Kashinclass DDG and a Mirka-class corvette maneuvered dangerously Close to America . They were attempting to force the carrier to change course while it was conducting flight operations .
 The Soviets have been known to harass U.S. ships prosecuting their submarines on other occasions .
 There had also been two serious incidents in the Sea of Japan on May 10 and il, when two Soviet destroyers collided with the destroyer USS Walker .
 This incident received front page headlines in the United States and was on the minds of Navy commanders in the Mediterranean . The incident was a major concern for the U.S. Navy commanders .
 Soviet harassment was more than an annoyance, it could well have led to a serious collision with an American warship . Soviet harassment could have been more than annoyance than annoyance, says historian .
 On June 8 the United States amphibious group with its embarked Marines departed Malta and steamed eastward toward the war zone . The U.S. amphibious force departed Malta on June 8 and headed eastward to the region .
 America and Little Rock moved eastward to provide assistance to USS Liberty, under attack off the Sinai coast . America, Little Rock also moved east to assist USS Liberty . USS Liberty was attacked by Sinai pirates off the coast of Egypt .
 On June 9, when America rendezvoused with Liberty, the carriers made their closest approach to the fighting . The carriers reached a position about one hundred nautical miles Posith of Alexandria, Egypt .
 The President also reduced the fleet's minimum distance to the Syrian coast from one hundred to fifty nautical miles . The minimum distance is $36 .
 We knew that Soviet intelligence ships were electronically monitoring the fleet's every movement . The fleet was electronically monitored by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Russian monitors observed the change in the fleet's pattern . We all knew the Russians would get the message as soon as their monitors did .
 The message was that the U.S. was prepared to resist Soviet intrusion into the Middle East . No translator would need to interpret the message to the Kremlin leadership .
 This was the most important instance of the Sixth Fleet being used to send a specific political signal . The Sixth Fleet was used in the 1980s to send an important message to the world .
 Israel apparently had no intention of seizing Damascus and soon stopped its advance into Syria . The Soviets made no military overt moves to carry out the threat .
 Most important Soviet naval activity during the crisis was trailing the United States carriers in the Mediterranean . The most important naval activity was trailing U.S. carriers .
 Saratoga was probably trailed by a Soviet intelligence ship from May 23 to June 13 . The ship is believed to have been tracked by the Soviet intelligence vessel .
 The Soviet navy also kept a Kotlin-class destroyer and two type T-43 minesweepers off Malta throughout the jaipeees . Although this close surveillance of the Sixth Fleet was conducted primarily for military purposes, it helped avert misperceptions of the fleet's role in
 Armed surface warships were frequently used as tattletales during the crisis . They had a higher top speed than intelligence ships and therefore were better able to keep up with U.S. carriers . Armed surface ships were used in the crisis because they had a faster top speed .
 The Soviet destroyers and frigates that were used as tattletales were not heavily armed, so they did not present a serious immediate threat to the carriers . They were not armed enough to pose a serious threat to carriers .
 Use of combatants rather than AGIs as tattletales “expresses increaseu Soviet interest, both military and political, in the force being shadowed’s shadowed, says Wells .
 The two Soviet cruise missile-armed ships occasionally moved to within missile range of the U.S. carriers . It is clear that they did not make a concerted effort to keep the carriers in their sights .
 Soviet Mediterranean Squadron carried out operations at a very low tempo . The Soviet Mediterranean squadron was based in the Soviet Mediterranean zone .
 Saratoga departed June 13, America departed June 14, and the amphibious group departed on June 15, respectively .
 Tactical-level interactions between U.S. and Soviet naval forces were intense during the crisis .
 Tensions at sea were acute on June 7 and 8 during U.S. prosecution of a Soviet submarine and Soviet harassment of the America carrier group .
 The U.S. and Soviet naval forces were in close proximity throughout the crisis . There were ample opportunities for inadvertent military incidents to occur between them .
 The Soviets also conducted an airlift of supplies to Syria and Egypt from June 8 te July 2 . The Soviets conducted a similar airlift operation in Egypt and Syria .
 Despite the intense tactical-level jneee tl eeton between U.S. and Soviet Naval forces, there were no incidents like those described above .
 No Soviet aircraft were encountered during the crisis, which is unusual for the Mediterranean . No Soviet planes were encountered .
 No Egyptian or Syrian vessels or aircraft were encountered during the crisis because the sixth Fleet was kept well clear of their coasts, #2"" There were very few accidents involving United States naval forces, and none serious enough to have an impact on Washington's ability to manage the crisis .
 Only mishap of the crisis was perpetrated by the nation that the U.S. supported in the war . Thus, ironically, the only mishap was that of the nation .
 The Johnson Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet .
 President or McNamara made no effort to provide specialized guidance in mechanisms of indirect control, other than limitations on how close the fleet could approach the coasts of the belligerents .
 The America carrier group experienced severe Soviet harassment on June 8 . The Ox-idene commanders were guided by standing Navy policies for handling such situations .
 Standing orders and rules of engagement played a crucial role in determining the nature of the interactions that occurred . There was significant delegation of authority to on-scene commanders, Navy says .
 Soviet and U.S. naval forces were tightly coupled during the crisis . Thus, Soviet and American naval forces had a strong relationship .
 The Johnson Administration used the Sixth Fleet to signal the U.S. intention not to intervene in the crisis . The fleet also used the fleet to warn the Soviets against direct military intervention in the conflict .
 The Soviet Union also conveyed political signals by rapidly building up its Mediterranean squadron, shadowing the Sixth Fleet, and keeping the bulk of the squadron well clear of the fighting . The majority of the Soviet squadron was kept clear of fighting and the Sixth .
 The 1967 Arab-Israeli War was the first crisis in which both superpowers actively used their mavies for political signalling . Both superpowers were involved in the conflict in the Arab Arab Spring .
 President Johnson had no control over whether or not the Soviet harassment of America on June 8 would produce a clash between the U.S. and Soviet navies . For example, President Johnson did not have control over the outcome of the June 8 incident .
 The stratified interaction model of international crises in which interactions evolve in separate, semi-independent sequences at the political, strategic, and tactical levels offers a good description of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 President Johnson had to rely more on command by negation and delegated command than did President Kennedy . President Kennedy relied more heavily on command than President Johnson did .
 The Sixth Fleet reacted to the attack on Liberty hours before it received instructions from the Washington .
 The President could not tell Rear Admiral Geis or Captain Engen how to handle the Soviet ships harassing America and her escorts . Similarly, the President was not able to tell the Soviets how to deal with their ships .
 The other potential causes of decoupling--impairment of political decisionmaking, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders--did not have an observable impact on the crisis .
 The second requirement for establishing that interactions became decoupled during a crisis is that operational decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differed from the decisions that political-level . decision-~ makers would have made in order to coordinate military operations with their political-diplomatic strategy .
 Divergence between tactical-level military operations and political-level objectives was not a problem during the crisis . Divergence from tactical operations to political goals was not an issue during that time .
 On-scene commanders were often making operational decisions on their own authority . Their decisions generally supported the President's political objectives . Commanders often made their own decisions to support the President .
 Sixth Fleet uniiebhte on June 6, taken on the initiative of Rear Admiral Geis, sent the political signal the President wanted to send at that moment, even though he had not ordered the movement .
 Navy commanders were determined not to be intimidated by the dangerous maneuvering of the Soviet ships, even at the risk of a collision .
 Vice Admiral Martin sent stern warning to Soviet destroyer . The game of chicken may not have been the types of actions President Johnson desired for managing tensions .
 There is no evidence that he disapproved of how the Navy commanders handled the situation . There were no collisions or shots fired, so even this incident is not a clear case of decoupling .
 Threat perceptions were not acute at any level of the chain of command . Officials in Washington were more concerned about the Soviet Navy than were the onscene commanders .
 Navy on-scene commanders perceived the Soviet threat to the Sixth Fleet to be less dangerous than did civilian officials in Washington .
 Threat perceptions and the security dilemma were not stratified during the crisis . Threat perceptions of the crisis were not as stratified as they were in the 1980s .
 There were intense tactical-level interactions during the crisis, but no cases of such interactions generating an escalation sequence the President could not control .
 The most dangerous interactions took place on June 7 and 8 during Soviet harassment of America and her escorts . America and escorts were harassed by the Soviet Union .
 A second Soviet ship joined the harassment on the second day, but did not escalate to violence . This interaction sequence did escalate, in the sense that a second ship joined .
 Navy commanders knew that there were no Soviet tactical aircraft or torpedo boats in the Mediterranean and therefore did not suspect the Soviets of the attack . The attack was the first time the U.S. Navy was attacked by the Soviets .
 Rivero, Wylie, Engen, Rivero and Engen wrote letters to author in 1988 . Rivero wrote to author from 1988 to 1988 .
 Naval commanders on both sides were determined not to be intimidated . They were cautious to avoid collisions .
 Their caution arose not so much from concern over the political repercussions of an incident, but from the prudence any good seaman would show under the circumstances . The incident occurred in the early hours of December 31, 2012 .
 Even deliberate collisions for signaling purposes are performed with great caution . Collisions at sea are extremely dangerous, so that even deliberate collisions are performed very carefully . Collision at sea is extremely dangerous .
 The first factor inhibiting escalation was caution on the part of U.S. leaders in the Middle East . The restrictions were placed on Sixth Fleet movements and on potentially serious incidents .
 The June 7-8 harassment incident stands out because it was entirely different from the behavior of the Soviet navy during the rest of the crisis . The incident stood out because of the behavior .
 Both this frigate and a Soviet AGI following Saratoga frequently maneeetad inside the United States formations . The practice is a dangerous practice when carrier groups maneuver to conduct flight operations .
 Two Soviet destroyers armed with anti-ship cruise missiles rarely were in the vicinity of the U.S. carriers . In fact, the two destroyers rarely were seen in the area of the United States carriers .
 Soviet submarines also appear to have maintained a low profile . No Soviet long-range strike aircraft were detected during the crisis .
 Soviet caution was an important factor in the lack of escalation during particularly intense interactions at sea . This Soviet caution led to a lack of escalating during intense interactions with the Soviet Union .
 U.S. Navy commanders could tolerate a certain —— of indiscretion by individual Soviet ships because it was not part of a pattern of harassment and did not appear to presage a Soviet pre-emptive attack .
 The third factor inhibiting escalation was the tight coupling between U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean .
 Sixth Fleet carrier aircraft and patrol planes kept Vice Admiral Martin informed of the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron's operations and movements .
 Soviet tattletales probably kept Moscow informed of Sixth Fleet operations and movements on a near real-time basis . The Sixth Fleet is believed to be one of the world's most powerful naval vessels .
 The signal the U.S. and Soviets were sending with their fleets was one of non-involvement in the hostilities . Overall, this was beneficial for crisis management because of the signal the two countries were sending .
 When Soviet ships harassed America, Vice Admiral Martin knew it was an isolated act . The rest of the Soviet squadron was operating normally, he said .
 Vice Admiral Martin knew that the Soviets probably were not responsible because he knew where their ships were and that they did not have any tactical aircraft over the Mediterranean . When Israel attacked Liberty, he knew that they probably were probably not responsible .
 Tight coupling is generally perceived as increasing the danger of escalation in crises . It can also reduce the likelihood of escalation when both sides are attempting to avoid involvement in a local conflict . Tight coupling can reduce the risk of escalation if both sides want to avoid it .
 The fourth factor inhibiting escalation was use of the Soviet-American hot line . Use of the hot line was also a factor in preventing escalation .
 President Johnson's use of the hot line to warn the Soviets of the U.S. response to the attack on Liberty ensured that Soviet leaders would not misperceive the purpose of the sudden launch of carrier aircraft and America's sprint toward Sinai .
 The hot line was used to dampen the potential negative effects of tight coupling between U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . It was used in the 1980s to prevent any negative effects .
 The hot line was used as a means for conveying political messages . Ironically, while tight coupling of the naval forces in the Mediterranean increased the need for the hot line .
 Soviet and American leaders could verify the veracity of statements made by the other side by comparing them with reports on other side's naval operations . Soviet and U.S. leaders were able to verify veracity .
 The essential requirement for this synergistic relationship to exist was careful coordination of naval operations with political objectives and diplomatic initiatives, says the U.S. Navy chief .
 The United States and the Soviet Union were largely successful in achieving such coordination . The U.S. and Soviet Union was largely successful .
 American policy was designed to use a military show of force to convince Nasser that he should reopen the Strait of Tiran and defuse tensions .
 This was to be accomplished by a series of careful moves and ""signals"" to the Egyptian Government . The Egyptian government was to make the move to Egypt .
 The moves were indeed observed by the Arab governments, but the signals were misinterpreted in the atmosphere of tension and distrust . The move was seen by Arab governments but misinterpreted, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Arab leaders believed U.S. forces were behind the attack on Syria . Syrian President Nasser's reference to the 6th Fleet (May 29) led to the attack . Arab leaders often disregard subtle evidence to the contrary .
 The U.S. policy did not succeed and provided the grounds for making the United States the scapegoat, for a situation it had tried desperately to prevent . Thus, the American policy failed and, in fact, provided the . grounds for . making the . United States a scapegoat
 In mid-May a third destroyer was added to the force, on May 23 the force was ordered into the Red Sea, and on June 3 a fourth was added . The force has now been ordered to a total of four .
 The credibility of these U.S. naval moves can be questioned, given President Johnson's reluctance to act unilaterally in the Strait of Tiran . 4t is certainly plausible that Egyptian President Nasser and other Arab leaders would view the moves as threatening .
 Egypt would later claim--either thinking it was true or knowing it was false--that United States carrier aircraft had attacked Egypt . Given such suspicions of U.S. intentions on the eve of the war, it is not surprising that Egypt would claim the attack was false .
 Sixth Fleet and Middle East Force movements in May, intended to support President's efforts to pressure Nasser into reopening the Strait of Tiran, thus sent an inadvertent signal of hostility to the Arab Nations .
 The inadvertent hostile signal would lead Arab leaders to assume U.S. hostility after war broke out . Arab leaders would assume United States hostility following war, experts say .
 There were no inadvertent military incidents that seriously affected United States afferts to manage the crisis . It lent credibility to Arab claims of American complicity in the Israeli attacks--claims that contributed to serious deterioration in U.S. relations with the Arab .
 The second most serious incident of the crisis was the harassment of America by two Soviet ships on June 7 and 8 . Two Soviet ships were harassed by the U.S. during the crisis .
 The absence of serious inadvertent incidents was largely due to the cautious manner in which the two superpowers conducted naval operations in the Mediterranean . This was largely because of the cautious way in which they conducted operations .
 Although there were relatively intense interactions between the two sides, the interactions could have been much more intense and dangerous than they actually were . The interactions were more intense than they were expected .
 The most important factor in avoiding incidents that could complicate crisis management is leaders' decisions . Leaders should moderate the intensity of tactical-level interactions and limit the tensions that would arise from those interactions .
 There was moderate tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining and military considerations . This arose primarily from restrictions placed on movements of the Sixth Fleet carriers and the efforts to use their movements for political signalling .
 The restrictions on the carriers did not impose unreasonable limitations on their ability to carry out their immediate mission . On the other hand, the restrictions were not unreasonable, the government said .
 The restrictions were disregarded by the on-scene commander when it was necessary to respond to the attack on the Liberty . Further, the restrictions on responding to the attacks on Liberty was disregarded .
 Vice Admiral Martin, on his own authority, launched aircraft to defend the ship and ordered America to close the scene at best speed .
 Both actions required violation of the geographic restrictions placed on the Sixth Fleet . Both actions occurred in violation of those restrictions .
 The President soon authorized the actions Vice Admiral Martin had already initiated .
 The tension between political and military considerations was not serious . Thus, the tension is not serious, the author says .
 There was only moderate tension between top-level control of military operations and tactical flexibility and initiative at the scene of the crisis .
 The carrier force commanders were not happy about this control of their operations, but it did not seriously interfere with their ability to carry out their mission . It did not interfere with the carrier force commander's duties .
 There was very little tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions . The U.S. military says it is ready to perform war-ready missions .
 Sixth Fleet operations during the crisis Gid not seriously detract from the fleet's readiness for wartime contingencies . Gid: "Gid not serious detracts from the . readiness for war contingencies"
 The carrier force commanders would have preferred to make Soviet efforts to track and target the carriers as difficult as possible . The carriers were attacked by Soviet aircraft carriers .
 This is a crucial consideration in wartime operations, but one that conflicts with political crisis management considerations . The U.S. government has been in touch with the U.N. since 2001 .
 There were intense interactions between U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . There were few instances of decoupled interactions between the two nations .
 The overall pattern was one of parallel stratified interactions with occasional momentary decoupling . It was found to be one of the most complex interactions in the world's history .
 The only aspect of naval operations that was closely controlled was the movement of the Sixth fleet in the Mediterranean . The Sixth fleet was the only part of the operation closely controlled .
 Control by negation was exercised over other aspects of Sixth Fleet operations . No instances of orders issued by the on-scene commander being countermanded by the White House .
 U.S. and Soviet naval forces were tightly coupled during the crisis . There were no serious incidents between the two countries .
 The Fourth Arab-Israeli War erupted in October 1973 . Egypt launched a surprise attack on Israeli positions on the east bank of the Suez Canal and Syria attacked Israeli positions . After initial setbacks, Israel launched devastating counterattacks .
 This precipitated a Soviet threat to intervene in the war, backed by mobilization of airborne forces . The Soviet threat was backed by mobilized airborne forces, according to a report .
 The Sixth Fleet played an important role in U.S. foreign policy, supporting the airlift and countering Soviet military threats . The fleet played a key role in the United States foreign policy .
 The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron also played an active role in the crisis, demonstrating Soviet concerns and politically countering the Sixth Fleet .
 The 1973 Arab-Israeli War was the first major crisis in the era of Soviet-American detente . The Arab-Israel War was a major conflict between Israel and the U.S.
 Detente had been inaugurated ceremonially at the May 1972 Nixon-Brezhnev summit in Moscow . Detente was inaugurated at the Nixon- Brezhnevs summit in 1972 .
 The two leaders signed the ABM Treaty, the Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms, and the Basic Principles Agreement .
 American involvement in the Indochina War began winding down early the next year . The war, long a source of tension in Soviet-American relations, was winding down in Vietnam .
 On January 27, 1973 the U.S.-North Vietnamese peace treaty was signed . The last United States troops left South Vietnam in February 1973 . In February 1973 the last American troops left the country .
 The second Nixon-Brezhnev summit was held in Washington and San Clemente in June 1973 . Nixon and Brezhnevs met in Washington, California, in 1973 and 1973 .
 The two leaders signed the Agreement on Prevention of Nuclear War . Among other provisions, it called for consultations between the superpowers in the event of nuclear accidents or third party nuclear threats .
 Soviet-American relations in 1973 were thus much better than they had been in the three previous crises examined in this study . Relations between the two countries were much better in 1973 than in previous crises .
 The agreement committed both sides to respect the international rules of the road for preventing collisions at sea . It also provided guidance for situations unique to naval forces (such as formations of ships) that were not adequately covered by international rules . The agreement was signed by both sides .
 Beginning in 1960, there had been a long series of incidents between U.S. and Soviet naval vessels, including collisions .
 The Incidents ae Sea Agreement was intended to prevent such incidents in the future . The agreement was agreed to prevent future incidents of such incidents .
 At the first annual review, held May 1973, a protocol to the agreement was signed that expanded its provisions . The first review was held in May 1973 . The protocol was signed in 1973 .
 As of October 1973, there had been no high-intensity superpower naval operations that seriously tested the Incidents at Sea Agreement . As of Oct. 1973, the agreement had been reached .
 From 1969 to late 1970, Egypt engaged Israel in a war of attrition along the Suez Canal . The war lasted between Egypt and Israel between 1969 and 1970 .
 Egyptian President Nasser's death in September 1970 did not lessen tensions with Israel . Nasser died in Cairo, Egypt in 1970 .
 Sadat committed himself to war with Israel if there was no progress toward a political solution . His successor, Anwar Sadat, pledged to go to war if there were no progress in a solution . Sadat's successor, Sadat: "Anwar's war is not over"
 Sadat expelled almost all Soviet military advisors from Egypt in July 1972 . The move was apparently prompted by Soviet efforts to restrain Egypt from resorting to force against Israel .
 In October 1972 Sadat ordered the army to begin planning an offensive to seize the east bank of the Suez Canal . Sadat replaced the top military leadership and ordered an offensive . The Suez canal was captured in 1972 .
 In early 1973, Sadat asked the Soviet Union to resume arms shipments to Egypt . Sadat was frustrated over lack of progress in the diplomatic arena . The Soviet Union responded to Sadat's request .
 U.S. policy in 1972 and 1973 was designed to maintain a stalemate between Israel and her Arab neighbors . Henry Kissinger believed that would erode Soviet influence and perhaps move Arab nations to seek improved relations with the united States .
 Heavy attrition of Israeli forces and a quick U.N. ceasefire backed by the superpowers were expected to move the conflict to the bargaining table before Israel would be able to dislodge Egyptian and Syrian forces .
 Success in achieving these limited objectives would destroy Israel's image of military invulnerability, restore Arab confidence and pride, and increase Arab credibility and influence with the superpowers . Success in this would destroy the image of Israel's military invulnerable .
 Sinai and Golan Heights would allow Egypt and Syria to negotiate from strength and force Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories on Arab terms . These psychological and political victories, and possession of strategic positions, would allow them to negotiate .
 They succeeded in achieving surprise and gaining ground on both fronts, inflicting heavy losses on Israeli ground and air forces . Israeli ground forces suffered heavy losses in the battle .
 Beginning October 8 Israel peanter sttactns on both fronts, driving Syrian forces from the Golan Heights by October 10, but suffering a defeat in the Sinai .
 Israeli forces met stiff resistance from Syrian forces (reinforced with Iraqi and Jordanian units) on October 13 . Israeli forces halted the offensive and consolidated defensive positions .
 Syria agreed to a ceasefire with the United Nations on October 23 . There was only sporadic fighting on the Syrian front thereafter . The United Nations agreed to the ceasefire in October .
 On October 14, Egypt launched a major offensive in the Sinai in order to iciicioats Israeli pressure on Syria . Egypt launched an offensive in Sinai to put pressure on the Syrian government .
 Israel quickly halted the Egyptian offensive and launched a counteroffensive on October 15 . The Egyptian offensive was halted by Israel and a counter offensive was launched by Israel . Egypt has been fighting an Egyptian offensive since then .
 Israeli armored units crossed the Suez Canal in small numbers on October 15 and 16, and in strength on October 17 . They threatened to cutoff Egyptian forces on the east bank of the canal .
 October 22, but the fighting did not stop and Israeli forces continued advancing in Egypt . The fighting continued in Egypt on October 22 .
 A second UN-sponsored ceasefire was set for 7:00 A.M. on October 24, but again the fighting failed to stop . Israel continued its offensive, surrounding the Egyptian Third Army . The Egyptian army is surrounded by the Egyptian army .
 Each side blamed the other for the initial failure of these two ceasefires to take hold .
 On October 25 Israeli-Egyptian fighting tapered off and a fragile cease-fire he1a. 25-hour ceasefire began on October 25 .
 The United States was brought’ into the confrontation through its support of Israel and the Soviet Union was brought into the . confrontation through support of Egypt and Syria . The U.S. was brought in by the . support of . Israel .
 The period of greatest superpower tension in the crisis (October 2425), resulted from actions taken by the local participants that éont Brant arrangements made by the superpowers to resolve the crisis . The superpowers had to be concerned about the behavior of their emtenes . This meant that
 The priorities of these objectives shifted during the crisis as circumstances in the Middle East changed . The priorities in the Mideast crisis shifted during this year's crisis, say officials .
 Nixon and Kissinger believed this would create the most conducive circumstances for post-war Giplomacy . President Nixon and Secretary Kissinger believed it would create a most conducive environment for post war Giplomas .
 The other major aspect of the United States strategy was to avoid a confrontation with the Soviet Union and to work in conjunction with the Soviets to resolve the crisis . The U.S. strategy was also to appear to be working with the Russians while attempting to limit their role in the Middle East
 This strategy remained consistent throughout the crisis, although the tactics used to pursue it changed significantly as U.S. perceptions of Israel's military situation changed .
 Some observers claim that U.S. leaders were concerned that Israel would use its nuclear weapons capability if threatened with a catastrophic defeat . The United States therefore had the objective of averting this possibility, they say .
 Additional Soviet objectives were to be able to take credit for Arab victories or for averting catastrophic defeat of Syria and Egypt, and to terminate the war under circumstances that would give the Soviet Union a central (or at lest a more important) role in post-war negotiations .
 The Soviet Union, like the U.S. had complex and contradictory objectives, had complex objectives . The United States and the Soviet Union had contradictory objectives .
 Attempting to maintain detente within the U.S. while increasing Soviet — in the Middle East at the expense of the United States was a particularly G@ifficult combination of objectives .
 It does not appear that the Soviet leaders believed, Tt . to the outbreak of the war, that another Arab-Israeli war would necessarily serve their interests in the Mideast .
 The Soviets appear to have sought what gains they could accrue from a conflict they could not avert without serious erosion of their influence among Arab nations . Rather, they appear to be seeking what gains could be gained from the conflict they couldn't avert .
 At this point, Arab nations would have their greatest bargaining leverege against Israel . At this time, Israel would have its greatest bargaining power against the Arab nations .
 The initial Soviet ceasefire proposal called for Israel to return to pre-1967 boundaries . To curry favor with the Arab nations, the initial Soviet Ceasey called for the return of pre- 1967 boundaries . The proposal was rejected by Israel's Arab neighbors .
 The third element was to resupply Egypt and Syria with sufficient military equipment to maintain an image of solidarity with the Arab cause . Israel must forestall a decisive Israeli victory, says Israel's ambassador to Egypt .
 An additional, minor element in the Soviet strategy was to encourage other Arab nations to assist Egypt and Syria in the war against Israel . The Soviet strategy also encouraged other Arab countries to assist in the conflict .
 Jordan and Iraq sent troops to the Syrian front during the war, demonstrating at least some Arab solidarity . Jordan, Iraq and Syria are the only Arab nations to send troops to Syria .
 Kissinger warned the Israelis not to pre-empt and attempted to forestall the Arab attack . Kissinger also attempted to prevent the Arab invasion of Israel .
 Initially, the United States was slow in pursuing a ceasefire in the UN Security Council, believing that Israel would soon turn the tide of battle . The U.S. was slow to pursue a ceasefire, believing Israel would turn the battle around .
 The United States maintained a low profile, evenhanded approach so as not to alienate the Arab nations . The U.S. maintained a . low profile . approach to the situation .
 The United States also sought to act in conjunction with the Soviet Union, rather than unilaterally, in the UN Security Council . The U.S. sought the support of the Soviets rather than unilateral action .
 The initial United States proposal was to be for a ceasefire based on the status quo ante . It was timed to go into effect after Israel had repulsed the invading armies . The initial U.S. proposal was based on a ceasefire .
 The Soviets reportedly sought Egyptian agreement for a ceasefire in place as early as October 6, a proposal the Egyptians ei aki dal . On October 7 the United States and the Soviet Union agreed in principle to a a a fire and the Soviets reassured the U.S. that they
 Through October 8 U.S. leaders believed, based on Israeli reports, that Israel would soon prevail over Egypt and Syria . They believed that low-profile resupply of Israel and diplomacy were all the actions the United States needed to take .
 Soviet-American tensions started rising during the October 9-12 period . Soviets-Americans tensions were high during that period .
 Israel's resupply requests became more urgent on October 9 . Israel revealed that it had suffered massive losses of tanks and aircraft in the first three days of the battle .
 On October 9 President Nixon approved Israel's requests for increased resupply and post-war replacement of all Israeli battlefield losses . For the next three days United States supplies were carried only in Israeli Planes .
 The Soviet Union had been delivering military supplies to Syria by sealift from the start of the war . Gmegced an airlift to Egypt the next day and began a sealift on October 10 .
 The United States rejected this proposal and sought to delay UN action on a ceasefire until Israel gained the upper hand on the battlefield . The U.S. rejected the proposal . Israel has been fighting in the Syrian conflict since 2006 .
 On October 10 or 11, in response to Israeli advances into Syrian territory, the Soviet Union placed three airborne divisions on alert . Israel invaded Syrian territory in the 1980s .
 That same day Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin warned Kissinger that the Soviet Union might intervene if Israel continued advancing on Damascus . Kissinger was warned that Israel's advance on Damascus would lead to an Israeli strike .
 Kissinger warned Dobrynin that the U.S. would resist Soviet intervention with force . Kissinger, in turn, said the United States would resist the Soviet intervention . Kissinger: "The United States will resist Russia with force"
 Israel informed the United States on October 12 that it would accept a ceasefire in place, but preferred that the UN resolution not-.be voted on for another day . Israel told the U.S. that it wanted that the vote on a ceasefire not-be-voted on October 13
 The United States also proposed to the Soviet Union a ceasefire in place linked to reaffirmation of UN Security Council Resolution 242, rather to Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories . The U.S. also proposed a ceasefire link to reaffirming UN Security . Resolution 242 .
 Egypt launched a major offensive in the Sinai in order to relieve pressure on Syria . Egypt launched the offensive on October 14 to relieve Syrian pressure . The Sinai offensive was launched in response to the Syrian conflict .
 Israel quickly halted the offensive, launched a counter-offensive on October 15, ania sent troops across the Suez Canal in small numbers on October 16 . Ania also sent troops into the canal in a small number of small numbers, Israel said .
 Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited Egypt October 16 and urged Sadat to agree to a ceasefire in place . The Soviet Premier visited Sadat on October 16 .
 The next day the Soviet Union expressed to the U.S. its support for a ceasefire in place . The Soviet Union also expressed support for the ceasefire .
 Arab oil exporting nations announced on October 17 a production cutback and price increase, to be followed by additional cutbacks until Israel withdraws from the occupied territories . The Arab oil exporter nations announced the cutsback and increase in production .
 Israeli armored units crossed the Suez Canal in strength in strength on October 17 . Israeli forces crossed the canal in strength .
 In response, the Soviet Union on October 18 began pressing for a ceasefire in place . The Soviet Union pressed for a cease-fire .
 As of October 18 the conditions that the U.S. had originally thought appropriate for a ceasefire were emerging . Thus, as of Oct. 18, the conditions were emerging for the ceasefire .
 Kissinger held initial discussions with Brezhnev late on October 20 . Kissinger flew to Moscow early the next morning and held initial talks with him . Kissinger traveled to Moscow to meet with the Soviet Union's leader .
 Nixon Administration submitted a $2.2 billion dollar aid package for Israel to Congress . Nixon administration submitted the package to Congress October 19 .
 Saudi Arabia joins embargo on oil shipments to the United States . Saudi Arabia announced on October 20 that it was joining the embargo . The embargo is a serious setback for U.S. foreign policy .
 On October 21 Kissinger reached a ceasefire agreement with the Soviets, which was to be presented to the UN Security Council that evening . Kissinger reached the agreement that night . Kissinger was the last president of the Soviet Union in the Cold War .
 The Soviet-~American ceasefire proposal, Resolution 338, was passed by the Security Council at 12:50 A.M. on October 22 . Resolution 338 was passed in a vote of the U.N. Security Council .
 Kissinger left Moscow that morning for Israel to explain the Soviet-American agreement to Israeli leaders . Kissinger left Russia that morning to explain to Israel that the agreement was made .
 The ceasefire was supposed to go into effect at 6:50 P.M. on October 22 . But Israeli forces in Egypt continued advancing, allegedly after Egyptian violations of the ceasefire .
 On October 23 Israeli forces cut the final supply line to the Egyptian Third Army, totally surrounding it . The Egyptian army is surrounded by Israeli forces .
 Egypt requested United States and Soviet troops to enforce the ceasefire on October 24 after Israel surrounded the Egyptian Third Army . Egypt requested the U.S. and Soviet forces to enforce a ceasefire . Israel surrounded Egypt's Third Army in October 24 .
 Brezhnev sent a letter to Nixon threatening unilateral intervention if the U.S. refused to participate . The Soviet Union began assembling its seven alerted airborne divisions at airfields for immediate deployment .
 The United States rejected the Egyptian proposal and warned the Soviets against unilateral intervention . The Egyptian proposal was rejected by the United States .
 At 12:25 A.M. on October 25, the United States set DEFCON 3 worldwide and readied the 82nd Airborne Division for immediate deployment to the Middle East . The U.S. set the alarm at 12:30 a.m. on Oct.
 Within hours the alert had been detected by the U.S. by the American press . The American press speculated on whether the move was warranted or motivated by domestic politics .
 As of October 31 it appeared that the Soviet airborne divisions had also returned to normal peacetime readiness, thus greatly reducing the poseibility of a superpower confrontation . Meanwhile, as of Oct. 31, it appears that the . Soviet airborne . divisions also appeared to have returned to . normal peac
 Admiral Thomas H Moorer was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . Admiral Elmo R Zumwalt, Jr., was Chief of Naval Operations . Admiral Worth H Bagley was CINCUSNAVEUR . Vice Admiral Daniel J Murphy was Commander Sixth Fleet .
 The principle advisory body during the crisis was the Washington Special Action Group . The panel was created by Kissinger within the National Security Council framework . Kissinger created the panel in 1973 .
 Kissinger was the principle link to the President, directly and through White House Chief of Staff Alexander Haig . Kissinger was a key adviser to President George W. Bush during his presidency .
 U.S. communications capabilities have improved significantly since 1967 . United States communications capabilities had improved significantly in 1967 .
 Two major developments were automated message processing at communications centers ashore and satellite communications . The two major developments came in the 1980s .
 Manual message processing, rather than radio propagation problems, typically caused the bulk of message transmission delays . Manual processing of messages is more likely to cause delays .
 Automated message processing and routing was being achieved through integration of Navy communications stations into the Naval Communications Processing and Routing System . The Common User Digital Information Exchange System was installed at NAVCOMPARS master stations .
 Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 173.7177 installed in only a small number of key ships . Quendt: "I'm not going to give up on this, I'm not giving up on it. I'm going to do it. It's a
 Sixth Fleet flagship USS Little Rock, aircraft carriers USS Franklin D Roosevelt, USS Independence and USS John F Kennedy had satellite communications terminals . USS Mount Whitney had satellite communication terminals .
 Satellite communications provided rapid, reliable encrypted teletype and secure © voice channels to Navy NAVCOMPARS stations ashore and to the Department of Defense .
 President in the White House had the capability to speak directly with Navy commanders embarked in ships equipped with satellite communications terminals . If he shose to do so, he could speak directly to Navy commanders .
 The remainder of the ships in the Sixth Fleet still se4ee on high frequency communications . eGainitdiedtiona.com .
 The only aspect of Sixth Fleet operations that was were under positive direct control by the White House was the location of the fleet in the Mediterranean .
 In addition to the overall effort to 471) amiral Thomas H Moorer, interview by author, February 9, 1988, 472, amiral Elmo R Zumwalt . 472 (Amiral 472) was amiral John Defterios of the U
 Admiral Donald D Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988. A Memoir , 436. 8735 ce ce ce . Admiral Engen's memoir was published in 1988 .
 Control of the Sixth Fleet operations was delegated to the chain of command . Other than movements of the fleet in the Mediterranean, control of the Fleet was delegated .
 Nixon and Schlesinger did not attempt to give orders directly to CINCUSNAVEUR, COMSIXTHFLT, or ships at sea . Nixon did not try to order Cincusnaveur, COMIXTH FLT or ships in sea .
 Nixon, Schlesinger, and Kissinger paid little attention to the guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated control, and did not use eae ee mechanisms to issue detailed operational guidance .
 General rules of engagement were spelled out in the JCS, with overall approval coming from Kissinger . Kissinger approved of the rules, with approval of JCS coming from JCS .
 It does not appear that any special mis-sion orders were issued for the crisis, other ‘than for support of the United States airlift to Israel .
 Contingency plans did not play a major role in the execution of U.S. naval operations during the crisis . Contingencies were not a major part of the United States Navy's operations .
 The plan was never executed because the Soviets backed down from a confrontation later that day . This plan was not executed because of the Soviets backing down from an earlier confrontation . The Soviet Union backed down on the plan because of a confrontation .
 The United States also had contingency plans for various types of military operations in the Middle East, such as evacuation of American citizens, but none were executed .
 The most important mechanism of delegated control during the crisis was the U.S. alert system . The United States alert system was an important part of the crisis .
 Schlesinger states that the decision on “enhanced readiness status” was made at 11:30 P.M. on October 24 during a WSAG meeting .
 Admiral Moorer states that he arrived at the White House at about midnight and DEFCON 3 was set shortly thereafter . Moorer says he arrived on the scene about midnight . He says DEFCon 3 was soon set shortly after .
 Admiral Zumwalt states that DEFCON 3 was set worldwide at 12:25 A.M. on October 25 . The DEFCon 3 is set to be set at 12.25 a.m. EST EST EST .
 Quandt states that the first orders for the alert were issued at about midnight and that the scope of the alert was widened at 1:30 A.M. on October 25 . The alert was issued about midnight on October 24 .
 The most likely sequence of events was that the decision to set DEFCON 3 was made at about 11:30 P.M. on October 24 during the WSAG meeting . The decision was likely made during that meeting .
 Setting DEFCON 3 had little effect on the Sixth Fleet, which was already at a high condition of readiness . The Sixth Fleet was already in a high state of readiness.
 The threat of Soviet military intervention soon subsided and U.S. forces quickly returned to normal peacetime readiness .
 Schlesinger then waited until he could consult Admiral Moorer before issuing alert orders . Schlesingers then waited to consult with Moorer to issue the alert .
 The message order setting DEFCON 3 worldwide was sent at 12:25m. on October 25 . The order was sent to set the alarm at 12.25m .
 At 1:25 A.M., specific orders were issued to the Sixth Fleet and the 82nd airborne division was alerted for immediate deployment to the Middle East . The 82nd was alerted to immediate deployment in the region .
 The Soviets routinely deployed their most modern vessels to the Mediterranean Squadron . The Mediterranean Squadron was the most capable Soviet naval force outside Soviet home waters .
 Most of the Soviet squadron was kept in the eastern Mediterranean, with surveillance patrols monitoring the Strait of Gibralter (including the U.S. naval base at Rota, Spain) and Strait of Sicily .
 Soviet ships began using the Egyptian port of Alexandria as a base in October 1967 . Soviet naval aircraft began using Egyptian airfields in May 1968 . Egyptian naval aircraft were also used in 1968 .
 In 1969 the Soviet navy began developing a naval base at Mersa Matruh, Egypt, and by 1970 was using a total of six Egyptian airfields for its naval aircraft . By 1970 the Soviet Navy had used six Egyptian airports for its aircraft .
 The Soviet navy began routinely using the Syrian ports of Latakia and Tartus in March 1968 . In May 1972 the Syrians agreed to Soviet construction of naval facilities in those ports .
 Beginning in March 1970 Soviet naval aircraft flying out of Egypt were allowed to refuel in Algeria . The move extended their range to the western Mediterranean .
 Egyptian expulsion of Soviet military advisors in July 1972 had no effect on Soviet use of Egyptian ports . But it caused Soviet naval aircraft to be transferred from Egypt to Syria .
 Kithira anchorage off the southern tip of Greece, Crete, and Sollum anchorage in Egypt . Most important anchorage was off the coast of Greece .
 Dangerous Soviet maneuvers near U.S. warships and formations had been a growing problem since 1960 . It reached severe intensity in the Mediterranean and the Sea of Japan in 1967 .
 The Soviet navy policy of harassing U.S. naval ships continued to be a serious problem through 1969 . The Soviet Navy continued to harass the United States .
 From 1970 onward, the frequency and severity of naval incidents at sea declined somewhat . The frequency of incidents was reflecting the improvement in Soviet-American relations .
 During the Jordanian crisis in September 1970, the Soviet navy slightly reinforced its Mediterranean Squadron and closely monitored U.S. naval operations . The Soviet navy did not provoke any incidents with United States ships .
 "Incidents at sea of-war at close range" continued to occur and remained a cause for concern in the United States Navy .
 Both navies largely complied with the agreement . There was a significant drop in the most dangerous Soviet maneuvering practices .
 Vice Admiral Engen: By 1973, the U.S. and Soviet navies had grown accustomed to operating close to each other . The United States and the Soviet Navy were operating in close proximity .
 It looked as though they were taking some care not to cause an incident .
 On the whole, their overt posture was restrained and considerate . This improvement in was restrained, considerate.
 Soviet-U.S. relations at sea was an important reason for the lack of naval incidents in October 1973 .
 Soviet naval involvement in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War began with sealifts of Moroccan troops to Syria in April and July . Moroccan troops arrived in Syria in July .
 Two Soviet tank landing ships and a freighter arrived in Oran, Morocco, on April 13 . Two Soviet tanks landing ships, freighters and a tank landing ship arrived in Morocco .
 The LSTs departed on April 15 escorted by a hadndnconllwes guided missile destroyer . The freighter departed April 18 .
 Two more LSTs arrived in Oran on July 7, loaded Moroccan troops and tanks, departed on July 9, and arrived in Tartus on July 15,474 . These two sealifts were symbolic Soviet support for pan-Arab unity against Israel .
 Two intelligence collection ships and two minesweepers have been moved into the eastern Mediterranean to augment the single AGI on patrol there . The move is part of a NATO mission to counterbalance the threat posed by Russia .
 Five Foxtrot-class conventional attack submarines arrived in the Mediterranean for routine rotation of the submarines on patrol . Five submarines that were supposed to return home were kept on station to augment the submarine force .
 Most of the Soviet ships were conducting werner. peacetime operations, with the majority of them anchored at normal Soviet anchorages in the vicinity of Crete or in Egyptian ports . Most of them were conducting . peacetime . operations .
 Task Group 60.2, the USS Franklin D Roosevelt attack carrier group, was in various Spanish ports . Task Group is based in Spain and is in various ports .
 Most of Task Force 61, an amphibious task force consisting of the helicopter carrier USS Guadalcanal and nine other amphibious ships, was in various Greek ports . Most of the task force is in various ports .
 A Marine battalion landing tean, augmented with additional troops for exercise, was embarked in the amphibious group . A total of about 3,000 Marines were on board for the exercise .
 Four nuclear-powered attack submarines were on patrol in the Mediterranean . The attack submarines are based in the region .
 USS John F Kennedy and her escorts were visiting Edinburgh, Scotland, after participating in a NATO exercise in the Norwegian sea . In the Atlantic, the attack carrier USS Kennedy was visiting Edinburgh .
 Egypt and Syria declared substantial areas of the eastern Mediterranean off their coasts to be war zones on October 6 . The two countries declared the area a war zone off their coast .
 The United States kept the Sixth Fleet well Clear of these war zones throughout the war . The U.S. kept the 6th Fleet well clear of the war zones .
 Soviet Union conducted significant naval operations in these war zones . The Soviet Union, on the other hand, did not participate in these operations .
 The only significant Soviet naval activity during the first two days of the war was the evacuation of seuaret personnel from Egypt and Syria .
 A Soviet Polnocny-class LSM evacuated civilians from Port Said on October 6, proceeded to Alexandria, and left there with more Soviet citizens on October 7 . The LSM left Port Said with a Soviet citizens in Alexandria, Egypt, and returned to Port Said .
 Soviet LSM and frigate that departed Port Said on October 5 visited the Syrian port of Latakia on October 6, probably to pick up Soviets evacuating Syria . Meanwhile, a Soviet ship that departed port of Port Said left port Said on Oct. 5, probably headed to Latakia
 Soviet Navy auxiliary vessels remained in Alexandria throughout the war . Interestingly, Soviet Navy ships remained in the city throughout the conflict .
 Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bombers Closely monitored the Sixth Fleet . Soviet aircraft were used to carry out reconnaissance missions .
 Kissinger asked Scowcroft to obtain a plan to move the United States Sixth Fleet into the eastern Mediterranean and plans to reinforce the Sixth Fleet if necessary . At 9:00 A.M. on October 6, Kissinger asked to obtain the plan .
 The decision to move a carrier into the eastern Mediterranean was made during an evening WSAG meeting . At 9:46 P.M. the JCS ordered Independence and her escorts to get underway from Athens and proceed to an operating area .
 Independence and her three escorts got underway from Athens on October 7 and proceeded to an area south of Crete . Independence and its three escort escorts were accompanied by a Greek military escort . Independence was the first ship to sail to Crete since leaving Greece in 2010 .
 Task Force 61, the Sixth Fleet amphibious force, was ordered to proceed to Souda Bay Crete and anchor there . The Sixth Fleet is based in the area .
 Independence arrived in the operating area south of Crete on October 8 . Independence joined Little Rock, the Sixth Fleet's flagship, in the area . Independence is the first ship to join Little Rock .
 The designated holding area south of Crete was ""a position that the Soviets would read as indicating that the U.S. was preparing for any contingency" "Close enough for us to act in an emergency," he said .
 Key, evenhanded approach being pursued by the Nixon Administration was reflected in the operational guidance provided to the Sixth Fleet . The low heightened concern by moving it off Cyprus was heightened concern .
 The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron continued normal peacetime operations during the October 6-13 period . The squadron continued to operate during the period .
 Weinland, 72; Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 171. 300, oted in Zumwalt, On Watch, 435 . Also see Weinland in Weinland's Decade Of Decisions .
 Most Soviet surface combatants were at anchorages near Crete and most Soviet attack submarines remained in the western Mediterranean . Most of the Soviet surface combators were in the eastern Mediterranean .
 Task Group holding area south of Crete during the period neither represented a severe threat nor gave indications of an increased state of readiness . Task Group holds area near Crete but does not appear to be under threat .
 One conventional attack submarine and two cruise missile firing submarines were in the general area . Coordination with Soviet surface units was infrequent and sporadic . One conventional submarine was in the area .
 Soviet-American tactical-level naval interaction in the Mediterranean began increasing on October 9 .
 A Soviet Kynda-class cruiser and an Ugra-class submarine tender, serving as the flagship for the commander of the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, joined the Kashin trailing the Independence and Little Rock, forming an anti-carrier group .
 Also on October 9, a Soviet AGI began monitoring the United States amphibious group at Souda Bay, remaining with it through October 25 .
 The presence of a Soviet tattletale warns a U.S. Navy commander that his ships are constantly targeted for preemptive attack if the Soviets elect to launch a one .
 Soviet flevules are even more dangerous when they are themselves armed with anti-ship missiles . Soviet fSetlevules were even more deadly when they were themselves armed .
 This provides the Soviets with the option of a preemptive strike that provides virtually no warning time for the United States fleet to defend itself . The U.S. fleet has no time to prepare for a possible strike .
 In the 1970 crisis Soviet ships armed with anti-ship missiles trailed the three U.S. carriers in the Mediterranean around the clock . The crisis occurred in the 1970s when the United States carriers were attacked .
 To counter this threat, the Sixth Fleet assigned ships armed with rapid fire guns to trail Soviet warships armed with anti-ship missiles . The Sixth Fleet deployed rapid fire weapons to combat this threat .
 A carrier outside the range of the cruise missiles on Soviet ships can clearly sink them easily with her aircraft . A carrier out of the range, the carrier can sink the Soviet ships easily with its aircraft .
 The Russians trail us closely in order to be able to destroy most of the carrier's planes or disable the carrier herself before aircraft can take off . Therefore, the Russians trail them closely, so that they can destroy them or disable them .
 We adopted the retaliatory technique of trailing the trailer so as to prevent them from preventing us from launching our planes by knocking out most of their cruise missiles before many of them took off . The U.S. military said it had adopted the tactic to prevent the U.K. from
 Each of the United States carriers would assign a destroyer or cruiser (what were then called frigates) to each of the Soviet tattletales that had weapons capable of threatening the carrier . The U.S. carriers assigned each of their ships to a ship that could be attacked by the
 To cover Soviet ships armed with long range anti-ship missiles, the U.S. carriers used the “anti-surface combat air patrol” tactic .
 The United States carriers launched aircraft armed with conventional airto-surface bombs and missiles to monitor the Soviet warships . The U.S. carriers launched planes armed with bombs, missiles and bombs to monitor Soviet ships .
 The objective of the U.S. ships and planes shadowing Soviet warships was to prevent them from launching anti-ship missiles against the United States carriers . The objective would have required taking the Soviet ships under fire before they had launched their weapons .
 The Roosevelt carrier task group got underway from Barcelona on October 10 and remained at sea in the western Mediterranean . The Roosevelt task group is in the eastern Mediterranean .
 Very little information is available on United States and Soviet submarine operations during the 1973 crisis . It is safe to assume that tactical maneuvering similar ‘to that on the surface was also taking place under the seas .
 Three Soviet ships apparently did not participate in Soviet naval activities directed against the Sixth Fleet until after their port visit . Interestingly, these three Soviet ships didn't participate in naval activities until after they visited .
 On October 10, the Soviet Union commenced an airlift to Syria and the next day commenced airlifts to Egypt . The Soviet Union airlifted Syria, Egypt and Egypt .
 Soviet cargo ships have been carrying supplies to Syria and Egypt from the beginning of the war . Meanwhile, Soviet ships had been carrying food supplies to the region since the war began .
 Five Soviet cargo ships delivered supplies during the October 7-12 period . The Soviet Union delivered supplies from October 7 to October 12 .
 The total tonnage delivered by the Soviet sealift between October 7 and October 23 is estimated to have been about 63,000 tons . Total tonnages delivered between Oct. 7 and Oct. 23 are estimated to be 63,00 tons .
 On October 11 the JCS ordered the Kennedy group to depart Scotland on October 13 and proceed to a point in the Atlantic west of Gibralter to support the United States airlift to Israel . Although the Soviet sealift tapered off after October 23, it continued through about November 1
 The same day, the JCS ordered the helicopter carrier USS Iwo Jima , with Battalion Landing Team 3/8 embarked (approximately 2,000 troops), deployed to the Mediterranean . The helicopter carrier was ordered to deploy to the region .
 On October 12 Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin delivered a note from the Soviet Government protesting the deployment of the Sixth Fleet to the eastern Mediterranean . The Soviet Government protested the deployment .
 Later that day Kissinger told the Israeli ambassador that the U.S. would move a third carrier into the Mediterranean, probably referring to the Kennedy . The Kennedy was the first aircraft carrier to enter the Mediterranean .
 The Soviet protest note and ita anieetis promise of a third U.S. carrier both illustrate the political role of naval forces in the crisis .
 Israeli Saar-class fast patrol boats fired Gabriel anti-ship missiles at Syrian missile boats . They sank a Japanese freighter and a Greek freighter as well as a Syrian missile boat . The Syrian missiles were fired at civilian merchant ships .
 Two more Syrian missile boats were sunk, but so was the Soviet merchant ship Ilya Mechnikov . The Syrian missile boat was sunk by Syrian forces in the 1980s .
 Israel's survival depended on persuading the United States to replace the Israeli losses of equipment and consumables, perhaps even by independent action against the Soviet supply line . The United States would threaten to precipitate a major clash between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Egyptian submarines allegedly sank two Greek freighters in the Mediterranean . Egyptian submarines are accused of sinking the two freighters . The incident occurred in the early 1980s .
 Israel destroyed several Soviet transport aircraft on Syrian airfields during raids on October 10 and 11 . Israel also destroyed several Russian transport aircraft during raids .
 The attacks on Syrian airfields and ports being used for the Soviet airlift and sealift were certainly deliberate . The destruction of Soviet transport planes and the sinking of the Soviet merchant ship could well have been accidents .
 One of the LSMs remained there through 17 October, the other through 25 October . The two LSMs are scheduled to remain in the U.S. until October .
 On October 13, probably in response to Israeli attacks on Soviet merchant ships, the Soviets placed a Kashin-class DDG off the Syrian coast . The move was probably a response to attacks on Israeli merchant ships .
 Two Soviet LSTs entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea on October 14 and proceeded to Syria on a resupply mission . The two Russian LSTS are believed to be the first to arrive in the Mediterranean .
 Moorer, letter to author, April 18, 1988; Dixon, . Dixon,  Zumwalt, On Watch, 436; Weinland, 70. Moorer . Moorer: "I'm glad to have been able to do so much for me"
 On October 14 the Sixth Fleet was ordered to provide assistance for the airlift . The Sixth Fleet has been ordered to assist with the operation .
 First, the fleet provided navigation, surveillance, air defense, and standby search and rescue support for the United States Air Force C-§ and C~-141 transports flying to Israel .
 Sixth Fleet carriers provided refueling services for F-4 and A~4 jets being ferried to Israel . Second, the sixth Fleet carriers refueled the jets .
 The F-4s landed at the Azores to refuel and refueled again in flight over the Mediterranean . They were refueled by Air Force KC-135 tankers in the Mediterranean over the weekend .
 The A-4s landed at the Azores to refuel, refueled a second time in flight by tankers from the Kennedy, then landed on Rows cama Tit in the central Mediterranean . They remained overnight for refueling, servicing and pilot rest .
 The A-4s were refueled in flight by tankers from the Independence during the final leg of their flight to Israel . The next day the next day, the Independence refueled the aircraft .
 The two carriers in the Mediterranean were forced to operate without some of their most valuable escorts at a time when they needed them to counter the Soviet anti-ship missile threat . The two aircraft carriers were forced .
 Sixth Fleet support for the airlift may have sent an inadvertent political signal to the Soviets . Sixth Fleet's support for airlift in the Soviet Union may have been a signal .
 On October 15 The Roosevelt began moving eastward to the central Mediterranean to support the U.S. airlift . The Roosevelt moved eastward on October 15 .
 A Soviet Petya-class corvette patrolling the Strait of Sicily began shadowing Roosevelt as it passed through the strait on October 16 .
 On October 16 a Sverdlov-class cruiser and KotlinClass destroyer joined the Kynda, Ugra, and Kashin trailing the Independence group and Little Rock . Roosevelt arrived on station east of Malta on October 17 and remained there until October 25,279 .
 Sverdlov and Kotlin replaced the Kynda and Kashin trailing Independence . As it turned out, the new leaders of the Soviet Union won the election in 1918 .
 S24noberts speculates that this may have been “reciprocity” for the detachment of two of Independence's escorts to support the United States airlift .
 The rotation of ships on October 16 was not motivated by political or strategic concerns, but by logistics . In all likelihood, the rotation was motivated by logistics, not political concerns .
 Soviet Navy underway replenishment techniques were not well developed in 1973 . The Soviet Navy did not use the techniques well developed by 1973 .
 USS Iwo Jima with 2,000 Marines embarked departed Moorehead, North Carolina, on October 16, for the Mediterranean, arriving October 25 . The ship arrived in the Mediterranean on October 25, arriving at the end of October .
 West of Gibralter Kennedy remained a part of the Second Fleet, rather than the Sixth Fleet .
 It was not replaced it departed, probably because Kennedy remained in the Atlantic rather than entering the Mediterranean . It departed the next day .
 From October 18 to resupply their ships while they trailed the fast U.S. carrier groups, they were resuppling their ships . The ships were able to get food and supplies from the United States carriers .
 A Mod Kildin-class destroyer armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea on October 19, further reinforcing the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron . A Kashin--class DDG and an MK-2-class destroyer 
 On October 20 a Soviet Kashin joined the Kotlin and Kashin already off Syria (for a total of 3 DDGs), increasing the defenses for Soviet ships and aircraft resupplying Syria . The Kotlin joined the Kashin, a Russian ship, and a Soviet ship joined the
 The Mediterranean was relatively quiet on October 22 and 23 . The three Soviet DDGs remained on station until the ceasefire went into effect, departing between October 24 and 74 .
 Sixth Fleet directed to begin planning to return to normal peacetime operations . U.N. ceasefire resolution was passed on October 22 . Sixth Fleet was directed to start planning to resume peacetime activities .
 Vice Admiral Murphy expected that the Sixth Fleet would return to al Operations in the near future . The Sixth Fleet is scheduled to be deployed to the Middle East .
 The only noteworthy U.S. naval operation took place on earouer 22, when fighters from Independence escorted Kissinger's plane into and out of Israel .
 Surveillance of Mediterranean chokepoints and trailing of Independence and Roosevelt continued . Surveillance of the Mediterranean continued .
 Kashin-class DDG trailing Roosevelt was repiaced by a Petya-class frigate on October 22 in a routine rotation . The Kashin class DDG trailed Roosevelt in the wake of the Second World War II .
 Most of the Soviet combatants were concentrated in the vicinity of Crete . A smaller concentration off Syria was a smaller concentration of Soviet combatants in Crete.
 Soviet ships armed with anti-ship missiles remained within range of the Independence task group south of Crete . The Independence task force is based in Crete, Greece .
 Soviet Tu-16 Badgers continued flying surveillance missions over the Mediterranean, but did not harass the Sixth Fleet .
 The White House received a report on this event on October 25, well after the decision to set DEFCON 3 . White House says the report was received by the White House on Oct. 25 .
 Detectives suspected the Soviets had sent nuclear warheads to Egypt for the Sovietmanned SCUD tactical rockets delivered to Egypt before the war . Perhaps as a political signal to the United States of the Soviet commitment to enforce the ceasefire .
 The evidence for this was sketchy and U.S. officials later expressed doubts that the Soviets had deployed nuclear warheads in Egypt . However, the evidence for the existence of the nuclear weapons in Egypt is sketchy .
 The surface combatants included three cruisers, twelve destroyers, about mine frigates and corvettes, three amphibious ships, and two minesweepers . The surface combatants included 3 cruisers and 12 destroyers .
 At least five of the Soviet ‘iin ed seen attack submarines were in the eastern Mediterranean on October 24 . The attack submarines are believed to have been in eastern Mediterranean .
 Five more Soviet submarines were known to be en route to the Mediterranean . Additionally, five more Soviet submarine was known to have been on board .
 That the Soviet ship carried warheads for the fleet is possible, but unlikely . The ship is believed to have been carrying warheads, but is unlikely to carry them .
 Soviet nuclear-capable units in the Mediterranean consisted of two Kynda-class cruisers and four or five guided missile submarines . At the time, the Soviet Navy had two or five missile submarines in Mediterranean .
 The submarines could not change the warheads on their missiles, which were mounted outside the pressure hull . Submarine submarines were unable to change their missiles' warheads .
 The Kyndas had internal magazines, but probably could not rebuild missiles with nuclear warheads . They had internal magazine magazines, which could not be used to build warheads .
 The submarines and Kyndas would have had to tie up alongside a pier or tender to reload entire missiles . The missiles would have to be reloaded by a ship or tender .
 Soviet Mediterranean Squadron began moving into position on October 24 to support the possibility of Soviet military intervention on behalf of Egypt . This was a formidable threat to the Sixth Fleet Garriezs.
 Galia Golan states that a Moskva-class helicopter cruiser, rather than a Kynda-class cruiser, joined Independence on October 24 . Golan: A Moskova-class aircraft cruiser, not a Kyndia-class, joined the ship .
 Rubinstein states that both of the Soviet Moskva-class helicopter cruisers were in the Mediterranean during the crisis . Rubinstein: Both Moskava-class helicopters cruisers are in the Mediterranean during the crisis .
 Independence was sitting astride Soviet air routes to Egypt, and the Soviets had every reason to expect that the Sixth Fleet would attempt to counter Soviet military intervention . Independence was a key factor in the Soviet intervention .
 Placing the Kynda group eile to Independence sent a clear warning that the Sixth Fleet would not be permitted to interfere in Soviet military operations . Placing Kynda eile in Independence sent the warning to Independence, it said .
 The Soviet amphibious ships could carry a maximum of about 1,800 troops, and probably carried much less than that . The force was inadequate to seriously threaten Israel or effectively defend Egypt without the airborne divisions that had been placed on alert .
 When DEFCON 3 was set, the Sixth Fleet was allowed to carry out the measures that Vice Admiral Murphy had been requesting since early in the crisis to improve the fleet's readiness .
 Kissinger makes it dade. however, that Sixth Fleet movements were being used to send a political signal to the Soviet Union . At 1:25 detect long before they detected the U.S. alert .
 The three attack carriers were concentrating astride Soviet sealanes and airlanes to Egypt, in position to forcibly prevent the Soviet Union from intervening militarily in the conflict . The three carriers were concentrated astrides astriding Soviet seals and air .
 An hour later the JCS suspended the heavy Navy support for the airlift we Israel . All but two of the escorts were allowed to return to the Independence and Roosevelt groups .
 USS Harry E Yarnell in the western Mediterranean and USS Belknap in the eastern Mediterranean as picket ships for the airlift . This left USS Harry and USS Harry in the east Mediterranean and the west Mediterranean respectively as pickets .
 At 3:00 P.M. on October 25, the JCS ordered four U.S. Navy drovers in the Baltic (previously detached from the Kennedy group) to proceed to the Mediterranean to reinforce the Sixth Fleet .
 The helicopter carrier Iwo Jima and its embarked Marines entered the Mediterranean, for a total of over 5,000 Marines assigned to the Sixth Fleet . Meanwhile, the helicopter carrier is also in the Mediterranean .
 Late on October 25 these three ships and two other Kashin-class DDGs proceeded toward Egypt . They joined a five-ship amphibious group already there on October 26 .
 Fe Conander Sixth Fleet, “Command History 1973,"" VI-8; Zumwalt, On Watch, 447; Roberts, 206. "I was in charge of the Navy's 6th Fleet in 1973."
 A Sverdlov-class cruiser and a Kashin-class DDG began shadowing the Roosevelt group on October 26 . A goon joined the anti-carrier exercise .
 The Soviet anticarrier exercise was probably intended as a signal that the Soviet navy was prepared to counter the Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean .
 The Soviets routinely carry out anticarrier exercises in full view of U.S. Navy observers . They often use United States carriers themselves as simulated targets .
 The Soviet Navy has made the U.S. aware of some of the tactics its ACW [fanticarrier warfare] forces might be expected to employ . The exercise activity has also made the United States .
 In effect, the Soviets have transmitted to the U.S. an “action language” vocabulary that can be used during crises . The Soviets have been able to communicate with the United States during crises, the author says .
 It is not clear how quickly the Navy Giscerned that the Soviet anti-carrier activities were an exercise rather than an actual attack . The U.S. Navy is not sure how quickly it realized it was an exercise .
 The navy could well have had warning of the exercise from intelligence sources, although there is no evidence of this . The exercise was a major exercise for the British Navy .
 Since Sixth Fleet ; ships and planes were closely monitoring all the major Soviet warships, final preparations for missile launch would have been detected immediately .
 The United States Sixth FPleet and the Soviet Mediterranean Fleet were, in effect, sitting in a pond in close proximity . The stage for the hitherto unlikely ""war at sea” scenario was set .
 Both fleets were obviously in a high readiness posture for whatever might be next . Neither fleet knew exactly what to expect .
 On October 27 a Sverdlov-class cruiser, Mod-Kildin Class destroyer (armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles), and Kotlin-class DDG began trailing the United States amphibious group .
 The three Soviet combatants represented a formidable threat to the lightly armed United States amphibious ships . The U.S. amphibious forces were attacked by the Soviets in the early 1950s .
 As Soviet combatants rendezvoused with the United States task groups, they joined the war at sea exercises . The exercises started on October 26 .
 A Soviet Kresta II-class ASW cruiser entered the Mediterranean from the Atlantic on October 27 . The cruiser was the only Soviet surface combatant to enter the Mediterranean during the crisis .
 This Kresta II remained in the western Mediterranean, well clear of the action to the east . This is the first time the Krestanica II has been in the Mediterranean .
 As Robert Weinland notes, “This gave the Soviets yet another clear-350 bia, 446.” The Soviets gave the Russians another clear of 350 bia .
 The Soviet anticarrier group that entered the Mediterranean on October 29 began trailing the Kennedy carrier group on October 31 and joined in the anti-carrier exercise .
 The Soviet navy now has an anti-carrier group trailing each of the three U.S. carrier task groups . Additional combatants also trailing the United States amphibious group .
 Also on October 31 two Nanuchkaclass corvettes armed with anti-ship cruise missiles entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea . Also on Oct. 31 two Corvettes and a Skoryy-class destroyer entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea .
 As of October 31 there were 95 Soviet naval vessels in the Mediterranean, including 40 surface combatants (five armed with anti-ship cruise missiles) 23 submarines (about seven armed with antiship cruise missiles), four AGIs, and 28 auxiliaries .
 The 40 Soviet surface combatants consisted of five cruisers, fifteen destroyers, six frigates and corvettes . The 40 surface combatants were included in the Soviet Union .
 Independence and her escorts were ordered to Athens for a port visit on November 3 . The amphibious group was ordered to proceed to Souda Bay and anchor . Independence and its escorts are ordered to arrive in Soudas Bay and anchored .
 Also on November 3, Soviet surveillance of the Sixth Fleet began to decline . Soviet combatants ceased trailing Roosevelt and the United States amphibious groups .
 Over the next few days Soviet combatants ceased trailing other U.S. Navy units as they left the eastern Mediterranean .
 The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron began reducing its strength to peacetime levels on November 7 when three combatants entered the Black Sea . Three of the three vessels were involved in the incident . The squadron is reducing its peacetime strength .
 The three U.S. carriers interrupted their cycle of port Fisies and remained at sea November 9-14 . Kissinger was in the Middle East conducting negotiations during the time .
 This was the final U.S. naval activity in the Mediterranean related to the crisis . The United States was not involved in the crisis in the region .
 The Soviet first salvo total of 88 anti-ship missiles included eight SS-N-14s carried by the Kresta II-class cruiser . Since 1973 that missile has been determined to be an ASW weapon .
 As of November 19 the number of Soviet ships in the Mediterranean had declined from 95 to 70 . Soviet naval operations had essentially returned to normal after the crisis .
 During the crisis, the United States Middle East Force consisted of a flagship and two destroyers . The U.S. Mideast Force was based in the Middle East .
 The Soviet Indian Ocean Squadron consisted of about twenty ships, including a destroyer, a Foxtrot-class attack submarine, two corvettes, two minesweepers, an LST, and various auxiliaries .
 The CNO had recommended on October 25, the day DEFCON 3 was set, that an attack carrier task group be moved into the Indian Ocean from the Pacific .
 USS John Hancock with five escorts and an oiler were ordered into the Indian Ocean on October 29 . The carrier was part of U.S. actions to increase readiness for military operations in the Middle East .
 At the time, there was no unusual Soviet naval activity in the Indian Ocean . The Soviet Navy was active in the area at the time of the time .
 A SverdlovClass cruiser and a Kashin-class DDG transited the Straits of Malacca, but remained in the eastern Indian Ocean rather than joining Hancock in the Arabian Sea .
 United States and Soviet naval activity in the Indian Ocean remained at unusually high levels for several months for reasons largely unrelated to the situation in the Middle East . The U.S. and Soviet Navy activity was largely unrelated .
 Soviet tattletales and aircraft closely monitored the Sixth Fleet . U.S. ships and aircraft monitored the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron .
 Soviet ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles were constantly within range of U.S. the carriers . The carriers were in the eastern Mediterranean when they were in contact with Soviet ships .
 The increased U.S. presence in the Indian Ocean was related only to the Middle East crisis only in the sense that the carrier task group was available in the event that Arab nations attempted to close the sea lanes out of the Persian Gulf by force .
 The 1973 Arab-Israeli War marked several records and new developments in Soviet naval operations . The war marked several new naval operations in the Soviet Union .
 This demonstrated a depth and flexibility that had not been seen by SE wetEon, 103.7 . This demonstrated the depth of and flexibility of the project .
 On the basis of the information now available, it appears that the Soviets were prepared to accept significantly higher risks in this crisis than before . The Soviet Union was willing to accept higher risks than before, writes Peter Bergen .
 The U.S. committed naval forces that, in the situation, appeared to be quite formidable . They behaved at the peak of the crisis as though they considered the Sixth Fleet effectively neutralized, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Soviet Navy can be viewed as having become a fullfledged superpower navy in 1973 . The Soviet Navy became a superpower in 1973.
 Several specific aspects of Soviet naval operations were also noteworthy . The Soviet Navy was involved in World War II .
 First, Soviet Navy conducted extensive and sustained operations within a combat zone for the first time . First, the Soviet Navy performed extensive operations within the combat zone . The Soviet Navy was involved in the first sustained operations in combat zone.
 In previous crises, Soviet ships had withdrawn from war zones, entering only as necessary to monitor the fighting ashore and to keep tabs on the Sixth Fleet . The Soviet ships were withdrawn from previous crises .
 The October 1973 crisis was the first Soviet-American confrontation in which the Soviet Navy posed a significant immediate threat to the U.S. Navy . The crisis occurred in October 1973 and October 1973 .
 Early on October 25, Schlesinger and Admiral Moorer briefed the Joint Chiefs on the events leading up to the worldwide DEFCON 3:alert . The Joint Chiefs briefed on events leading to the event .
 For the first time in the post-World War II era, the U.S. Navy had been effectively denied complete control of the seas . The United States Navy was effectively denied control .
 Throughout the entire period from 1957 through 1980, the Soviet Navy never posed a greater threat against United States naval forces operating on the high seas . Nor was the navy’'s effect ever more relevant in the U.S.-Soviet nonstrategic balance of power .
 The final noteworthy point about Soviet naval operations in the October 1973 crisis is that the Soviets did not deploy as many ships to the Mediterranean as they could have sent . The Soviets didn't deploy enough ships as many as they did in the Mediterranean .
 At the height of the Soviet buildup, only 20 of the 42 cruisers and destroyers in the Black Sea Fleet had been sent to the Mediterranean . Only 20 of 42 ships in the fleet were sent to Mediterranean .
 No modern ASW ships were sent because the primary threat was United States surface ships, not United States submarines . U.S. surface ships were the main threat, not submarines, as was submarines .
 The Soviets appeared to send their Older ships to the Mediterranean simply because of the ships' age . Robetts, ps 195% Weindend, 72. oT 0 Di snuken, 503. o .
 The Soviets sent two relatively new Nanuchka-~class corvettes armed with antiship missiles to the Mediterranean . Additionally, the Soviets also sent two new nanuchka/~class corvettes .
 The one possible implication of this pattern is that the Soviets probably did not expect the crisis to escalate to war with the U.S. The Soviets probably didn't expect to go on to war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Had they — expected war, they probably would have surged every available ship and submarine into the Mediterranean . Had they – expected war - they . probably would . surge every available vessel and ship into the . Mediterranean .
 A remote possibility was that Soviet Mig-25s in Egypt might try to intercept U.S. SR-71 reconnaissance planes flying over the Suez canal . The possibility was a remote possibility of intercepting the planes .
 Despite intense tactical-level interaction between U.S. and Soviet Naval forces, there were no collisions at sea or other dangerous incidents . Despite the intense interaction, no collisions were recorded .
 Unlike 1967, there were no instances of Soviet close quarters maneuvering to harass the Sixth Fleet . The Sixth Fleet was never attacked by the Soviet Union .
 Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bombers were active over the Mediterranean, but did not harass the Sixth Fleet . Soviet aircraft were active in the Mediterranean .
 Egyptian navy established a distant blockade of Israel with destroyers (beyond the range of Israeli missile boats) and southeast of Crete with submarines . There were minor incidents, such as training S720 .
 There was one minor incident between U.S. and Soviet forces outside the Mediterranean about the time war broke out in the Middle East .
 A U.S. F-4 Phantom jet fighter from Kennedy was sent up to intercept and trail a Soviet Tu-16 reconnaissance bomber . The plane collided mid-air in a NATO exercise in the Norwegian Sea .
 The Nixon Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean .
 Sixth Fleet movements, however, were closely controlled--much closer than in the 1967 Mideast War . Sixth Fleet movement was closely controlled .
 The President and Schlesinger did not attempt to communicate directly with any level in the chain >) 5 Roberts, 196. 5 Roberts: "On the other hand, the President and . Schlesingers did not . attempt to . communicate directly"
 The U.S. government did not make an effort to provide specialized guidance in mechanisms of delegated control . Nor did they made an effort .
 The ships of the Sixth Fleet acted in accordance with Navy standing orders in responding to Soviet naval operations .
 Soviet tattletales and aircraft closely monitored the Sixth Fleet . U.S. ships were also closely monitored by the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron .
 The Soviets quickly responded to changes in Sixth Fleet operations . Every U.S. carrier in the eastern Mediterranean targeted with anti-ship missiles .
 The Sixth Fleet quickly reacted to changes in Soviet naval operations, keeping Soviet ships that were an immediate threat to the carriers in the sights of U.S. ships or planes .
 The U.S. used the Sixth Fleet for political tiguldecle. It is clear that the U.K. used it for political purposes. The United States used it as a weapon of war .
 The Mediterranean Squadron almost doubled in numbers of ships and quadrupled in firepower . The bulk of the Mediterranean Squadron was kept clear of the fighting ashore .
 U.S. leaders also read political signals into Soviet naval actions that may not have been intended as signals . This is an example of inadvertent signaling . As will be discussed below, we will also discuss the implications of the Soviet naval action .
 The United States relied on methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled . Both sides used their forces as political instruments under conditions of acute crisis .
 The U.S. communications system provided much faster communications in 1973 than it had in 1967, but still did not permit the President to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet .
 This did not cause problems because the White House did not attempt to exercise such Close Control . The White House has not attempted to exercise any of its own control of the situation, says CNN.com .
 Impairment of political-level decisionmaking was at least a minor factor in the crisis, officials say . The crisis was caused by a lack of political decisionmaking, they say .
 The President's political travails appear not to crisis have had a direct impact on U.S. actions in the crisis, but undoubtedly complicated top-level decisionmaking . Nixon reportedly made key decisions himself and was kept informed of major developments .
 There was intense tactical-level interaction between the U.S. and Soviet navies in the Mediterranean .
 The White House was not directly controlling the actions of the Sixth Fleet in that interaction . Available accounts of the crisis suggest that Nixon and Kissinger were unaware that it was occurring .
 Sixth Fleet efforts to counter the Soviet anti-ship missile threat required frequent tactical decisions . Soviet ships maneuvered to keep the U.S. carriers targeted .
 This intense maneuvering for tactical advantage was too fast-paced for the White House to be able to effectively control it, CNN says . The White House was unable to control the situation, CNN reports .
 In his memoirs, Nixon intersperses descriptions of the Middle East crisis with descriptions of Watergate scandal . This is a good illustration of the impact that the scandal had on Nixon's attention . Nixon's memoirs show the impact of the scandal on his attention .
 The same situation could well have existed for the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, which was constantly targeted at point blank range by United States warships and attack aircraft .
 Tactically inappropriate orders were a major factor in the crisis and led to decoupling . Tactically inappropriate orders were major factors in the collapse of the United States .
 The White House ordered the fleet to remain in small, fixed operating areas . To ensure that the White House sent only the desired political signals, the fleet remained in small areas .
 This made the United States fleet extremely vulnerable to a Soviet preemptive strike . The U.S. fleet was at risk of being attacked by the Soviet Union .
 The on-scene commanders--acting on their own initiative and well within their delegated authority--sought to reduce their vulnerability by countertargeting the most threatening Soviet naval units .
 The White House ordered tight control of Sixth Fleet movements by the White House . Tight direct control of sixth Fleet movements generated tactically inappropriate orders . The U.S. Navy has been in close contact with the U.N. since 2010 .
 The second requirement for establishing that decoupling occurred is that the oueiat onal decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differed from those that political-level decisions would have made in order to coordinate those actions .
 Sixth Fleet moved south of Crete to demonstrate to Soviet Union that the United States was prepared for any contingency . Sixth Fleet was moved to Crete in order to demonstrate that the U.S. was not preparing to take an active part in the conflict .
 It's not clear that the White House would have viewed Sixth Fleet preparations for preemptive strikes against the Soviet navy as supporting the U.S. strategy or as sending political signals to the Soviet Union .
 During the first week of the crisis, U.S. Navy on-scene commanders were relatively unconcerned about the Soviet naval threat . The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron essentially continued peacetime operations .
 U.S. Navy commanders in the Mediterranean were highly concerned about the threat of a Soviet preemptive attack due to the untenable tactical position in which the Sixth Fleet had peen placed by White House restrictions on the fleet's movements .
 Soviet ships and submarines armed with antiship missiles were constantly within range of the United States carriers while they were in the eastern Mediterranean . The U.S. carriers were also in the region .
 Sixth FPleet forces deal with a Soviet anticarrier warfare exercise . One of the most difficult situations is a Soviet anti-aircraft exercise .
 When a U.S. ship is used as the simulated target, Soviet ships maneuver so realistically that it is virtually impossible to distinguish between exercise activity and a real attack on a carrier .
 All that is needed to transform the exercise into a shooting war is the order to fire . All that's needed to be transformed into a shoot-out war is to order fire .
 The period of this Soviet exercise could well have been the Closest that the Soviet Union and the United States have ever been to ‘hair trigger” readiness for war . At least at the tactical level, the U.S. and Russia could be at the brink of war
 Senior U.S. Navy officers appear to have had a good grasp of the concerns felt by the on-scene commanders in the Mediterranean .
 Kissinger did not perceive a threat from the Soviet Navy during the crisis . Kissinger, in particular, did not see a real threat from Soviet Navy .
 Kissinger also was either unaware of the Soviet anti-carrier exercise or did not understand the threat it represented to the Sixth Fleet . Kissinger also did not know of the exercise or understand it .
 Stratified threat perceptions did arise at the very top of the chain of command, between civilian and military officials . The U.S. military says the situation is "strategorically different"
 Soviet naval operations in the Mediterranean appeared much more threatening to the Navy chain of command than they did to Kissinger . It is not surprising, therefore, that Soviet naval . operations in . the Mediterranean . appeared more .threatening to the . Navy chain-of-command than Kissinger .
 Most recent communication with Soviets contains request that U.S. join them in more forceful enforcement of Israel/Arab ceasefire by introduction of both US/Soviet forces . US/Russian forces would enforce ceasefire by introducing both US and Soviet forces .
 Soviets further state intentions to consider unilateral action if U.S. declines . Soviets state intention to consider unilaterally action if United States declines . Soviet Union says it is considering unilateral action .
 U.S. response includes signal of elevation in force readiness, i.e., DEFCON Three world wide, alerting of 82nd Airborne . More eastward movement of carriers in Med . and redeployment of SAC forces from Pacific .
 This message and similar verbal communications were important for ensuring that . key military commanders understood the purpose of the alert, which is described as a “signal” to the Soviets . This message was important for . ensuring that key military . commanders understood .
 Commander Seventh Fleet was as much in the dark on U.S. policy during the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis as Commander Sixth Fleet was in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Commander Seventh was in dark during the Taiwan Strait crisis .
 Military chain of command is totally excluded from being kept informed on political matters . This can create problems in coordinating military operations with political objectives, writes David Cameron .
 Failure to provide the military chain of command with sufficient information to be able to understand the political context of a crisis is a major source of stratified threat perceptions . Failure to give sufficient information can be a major problem for the military .
 The security dilemma can be stratified in a crisis, writes Andrew Hammond . Decisionmakers at the political and tactical levels of interaction can hold much different threat perceptions, he says .
 At the political level of interaction, neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union had an incentive to launch a first strike against the other .
 Military and naval moves were taken primarily for aah ecsd purposes, rather than to achieve military advantages . The U.S. DEFCON 3 alert was taken by the U.K. military .
 At the tactical level of interaction, the U.S. and Soviet naval forces had strong incentives to strike first . The United States and Soviet forces were actively targeting each other . The Soviet and American naval forces were active in the fight against each other during the Cold War .
 Soviet Navy onscene commanders must have shared similar concerns due to U.S. counter-targeting of their major combatants . Soviet Navy commanders may have shared .
 The security dilemma was thus aseneitiddooniid at the political level, but acute at the tactical level . The security dilemmas are both political and tactical, as well as political .
 Although there were intense tactical-level interactions during the crisis, there were no cases of escalation sequence . No cases of such interactions generating an escalation sequence.
 Each side was constantly targeting the other and both sides were ready to launch preemptive attacks . No a oeieiaiaiaa were fired during the crisis .
 Neither the United States nor the Soviet Union wanted to intervene militarily in the war if they could possible avoid it, largely out of concern for an armed clash with the other Aerials . Therefore they both acted cautiously with their military and naval forces, avoiding situations that could inadvertently involve them in
 If the exercise had commenced late on October 24 or early on October 25, at the peak of superpower tensions, it might easily have been misperceived by ‘the United States as a further indication of imminent Soviet military intervention in the Middle East .
 It would be tempting to speculate that the Soviets deliberately waited until after tensions had peaked in the Middle East before starting the exercise . But the available evidence argues against that interpretation .
 The Soviets started the exercise in response to United States concentration of the Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean . The exercise was a response to the U.S. concentration of its Sixth Fleet .
 The Soviet anti-carrier exercise could well have started at any time in the crisis if the Sixth Fleet had been concentrated in the eastern Mediterranean . The implication of this is that the exercise could have started in the region at any point .
 While the overall pattern of Soviet military and naval behavior was one of restraint, the Soviets were willing to engage in certain highly provocative activities . Therefore, while the pattern of . Soviet military . behavior was . one of . restraint .
 The United States and the Soviet Union communicated with each other frequently during the crisis . The second factor inhibiting escalation was that the U.S. and the . Soviet Union communicate with the United States regularly during the .
 This helped prevent the problem of ambiguous political signals, which can cause intentions and objectives to be misperceived . This helped to prevent the problems of ambiguous signals, such as ambiguous signals .
 Soviet &46 warnings to the United States on October 24 that it was prepared to intervene unilaterally in the Middle East if Israel did not respect the United Nations ceesefire were particularly dmportant for avoiding a clash .
 The situation would have been worse if the U.S. and the Soviet Union had not been in direct communication at that point . The United States and Soviet Union were able to communicate with each other .
 The two superpowers probably would have had great difficulty interpreting the political significance of each other's military moves on October 24 and 25 had they not had to express their interests and concerns to each other .
 The third factor inhibiting escalation was estan bas prudence on the part of the U.S. Navy commanders in the Mediterranean . The United States has not responded to the situation .
 This was especially important due to Soviet targeting of the Sixth Fleet with anti-ship missile platforms . This was particularly important due . The Sixth Fleet was targeted by the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 On-scene commanders had to carefully balance the need to maintain a tactically viable situation against the danger of incidents with the Soviet Navy . The Soviet Navy was the focus of the mission .
 White House orders prohibit carriers from maneuvering to evade Soviet targeting . This task was not made easier by the White House . White House ordered carriers to avoid Soviet targeting.
 The U.S. ships and aircraft were assigned to monitor high-threat Soviet ships and Gestroy them if they attempted to launch anti-ship missiles . Caution and prudence was particularly important for the United States .
 A single misjudgement could have produced a Soviet-American sea battle in the Mediterranean . The Soviet-U.S. sea battle could have taken place in the early 1950s .
 That no incidents occurred ids testimony to the caution and prudence shown by the onscene commanders . No incidents occurred during the operation .
 There were no inadvertent military incidents serious enough to affect the crisis . There were instances of U.S. leaders misperceiving political signals being sent by Soviet naval movements .
 The actual pattern of Soviet naval Sseeetcnd suggests a higher degree of Soviet commitment to Syria and Egypt than Kissinger perceived . Kissinger perceived a greater commitment to the region than he perceived .
 Kissinger describes the Soviet ships that Kissinger describes as moving west actually went to Soviet anchorages off Crete . Kissinger says the ships were actually going to anchorages in the region . Kissinger: The ships that he describes were actually Soviet ships .
 Soviet replenishment and supply ships were located at the anchorages . The practical reason for that was that Soviet ships would be located at anchorages, not at sea .
 The Crete anchorages occupy a strategic position in the eastern Mediterranean . They are ideal for covering the Sixth Fleet when it moves into the area .
 The actual signal being sent by Soviet ships moving west was that of Soviet intent to neutralize the Sixth Fleet . Thus, the actual signal was "neutralizing" the 6th Fleet .
 The Soviets probably were not signaling intentions parallel to those of the U.S. when they concentrated the Mediterranean Squadron off Crete . The Soviet Union was concentrating its Mediterranean Squadron in the Mediterranean .
 Kissinger misperceived the intent of the Soviet naval moves, giving them a political interpretation reflecting his view at the start of the crisis that Soviet intentions were benign . Kissinger said in the 1970s he believed the Soviet intention was benign .
 In every case the naval actions can be accounted for by motives or considerations other than political signalling, such as logistic requirements or improving tactical readiness, say experts .
 There was serious tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations . The tension was between the political and military needs of diplomacy and military operations, the author says .
 The most serious tension was between Washington's need to control Sixth Fleet movements for political purposes and the on-scene commander's need for freedom to maneuver the fleet in order to reduce its vulnerability . Washington wanted to control the fleet for political reasons .
 The White House insisted on restricting the movements of the Sixth Fleet lest the fleet's movements send a misleading signal of U.S. intentions to the Soviet Union .
 Several times during the next few days Dan asked permission of the JCS to move these ships er those toward the east in order to make his gsurveillance of the battle scene more effective .
 Each request was turned down by Admiral Moorer, acting, he told me, on instructions from the White House . Henry Kissinger almost certainly meant Henry Kissinger .
 To explain the nature of the Sixth Fleet's vulnerability requires a brief review of modern naval warfare .
 The Soviet tactic of keeping ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles created serious operational problems for the Sixth Fleet . The U.S. carriers were attacked by the Soviets in the 1980s .
 Modern anti-ship missiles allow a single weapon to destroy or seriously damage a ship . Large missiles favored by the Soviet navy allowed a single missile to damage or destroy a vessel .
 Soviet naval writings emphasize the importance of 1605 "the battle of the first salvo" 1605 . The Soviet Navy refers to 1605 as the "first salvo".
 U.S. Navy tactical dcctrine for the defense of surface ship battle groups emphasizes destruction of launch platforms before they can launch their missiles .
 Requiring a task group operate at a fixed location with little freedom of maneuver increases its vulnerability to a Soviet preemptive strike . Requiring that a task . group operate in a 'ModLoc' increases vulnerability to . a strike .
 A force in ModLoc is trapped in a set-piece battle in which an enemy with superior numbers can organize an overwhelming coordinated attack . The game is set to take place in the ModLoc world of ModLoc .
 This is exactly the situation in which the White House placed the Sixth Fleet . The White House has placed the sixth Fleet in the Pacific .
 The fleet was not granted the freedom to maneuver it needed to outrun slower Soviet tattletales and to prevent the Soviets from keeping the carriers constantly targeted . The fleet did not have the freedom of maneuvering needed in order to escape the Soviets .
 United States warships, their guns manned and ready, and United States attack aircraft, armed with conventional bombs and missiles, kept every Soviet ship that could threaten the carriers constantly in their sights .
 Both sides had strong incentives to strike first if they believed that war was imminent . Both sides would have strong incentives for striking first .
 This was a tense and dangerous situation that would have been at least partially alleviated if the Sixth Fleet had been granted freedom to maneuver at will . This was the situation in the U.S. Navy's war with Russia .
 A restriction imposed on the fleet for political purposes patrenaiters misperceptions of United States intentions) exacerbated the risks of a military confrontation . A minor incident could touch off an armed Clash at sea between the superpowers .
 President Nixon and Schlesinger respected the military chain of command, using it to send orders to the Sixth Pleet rather than attempting to communicate directly with the fleet . President Nixon used the chain to communicate with the military .
 Navy chain of command was irritated by White House control of Sixth 611, unwalt, interview by author, February 16, 1988; Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988 . Navy chain-commanders were annoyed by the White House's lack of control of the Sixth
 There is moderate tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to 5 ean wartime combat missions . There was moderate tension .
 The commanding officers of the carriers Kennedy and Roosevelt state that they did not experience a degradation of their readiness to perform wartime missions during the crisis . The commanding officer of both ships says they did .
 This was a cause for concern on the part of Vice Admiral Murphy and Vice Admiral Engen. This was not the first time Vice Adm. Murphy and Engen had been involved in this type of incident .
 This depleted U.S. war-reserve stocks left some operational units without sufficient equipment . Thus, although supplies to carry out wartime missions were not sufficient .
 Sixth Pleet operations in the crisis did not degrade the fleet's readiness for wartime operations . United States resupply of Israel degraded the overall combat readiness of U.S. forces, says Pentagon .
 In summary, the stratified interaction model accurately describes Soviet~-American interaction during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 There was intense tactical-level interaction between U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . There was significant decoupling of tactical level interactions from political-level crisis management efforts .
 The overall pattern was one of parallel stratified interactions with frequent momentary decoupling . The study was published in the U.S. Geological Survey .
 U.S. and Soviet naval forces were very tightly coupled during the crisis . There were no serious incidents between then and the next two years .
 There were serious political~-military tensions arising from 6l6Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988 . The author of the letter: "There are serious political ~-military . tensions"
 Eight research questions addressing the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries were answered in each case study .
 The the the Rolie case studies showed that the stratified interaction model provides an accurate description of international interaction in crises .
 The next chapter will examine four cases of peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships in order to take a closer look at how the military chain of command reacts to such incidents .
 Chapter IX will then use the findings from all eight of the case studies in a structured, focused comparison in order to derive contingent generalizations on crisis interaction and crisis stability . Chapter IX uses the findings of all eight case studies to compare the results of each case study .
 Cade oO iy ay a eras ae Th t ,, as 3 ; é . pot & pot & Ly ‘ ' ’ a ‘ ‘’ ’ « ad hk *, & »@ a % eo. Ly . C
 R PLY he eee ° , r a sath soak. o> Joe 3 t ‘ a ""es E SP 8 OFS, ahi te ‘ t F ' € TEWree® Teas 3 rai 4 ae ‘ se we ‘
 Ya RIES ve ‘gtate2utavie toe eure ceceepea ret tee f~ oe . 4 *” sy a5. se , A el ‘es 2 St ed eC meete rey Pe . > a fct
 Lid had tool te Save $8 e a rates, tig awa ag f° * PT he wee gt Vy 7 x ty 0 ROL oy Gh ae PM hat .
 Col gaa tase ates gw ep ede as Re ad PEPE ER oS ‘ piwtgte a ia 4 0t¥, oa zea wate Taya) si¥i AYES 0 2 Ti ad Dae
 The political importance and potential dangers of such missions are generally recognized . The mission is a major concern in the United States .
 Routine naval missions often viewed as non-political or ordered for peacetime military objectives rather than for political purposes . Not as well understood, however, is that routine missions almost always have important political undertones .
 Certain “non-political” missions, such as intelligence collection or surveillance near a potentially hostile country, need to be viewed as political in mature even though not ordered for political purposes . For this reason certain ‘non-partisan’ missions must be seen as political, even
 This chapter presents the third phase of the research design, a structured focused comparison of four cases in which a U.S. Navy ship was attacked during peacetime or crisis operations . This chapter includes a structured comparison of the four cases .
 The focus will be on how the military and naval chain of command reacted to the attacks . The focus of the investigation will focus on how they reacted .
 Four of the eight questions asked in the previous chapter will again be asked in these cases . The questions will be asked again in the next chapter .
 Four questions address decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified escalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions . The four questions address stratified interaction, escalation dynamics and misperception .
 The previous chapter showed that the conditions necessary for stratified interactions are usually present in crises . The last chapter of this chapter was the first to show that stratified interaction is possible in a crisis .
 Decoupling simply means that national leaders lose control over tactical-level military interaction . It's not a matter of national leaders losing control of the military, but it's important to national leaders .
 The focus will be on identifying escalation-inhibiting features and the conditions that can cause the escalation-inshibiting factors to break down . The focus of the focus is on identifying the features that can trigger the break-down .
 Armament consisted of three 5~-inch/38 calibre twin mounts controlled by a MK 37 director . Two fixed Hedgehog ASW launchers, two fixed hedgehog launchers, and two ASW torpedo tube mounts .
 Maddox was a good pvelities for intelligence collection duties off the coast of a potentially hostile nation due to its weapons, speed and maneuverability . Maddox is one of the oldest ships in the Navy .
 The North Vietnamese-backed guerilla war against the South Vietnamese Government and the Communist insurgencies in Cambodia and Laos dominated the international situation in Southeast Asia in August 1964 .
 The political and military situation in the Republic of Vietnam had been deteriorating for years due to chronically unstable and ineffective governments . The situation in Vietnam has been deteriorating since 2003 .
 The Democratic Republic of Vietnam ordered the Viet Cong to take the offensive in December 1963 . In 1964, the DRC increased the infiltration of regular army troops into South Vietnam .
 Indochina was viewed by the Johnson Administration as a crucial battle in a global struggle between East and West . The Cold War had not yet been thawed by detente and the Cold War was not yet being thawed .
 Military and economic aid to South Vietnam increased significantly during the first half of 1964 . The U.S. sought to shore up the faltering Saigon regime .
 As part of OPLAN 34A the United States Navy provided South Vietnam with eight fast patrol boats and other small craft . The U.S. Navy also trained their crews and naval commandoes for raids on North Vietnam .
 Contingency plans were drawn up and target lists were prepared by June 1964 . Contingencies plans drawn up by June 1963 .
 The desirability of a Congressional resolution authorizing the President to take military action in Indochina was also recognized . A proposed resolution was drafted in May 1964 . The resolution was also drafted .
 In April 1962 the U.S. Navy had initiated a series of patrols by destroyers in international waters off the coasts of China, the Soviet Union and North Korea .
 The first Desoto patrol off the coast of North Vietnam was conducted in December 1962 . Desoto patrols were conducted by the Desoto team in the 1960s .
 DRV Navy vessels shadowed subsequent patrols, but did not interfere with them . DRV navy ships shadowed the patrols but didn't interfere them .
 There were no joint operations involving RVN OPLAN 34A forces and U.S. Navy Desoto destroyers . No joint operations were conducted by RVN .
 The value of intelligence collected by the Desoto patrols to the South Vietnamese operations was recognized . Coordination between the two programs sought to prevent the programs from interfering with each other .
 In 1964 minimum distances of the Desoto patrols from North Vietnam were eight miles from the mainland and four miles from islands . North Vietnam claimed only a three mile territorial limit was Claimed by North Vietnam .
 Maddox arrived off the coast of North Vietnam the afternoon of July 31 and the next afternoon was operating in the vicinity of two islands attacked by RVN Navy boats on an OPLAN 34A mission . The next day Maddox was operating near the islands .
 DRY Navy headquarters ordered preparations for battle that night . Early in the morning of August 2 DRY navy headquarters ordered .
 At 3:00 P.M. on August 2 Maddox detected three DRV P-4 Class torpedo boats on radar closing at high speed . Maddox found the three P4 Class boats closing at close range .
 Maddox, which was about twenty-eight miles off the coast, increased speed to twenty-five knots and set a course to the south-east to move away from the coast . Maddox is now moving away from coast and is moving towards the south .
 Maddox set general quarters, reported approaching contacts, and requested air support . Maddox reported the approaching contacts to the U.S. Maddox then requested air assistance .
 Four F-8 Crusaders and the destroyer | USS Turner Joy were immediately dispatched to assist Maddox . The destroyer | Turner Joy was also dispatched to help Maddox.
 The first shots of the engagement were fired by Maddox invoking the principle of anticipatory selfdefense against forces showing hostile intent . Maddox fired the first shots, invoking the . principle of . anticipatory . selfdefense .
 At 4:28 P.M. the F-8s from Ticonderoga attacked the DRV boats, scoring hits one one one of them .
 Commander Seventh Fleet ordered halt to the action after the air attack . Commander of Seventh Fleet orders halt of the operation after the attack .
 One DRV torpedo boat sunk, a second heavily damaged and the third slightly damaged . One DRVA torpedo boat was sunk, one heavily damaged, and a third heavily damaged .
 Maddox was struck by one machine gun bullet that caused minor damage and no casualties . Maddox suffered minor damage but no casualties from the bullet strike . No casualties were reported .
 U.S. intelligence assessments concluded that the attack on Maddox reflected growing North Vietnamese sensitivity to ieeusstSae and readiness to take aggressive action when threatened . United States leaders concluded that attack may have been an unauthorized action by a local commander .
 The President ruled out reprisals against North Vietnam, but in a public statement warned that U.S. Navy ships and aircraft would “attack any force that attacks them”
 Admiral Sharp approved a recommendation from Admiral Moorer to resume the patrol, and an order was sent to COMSEVENTHFLT for Maddox to do so . Vice Admiral Johnson had already taken the action .
 The manner in which the decision was made in Washington to continue the patrol illustrates the mood among top civilian officials at the time . The decision to carry out the patrol shows the mood in Washington .
 Johnson approved Cornelius' recommendation, Cornelius showed him the message, which Johnson immediately approved . Cornelius also approved Johnson's approval of the message .
 Cornelius was able to talk with the Navy's duty captain, and informed him of the president's decision . Cornelius: "It's a good thing that you can talk to the captain of the Navy"
 The Maddox was ordered to return to the Gulf by the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet . The Turner Joy and the Maddox were the first to arrive in the Gulf .
 The President's action did not raise any opposition because the Navy chain of command agreed with the decision and had already ordered Maddox to resume the patrol .
 Minimum distance from the North Vietnamese mainland was increased to twelve miles . At night the ships were to move out into the Gulf for safety . The minimum distance from North Vietnam mainland increased to 12 miles .
 Maddox and Turner Joy resumed the Tonkin Gulf Desoto patrol the morning of August 3 . Maddox, Turner Joy were on patrol in the area .
 The night of August 3-4 the RVN Navy conducted two OPLAN 34A missions, attacking DRV shore defenses . The missions were attacked by the DRV on the night of that night .
 Maddox and Turner Joy were over sixty miles from the coast of North Vietnam that night . They gained high-speed radar contacts at short range, locked on with fire control radars, and opened fire . Maddox opened fire on North Vietnam over 60 miles from North Vietnam .
 For the next four hours, the two ships engaged at least five possible contacts at close range . The two ships evaded several torpedoes detected on sonar . For the rest of the time, they evaded torpedoes .
 Numerous radar and visual indications of hits on patrol boats have been reported . Numerous radar, visual indications were reported .
 16 U.S. Navy aircraft participated in the engagement, attempting to locate and attack contacts reported by the Geatccuans 4 . Sixteen aircraft were involved .
 It had been a dark and evercast night, with unusual radar propagation conditions that easily could have generated false contacts . It was a dark night with unusual weather conditions .
 Only two pilots reported sighting possible contacts, and their reports were uncertain .
 Review of action makes many reported contacts and torpedoes fired appear doubtful . Review: Many reported contacts with torpedoes and contacts with the U.S. seem doubtful .
 Freak weather effects on radar and overeager sonarmen may have accounted for many reports . Freak weather may have been behind the radar effect .
 Captain Herrick sent a second message summarizing the immediately available evidence of an attack, but warned that the “entire action leaves many doubts except for apparent ambush at beginning.”
 Based on professional judgement (twelve years experience in destroyers; a month at sea in Maddox in 1974), this is the best assessment of the incident .
 There appear to have been two North Vietnamese patrol boats in the vicinity of Maddox and Turner Joy at the start of the incident . But they did not pursue the United States ships after they opened fire .
 President Johnson and his advisors were predisposed to retaliate . They wisely insisted on confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack . President Johnson's advisors wisely insisted that there was an attack .
 LBJ wanted to announce a decision so he could announce it on prime time TV news . LBJ's decision was made to be announced on prime-time TV news. LBJ: "It's a good time for the nation to make a decision"
 Well, I was on the phone both with General Wheeler and with Secretary McNamara. Well, he said. "Well, I'm not going to be surprised," he added. "I'm not surprised, but I'm glad to be able to talk to you."
 McNamara was trying to confirm in his own mind that an attack occurred, McNamara says . McNamara: "I'm not sure what happened to me. McNamara's life is going to be over."
 My staff was working to try and correlate all the reports that would come in and CINCPACFLT staff was doing the same thing . My staff were working to . try and try and . correlate all of the reports .
 Admiral Moorer, CINCPACFLT, and I decided that there was enough information available to indicate that an attack had occurred . Admiral . Moorer said that there were enough information to indicate an attack .
 I told Secretary McNamara that, but we also asked the Maddox to confirm absolutely that the ships were attacked and told them to get word to us as quickly as possible . The Maddox was the first ship to be attacked by the U.S. Navy .
 We also had some radio intercept intelligence which tended to confirm the attack . We had radio intercepts which indicated the attack was likely to be carried out .
 Admiral Moorer and I in Honolulu and General Wheeler dn Washington, Secretary McNamara in Washington . We received an order to attack the next day, attack North Vietnamese patrol craft bases .
 In the meantime we were still receiving amplifying messages from the Maddox, Turner Joy, and Captain Herrick . We are still getting messages from them from Maddox and Turner Joy .
 Generally speaking, they seemed to still indicate that the attack occurred . However, they still seemed to indicate that it occurred .
 Turner Joy said that crew members saw torpedoes and that a target burned when hit, and that her men saw black smoke . Turner Joy: "The crew saw a target burn when hit"
 "We were still goi g back and forth about the attack in the Tonkin Gulf. So while we were getting the planes ready aboard the Ticonderoga and the Constellation, we were still goingi g . We were getting ready to go to war, but were still
 You have to validate the fact that you were actually under attack . This is the thing that will decide whether a retaliatory attack is ordered . It will decide if a retaliation is ordered by the U.S.
 Moorer and Sharp decided on their own that there had been an attack and that's what they told McNamara, and that’s when Byesident Johnson ordered the retaliatory attack .
 Vice Admiral Blouin, Admiral Sharp, and Vice Admiral Johnson reveal intense pressure from the President and the Secretary of Defense for the Navy chain of command to make an instant assessment as to whether or not an attack had occurred .
 Comments suggest the decision to retaliate against North Vietnam was based on a hurried and tentative evaluation of incomplete and ambiguous information . Furthermore, their comments suggest that the decision was made based on an incomplete evaluation of information .
 Not even the on-scene commander was certain what actually had happened, but tentative indications that there may have been an attack were viewed as sufficient cause for ordering retaliation . The on-site commander was not sure what had actually happened .
 As early as 3:10 P.M., Eastern Daylight Time, President Johnson gave McNamara tentative authorization to conduct retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam . McNamara gave the president tentative authorization for the strikes .
 At 5:19 P.M. President Johnson approved plans for air strikes against DRV naval vessels in or near five North Vietnamese ports, and against a fuel depot ashore .
 Seven DRV vessels, heavily damaged ten, and slightly damaged 16 others destroyed . Almost all of the major vessels in the DRV Navy at the time .
 Maddox and Turner Joy resumed the Desoto patrol off North Vietnam from August to August &, with no further incidentee. Maddox & Turner Joy .
 The stage was set for the 1965 escalation of the U.S. role in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War began in 1965 .
 North Vietnam and the Viet Cong were not cowed by the U.S. resolution or the retaliatory air strikes and conducted further attacks on Americans in South Vietnam . The Viet Cong and North Vietnam continued to carry out further attacks against Americans .
 The second point is that there was a similar incident in the Tonkin Gulf a month after the August 4 incident . The incident occurred in the same area a month ago .
 USS Morton and USS Richard S Edwards commenced a Desoto patrol off the coast of North Vietnam on September 13, 1964 . The two ships remained at least twenty miles from the coast .
 Two destroyers detected two radar contacts closing them at high speed, set general quarters, and requested air support . At 7:29 P.M. on September 18, the two destroyers were closing in on each other .
 At 8:16 P.M. they fired warning shots and at 8:22 P.m. opened fire on the contacts . At 8.16 p.m., the contacts were fired at least twice . At the time of the shooting, the contacts had been in contact with
 A Navy investigation later concluded that a North Vietnamese patrol boat probably was in the vicinity of the ships at the beginning of the incident . There were no attacks on the destroyers, but no attacks .
 North Vietnamese patrol craft were detected at the beginning of the August 4 incident . There were no attacks on the United States destroyers and the targets they were all false . The same thing may have happened in the same incident .
 The chain of command reacted to the September 18 incident with restraint and skepticism . Second, in contrast to the August 4 incident, the chain reacted with restraint, skepticism, the author says .
 The chain of command from the President to CINCPACFLT was predisposed to believe that there had been a North Vietnamese attack and paid little heed to the on-scene commander's doubts .
 On September 18 the JCS initially recommended retaliatory air strikes, but reversed itself due to lack of evidence that there had been an attack on the destroyers . The JCS said there was no evidence of an attack .
 Officials in Washington spent hours bombarding Navy commanders in the Pacific with demands for more information on the second incident before they felt they had sufficient information to base the decision to retaliate .
 The President and the Secretary of Defense were unable to control U.S. Navy operations in the Tonkin Gulf while the incidents were in progress . The President was thus unable .
 Operations decisions made by tactical-level commanders did not diverge from the political-military objectives of political-level leaders . Military-political objectives were not diverged from political objectives, according to the study .
 Military commanders and political leaders were in agreement that North Vietnamese attacks on U.S. ships warranted retaliatory air strikes . The Desoto patrol should be resumed after the incidents in order to assert freedom of the seas .
 The on-scene commander had the greatest doubt that there had been a North Vietnamese attack on August 4 . Captain Herrick cautioned against a hasty reaction to the attack .
 National leaders temporarily lost control over events in the Tonkin Gulf during the incidents . However, this did not result in uncontrollable escalation of the confrontations .
 The pattern in the two incidents is one of momentary decoupling followed by immediate disengagement . The patterns in the incidents are similar but are not always followed by a disengagement, say experts .
 On-scene commanders, acting on their own authority, used limited force in response to apparent imminent attacks . Rules of engagement: Use limited force .
 They were not required to request--and did not seek--permission from higher authority to use force in self-defense . The victims did not have to request permission from higher authorities .
 On-scene commanders halted engagements on their own authority and without guidance from higher in the chain of command . Once the immediate threat had been countered, commanders halted the engagements .
 The first might be called military prudence: on-scene commanders did not want to fight under tactically unfavorable circumstances . The second might be the military's decision not to engage in combat in the first place .
 Air support arrived after the PT boats were driven off by Maddox in the first incident, and was ineffective due to darkness and low cloud cover in the second incident . Air support was ineffective in both incidents .
 It may be the case that when U.S. forces are the victim of an unanticipated attack, tactical military considerations lead military commanders to the same general course of action that political considerations lead national leaders toward .
 In the Tonkin Gulf incidents, military considerations tended to make tactical-level commanders more cautious than political-level leaders . Military considerations tend to be more cautious in Vietnam, CNN says .
 The second escalation-inhibiting factor was compliance by on-scene commanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control . On-scene commander compliance was also a factor .
 Hot pursuit of the attacking force in international waters was authorized and used on August 2 when Navy planes attacked the PT boats after they had disengaged . Hot pursuit was authorized .
 These provisions specifically approved by the President allowed force to be used without further permission from higher authority, but also resulted in the engagements halting quickly rather than escalating . These provisions were approved by President Obama .
 President and — of Defense McNamara Placed on confirming that there actually had been a North Vietnamese attack the night of August 4 . The third escalation-inhibiting factor was the emphasis .
 They did not accept initial reports from the Tonkin Gulf at face value . They insisted on knowing the basis for the conclusion that there had been an attack on destroyers .
 The August 4 incident in the Tonkin Gulf suggests three conditions that can cause escalation-inhibiting factors to break down . The incident suggests three factors that can break down: escalation inactivity, escalation and escalation .
 The first condition is tongseeck frustration and animosity toward the other side in a crisis or incident, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 United States leaders had for years been growing increasingly belligerent toward North Vietnam due to its support for the Viet Cong . U.S. leaders had been preparing contingency plans for direct military action against the North .
 An apparent North Vietnamese attack on U.S. forces would be likely to provoke a strong United States response . This created an atmosphere in which an apparent attack on United States forces would have a strong response . The U.N. military says an apparent North-Vietnamese attack on
 The second condition is the immediate reiterate of a confirmed provocation by the other side, particularly when the United States response to the prior incident was retrained and warned against further incidents . The U.S. response to a prior incident has been retrained .
 The United States reacted with notable restraint to the confirmed August 2 North Vietnamese attack on Maddox . The U.S. merely warned against further attacks .
 The third condition is for all levels in the military chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary .
 A strong unity of views can suppress skepticism that normally greets ambiguous initial reports of a military incident, or lead to hasty assessment of the incident in the rush to launch retaliatory attacks .
 The President decided to retaliate before a complete assessment of the evidence had been made . This appears to have occurred in the United States decision to retaliate after the August 4 incident-McNamara .
 The U.S. responses ta the incidents did not send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious accidental military incidents . The United States responded to the incidents in the wake of the attacks in Afghanistan .
 Desoto patrols apparently were misperceived by th Vietnam . However, the-Desoto patrols appeared to be misperceive by the Vietnamese .
 Some U.S. intelligence analysts and military officers suspected that the North Vietnamese misperceived the Desoto patrol destroyers as participating in or directly supporting OPLAN 34A attacks on North Vietnam .
 None of the three tensions was serious because the U.S. responses were limited . All levels of the chain of command held generally similar views toward the need to retaliate .
 The only aspect of the incidents that generated tension was the demand for confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack in the second incident .
 McNamara’s efforts to confirm that there had been an attack somewhat annoyed Admirals Sharp and Moorer, both of whom had immediately recommended retaliation . McNamara had initially recommended retaliation.
 Confirmation was necessary so that retaliation could be justified politically . Confirmation is necessary to prevent retaliation against President Obama's actions, officials say .
 Liberty's mission was collection of electronic and communications intelligence, though for important reasons the Navy cloaked this mission under the cover of electromagnetic propagation research .
 Armament was four .50-caliber machine guns-leaving the ship defenseless against any attack with weapons heavier than small arms . Armament consisted of four machine guns .
 Although a superb platform for peacetime intelligence collection, Liberty was extremely vulnerable when operating in close proximity to hostilities . Liberty was very vulnerable to hostilities when operating close to hostilities.
 Liberty was ordered to the Eastern Mediterranean as Arab-Israeli tensions reached the crisis point in late May . Liberty was deployed to the region as tensions reached a crisis point .
 Specific forces were not designated to defend Liberty because the U.S. did not have forces designated to do so . Read a Chapter VII for a description of the background to the 1967 war, United States policy during the crisis .
 At least five messages were sent from the coasts of the belligerents--apparently in response to Arab claims that the U.S. Navy was aiding Israel . Egypt and Israel have warned that the seas off their coasts are war zones .
 Due to misrouting of the messages to communications stations that were not handling cra fic to Liberty, the ship did not receive these crucial ieomwages .
 Commander Sixth Fleet gained operational control of Liberty shortly before the ship commenced its mission . Liberty did not have ships or aircraft alerted to provide support for Liberty in the event of an attack .
 At 2:00 P.M. two Israeli Mirage jet fighters attacked Liberty with rockets and cannon fire, followed by Mystere jet fighters attacking with rockets, Napalm and Napalm .
 At 2:35 P.M. three Israeli torpedo boats attacked, launching at least five torpedoes, one of which struck Liberty in its intelligence space . One of the torpedoes struck Liberty's intelligence space.
 An hour later the torpedo boats returned to offer assistance, which was refused by Liberty . Liberty refused the offer of assistance, and the boats returned .
 Liberty was able to report that she was under Stradey to the Sixth Fleet's carriers .
 Liberty apparently was unable to communicate with the Sixth Fleet during the first half hour of the attack due to power outages and damage to radio antennas and transmitters . Liberty is the first ship to be attacked by the U.S. Navy .
 Ennes has Claimed that the Israelis jammed Liberty's radios, but this cannot be substantiated . This could well have been electroMagnetic interference rather than deliberate jamming .
 There were no reports from Sixth Fleet units of communications jamming during the attack on Liberty . No reports of jamming were made during the operation .
 What Liberty's radiomen detected was probably Israeli electronic countermeasures intended to jam air search and fire control radars . It would have been normal if the Israeli pilots thought they were attacking an armed warship .
 Saratoga received and immediately relayed a second voice report from Liberty, stating "Three unidentified gunboats approaching, vessels now... nf3 Liberty did not finish the transmission, probably due to the Israeli attack".
 Saratoga received and relayed a fourth voice report from Liberty, stating "Hit by torpedo starboard side" Liberty was hit by a torpedo on the side of the ship . Liberty was the first ship to be hit by torpedo .
 $2uS5 Saratoga message, USS SARATOGA 0812352 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified. Need assistance ineteadvatary en” These are $2US5 messages, USS Saratoga 0812
 Saratoo was relaying over radioteletype a report received over HF/SSB voice radio . Saratsoo was the first person to relay a radio report received by a radio station .
 Saratoga probably preceded the radioteletype message with a voice radio report to CTF 60 or COMSIXTHFLT . The message is believed to have been sent from the USS Saratoga .
 USS Saratoga message, USS SARATOGA 081245Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified. Liberty incident file, Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Washington, DC).
 None of these reports give the identity of the attackers . An important point is that no one has been identified as the attackers.
 COMSIXTHFLT did not know the identity of the attackers until after he had ordered initial actions in support of Liberty . The attackers' identity was not known until after the initial actions were made .
 Vice Admiral Martin, COMSIXTHFLT, responded to Liberty's reports that she was under attack by ordering Saratoga and USS America (CVA 66) to launch aircraft to defend Liberty against further 6 attacks .
 Admiral Wylie, letter to author, March 28, 1988 . Saratoga launch fouy armed A-1's ASAP same Mission .
 There was no question that Vice Admiral Martin had authority to use force to defend Liberty . "There were no questions about whether he had the right to take action," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is no question" that Martin had the authority to fight Liberty .
 Admiral Horacio Rivero, Vice Chief of Naval Operations in 1967, has stated, in reference to the Liberty incident, that “No commander needs permission to defend himself, his forces, or other U.S. forces under attack when he can assist.”
 Admiral Horacio Rivero, Jr., Jr., wrote a letter to author, March 10, 1988 . Sixth Fleet commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 081250Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 .
 The carriers did not have planes on alert to support Liberty . The A-4s and A-l1s had to be fueled and armed, and their pilots briefed .
 The estimated launch times were 3:45 P.M. for America's A-4s and 4:00 P.m. for Saratoga's A.Ls . America's first A-Ls were launched at 3.45 p.m., 3:00
 Vice Admiral Martin also ordered Task Force 60 to close Liberty's position . The destroyers USS George F Davis and USS Massey will rendezvous with Liberty at 48 best speed . Task Force also ordered the destroyers George F. Davis (DD 937) and USS .
 Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813202 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified) COMS.COMSIXthFLT told Liberty over voice radio $0 -oemander sixth Fleet message .
 The planes launched at 3:45 P.M. and 4:00 P.m. were the first launched specifically to defend Liberty . The planes are the first to launch specifically to protect Liberty .
 Ennes Claims that prior to this America launched nuclear-armed alert aircraft to defend Liberty, but that they were recalled when higher authorities learned of it . Ennes claims that prior . authorities recalled the aircraft .
 America was conducting routine flight operations for training at the time of the attack . The earlier launches described by Ennes were probably probably training missions .
 It would have been routine for the carriers to have armed fighters on alert for air defense in the event of an air attack .
 It would have been routine in 1967 for the carriers to have nuclear-armed strike aircraft on alert for general war contingencies .
 The actions that Vice Admiral Martin did not take were as important as those he did take, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The actions he took were important, he says .
 He did not order attacks on Soviet forces in the Mediterranean or retaliation against Egyptian forces or airfields . Egypt did not retaliate against any of the attacks .
 "The actions he ordered were strictly limited to the defense of Liberty," he said . The actions were limited to 'defense of Liberty,' he added .
 The rules of engagement he issued were carefully crafted to avoid further incidents . "Rules of engagement" was carefully crafted, he said .
 The restraint and prudence shown by Vice Admiral Martin made a substantial contribution to preventing the Liberty incident from escalating to a superpower confrontation . The restraint . made a "substantial contribution" to preventing a confrontation between the two countries .
 COMSIXTHFLT made an initial voice report to CINCUSNAVEUR and Commander in Chief United States Forces Europe stating that Liberty was under attack and that he was taking action to defend her . C.C.F.E. made the initial call to C.
 COMSIXTHFLT sent a message situation report Gescribing in greater detail the actions he had ordered and informing USCINCEUR that he had declared the forces 50 attacking Liberty hostile .
 Sixth Fleet commander sent exercise 49 commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813052 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 .
 COMSIXTHFLT informed USCINCEUR of his actions before the planes were launched, allowing him to exercise control by negation should it have been necessary . The planes were then launched .
 None of Vice Admiral Martin's orders were countermanded by higher authorities . None of his orders was counter-mandated by authorities .
 Vice Admiral martin used his authority to declare a threatening force hostile in response to reports from Liberty that she was under attack . Vice Admiral Martin declared the force hostile .
 IAW (In accordance with] CINCUSNAVEUR INST {Instruction] P03120.5B forces attacking Liberty are declared hostile . IAW: Forces attacking Liberty declared hostile. IAW. P3120.
 Egyptian territorial limit {is] only 12 miles and Liberty right on edge . In addition brief pilots that Egypt's territorial limit is only 12 .
 Do not fly between Liberty and shoreline except as required to carry out provisions para ~2 above .
 At 4:14 P.M. the U.S. Defense Attache Office in Tel Aviv sent a message to COMSIXTHFLT and the chain of command reporting that Israel had informed the United States Naval Attache of an accidental attack on a United States ship off the
 This was the first indication received as to the identity of the attackers . This was first indication that the attackers were responsible for the attack .
 At 4:22 P.M., Liberty reported that she had identified the attackers as Israeli . Shortly thereafter, she reported that the attackers had been Israeli . Liberty also reported that they had identified Israeli attackers .
 COMSIXTHFLT at abut 4:30 P.M. ordered the attack aircraft fecalled . In response to these reports and a report from Liberty that the attacks had ended, the attacks ended .
 COMSIXTHFLT reported to CINCUSNAVEUR and USCINCEUR at 439 P.M. that he had recalled the aircraft 33 .
 Guidance from Washington lags far behind pace of events in the eastern Mediterranean . U.S. has been slow to react to events in eastern Mediterranean region .
 2 commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813362Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified) It was not until 4:16 that the U.S. Navy sent the message to the commander of the Sixth Fleet .
 Both messages apparently were sent before Washington learned that Israel was responsible for the attack .
 Neither of the messages had any impact on actions taken by the Sixth Fleet . The Sixth Fleet was in the middle of the night .
 The JCS message would have been received by Vice Admiral martin about the same time he received the DAO Tel Aviv message reporting Israeli responsibility for the attack . Vice Admiral Martin would have received the message about the attack about the time he got the message .
 Secretary of Defense authorization to use force would have been received by Vice Admiral martin about 15 minutes after he ordered recall 34 of the planes sent to defend Liberty .
 Late arrival of messages could seriously complicate crisis management efforts, prompting new fighting after initial disengagement . Vice Admiral Martin acted entirely on his own authority .
 The destroyers rendezvoused with Liberty early on June 9, and later that morning helicopters from America began evacuating Liberty's wounded .
 In the case of the Liberty in the Mediterranean in June as an example, I thought the Liberty had been attacked by Soviet forces. In June, the Liberty was attacked by the Soviet forces, he said .
 Thank goodness, our carrier commanders did not launch immediately against the Soviet forces who were operating in the Mediterranean at the time . The Soviet forces were operating there in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Thank goodness, we did not launch against the Egyptians . We took time to find out it was the Israelis. Thank goodness for not launching against Egypt .
 Jonathan T Howe, Multicrises: Sea Power and Global Politics in the Missile Age (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), 102. Howe: "Multicrises" was a key moment in history . Howe: 'Multicris' was a time when the world
 COMSIXTHFLT and CTF 60 took no actions against Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . CTF60 took no action against Soviet forces in Mediterranean .
 Vice Admiral Donald D Engen, Commanding Officer of America in 1967, states that the Sixth Fleet knew the Soviets could not have conducted the attack because there were no Soviet aircraft or naval vessels in the vicinity of Liberty . Engen: "No Soviet aircraft, naval vessels were in the
 Rear Admiral Wylie states that there was no concern at CINCUSNAVEUR that the Soviets had conducted the attack . Rear Admiral Horacio Rivero states that the CNO's staff was not concerned about the attack by the Soviets .
 Secretary of Defense was not able to directly control Sixth Fleet actions during the incident . In retrospect, it is perhaps fortunate that McNamara's inaccurate suspicions as to who had attacked Liberty .
 Officials in Washington made an important contribution to preventing the Liberty incident from escalating to a superpower confrontation by notifying the Soviet Union of the attack and the U.S. response .
 In his memoirs, 8 vice Admiral Donald D Engen, letter to author, March 21, 1988; Rear Admiral Wylie, March 28, 1988, Rear Admiral Rivero, March 10, 1988 . Rear Admiral Donald Engen wrote to author on March 21 1988; Admiral
 There was a possibility that the incident might lead to even greater misfortune, I sent a message to Chairman Kosygin on the hot line . I sent it to avoid further confusion and tragedy that I sent him a message .
 I told him exactly what had happened and advised him that carrier aircraft were on their way to the scene to investigate . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 I wanted him to know, I said, that investigation was the sole purpose of these flights, and I hoped he would inform the proper parties . I said he would . He said he hoped he . would inform him of the investigation .
 Kosygin replied that our message had been received and the informafion had been relayed immediately to the Egyptians . The message was relayed to the Egyptian government .
 President Johnson somewhat distorted the mission of the planes that had been sent to assist Liberty . The planes were fully armed and had been ordered to defend her, rather than just investigate .
 Portraying their mission as investigation was probably intended to allay Soviet and Egyptian concerns . Portrayed their mission was probably aimed at allaying Soviet and Egypt concerns .
 The President's use of the hot line was important because Sixth Fleet actions in support of Liberty could have been misperceived as imminent United States intervention .
 Israel officially claimed that it had “erroneously’t attacked Liberty believing that it was an Egyptian vessel, and apologized for the attack . Israel said it had attacked Liberty thinking it was Egyptian vessel .
 In June 1968 Israel paid $3. million to the families of those killed . In April 1969, Israel agreed to pay $3 million for the men wounded in the attack . In December 1980, Israel also paid $6 million for damage to the Ship of Israel .
 Political factors prevented political-level leaders from exercising direct control over Sixth Fleet actions . However, decoupling did not occur .
 The actions ordered by Vice Admiral Martin were restrained and anticipated the desires of top-level officials in Washington, D.C. The actions were restrained, the vice admiral says .
 Interactions were stratified during the incident--evolving independently at the political and tactical levels--they were not decoupled . Thus, although interactions were . stratified, they were . evolving independently at . the political, tactical levels .
 Tactical-level interaction did not become decoupled in the Liberty incident, the case does shed light on three escalation-inhibiting factors . The Liberty incident was the first of its kind .
 On-scene commander contributed to avoiding an unnecessary clash with Soviet or Egyptian forces . First, by fully complying with with the standing rules of engagement and limiting his actions to those necessary to defend Liberty, he avoided a clash with the Soviets .
 The last two factors emphasize the importance of communications among the parties to a crisis for avoiding misperception and escalation .
 Vice Admiral Martin carefully limited the Sixth Fleet response to the attack . The President used the hot line to prevent misperceptions from arising . Vice Adm. Martin carefully .
 The Israeli attack on Liberty was itself an inadvertent military incident . No further incidents occurred in the wake of the attack .
 There was little tension between political and nahi Cung ""Coan Tadeo tices" because the incident was over before significant diplomatic activity could begin .
 The limitations that Vice Admiral Martin placed on his forces supported United States political objectives in the crisis . The limitations supported U.S. political objectives .
 Sixth Fleet response to the attack was small-scale and of short duration . There was no tension between performance of crisis missions and maintaining readiness to perform wartime missions .
 USS Pueblo was launched in 1944 as FP-344, a light cargo ship in service with the Army Transportation Corps . The ship was mothballed in 1954, and the ship was taken over in 1968 .
 The ship was delivered to the Navy in 1966, renamed Pueblo, underwent extensive conversion for its new duties, and was commissioned on May Tet 1967 . It was commissioned in May 1967 .
 Pueblo's primary mission, like that of Liberty, was collection of electronic and communications intelligence . It was designated an environmental research ship with the cover of conducting oceanographic research .
 The crew consisted of six officers, seventy-five enlisted men, and two civilian oceanographers . The crew of the ship was six men and two women .
 Armament was two .50calibre machine guns--installed in the wake of the Liberty incident--which had little value for self-defense . Armament of the two machine guns was little for self defense .
 In 1968 detente had not yet lessened Soviet-American Cold War tensions . The U.S. was deeply involved in the Vietnam War, and the protest movement against the war was rapidly gaining momentum .
 The international setting on the Korean Peninsula was dominated by North Korean hostility to the governments of South Korea and the United States . North Korea has long been hostile to South Korea, the U.S.
 An armististice had been in effect on the Peninsula since the armistice of July 1953 . Numerous armed clashes had occurred near the demilitarized zone and in South Korean waters .
 Political and military tensions had been high in the two weeks before Pueblo arrived on station . North Korea renewed talk of uniting the Peninsula militarily in recent weeks .
 North Korea stepped up its propaganda claims of South Korean and American provocations against the North . North Korea also warned that military action would be taken against incursions into its territorial waters .
 This incident further increased tensions on the Peninsula, bringing North and South Korea to the brink of a military confrontation . North and North Korea have been at odds for years over the years .
 CINCPAC then forwarded the proposal to the Joint Reconnaissance Center . The proposal was then forwarded to CinCPAC . CINCAC then sent it to Joint Reception Center .
 Joint Reconnaissance Center served JCS as the central coordination center for peacetime reconnaissance and surveillance missions . JCS was the center of peacetime missions for the U.S. Air Force .
 JRC passed the proposal to the Defense Intelligence Agency for a final evaluation of the proposal and threat assessment . JRC has been given the proposal by the JRC .
 JRC added Pueblo's mission proposal to hundreds of others in the ""Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule, January 1968,” which was reviewed by the military services, Central Intelligence Agency , National Security Agency , and State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research .
 The Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule was submitted to the Joint oneeise . After this review, which generated no objections to the minimal risk assessment .
 On this eccasion, the boceatitesis Deputies, acting on behalf of the Chiefs, actually approved the schedule .
 On December 29, 1967, Nitze approved the Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule, including Pueblo's apparently routine mission . Nitze also approved the monthly reconnaissance schedule, including the mission .
 Similar surveillance missions conducted off the coasts of the Soviet Union and China were often subjected to harassment, but never attacked .
 North Korea had not reacted to previous surveillance missions and had a very small navy, so the danger to Pueblo was assessed as minimal . North Korea did not react to previous missions .
 United States military and intelligence officials believed that North Korea would not attack a U.S. vessel in international waters . North Korea believed to be unlikely to attack a United States vessel, officials say .
 A mission off the coast of North Korea was selected for Pueblo's first operation . The mission was selected because it appeared to be a relatively safe way to train an inexperienced crew for more demanding and dangerous missions off China and the Soviet Union .
 Admiral John J Hyland, then CINCPACFLT, has aptly described Pueblo'’s first mission as a ‘shakedown’ voyage . Admiral Hyland has described the mission as ‘a “shakedown""
 There were no contingency plans for support of Pueblo in an emergency, officials say . The state has no plans to support the community in any way .
 Pueblo was overflown by North Korean Mig jet fighters . The patrol boat was soon joined by three P-4 torpedo boats . The attack was the first of its kind .
 Pueblo started heading for sea, but at 1:27 P.M. was fired on by the SO-1 and the P-4's . The SO-2 and P-3's fired on at 1.27 p.m. on July 4 .
 In response to a signal to ""Follow me"" from the SO-1, Pueblo started into Wonsan harbor . The SO1 sent a "Follow me" signal to follow . In response .
 Pueblo was boarded and seized by the North Koreans at 2:32 P.M. It was the only death in the incident . After once attempting to stop, which drew a barrage of fire that caused the only one death .
 Pueblo was in communications with the United States Naval Communications Station at Kamiseya, Japan over high frequency encrypted radioteletype at the time of the attack . At 8:30 P.M. at 8 p.m. the Haebore°’ Puebl
 At the time of the attack, Pueblo was unable to use this circuit due to a frequency shift that was in progress, degrading the net . The attack was the first time the net had been attacked by a hacker .
 Pueblo sent the reports in the “PINNACLE” category reserved for emergencies and other serious matters of “national level” interest .
 OPREP-3 PINNACLE reports automatically sent to every level in the military chain of command, including the White House .
 Pueblo's radiomen sent informal real-time status reports to Kamiseya over radioteletype until the ship was boarded . The ship's status updates were sent over to the ship's crew .
 Such informal messages were known as "" operator chatter” and had to be put into official messages by Kamiseya before commands not listening to Pueblo directly could receive them . Such informal messages had to be put into official messengers before commands not 
 The message was relayed by Kamiseya and received by the COMNAVFORJAPAN duty officer twenty-three minutes after it was sent . The message had been relayed by the Komiseya crew .
 Pueblo reported that the North Koreans had ordered the ship to follow them and were preparing to board it . In this message, the ship reported that they had ordered it to follow and were ready to board the ship .
 Kamiseya immediately relayed this message to COMNAVFORJAPAN, where the duty officer received it only four minutes after itewas sent by Pueblo . Kamisey immediately relayed the message to ComNAvFORJapan .
 This was the message that served as a trigger--alerting the chain of command that there was a genuine emergency in the Sea of Japan . This is the first time the U.S. has sent such a message to the Japanese government .
 COMNAVFORJAPAN staff began notifying other commands of the emergency . The COMNAvFORJapan staff began to notify other commands .
 Rear Admiral Frank L Johnson, Commander United States Naval Forces Japan, was notified in Tokyo by telephone of the emergency . Pueblo sent the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE . Rear Admiral Johnson was notified by telephone .
 At 1.53 P.M., thirty-five minutes after Pueblo sent the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE, the duty officer at Fifth Air Force headquarters was notified via secure telephone of the emergency . /° 69 rhid. rpid. /°69
 COMNAVFORJAPAN sent several “CRITIC” messages containing Pueblo's operator chatter describing the North Korean attack . COMNAvFOR JAPAN also sent messages containing operator chatter about the North Korea attack .
 CRITIC was the highest priority of message, reserved for strategic warning and alerting of National Command Authority of attacks on U.S. forces . At the time, the message was used to alert the Pentagon of possible attacks .
 The Navy communications system was able to maintain connectivity between Pueblo and the radio station at Kamiseya, but experienced serious delays in relaying time-critical Messages to commanders that needed them .
 This is certainly plausible, and means that he would have received Pueblo’s reports of the attack real-time . This would have been the first time he had been in contact with the attack .
 Admiral Bringle, then in the Tonkin Gulf on USS Kitty Hawk, has stated that his radiomen also monitored Pueblo’s operator ~ ‘chatter, and that he ordered Enterprise into the Sea of Japan in response to the chatter .
 Admiral Bringle was probably receiving COMNAVFORJAPAN's CRITIC messages relaying the Operator chatter . The Admiral was probably getting the messages from COMNAvFOR JAPAN .
 Admiral Sharp, who was visiting Admiral Bringle on Kitty Hawk, has stated that shortly after 5:00 P.M. he received the CRITIC messages forwarding Pueblo's operator chatter . Admiral Sharp was visiting the Kitty Hawk when the messages began to be forwarded to Admiral Br
 Second, about eighteen minutes after it was sent by Pueblo, Kaniseya retransmitted the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE as a CRITIC message to DIA, NSA, JCS and other commands .
 White House received the CRITIC at 11:43 P.M. (earlier than JCS) Situation Room watch officers began notifying National Security Advisor Walt W Rostow and other top officials of the emergency . JCS Chairman General Earle G Wheeler was notified of the message
 By the time top-level officials had been notified of the emergency, it was too late to take action to prevent seizure of the ship . Meanwhile, Pueblo had been boarded and seized by the North Koreans at 11:35 P.M. , and would enter Wonsan
 U.S. forces in the Far East did not respond to Pueblo's calls for assistance in time to prevent the ship from being captured by North Korea .
 The Fifth Air Force had seven F-d fighter-bombers on alert in South Korea, but were configured for nuclear weapons . The Korean Air Force also has seven nuclear-capable F-D fighter bombers .
 Commander Fifth Air Force also ordered planes dispatched from Okinawa, where there were eighteen fighter-bombers . Commander Fifth . Air Force commander ordered planes from Okinawa .
 Two F-105s, armed only with 20 millimeter cannon to save time, were launched at 4:11 P.M. but could not reach Pueblo before dark . They had to land and refuel in South Korea because they had to return to refuel .
 Enterprise carried a total of fifty-nine fighter and attack aircraft . Thirty-five of the aircraft were operational on January 23 . Enterprise had thirty-five operational aircraft .
 Epes, Commander Task Group 77. Epes received Pueblo's first OPREP-3 PINNACLE at 2:30 P.M. and received the initial CRITIC messages eight minutes later . Epes is the commander of Commander Task Force 77 .
 Pueblo was boarded almost three hours after it was boarded and twenty-five minutes after it reached the mouth of Wonsan Harbor . The ship was taken off the coast of North Korea on Monday morning .
 If COMNAVFORJAPAN had requested support from Enterprise as soon as Pueblo'‘s first OPREP-3 PINNACLE was received at 1:21 P.M., Enterprise probably would have been able to place attack aircraft over the ship before it
 Enterprise and Truxton received and executed this message at 3:50 P.M., Vice Admiral Lee, interview by author, February 5, 1988 . Enterprise and . Truxton got and executed the message at . 3:51 P.m.
 A U.S. navy destroyer was also ordered to the scene, but could not arrive until the next day . Pueblo was tied up in Wonsan, North Korea .
 There were no contingency plans to support Pueblo in the event of an attack, and no air or naval forces were designated to provide such support . No contingency plans were made to provide support .
 U.S. forces were unprepared to provide quick-reaction support to Pueblo when she was attacked . The United States was unprepared for quick-response support to the attack .
 Aircraft that were not ready for a strike mission would have required one to two hours for fueling and arming and pilot briefings before they could even take off . Aircraft not ready to take off would have to wait for fuel and arming before taking off .
 The nearest United States warships would have required at least eighteen hours to reach Pueblo, Colorado . The nearest U.S. Navy ships would have needed at least 18 hours to get to the town .
 Air Force and navy commanders in the Far East concluded they would not be able to provide adequate forces to support Pueblo prior to the ship entering Wonsan Harbor, or prior to darkness, when providing air 84 support would be extremely difficult .
 When these factors were assessed against actual times of events associated with the incident, time of receipt of the information that the ship was under attack, and force response time, it was apparent to all levels of command that the Pueblo could not be retrieved by any action .
 The third factor that inhibited an immediate response was the presence of large numbers of North Korean air force Mig fighters and the close proximity of North Korea surfaceto-air missile sites around Wonsan .
 The ship had reported Migs overhead before being captured, indicating that the North Korean air force had been alerted to provide air cover .
 It might have been necessary to strike North Korean surface-to-air missile sites in order to protect the attack aircraft and their fighter escort .
 Any Navy warships sent to rescue Pueblo would have required substantial air cover . Similarly, any Navy warships would have needed substantial air support .
 U.S. military commanders believed that once Pueblo had been seized, any response would have to be relatively largescale and include a strong fighter escort for the strike force .
 Their judgement was that the North Koreans would not be cowed by only a few attack aircraft, which would be relatively easy to shoot aoa l . The perception that a large-scale response was called for further increased the time required to mount a response, which reinforced the view .
 Rules of engagement and standing orders did not inhibit U.S. commanders from providing support to Pueblo prior to the ship entering Wonsan . Rules of Engagement and standing order did not . not inhibit United States .
 At the time of the attack, the U.S. had the historic right-codified internationally by Article 51 of the United Nations Charter~--to take any action in self-defense proportionate to the attack and necessary to protect the ship .
 The U.S. could have taken steps to prevent the capture of the USS Pueblo would have been fully justified, author says . "Whatever military steps the United States could have take within these limits from the air or on the sea," he says .
 There were no rules eof engagement limiting going to the aid of Pueblo during this time . No rules were put in place limiting the aid efforts .
 In 1955 President Eisenhower approved a national Security Council staff proposal that a distinction be drawn between self-defense and reprisals . The proposal was approved by the National Security Council . President Eisenhower had approved the proposal .
 Military commanders were authorized to use force in self-defense, including hot pursuit into the airspace or territorial waters of other nations under certain circumstances . Military commanders can use force against any nation's enemies .
 Only the President can order reprisals, generally considered to be any retaliatory attacks against the 94 territory of another country .
 An effective rescue mission probably could not have been carried out without suppressing North Korean air and coastal defenses . There would have been a high risk of weapons directed against North Korean haval vessels inadvertently impacting ashore .
 Moorer, Navy commanders had to get authorization from higher authority before taking military action against North Korea . Moorer: Navy commanders must get authorization before taking action .
 Special Siam tees that investigated the incident states that combat action after Pueblo arrived in the harbor could be viewed as retaliatory in nature, requiring approval of 99 by higher authority .
 General Wheeler testified that on the morning of January 23, he received a “hold” order from “higher authority,” which could only be the Secretary of Defense and the President . He testified that the order came from a ‘higher authority’
 The U.S. aircraft arrived in the Sea of Japan at 12:25 A.M. the next morning . It was four hours ee, tied up in Wonsan, four hours after the U.N. arrived .
 Washington had not established a hold order on our forces until 0025 on the 24th January, Korea time (10:25 Washington time on the 23rd) Korea time . Our operational commanders were apparently not precluded from exercising their own judgement in respect to providing some assistance to the P
 Operational commanders had both the authority and the opportunity to fg act 1f they had been able to do so immediately, it would appear .
 U.S. forces were not authorized to engage North Korean forces inside North Korean territorial waters . Military actions taken after Pueblo was inside the North Korean port of Wonsan would have constituted reprisals, thus requiring approval of the President .
 The restrictions essentially halted United States military action in support of Pueblo from 4:45 P.M. onward . These restrictions essentially halt U.S. military action .
 President Johnson and his advisors considered a wide range of military options, but quickly decided that none of them were feasible . President Johnson decided not to pursue military action .
 The President decided against war, we don’t need two,” presenting an ultimatum to North Korea . McNamara’s excuse was ‘We've already got one of the problems we face,’ he said .
 President Johnson's primary concern was for the safe return of the crew, and he was also reluctant to become involved in a second conflict while deeply engaged in Vietnam .
 As a political gesture President Johnson ordered twenty-two Air Force reserve squadrons and six Navy reserve squads called up to active duty . Johnson ordered the call-up of the Air Force and Navy reserves .
 At the height of the buildup, the Navy had over eighteen warships in the Sea of Japan . Three aircraft carriers, two cruisers, and fourteen destroyers were among the warships . At the time of the build-up, the U.S. Navy had three aircraft carriers and two
 This show of force had no apparent effect on the North Koreans, who kept their air and naval forces close to shore . The U.S. Seventh Fleet was well clear of the United States Seventh Fleet .
 The Soviet Union reacted to the U.S. naval presence with vitriolic anti-American propaganda and harassment of the carrier task groups .
 Initially, five Soviet ships, including three destroyers, an intelligence collection ship, and an naval research ship, trailed the U.S. carriers . Initially, the Soviet ships trailed the United States carriers .
 On February 4, Soviet Tu-16 Badger bombers began intense surveillance of the U.S. carriers and repeatedly buzzed them at low altitude .
 This was the first instance of Soviet missile-armed aircraft conducting simulated strikes against U.S. warships during a period of international tension . The first time the Soviet aircraft conducted simulated strikes was conducted against United States warships .
 On February 6 a Soviet anti-carrier group, consisting of two Kynda-class cruisers, and four destroyers, took station in the Sea of Japan just north of the DMZ off the coast of North Korea-~a clear signal that the Soviet Union would oppose U
 On February 17 a Soviet destroyer and the research ship harassed the United States formation by conducting dangerous maneuvers violating the rules of the roaa . The U.S. formation was formed in February .
 Soviet simulated anti-carrier strikes and harassment significantly increased tensions in the Sea of Japan . Soviet simulated attacks on aircraft carriers significantly increased tension in the sea .
 Soviet harassment of U.S. naval forces in the Sea of Japan commenced after the United States began discussion with North Korea in Panmunjon on Pueblo .
 Admiral Hyland and Admiral Bringle state that there were no serious incidents between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Sea of Japan during this period .
 Admiral Hyland and Admiral Bringle wrote to author on March 24, 1988 . Hyland, Bringle and Hyland were admirals in the late 1980s .
 It is not clear what the Soviets were attempting to signal, however, exactly what they were trying to signal .
 The most likely Soviet intentions in 1968 were to deter the United States from taking military action against North Korea, to neutralize U.S. coercive threats during the talks with North Korea . The Soviet intentions were to demonstrate opposition to the United. States naval presence close to the Soviet Union in
 In 1968 and 1973 the Soviets did not commence simulated anti-carrier attacks until after tensions had started to ease . Such Soviet behavior does not mean that such Soviet behavior is not dangerous from a crisis management perspective . In 1973, the Soviets staged simulated attacks on aircraft carriers .
 A tense and dangerous situation can thus keep Spisicn at sea even while U.S. leaders perceive that the crisis has peaked and the danger of an armed clash has eased .
 The United States limited its response to protests and negotiations for the release of Pueblo's crew . Other than the symbolic military actions described above, the U.S. limited their response to the protests .
 The crew was imprisoned near Pyongyang, where for eleven months they were exploited for anti-American propaganda and subjected to torture and brutal treatment . For eleven months, the crew was exploited by the North Korean regime .
 The United States signed a confession that the Pueblo had intruded into North Korean waters . The U.S. immediately repudiated the confession, and the crew of the U.K. was released in Panmunjom .
 North Korea continued its harassment of the South Korean fishing fleet in 1968 . North Korea seized at least sixteen fishing boats in the same year .
 Emergency messages from Pueblo required over an hour to reach Washington and U.S. military commanders in the Pacific . Emergency messages required over a dozen minutes to reach the United States military .
 U.S. military commanders had authority to take military action in support of Pueblo . But they decided not to do so . The United States did not act .
 President Johnson was not confronted with having to halt combat operations or approve them after ne none eon initiated . President Johnson did not have to halt operations after ne ne none was initiated .
 The President did not have direct control over the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo . United States forces acted essentially as he would have wanted them to act under the circumstances, the President said .
 U.S. military commanders were reluctant to mount a response that would have been excessively vulnerable to North Korean attacks . United States was reluctant to respond to a North Korean attack .
 Loss of U.S. aircraft sent to defend Pueblo almost certainly would have generated escalatory pressures, so military prudence led to tactical decisions that supported crisis management objectives . Loss of United States aircraft .
 U.S. military commanders complied with the restrictions imposed on military operations by the standing peacetime rules of engagement . They did not order actions that would have constituted reprisals against North Rowers .
 The guidance contained in the peacetime rules of engagement may not have been appropriate to the specific circumstances, but U.S. military commanders were careful to comply with that guidance .
 Neither problem appears to have been arisen in the Pueblo incident, probably due to the relatively passive U.S. response to the North Korean provocation .
 North Korea succeeded in achieving a fait accompli, effectively limiting United States options to settling on North Korean terms . The passive U.S. response annoyed the South Koreans, but this arose from correct perceptions rather than from misperceptions .
 It apparently had little impact on long-term U.S.-South Korea relations with South Korea . The decision was made in 2009 .
 There were essentially no tensions between political and military considerations . The U.S. President Barack Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 All levels in the chain of command agreed that effective military action could not be taken before Pueblo entered Wonsan . The North Korean government agreed not to take action before entering the city .
 There was disagreement between military and civilian officials over whether or not reprisals should be taken against North Korea . Officials disagreed over whether to try to recover the ship by force .
 U.S. military commanders in the Far East had ample authority to take military action without having to seek permission from higher authorities . Pueblo remained in international waters so long as it remained international waters . The United States has ample authority in the region to take action without permission .
 The “hold” order issued to the military came well after commanders in the Far East had decided against taking immediate military action . It served only to avoid further incidents with North Korean forces while Washington weighed reprisal options .
 There was some tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions . "There is some tension" between readiness and readiness for war missions .
 Initial response to North Korean attack on Pueblo had to be made with U.S. forces in and around Japan and South Korea .
 Commander Fifth Air Force did not hesitate to order reconfigured planes reconfigured for conventional ordnance . Commander Fifth . Air Force ordered the planes to be reconfigured .
 The heavy commitment of United States forces in Vietnam limited the options available to U.S. military commanders . The President and Secretary of Defense are reluctant to take action against North Korea that could result in another military conflict .
 USS Stark was launched in 1980 and commissioned in 1982 . The 1987 Attack on the Stark was the USS Stark . USS Stark is one of the most famous ships in the world .
 Antiaircraft armament consists of Standard SM-1 25-mile range missiles fired from a MK 13 launcher, a 76 millimeter MK 75 gun and a 20 millimeter weapon system for defense against anti-ship missiles .
 Stark is well-armed for defense against air threats--particularly anti-ship cruise missiles . With these weapons and the SPS-49 air search radar, naval tactical data system, tactical data link, MK 92 fire control system, SLQ-32 electronic warfare system .
 Stark was a good choice for patrol duties in the Persian Gulf . With its modern systems for surveillance and self-defense, Stark was chosen for patrol .
 The Iran-Iraq War dominated the international situation in the Persian Gulf in May 1987 . The war was the first Gulf war between Iran and Iraq in the Middle East .
 Iran repelled the Iraqi assault and the war stagnated along the Shatt al-Arab estuary . Iraq's invasion of Iran in the 1980s was the first invasion of the region .
 Iran and Iraq frequently attacked oil facilities in the Persian Gulf in an effort to cripple each other's economies . The two countries often attacked oil platforms and shipping terminals in the region .
 During the first three years of the war, Iraq conducted sporadic attacks on shipping in the vicinity of Iranian ports and oil terminals .
 Iran was stopping and boarding tankers entering the Persian Gulf to verify that their destination was not Iraq . In retaliation for Iraqi attacks on oil facilities, Iran stopped and boarded tankers to verify their destination . Iran was responding to attacks on Iraqi oil facilities .
 The shipping war escalated in May 1984 with the first Iranian attacks on commercial shipping in the Persian Gulf . The first Iranian attack on commercial ships was in the early 1980s .
 Iraq also conducted attacks more frequently and covering more of the Persian Gulf . Iraq also escalated its attacks on shipping in 1984 .
 Mirage fighters fired Exocet missiles at whatever contacts they picked up on radar without attempting to identify their nationality . The missiles hit ships belonging to Iraq's allies on more than one occasion .
 Iran and Iraq intensified their anti-shipping campaigns in 1986, conducting twice as many attacks as in 1985 . Iraq and Iran carried out double as many anti-ship attacks in 1986 .
 Iran was viewed as the primary threat due to its hostility to the U.S. and Arab nations siding with Iraq . Iran was seen as the main threat to the United States and to Arab nations .
 U.S. Navy ships began escorting American-flag merchant ships in the Persian Gulf in 1984 . Iran began attacking shipping in 1984 after it began to attack shipping .
 In the spring of 1987 the United States was responding to a request from Kuwait for assistance in countering an Iranian campaign against Kuwaiti shipping . The U.S. was making final plans for reflagging and escorting Kuwaiti tankers .
 Their presence was intended to show the flag, demonstrating U.S. resolve to keep the sea lanes open and deterring Iran from attacking American shipping . The U.N. says the presence of the ships is intended to deter Iranian attacks .
 The rules of engagement required Navy ships to radio warnings to approaching planes and carefully assess their actions for indications of hostile intent before firing . To avoid inadvertently shooting down any of the many friendly aircraft over the Gulf, the rules were required .
 Prior to the Stark incident, procedures had appeared sufficient to avert possible attacks on U.S. Navy ships and avoid incidents with civilian aircraft .
 U.S. Navy ships were told that the primary danger to them was inadvertent attacks . They were told they were to regard all Iranian and Iraqi aircraft as potentially hostile .
 Stark was briefed on the Persian Gulf rules of engagement on February 28, 1987, just prior to joining the Middle East Force . Stark had been briefed on Persian Gulf Rules of Engagement .
 The report of the investigation into 112, ear Admiral Grant Sharp, “Formal Investigation Into the Circumstances Surrounding the Attack on the USS Stark on 17 May 1987,"" letter serial no. 1 . The report was published in 1987 .
 The Rules of Engagement that were in existence on 17 May 1987 were sufficient to enable Stark to properly warn the Iraqi aircraft, in a timely manner, of the presence of a U.S. warship; and, if the warning was not heeded, the rules of engagement were
 Stark authorized to use force in anticipatory selfdefense against any aircraft that demonstrated hostile intent by flying an apparent anti-ship attack profile and failing to respond to radio warnings to remain clear . Stark was authorized to . use force against aircraft that demonstrate hostile intent .
 Iraqi aircraft were routinely detected on antishipping flights, but usually did not provoke a reaction by U.S. Navy ships . Trddis' were regarded as nonhostile and their targets were inside the Iranian Exclusion Zone .
 Middle East Force warned on May 14 and 16, 1987, that Iraqi planes were conducting anti-shipping strikes in the central Persian Gulf (the area in which Stark was operating)
 Stark had received these messages and was thus fully appraised of the threat . Stark had been given the message . Stark was then briefed on the threat by the White House .
 On May 17, 1987, Stark was patrolling the central Persian Gulf about eighty-five miles northeast of Bahrain, twelve miles outside the Iranian Exclusion Zone . Stark was on patrol in the Persian Gulf .
 Stark was informed that a U.S. Air Force AWACS radar plane had aekectes an Iraqi aircraft two hundred miles from the ship . The plane was heading southeast along the coast of Saudi Arabia .
 Stark picked up the plane on air search radar when it was seventy miles away . Stark detected the Mirage's radar in the search mode . Stark also picked up a plane in the air search mode of the Mirage . Stark's plane was picked up by the Mirage and detected the plane's radar
 The near miss occurred in 1986 when an Iraqi missile struck a ship about six miles from the destroyer USS John Hancock .
 At 9:07 P.M. the Mirage launched an Exocet missile from a range of about twenty-two miles . The Mirage launched the missile at a range from 22 miles away .
 A minute later the plane launched a second Exocet missile at a range of about fifteen miles . The plane launched two missiles at a distance of about 15 miles .
 Stark was sending a second warning to the Iraqi plane when the second missile was launched . Stark was trying to warn the plane when he launched the missile . Stark's warning was the first time he had launched a missile at Iraq .
 Stark's electronic warfare system detected the homing radars on the Exocet missiles, but they were misidentified as the Mirage's radar in a fire control mode . Stark's electronic system detected the radars but misidentified them as Mirage's .
 The Tactical Action Officer ordered initial defensive actions after the missiles were launched . But the response was too late to be effective, he said .
 First detection of the missiles was a sighting by a lookout, who did not recognize them as missiles and sound a warning until seconds before they struck . First detection was a . sighting .
 About twenty seconds later the gecond missile eee the ship near where the first had struck, exploding just inside the ship . About 20 seconds later, the second missile struck the ship and exploded .
 No U.S. ships or aircraft attempted to engage the Iraqi plane before the attack . None were able to engage it after the attack in Iraq . The Iraqi plane was attacked by the Iraqi government in 2003 .
 The Urited States delivered a formal diplomatic protest to Iraq and demanded a full explanation for the attack . Iraq has been accused of attacking U.S. troops in Iraq .
 Reagan Administration spokesmen described the incident as an accident, a case of mistaken identity . Reagan administration spokesmen said the incident was an accident . Reagan Administration spokesman: "It was a mistake"
 The U.S. expected an apology and compensation for the men who died and the damage to the ship . The United States also stated that it expected compensation and an apology for the deaths .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff revised rules of engagement for Middle East Force ships . Radio warnings and defensive measures must be taken at longer ranges . All aircraft approaching United States Navy ships must be treated as potentially hostile .
 Iraqi spokesmen stated that the pilot believed he was attacking an Iranian ship and had not heard the warnings broadcast by Stark . The pilot thought he was attacked by the Iranian ship .
 Iraq also claimed Stark had been ten miles inside the Iranian Exclusion Zone . The United States refuted the claim, saying Stark was inside the zone .
 Iraq and the United States later reached an agreement on measures to prevent inadvertent attacks on U.S. Navy ships . The agreement was reached, but incidents continued to occur in which United. States ships had to warn off Iraqi aircraft .
 In some cases Iraqi planes veered away only seconds before they would have been shot down . Iraqi planes were shot down by Iraqi forces in the 1990s .
 This section will review the 1987 attack on Stark to answer the four research questions . Findings are based on the research conducted by Stark in 1987 . This section concludes that Stark was attacked in 1987 to raise questions about Stark .
 The identity of the attacking aircraft was known well before the attack . Military commanders at the scene quickly concluded that the attack had been inadvertent .
 No effort was made to shoot down the Iraqi plane because no U.S. forces were in a position to shoot it down . No United States forces were able to shoot the plane down because of lack of resources .
 Stark failed to take defensive actions authorized under the rules of engagement, he says . The only sense of failure to support national policy was that Stark took defensive actions . Stark's actions at the tactical level failed to support policy, he said .
 Because the attacking aircraft was known to have been Iraqi, there was no question that Iran might have been responsible for the attack on Stark .
 U.S. commanders in the Persian Gulf probably would have suspected Iran had conducted the attack . Without such intelligence, United States commanders in Persian Gulf would not have suspected that Iran had attacked .
 Circumstantial evidence pointing to Iranian complicity and lack of an Iraqi admission of responsibility could well have led to the President ordering retaliatory attacks on Iranian forces .
 It appears that inadvertent escalation would be more likely when intelligence is incomplete and ambiguous, supporting worst-case assessments of the nature and implications of an attack on U.S. forces .
 Onscene commanders could conclude that full-scale attacks on U.S. forces at the scene of the crisis will soon follow, placing a premium on preempting the expected enemy attack .
 On-scene commanders might have authority to preempt without having to seek permission from higher authority . Under certain circumstances commanders might be able to preempt preempt .
 Neither of these problems arose after the attack on Stark, but the attack itself was an inadvertent military incident .
 The attack on Stark illustrates the danger of inadvertent military incidents . U.S. naval forces are operating in close proximity to hostilities .
 U.S. Navy ships in Persian Gulf had authority under rules of engagement to use force in self-defense or anticipatory selfdefense . United States ships in the Persian Gulf have authority to use use of force in the self-defence .
 Navy commanders in the Persian Gulf had been placed in a complex and dangerous tactical environment . Nevertheless, Navy commanders were placed in an extremely dangerous environment .
 There was great risk of U.S. ships being attacked inadvertently or deliberately, and equally risk of political embarrassment to the United States if civilian of friendly military aircraft were shot down .
 Rules of engagement cannot eliminate the dangers and risks inherent in such an environment, they can, at best, reduce the likelihood of incidents with undesirable political or military consequences . Rules of Engagement are not enough to reduce the risk of an incident with undesirable consequences .
 Comparing circumstances in which the four incidents occurred and the possible motives of the attackers will shed further light on the nature of peacetimes attacks on U.S. Navy ships .
 There are important similarities in the international circumstances of the attacks . Circumstances of Peacetime attacks are similar to those of the terrorist attacks .
 In all four cases some form of conflict, tensions, or rivalry among the major powers structured the environment and affected American interests sufficiently to compel limited U.S involvement .
 In three cases a local armed conflict was being fought at the time of the incident . In three of the cases, the incident occurred in the country .
 In the Pueblo case an intense ideological and political rivalry, held in check only by an uneasy military armistice, had recently escalated to a high level of tension . A series of military clashes and a significant rise in casualties have been reported in recent weeks .
 As the case studies show, such factors are not always effective in preventing peacetime attacks on Navy ships .
 The situation was politically and militarily complex in all four cases . The United States had interests compelling it to become involved in the conflicts, but other interests and political constraints restrained the U.S. from direct intervention .
 Naval forces were employed to pursue limited political-military objectives . Thus, naval forces were used to . pursue limited military objectives .
 The missions being conducted by the U.S. Navy ships also varied considerably .
 In three of the cases the ships were on an intelligence collection mission (Tonkin Gulf, Liberty, and Pueblo), and in the remaining case the ship was on a surveillance mission . The ships were in the Gulf of Tonkin Gulf on intelligence collection missions .
 In two of the cases the missions had no important political objectives and were ordered for military purposes . The missions were ordered to carry out military purposes, not political objectives . The mission was ordered by military purposes only .
 The political implications of the naval missions in the four cases also varied . The military missions in each case are considered political and political .
 Two of the missions (Liberty and Pueblo) were viewed as nominally non-political, but had significant latent or inadvertent political impact . Two missions were seen as non-politically neutral, but also had significant political implications .
 If one accepts the theory that the Israeli attack on Liberty was deliberate, then it could be an inadvertent signal of retrenchment . Israel-symbolizing opposition to unrestrained Israeli offensives against neighboring Arab countries, particularly new offensive action against Syria .
 Pueblo appears to have sent an inadvertent signal of hostility to North Korea . It symbolizes support for South Korean offensive action against the North . The U.S. appears to be backing South Korean military action against North Korea.
 Two missions had definite political purposes in addition to important military functions . Two of the missions were for political purposes . Two missions were political .
 Stark had the political purposes of demonstrating U.S. support for Persian Gulf states opposed to Iran . Stark supported the principle of freedom of navigation in the international waters of the Persian Gulf . Stark had a political purpose of demonstrating United States support .
 These two cases clearly show the politicalmilitary nature of military actions taken during crises . These two military actions clearly show that the military is involved in the political process .
 The motives of the perpetrators of the attacks in most cases cannot be ascertained with certainty, but sufficient evidence is available to postulate reasonably plausible motives . Motives for the attacks cannot be determined with certainty .
 Two of the attacks were motivated by self-defense, defense of territorial waters, or retaliation for hostile acts believed to have involved the ship that was attacked . The other two were motivated in self-defence or retaliation .
 The other two attacks were portrayed as accidents that resulted from mistaken identity . However, in neither case had the ship committed the hostile acts of which it wishacunsein wished .
 Genciated weiky established as having been deliberate unprovoked aggression against a warship known by the attacker to belong to the United States and to be on routine operations in international waters .
 North Vietnam apparently perceived Maddox as having participated in or supported South Vietnamese raids that had taken place nearby . North Vietnam believed Maddox had supported or participated in the raids .
 North Korea probably had no way of knowing that Pueblo would be a lucrative target . It was the first mission for the U.S. Navy's first mission .
 The political situation on the Korean Peninsula in early 1968 suggests that Pueblo's mission probably was perceived by the North Koreans . North Korea's pattern of North Korean hostility toward the U.S. suggests that the mission was perceived .
 North Korea had been pursuing an aggressive campaign of provocations against the South . It had been warning South Korea and the United States against violating North Korean waters .
 North Korea was particularly sensitive about the presence of U.S. aircraft and vessels off its coast . The North Koreans were spoiling for a fight .
 North Korea may have misperceived Pueblo to be an immediate threat to North Korean territory or territorial waters, or as a deliberate political provocation in response to the North Korean propaganda campaign . It may have landed South Korean saboteurs or agents in retaliation for North Korean attacks on the
 Israel claimed Liberty was mistaken for the Egyptian transport El Quisir . Iraq claimed Stark was mistaken with a civilian tanker headed for an Iranian port .
 The danger of U.S. ships accidentally being caught in the fighting was recognized in the Liberty and Stark cases . The precautions were taken .
 In the Liberty case the threat of indiscriminate attacks-Geliberate attacks launched without efforts to identify the target--appears to have ee underestimated, with the result that Liberty was inadequately protected against such a threat .
 In the Stark case the rules of engagement authorized measures to defend against indiscriminate attacks . Middle East Force ships had been warned of the danger of indiscriminate attack .
 The threat of indiscriminate attacks must be regarded as everpresent when U.S. ships must operate in the vicinity of hostilities .
 This underscores the danger of accidental or indiscriminate attacks in peacetime, the U.S. says . The danger is that friendly nations may not be relied upon to avoid the United States .
 These incidents also warn against reliance on the imaginary lines prominently displayed on charts as providing protection against attacks .
 Precise navigation is a luxury often foregone, either deliberately or inadvertently, in the heat of battle . Precise navigations are a luxury that often foregoes, either intentionally or inadvertently .
 Questions were raised in the aftermath of the attacks on Liberty and Stark about whether they were, in fact, accidental . Questions have been raised about whether the attacks were accidental .
 From a purely military perspective the attack was a rational action, but the political-rationale for a deliberate attack is weak . The political rationale for the deliberate attack on the UK is weak, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The U.S. attacked the ship in 2010, but it was not clear why it was necessary to attack the ship . The attack was the first time the ship had been attacked by the United States in the past .
 There is insufficient evidence to resolve the controversy over the Liberty incident, says CNN.com . The Liberty incident is not resolved .
 The Israelis insist to this day that the attack was an accident . They have given an elaborate scenario explaining how it occurred . Israel insists that it is an accident, and has given a detailed account of the attack .
 In 1956, U-2 reconnaissance planes alerted President Eisenhower to British, French, and Israeli military and naval moves . The U.S. helped President Eisenhower exert strong pressure on the three nations to abandon their plan to seize the Suez Canal early .
 Liberty could have been viewed by the Israelis as giving President Johnson the same advantage in 1967 .
 In an interview with the author, Arthur C Lundahl, Director of the CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center in 1956, confirmed that U-2s had monitored the crisis .
 The arguments given by Israel to support their claim of mistaken identity can be dismissed as an effort to cover a poor showing by the Israeli Defense Forces . Israel claims Liberty was not flying a United States flag, did not have United States hull markings, and was moving at over thirty knots .
 Stark incident appears to be a clear-cut case of indiscriminate attack, but allegations have been made that it too was deliberate . Allegations made that the Stark incident was deliberately deliberate .
 Of the charges raised in the three incidents, this one is least plausible and least supported by evidence . Of the three alleged incidents, the charges are the least plausible, the most likely to be true .
 At the time Israel and Britain were allies in the Suez Crisis . Crane was on patrol as part of their campaign against Egypt . He was killed in the Egyptian city of Suez .
 During the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Israeli Navy missile boats accidently struck Greek, Japanese, and Soviet merchant ships with Gabriel anti-ship missiles . The Gabriel missiles were fired at Syrian naval vessels .
 In the 1956 and 1967 wars, the Israeli Air Force appeared to be poorly trained and organized for war at sea . Israel launched indiscriminate attacks in the 1956, 1967, and 1973 wars, apparently due to permissive rules of engagement .
 Iraqi leaders would have had to have been extremely ill-informed of U.S. domestic political opinion, writes Peter Bergen .
 If anything, the United States aucdislion to delay the start of convoying of Kuwaiti tankers . The attack influenced the U.S. response to the attack . The United States delayed convoying .
 The first set of motives, those for the attacks the perpetrators claimed they had thought they were launching, are all routine wartime reasons for attacking ships . The second set of motive is that the attacks were thought to have been launched by the perpetrators . The attacks are thought to be the first set
 As these two incidents show, indiscriminate attacks are motivated by common wartime political-military objectives . The attacks were motivated by political-political objectives, the authors say .
 Neither Israel nor Iraq were motivated to identify their targets before striking . This appears to have been the motive for indiscriminate attacks in the Liberty and Stark incidents .
 Given delegation of decisionmaking authority, these motives may come into play at low levels in the chain of command even when national policy is one of restraint and caution . The motive may come to play in low-level decisionmaking decisions in the U.S.
 Indiscriminate attacks are most likely when armed forces equipped with powerful modern weapons have only rudimentary tactical training, as in the case of Iraq . Well-trained forces have permissive rules of engagement that emphasize military expediency, such as Israel .
 The second set of motives for the two attacks are those that would have prompted deliberate attacks on ships known to-‘have been U.S. Navy. ‘That would have been the first set of motive for the attacks,’ says CNN.com's John Sutter
 Similar motives could well prompt deliberate attacks on U.S. naval vessels in future crises, experts say . Similar motives may well prompt attacks on United States naval vessels .
 A wide range of military and political motives for attacking ships in wartime could create tactical circumstances in which U.S. Navy ships are indiscriminately or accidently attacked .
 Belligerents in a local conflict could also have motives for attacking U.S. ships near the scene of fighting .
 This chapter presented the third phase of the research design . It presented a structured focused comparison of four cases in which U.S. Navy ships were attacked during peacetime or crisis operations .
 Four research questions, addressing the decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified escalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions, were asked in each case .
 Next chapter integrates the findings from all three phases of the research design and from them derives contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction . The next chapter integrates findings from the findings .
 It must be capable of offering different explanations for a variety of crisis management and crisis stability problems . That is, it must be able to offer differentiated explanations for crisis management .
 A differentiated explanatory theory is constructed by formulating contingent generalizations-regularities that occur only under certain specific conditions . A differentiated explanation theory can be constructed in a different way to explain why .
 The objective of this study has been to identify different causal patterns associated with variation in crisis military interaction . The aim of the study is to identify a different causal pattern .
 An analyticinductive procedure was used to analyze four historical cases of crisis naval operations and four cases of peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships . For this purpose, an analysis of four historical incidents was used .
 This yielded a typology of crisis management and crisis stability problems, each linked with a somewhat different causal pattern . Crisis management and stability problems are each linked to a different type of problem .
 Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory were applied to historical cases through the method of structured focused comparison . To develop the contingent generalizations, eight questions were developed .
 The purposes of this chapter are to summarize the findings of the eight case studies . The findings are to derive from them contingent generalizations on crisis military interactions and crisis stability . This chapter concludes that the findings should be based on the findings .
 The first section will present the findings on the theory of stratified interaction, including the corollary of decoupled interactions . The second section will show the findings in the first section of this section .
 The second section will present the findings on crisis stability, including the crisis security dilemma, escalation dynamics, and misperception . The findings will also be presented on crisis security and escalation .
 The third section will present the findings on the three political-military tensions.and their impact on crisis management.
 The final section will present the contingent generalizations on crisis military interaction . The last section will give an overview of the military's role in crisis .
 These questions were examined in the four case studies of crisis naval operations .
 Mechanisms of indirect control, rather than direct control, played the major role in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis . Decisionmaking authority was delegated selectively .
 President retained total control of nuclear weapons and delegated authority to retaliate with conventional weapons against mainland targets only under circumstances in which the Joint Chiefs did not have time to consult with him prior to taking action . To control the risk of escalation, the President retained control of the nuclear weapons .
 Throughout the crisis Washington was illinformed of the status of operations currently in progress, which precluded American leaders from exercising close control over the operations .
 The U.S. Navy controlled naval operations through mechanisms of indirect adtunci, rather than direct control . The Navy controlled most of its naval operations by indirect control .
 The President and tieNanare retained authority certain crucial decisions, including retaliation against Cuban air defenses and the boarding of ships .
 They exercised control by negation, rather than positive control, over Navy operations they felt were particularly sensitive . Other than this, however, they exercised control over negative control, not positive .
 Less sensitive a were not Closely controlled, with methods of delegated control being used . Less sensitive areas were not closely controlled . Delegate control was used to control less sensitive areas .
 In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, The Johnson Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean . In the same period, the U.S. did not exercise direct direct control of the operations .
 The USS America experienced severe Soviet harassment on June 8 . On-scene commanders were guided by standing Navy policies for handling such situations .
 In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Nixon Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean . The Nixon administration did not exercise direct direct control of the operations .
 Washington told the fleet exactly where it was permitted to operate . Instead of giving the fleet boundaries, the fleet was told where it could operate .
 The pattern observed in the four case studies of U.S. naval operations in crises was one of direct control being exercised selectively to a limited degree .
 Heavy reliance was placed on mechanisms of indirect control in all four cases . The guidance contained in those mechanisms was not always revised to reflect the specific circumstances of the crisis at hand .
 Tacticallevel military interactions rarely were under the direct control of political-level leaders . Political-level military interaction rarely occurred under the control of leaders .
 The pattern of Communist Chinese shelling suggested that they had good intelligence on convoys and protests of alleged U.S. violations of their airspace and territorial waters .
 The United States and Communist China both took steps to prevent Clashes between their forces . The measures largely prevented interactions between the two countries .
 The intelligence requirement for tight coupling of the two sides’ forces was met, but tactical interactions tended to be dampened by measures taken to avoid clashes . Thus, although the intelligence requirement was met .
 In both cases, Khrushchev's decision not to challenge the quarantine dampened the interactions between the two sides . In both instances, the decision to not challenge the quarantines dampened their interactions .
 The Soviet submarines were not attempting to force their way through U.S. naval forces to get to Cuba, they were — to return home unmolested . The Soviet submarine was not trying to force its way into Cuba .
 The only Soviet ships that approached the quarantine line were those that the U.S. would have no reason to take into custody . The United States would not have a reason to arrest any of the ships .
 Leaders on both sides made efforts to avoid provocations . Interactions between U.S. and Cuban forces were also dampened by the efforts .
 Soviet and American naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 Soviet tattletales closely monitored the Sixth Fleet . U.S. ships and planes searched for and trailed Soviet submarines .
 Soviet and U.S. forces were tightly coupled during the crisis-~-much more tightly than they had been in any previous Soviet-American crisis . Thus, Soviet and American forces were closely coupled during that crisis .
 In summary, naval forces at the scene of the crisis were tightly coupled in all four of the Crisis naval operations case studies .
 The tightness of coupling between the forces of the two sides can vary significantly from crisis to crisis and over time within a particular crisis . However, the tightness . of coupling . between the . forces of . the forces . of the . two sides varies significantly between crisis . and over
 Tactical-level military commanders have independent access to intelligence and surveillance information . They are not dependent on political decisionmakers for information on the adversary .
 Naval forces tend to react quickly to changes in the other side’s operations, seeking to maintain or improve their tactical position in the event of hostilities . As would be expected under conditions of tight coupling, naval forces react quickly .
 Both Communist China and the United States used their military forces for political purposes in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis . The U.S. and Communist China used military forces in the crisis in 1958 .
 The U.S. accepted a test of capabilities under the ground rules established by the Chinese Communists . The test was backed by a massive concentration of naval and air power in the Straits to convey a strong deterrent threat .
 The President and McNamara actively sought out ways to reinforce the signals being sent to the Soviets, such as by modifying Navy ASW procedures to support the political objectives .
 Khrushchev was probably avoiding signals of hostile intent by not placing Soviet forces at full alert, recalling freighters carrying arms, and recalling the three submarines in the Atlantic .
 Russia shot down an American U-2 over Cuba over Cuba on October 27 . The action may not have been authorized in the Kremlin, but this action may have been .
 The United States and the Soviet Union used their naval forces for political signalling in the 1967 ArabIsraeli War . The U.S. and the USSR used naval forces in the Arab-Israeli war .
 It is clear that the U.S. used the Sixth Fleet for political signaling, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The United States is using the fleet to send political signals, he says .
 The Soviets sent a note protesting the movement of the U.S. fleet into the eastern Mediterranean in 1973 . That the Soviets received the signals being sent with the Sixth Fleet .
 The Soviet Union used its Mediterranean Squadron for political signaling . U.S. leaders received the Soviet signals, and it was clear that they received the signals .
 In summary, naval forces were used by both sides for political signalling or related political functions in all four of the case studies on crisis naval operations .
 Use of naval forces for political purposes can bring naval units of the two sides in a crisis into close proximity, creating a danger of military incidents . Use of political forces can bring military units of two sides into close .
 Both sides faced their forces as a political instrument under conditions of acute crisis . Both sides used their forces to fight back against each other in an acute crisis, say experts .
 In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled . Both sides used their forces as a political instrument under conditions of acute crisis .
 The model of international crises in which DP iniesacts one evolve in separate, semi-independent sequences at the political, strategic, and tactical levels offers a good description of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the U.S. relied on methods of delegated control . Both sides used their forces as political instruments under conditions of acute crisis .
 President Nixon had no direct control over Sixth Fleet counter-targeting of Soviet ships carrying anti-ship cruise missiles . He was probably unaware that this activity had inadvertently been set in motion by White House orders .
 Communications between Washington and the Far East were slow and cumbersome . Communications between the U.S. and Far East was slow . The U.N. had a monopoly on air travel in Asia .
 President suspended convoy escort operations on October 6 in response to the Communist unilateral ceasefire announcement . The order was not received by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force until after two more Nationalist convoys had been escorted on October 7 .
 Extra day of escort operations did not adversely affect U.S. efforts to resolve the crisis, but it could have had a much more serious impact . Chinese Communists had made the ceasefire contingent on the United States not escorting Nationalist convoys .
 Eisenhower Administration policy toward defense of offshore islands was ambiguous . Compounding the problems created by this rapidly evolving situation was ambiguous Eisenhower administration policy .
 On-scene commanders had ample authority to take military action under the terms of the defense treaty with the Nationalists and the Formosa Resolution if Taiwan were threatened . But initially had He epee unde guidance on the offshore islands .
 Left to their own devices, commanders took actions on August 24 and 25 --sending United States destroyers the assistance of Nationalist forces defending the offshore islands--that the Président may not have authorized .
 This is another potential example of decoupling during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . This could have happened during the 1950s and 1960s, when the U.S. entered the Taiwan Strait Islands .
 The effort to Evenetes Close control over large-scale cperations seriously overloaded and degraded U.S. communications systems . Despite the advances in communications technology, the effort to
 The intercept and boarding of merchant ships takes place at a relatively easy pace and is relatively easy to control . Similarly, the intercept and . boarding of . merchant ships is also relatively easy-to-control .
 Air combat and sea battles fought with tactical aircraft and cruise missiles, never arose . Fast-paced eno tgenellés:. such a . such a battle fought with . tactical aircraft such as . tactical . aircraft and . cruise missiles never arose.
 This appears to have been a key factor in the success of the President's crisis management efforts--opening with operations that were inherently slow-paced . The President's team opened operations with a slow pace of operations .
 President and McNamara avoided the problem of inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control . By tailoring certain key guidance contained in mission orders and rules of engagement to support the President's political objectives, they avoided inappropriate guidance .
 McNamara did not attempt to rewrite Navy tactical doctrine, but did impose certain requirements and limitations on the Navy . McNamara imposed certain requirements on Navy .
 The method of control they used--control by negation--only required that orders be given if a Navy commander embarked on a course of action that they opposed . The method was used by the U.S. Navy .
 He authorized use of force, if necessary, to prevent Soviet submarines from reaching Cuba without being inspected for offensive weapons . He had been briefed on and approved quarantine plans .
 McNamara received detailed briefings on Navy operations, including ASW operations, at least once daily in Flag Plot . He also received frequent situation reports in between briefings .
 McNamara‘'''s knowledge of Navy ASW procedures was detailed enough to know that the Navy would need to develop special procedures for signalling submarines to surface for identification .
 Navy ASW forces strictly complied with the special submarine and surfacing procedures . The U.S. Navy's ASW operations were closed in accordance with special procedures .
 No unauthorized actions occurred despite the resentment many senior Navy officers felt against the close attention that the President and McNamara paid oem operations . No unauthorized action occurred despite resentment many .
 There were no serious instances of decoupling in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Two of the potential causes were present in the Arab-Arab War .
 The United States communications system did not permit cinealituids Baent to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet . The U.S. communications system was not allowed to allow them to exercise direct control .
 A second potential cause of decoupling-~--a fast-paced tactical environment--was also present during some periods of the crisis .
 In spite of these factors, divergence of tactical-level military operations from political-level objectives was not a serious problem during the crisis . The U.S. military says the situation was not serious enough .
 On-scene commanders often made operational decisions on their own authority . Their decisions generally supported the President's political objectives . On-site commanders made their own operational decisions .
 The response of Navy on-scene commanders to Soviet harassment on June 8 may have been an instance of tactical-level military operations diverging from political-level objectives, but there is no evidence that the President disapproved of how they handled the situation .
 The U.S. communications system provided much faster and more reliable communications in 1973 than it had in 1967 . The President still did not permit the President to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet .
 President Nixon was in the midst of the Watergate scandal and the resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew . President Nixon died in the early 1970s at the age of 60 .
 President Nixon reportedly made key decisions himself and was kept informed of major developments in the crisis . Nixon did not exercise close, detailed control over U.S. actions in crisis, says historian .
 The 1973 Arab-Israeli War was fought in the Mediterranean during the Arab-Arab War . The war was the first of its kind in the Arab Spring .
 The White House did not directly control the actions of the Sixth Fleet . Available accounts suggest that Nixon and Kissinger were unaware of the intensity of naval interactions that were occurring .
 The same situation could well have existed for the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, which was constantly exugeted at point blank range by United States warships and attack aircraft .
 Tactically inappropriate orders were a major factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War and may have led to decoupling . The Israeli-Arab war may have ended in a humiliating defeat .
 This made the United States fleet extremely vulnerable to a Soviet preemptive strike . The U.S. fleet was at risk of being hit by the Soviet Union .
 The factors listed above may have led to decoupling of tactical-level interactions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 The Sixth Fleet was moved to south of Crete to demonstrate to the Soviet Union that the United seawes was prepared for any contingency, but had no aggressive intent and was not preparing to take an active part .
 Sixth Fleet movements of October 25 were intended to deter escalation of the conflict . The fleet was restrained in order to avoid signalling excessive hostility or an intention to intervene directly in the conflict.
 There may have been tactical-level interactions between U.S. and Soviet naval forces that complicated management of the crisis . There may well have been interactions between United States and Soviet forces .
 Defense Department and Navy communication systems were not configured to enable Washington to speak directly to ships at sea in the Far East . Although the technical capacity to do so may have existed, it may not have existed . The Pentagon was unable to communicate directly with ships in the region .
 Conditions for decoupling were present in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents . Operational decisions made by tactical-level commanders did not diverge from the political-military objectives of political-level leaders .
 Commander Seventh Fleet ordered the engagements halted as soon as the United States ships were out of danger . The on-scene commander acted with caution to avoid encounters with North Vietnamese forces .
 The on-scene commander had the greatest doubt that there had been a North Vietnamese attack on August 4 . The commander cautioned against a hasty reaction .
 The pattern in the two incidents was one of momentary decoupling followed by tactical-level escalation and disengagement . The patterns in the incidents were similar, but were not as quickly as possible .
 On-scene commanders used limited force in response to apparent imminent attacks, officials say . Rules of engagement: Use limited force against imminent attacks .
 The on-scene commanders halted the engagements on their own authority and without guidance from higher in the chain of command .
 The actions ordered by Commander Sixth Fleet were restrained and anticipated the desires of top-level officials in Washington, D.C. The actions were restrained, the commander said .
 Commander Sixth Fleet carefully spelled out rules of engagement . Rules of engagement intended to avoid unnecessary incidents while defending Liberty .
 Bmergency messages from Pueblo required over an hour to reach Washington and U.S. military commanders in the Pacific . The messages were required to reach the United States and the Philippines .
 President Johnson was not confronted with having to halt combat operations or approve them after the fact because Bante were initiated . President Johnson did not have to stop combat operations because of the Bante .
 U.S. commanders in the Far East had already come to the conclusion that there were no effective military actions that could be taken to rescue Pueblo without needlessly endangering the crew . United States commanders had already decided not to take military action .
 The President did not have direct control over the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo . The U.S. foroes ected essentially as he would have wanted them to act under the circumstances .
 The attack lasted only a few minutes and was over before any other units could employ their weapons in support of Stark . Stark was killed in the attack, but the attack was over quickly .
 No U.S. forces were in a position to shoot down the Iraqi plane, officials say . No United States forces are in a place to shoot it down, they say .
 In summary, various potential causes of decoupling were present in all eight of the cases examined in this study .
 The most common cause of decoupling was communica-~ tions problems or communications that are simply too slow to permit direct control of military operations .
 The second most common cause of decoupling was a fast-paced tactical environment . The most common reason for decouplings was a rapid pace of play, not a tactical situation .
 This was a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents and the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the 1967 Liberty incident, and the 1973 Arab-Israel War .
 Ambiguous orders were a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Tactically inappropriate orders were also a factor .
 Impairment of political-level decisionmaking was a factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . The Arab-Arab War was fought in the Arab Spring .
 The pattern between instances of momentary decoupling is parallel stratified interactions . The pattern is the pattern between momentsary decreepling and parallel stratifications of interactions .
 Momentary decoupling was seen in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, and possibly in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 In this pattern, a tactical-level incident occurs that is not directly controlled by political-level leaders and does not support their political objectives . In the past, the incident occurred that does not directly control by political leaders, but does not .
 Decoupling followed by disengagement occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents . It was the first time the U.S. participated in the Vietnam War .
 The security dilemma is stratified, arising from interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war at each level . In a crisis, the interaction processes occur separately at three levels and affect war differently .
 National leaders and on-scene commanders holding different threat perceptions appears not to have been a serious problem in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis . The 1958 crisis was the first to occur in the region between Taiwan and Taiwan .
 The entire chain of command, from the President down to commanding officers at sea, appear to have been aware of the danger of incidents with Communist Chinese forces .
 The emphasis in JCS operational directives was on avoiding clashes with the Communists, and on-scene commanders took similar measures on their own initiative .
 These actions prevented U.S. forces from operating in the sights of Communist guns, thus reducing their vulnerability to preemption by the Communists . These actions largely prevented United States forces from . operating . in the . sights of Communists guns .
 Some commanders in the Far East wanted to take more vigorous action against Communist China . But they did not perceive a significantly greater threat to U.S. forces than did Washington .
 President and McNamara were also concerned about the Soviet submarine threat . However, the differences were not extreme and the differences are not extreme .
 There was edcogaitiion at all levels that for several reasons, including the fact that submarines were to be stopped and boarded under the quarantine, the Navy would have to conduct intense ASW operations .
 Navy commanders were particularly concerned about the threat from Cuban Komar missile boats . The Komar boats are known as Komar submarines .
 Perceptions of the threat from Cuban aircraft were mixed, not following any pattern, and not stratified . Cuban aircraft did not follow any pattern and did not have any pattern patterns .
 Threat perceptions and the security Gilemma were not stratified during the crisis . Threat perceptions of the situation were not as stratified as they were in the 1980s .
 U.S. Navy commanders were relatively unconcerned about the Soviet naval threat because the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron essentially continued peacetime operations .
 "From October 14 onward, however, the tactical situation changed dramatically for the worse. From October 14 onwards, the situation has changed dramatically . The situation has been described as a 'messy mess'
 Henry Kissinger did not perceive a threat from the Soviet Navy during the crisis . Kissinger was either unaware of the Soviet anticarrier exercise or did not understand the threat it represented .
 The Navy chain of command from the JCS Chairman down to the carrier Commanding Officers perceived a serious threat from Soviet anti-carrier operations . Civilian officials did not perceive a threat to the Sixth Fleet .
 Stratified threat perceptions did arise between civilian and military officials at the top of the chain of command . The U.S. military says it has a "strategorically different" perception of threat .
 The on-scene commander lacked important information on the political context of the crisis . He had to interpret Soviet behavior on the basis of military and naval moves being made .
 It is not surprising, there-fore, that Soviet naval opera~ tions in the Mediterranean appeared much more threatening to the Navy chain of command than they did to Kissinger . Kissinger: "It was not surprising" that Soviet forces were more threatening than Kissinger .
 At political level of interaction, neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union had an incentive to launch a preemptive first strike against each other .
 Military and naval moves, including the United States DEFCON 3 alert, were taken primarily for political purposes . The United States is currently on a temporary stand-off with Russia .
 At the tactical level of interaction, however, United States -and Soviet naval forces had strong ee to strike first and were actively targeting each other . The U.S.-Soviet naval forces were active at the time .
 Commanders were seriously concerned about the threat of a Soviet preemptive attack due to Soviet anti-carrier operations . U.S. Navy on“scene commanders were seriously worried about the . threat of the Soviet . attack .
 Soviet Navy commanders must have shared similar -eoncerns due to United States counter-targeting of their major combatants . U.S. counter-targets of Soviet Navy forces are thought to have been counter-attacked .
 The security dilemma was thus stratified--mild at the political level, but acute at the tactical level . The security dilemmas are so acute that they are both political and tactical . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful military since 2001 .
 A number of incidents could have triggered an inadvertent naval battle in the Mediterranean . U.S. and Soviet leaders might not have been able to control until after the initial engagements were over .
 Research was done to identify escalationinhibiting factors and conditions that can cause those factors to break down . None of the cases escalated to war, but research has shown that escalation can be prevented .
 When decoupling occurred in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, it did not produce tactical-level escalation . Decoupling was not a major escalation in the 1950s and 1960s .
 This tactical-level prudence compensated for lack of operational guidance when decoupling occurred . This prevented escalation even when actions took place that the President had not ordered .
 The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1958 Taiwan straits Crisis was that both sides took steps to avoid military clashes and adhered to tacit ground rules for a test of capabilities .
 Ground rules included no Communist attacks on United States forces, no U.S. attacks on Chinese forces except in self-defense (and Gefense of Nationalist forces in international airspace or waters) and no United States attacks on the Chinese mainland . Ground rules also included no attacks on
 By 1958 the U.S. and Communist China had evolved tacit rules of crisis behavior . Those rules contributed to preventing escalation in China .
 The first was caution and prudence on the part of the U.S., Soviet, and Cuban leaders @Guring the crisis . The first, the first, was caution . The second was caution, prudence .
 President Kennedy's decision to open with relatively slow-paced naval operations, Khrushchev's early decision not to challenge the quarantine, and Castro's . Castro's decision . not to provoke the United States aes the factors that determined the nature of the tactical-level interactions .
 Escalation was avoided by the tactical environment 1001 having been structured in such a manner as to prevent Clashes from occurring .
 President Kennedy selected quarantine over other military options over other options . The outcome was due to decisions made in Moscow and Havana as well as Washington .
 The fact that no effort was made by on-scene commanders to strike at Cuban air defenses marks compliance with the requirement that the President approve retaliatory attacks . The President approved the President's order to attack Cuba's air defenses .
 The special ASW procedures specified by McNamara were used as he had intended . McNamara was killed by a rocket attack on the U.S. Coast Guard .
 There were no instances of naval forces conducting unauthorized operations or using weapons in violation of the rules of engagement . No instances of unauthorized operations were reported .
 The need for communication between the two sides is well established in crisis management literature . The need to communicate with the government and the public is well known in crisis literature .
 Formal and informal messages were used to clarify intentions, express concern over incidents, and defuse situations .
 Military moves were not the only means of signalling intentions available to President Kennedy . Kennedy had several other channels for delivering formal and informal messages to Khrushchev .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were exchanging communications frequently during the crisis . They could wait, send protest, and assess the implications of an isolated incident, rather than immediately reacting to it .
 The availability of formal and informal communications between the two superpowers appears to have moderated the use of military forces for political signaling by allowing diplomatic rather than military responses to military incidents . These communications were not perfect, but the availability was not perfect .
 The first factor was caution on the part of U.S. leaders in the pcssittins Bacers they placed on Sixth Fleet movements and caution on possible serious incidents .
 The most dangerous interactions took place on June 7 and 8 during Soviet harassment of USS America . USS America and her 1003 escorts were harassed by Soviet forces .
 The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War was that the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron generally behaved in a cautious and circumspect manner .
 Soviet caution was an important factor in the lack of escalation during particularly intense interactions at sea . The Soviet Union was cautious in its dealings with the Soviet Union .
 United States Navy commanders could tolerate a certain amount of indiscretion by individual Soviet ships because it clearly Was not part of a pattern of harassment and did not appear to presage a Soviet preemptive attack .
 Soviet efforts to show caution around the Sixth Fleet were not entirely successful in preventing tensions from arising . However, they did help prevent serious incidents from occurring .
 The third factor inhibiting escalation in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War was the tight coupling between U.S. and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . The United States and the Soviet Union had a tight coupling .
 The signal the U.S. and Soviet Union were sending with their fleets was one of non-involvement in the hostilities . Overall, this was beneficial for crisis management because of the signal the two countries were sending .
 Both sides used the hot line to express concerns, give warnings, and avoid misperceptions . The hot line was set up to help both sides express concerns .
 The hot line was used to communicate political messages from the Navy . It was used as a way of conveying political messages to the public .
 There were intense tactical-level interactions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, but no instances of the interactions generating an escalation sequence . No instances of such interactions generating escalation sequence.
 The most dangerous inter-actions occurred during the Soviet anti-carrier exercise , but they @i@ not escatate to violence . Most dangerous interactions occurred in the Soviet exercise .
 Each side was constantly targeting 1005 the other and both sides were ready to instantly launch preemptive attacks . No weapons were fired during the crisis, but each side was ready to strike .
 Neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union wanted to intervene militarily in the war if they could possible avoid it . Instead, they wanted to avoid an armed clash with the other superpower .
 Both countries acted cautiously with their military and naval forces, avoiding situations that could inadvertently involve them in the fighting . With one exception, avoiding actions that were unnecessarily provocative .
 The only exception to this pattern was the Soviet anti-carrier exercise that commenced on October 26 . The action was much different from Soviet behavior throughout the rest of the crisis .
 While the overall pattern of Soviet military behavior was one of restraint, the Soviets were willing to engage in certain highly provocative activities . Thus, the pattern of Russian military behavior in the 1960s and '90s was that of restraint . The Soviet Union was willing to take part in some highly
 The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War was that the United States and the Soviet Union communicated with each other frequently during the crisis . The U.S. and Soviet Union were often in contact during the war .
 Soviet warnings to the United States on October 24 that it was prepared to intervene unilaterally in the Middle East if Israel did not respect the United Nations ceasefire were particularly important for avoiding a clash .
 The situation could have been much worse if the U.S. and the Soviet Union had not been in direct communication . The United States and Soviet Union issued the most intense warning of the crisis .
 The superpowers probably would have had great difficulty interpreting the political significance of each other's military moves on October 24 and 25 had they not been able to express their interests and concerns to each other . The world's top two superpowers were able to communicate their concerns and concerns .
 The third factor inhibiting escalation in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War was caution and restraint on the part of the U.S. Navy commanders in the Mediterranean . The war ended in a stalemate between Israel and Israel .
 U.S. ships and aircraft were assigned to monitor high-threat Soviet ships and destroy them if they attempted to launch anti-ship missiles . This was particularly important for the United States to destroy Soviet ships .
 When the Soviets began their anti-carrier exercise, U.S. ships and planes had to distinguish between preparations for simulated and actual attacks--an exceedingly difficult task . The Soviets were preparing for a simulated attack on the USS Lexington .
 The second escalation-inhibiting factor in the Tonkin Gulf Incidents was compliance by on-scene commanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control .
 Under the peacetime rules of engagement in effect in 1964, U.S. forces were authorized to use force in self-defense and in anticipatory self defense when attack appeared imminent .
 Hot pursuit of the attacking force was authorized in international waters . Hot pursuit was used on August 2 when Navy planes attacked the PT boats .
 retaliation aa ee in North Vietnam was not authorized unless specifically approved by the President . On the other hand, retaliation was not approved by North Vietnam . The U.S. has not been able to retaliate against North Vietnam in Vietnam .
 On the one hand, these provisions allowed force to be used without further permission from higher authority, but | on the other hand, they resulted in the engagements halting quickly rather than escalating .
 Double-checking the accuracy of initial reports is important for avoiding unwarranted escalation of a confrontation . There may not have been a confrontation at all, and there may not be a confrontation all over .
 The first condition is long-term frustration and animosity toward the other side in aie or incident, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The naeana condition is the immediate prior occurrence of a confirmed provocation by the other side, particularly when the U.S. response to the prior incident was retrained . The other side has been warned against further incidents .
 The August 4 incident provoked U.S. retaliation against the North even though the circumstances were not clear . The circumstances of the incident were unclear .
 The third condition that can degrade the escalationinhibiting factors is for all levels in the military chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary .
 The Liberty incident sheds light on three escalationinhibiting factors, including the Liberty incident . It is the first time the incident has occurred in the U.S.
 Use of the hot line apparently helped prevent the Soviets and Egyptians from misperceiving the intent of actions taken by the on-scene commander . The hot line also helped prevent Soviet and Egyptian forces misperceive the intended actions .
 Sixth Fleet planes were recalled before they entered the war zone off the coast of Sinai . Israeli notification of the United States that 1010 it had inadvertently attacked a U.S. naval vessel cleared up confusion in Washington .
 United States military commanders complied with the restrictions imposed on military operations by the sesgeuins peacetime rules of engagement . U.S. forces were not ordered to attack North Korean forces inside North Korean territorial waters and airspace .
 The guidance contained in the peacetime rules of engagement may not have been mipropriaté to the specific circumstances, but U.S. military commanders were careful to comply with that guidance . The guidance may be mipsy, but it may not be appropriate to specific circumstances .
 Circumstantial evidence pointing to Iranian complicity and lack of Iraqi admission of responsibility could well have led to the President authorizing retaliatory attacks —— Iranian forces or bases .
 This situation is analogous to that described in the Liberty incident, when accurate information on Soviet forces in the Mediterranean prevented U.S. military commanders from suspecting that the Soviets had attacked Liberty . The Liberty incident was similar to that in the 1950s .
 It appears that inadvertent escalation is more likely when intelligence is incomplete and ambiguous, supporting worst-case assessments of the nature and implications of an attack on U.S. forces .
 On-scene commanders could conclude that full-scale attacks on U.S. forces at the scene of the crisis will soon follow, placing a premium on preempting the expected enemy attack . unde¥ certain circumstances might have authority to preempt .
 In summary, six internal and two external escalationinhibiting factors were identified in the case studies . The study was based on the case study of six cases .
 The 1012 internal factors function within the government and military chain of command of one nation . They are internal factors that function in the government, military chain-command of a nation .
 The internal factors are military prudence (avoiding threat of surprise attack and combat under unfavorable circumstances) caution and restraint on the part of on-scene commanders . National leaders structuring the tactical environment to dampen military interactions, accurate and timely tactical intelligence on friendly and potentially hostile forces .
 These factors tend to moderate the intensity of tactical-level interactions, prevent armed clashes from occurring, and produce disengagement rather than escalation when clashed do occur .
 External escalation-inhibiting factors function between the two sides in a crisis, say experts . External escalation factors function to prevent escalation, they say . The U.S. government has been accused of using violence in the past .
 Tacit rules of crisis behavior are best developed between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, but also ‘contributed to avoiding escalation in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis,’ according to the book .
 Soviet naval forces have engaged in exceedingly dangerous behavior--dangerous maneuvering at close quarters and simulated attacks on U.S. naval forces-1013 during international crises . The Soviet Navy has simulated attacks against United States naval forces during crises .
 The 1972 Soviet-American Incidents at Sea Agreement has only been partially successful in moderating such Soviet behavior . The 1972 agreement was only partially successful, but it has since been partially succeeded .
 The most dangerous situation arises in confrontations with nations that the U.S. does not share tacit rules of crisis behavior, like Libya, Iran, and North Korea . North Korea is one of the countries that the United States doesn't share tacit norms .
 The findings of the eight case studies indicate that, contrary to what the escalation dynamics theory predicts, there is a tendency for naval tactical-level interaction to lose momentum and for the forces involved to disengage after an initial incident .
 Pauses tend to occur naturally in naval operations due to the need to regroup and prepare for further action . Pauses are natural in military operations, but are often followed by a pause .
 Due to the risk of defeat in battle, naval commanders are reluctant to initiate or sustain combat operations under circumstances they cannot predict .
 Naval commanders quickly reach the limits of their authority and need permission from higher authority to initiate further combat operations . Naval commanders need permission to launch further operations .
 Naval commanders normally try to break off combat ac-tion as soon as it is safe to do so . If do not have such permission, or anticipate that they will not be able to get it, they will try to take advantage of it .
 The Operational requirements of crisis management, if being followed, tend to accentuate the tendency toward disengagement by denying on-scene commanders tactical options . Options (such as surprise attack and concentration of 1014 superior force) can be crucial for successful combat operations .
 The first condition is for national leaders and military commanders to be predisposed to take action against the adversary due to long-term failures of diplomacy, military and diplomatic frustration .
 Sustained hostility, harassment, or a history of aggression by the adversary can generate a perception that the adversary's leaders are unreasonable, irresponsible, or uninterested in serious negotiations, reducing the incentive to pursue diplomatic initiatives toward the adversary .
 These expectations could be eiCuey correct, but could also result from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the adversary's objectives and intentions .
 Prior attacks can create an expectation that further attacks will occur, or that the adversary is likely to escalate the level of violence . Prior attacks create a belief that further violence will occur .
 Short-term expectations of further violence could be entirely correct, but could also result from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the adversary's objectives and intentions . As with long-term frustrations, short-term . expectations of violence could also be due to lack of intelligence on adversary's intentions .
 The short-term effects of immediate prior hostile acts can reinforce the effects of long-term frustration with the adversary, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Expectation of further attacks tends to predispose national leaders and military commanders toward broader military options toward the adversary . Expectation that further attacks will predispose military leaders to broader options .
 The third condition that can erode the escalationinhibiting factors is for all levels in the chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary and the need for immediate retaliation .
 A strong unity of views can suppress skepticism that normally greets ambiguous initial reports on a military incident, or lead to hasty assessment of the incident in the rush to launch retaliatory attacks .
 The principle problem arose from the ambiguity of the Eisenhower Administration's commitment to the defense of the offshore islands . The U.S. experienced arose from an ambiguity over the commitment of the U.K. to defend the islands .
 Eisenhower Administration attempted to resolve this dilemma with a calculated policy of ambiguity . Communist probe of the American commitment only prompted the Communist probe . Nationalists were using the crisis as grounds for striking back at the mainland .
 The problem was not that the Communists and Nationalists misperceived United States it pemtienvemgunt rather that they correctly perceived the ambivalence in U.S. policy . The problem is not that they misperperceived the United States as a nation .
 There do not appear to have been any instances of the Soviets seriously misperceiving the intent of Sixth Fleet Operations during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Close Soviet monitoring of the fleet and United States use of the hot line was largely due to Soviet monitoring .
 It 1018 complicated U.S. efforts to manage the crisis by lending credibility to Arab claims of American complicity in the Israeli attacks . It contributed to serious deterioration in United States relations with Arab nations .
 There were no inadvertent military incidents that seriously affected U.S. crisis management efforts in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 The most serious incident of the crisis was the attack on the Liberty, but Israel quickly notified the United States that it had conducted the attack, thus defusing tensions over the incident .
 The second most serious incident of the crisis was the harassment of USS America by Soviet ships on June 7 and 8 . The harassment of the USS America was the most serious of the incident .
 The most important factor in avoiding incidents that coulda complicate crisis management was the decisions made by netional leaders on the two sides that structured the tactical environment in such a manner as to moderate tensions that would arise .
 There were no inadvertent military incidents serious enough to affect U.S. efforts during the Arab-Israeli War . There appear to have been instances of leaders misperceiving the political signals being sent by Soviet naval movements .
 Kissinger 1019 interpreted Soviet naval moves at the start of the war as demonstrating non-involvement in the conflict . But the actual pattern of Soviet naval operations suggests a higher degree of Soviet commitment to Syria and Egypt than Kissinger perceived .
 Kissinger also missed the point that Soviet naval movements demonstrated an intent to neutralize the Sixth Fleet if it were positioned to intervene . Kissinger: "The Sixth Fleet would be neutralized if it was positioned to attack"
 Naval analysts and other observers have read political signals into several other U.S. and Soviet naval actions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 It's not clear that any of those alleged signals were intentional or that the other side perceived the signals being sent . It is not clear, however, that any signals are intentional .
 This further underscores the inherent ambiguity of naval movements as political signals, and the tendency for naval movements even when undertaken for non-political purposes . This underscores the fact that naval movements are perceived to be political signals .
 The U.S. response to the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents G@id not send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious unintended military ‘silanes 2 . However, the Desoto patrols apparently were misperceived by North Vietnam .
 Some U.S. intelligence analysts and military officers suspected that the North Vietnamese misperceived the Desoto patrol destroyers as participating in or directly supporting OPLAN 34A attacks on North Vietnam .
 McNamara would later insist that there were no grounds for the North Vietnamese to have confused the Desoto and OPLAN 34A operations . Such a misperception provides a plausible explanation for the attack on Maddox .
 The U.S. response to the attack on the Liberty did not ‘send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious accidental military incidents’ The United States response did not send ‘serious inadvertent . political signals’
 Commander Sixth Fleet carefully limited the fleet's response to the attack . President used the hot line to prevent misperceptions from arising . Commander Commander Commander of Sixth Fleet limited the Fleet's response .
 The Israeli attack on Liberty was itself an inadvertent military incident . No further incidents occurred during the Sixth Fleet's response to the attack .
 The U.S. response to the North Korean seizure of the Pueblo did not send serious inadvertent political signals or result in inadvertent military incidents . The relatively passive United States response was probably due to the relatively passive response to North Korean provocation .
 North Korea achieved a fait accompli, effectively limiting U.S. options to settling on North Korean terms . The U.N. has a long way to go with North Korea, experts say . North Korea has a right to the U.K.
 The passive Se e¥Spense annoyed the South Koreans, but this arose from correct perceptions rather than from misperceptions . The passive reaction to the South Korean language annoyed some of them .
 The attack on Stark dllustustrates the danger of inadvertent military incidents when U.S. naval forces are operating in close proximity to hostilities . The attack is a reminder of the dangers of accidental military incidents .
 In summary, inadvertent political signals may have been a factor in some of the crises . But inadvertent military incidents were not serious problems in the eight cases examined .
 Misperceptions of U.S. intentions may have been a factor in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and the 1968 Pueblo incident .
 Four peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships appear not to have generated misperceptions . United States naval operations in response to the four peacetime . attacks on United States Navy ships have not been misperformed .
 There appear to be three reasons for the lack of inadvertent military incidents in crises . The lack of accidental military incidents is one of the reasons for this lack of incidents .
 The primary reason why exercises are cancelled is that the forces are needed for crisis operations . But exercises have also been cancelled to avoid potential political complications .
 The military chain of command usually advises on-scene commanders to act with caution and avoid provocative actions . The second reason is that the chain-of-command usually advises that the military is wary of provocative acts .
 Military prudence is occasionally violated by top-level political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters, but on other occasions United States leaders have been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting in local conflict .
 Tensions between political and military considerations were examined in all eight case studies . Tensions were examined by the authors of all eight cases .
 Political vs Military Considerations in the 1958 Taiwan Strait crisis . Restrictions placed on the support that could be provided for the Quemoy resupply effort .
 The most efficient way of resupplying the Nationalist garrison ar have been to carry their supplies in . United States amphibious ships escorted right up to the beach by United States warships .
 This would have been a serious provocation to the Communists, who might mot have refrained from shelling the American vessels . However, this would have led to the Communist Party shelling .
 U.S. naval bombardment and air strikes against Communist shore batteries, air fields, and naval bases would have been possible . That would have led to United States bombing, air strikes, and bombing .
 There was also concern that the President's strategy of applying military force in graduated increments would increase the difficulty of carrying out the air strike or invasion options by alerting the Cubans .
 Tensions arose between the military consideration of protecting U.S. forces against a sudden attack by Cuban or Soviet forces, and the political consideration of avoiding military moves .
 civilian leaders accommodated military commanders to a much greater degree than past accounts have acknowledged . However, civilian leaders accommodate military commanders more often than previously thought, military officials say .
 President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara were sympathetic to the military's concern with protecting its men . President Kennedy was sympathetic . President McNamara was sympathetic.
 The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine were not significantly Gdifferent from normal peacetime rules . The quarantine did not infringe upon a commander’s right of self-defense, the commander said .
 The only operational area in which the President deliberately denied the military any authority to take action in self-defense was in the case of Cuban air defenses firing on U.S. reconnaissance aircraft . This was based on the well-established distinction .
 There was moderate tension between political and military considerations during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . The conflict was the first Israeli-Arab conflict to take place in Israel since 1967 .
 The carrier force commanders objected to restrictions on their mobility, which denied them one of the greatest advantages of carrier air power . The publicity surrounding their movements made it easier for the Soviets to target the carriers .
 The restrictions were disregarded by the on-scene commander when it was necessary to respond to the attack on the Liberty . The restrictions are disregarded when it is necessary for the response .
 The President later authorized the actions that Commander Sixth Fleet had already initiated, which indicates that tensions between political and military considerations are not serious .
 There was tengion between political and military considerations during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . The Arab-Arab War was fought between Israel and Israel .
 The most serious tension was between Washington's need to control Sixth Fleet movements for political purposes and the onscene commander's need for freedom to maneuver the fleet . Washington wanted to reduce its vulnerability to Soviet preemptive attack .
 The White House restricted the movements of the Sixth Pleet lest the fleet's movements send a misleading signal of U.S. intentions to the Soviet Union . The Sixth Pleet's movement was restricted to avoid a misleading message to the Soviets .
 Soviet Navy doctrine placed heavy emphasis on the first strike, making it a central objective of strategy as well ea tactics . Navy doctrine emphasized first strike in Soviet Navy .
 U.S. Navy tactical doctrine for the defense of surface ship battle groups emphasized destruction of launch platforms before they can launch their missiles .
 The side that gets off the first salvo in the D-day shootout is likely to accrue a significant tactical advantage that could determine the outcome of a war at sea .
 A restriction imposed on the fleet for political purposes (avoiding misperceptions of United States intentions) exacerbated the risks of a military confrontation . A minor incident could touch off an armed clash at sea between the superpowers .
 None of the three political-military tensions was serious in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents . U.S. responses were limited and all levels of the chain of command held generally similar views toward the need to retaliate .
 The only tension was that generated by the White House demand for confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack in the second incident .
 Confirmation required time to assess the evidence, which could delay retaliatory strikes-ealerting the adversary and losing the advantage of surprise . But confirmation required .
 There was little tension between political and military considerations in the Liberty incident . Incident was over before significant diplomatic activity-other than hot line messages-could begin .
 The limitations that Commander Sixth Fleet placed on his forces supported U.S. political objectives in the crisis . The limitations of the limitations supported United States political objectives .
 There were essentially no tensions between political land and military considerations in the Pueblo incident .
 All levels in the chain of command gneed that effective military action could not be taken before Pueblo entered Wonsan . The U.S. has been in contact with the North Korean government in North Korea .
 The military says the options are the military feasibility of the options proposed by the military . But disagreements primarily revolved around the military's military feasibility, rather than the political implications .
 The Chief of Naval Operations insisted on frequent and detailed reports from Navy commanders in the far East . But methods of delegated control were used and officials in Washington relied heavily on mechanisms of indirect control .
 The origin of the tension was a sudden attempt to impose radically new methods of direct control on a command system set up without prior planning, consideration of the implications, or even consultation with the military .
 The Navy, with its tradition of granting autonomy to commanders at sea, reacted strongly to the Kennedy Administration's efforts at closely controlling military operations . The Navy reacted strongly .
 Admiral Anderson was at the interface between 1029 between civilian authorities and the Navy chain of command . He took the lead in preventing what he perceived to be unreasonable civilian interference in naval operations .
 There was a widespread attitude that McNamara was incompetent at controlling military operations . There was also a widespread belief that he failed to control the military .
 There was serious tension between the President's desire to maintain control over events and the Navy's traditional philosophy of command, in which commanders at sea are delegated substantial authority .
 The fact that Navy commanders who did not have to work with McNamara felt less resentment and better understood the President's 1030 political objectives strongly suggests that much of the friction and anger visible in Washington was generated by McNamara's personality, management style, and personal attitudes .
 Because of the emphasis on direct civilian control of military operations, civilian authorities did not keep Military leaders adequately informed of the overall U.S. political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis .
 By not informing the JCS of political-diplomatic efforts at resolving the crisis, the President risked defeating his efforts to ensure that military operations supported his political objectives . The JCS is a member of the U.N. Security Council .
 The Chiefs did not need to know the details of sensitive communications with the Soviets to understand the President's diplomatic objectives . The Chiefs didn't need to be privy to details of the conversations .
 The general location and movements of the fleet in the Mediterranean were closely controlled . Orders to the Sixth Fleet were passed via the chain of command .
 On-scene commanders disliked this control of their operations, but it did not seriously interfere with their ability to carry out their mission . It did not interfere with them being able to carry on their mission, commanders said .
 President Nixon and Schlesinger respected the military chain of command, using it to send orders to the Sixth Fleet rather than attempting to communicate directly with the fleet .
 Tensions arose primarily from the emphasis that President Nixon and Kissinger placed on using the Sixth fleet for political signalling, which required close White House control of the fleet's movements .
 There was little level of control tension in the Liberty. incident because the incident evolved too rapidly for officials in Washington to play a direct role in controlling events .
 JCS and the Secretary of Defense could only reaffirm orders already given by Commander Sixth Fleet Commander . Commander sixth Fleet Commander of Sixth Fleet could not confirm orders given by the JCS .
 Tensions arose between crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis . Crisis missions were conducted in response to the crisis in 1958 . The U.S. responded to the situation in the wake of the crisis .
 The CNO's staff was concerned that prolonged operations would erode U.S. capabilities for military operations in other parts of the world or for general war . CNO was concerned prolonged operations erode United States capabilities .
 CNO Admiral Arleigh Burke felt that United States naval forces were overextended during the crisis . U.S. forces would have been hard pressed to respond to an outbreak of fighting elsewhere while committed in the Taiwan Straits .
 Of the three types 1033 of political-military tensions, tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions was the most serious in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis .
 Military men were not overly concerned about the negative consequences of the Srawazat tions for invasion of Cuba because there was no immediate need for the forces elsewhere .
 This situation would have changed drastically if the Soviets had moved against Berlin or Turkey in response to a U.S. move against Cuba, which justifies the President's concern for such a Soviet move . The President's concerns would have been justified by such a move .
 There was very little tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War .
 Sixth Fleet operations during the crisis did not seriously detract from the fleet's readiness for wartime contingencies . The fleet's operations during this crisis were not seriously disrupted .
 The only feature of the crisis operations that the on-scene commanders did not like was the publicizing of the fleet's 1034 movements . The fleet's movements were the only feature that the commanders didn't like .
 There is little tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness for wartime contingencies . Other than this, there was little tension with performance of crises missions .
 There was moderate tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 There apparently was little concern that the Navy's response to the crisis would degrade its ability to respond to threats elsewhere . The Navy is responding well to the threat of a nuclear attack on North Korea .
 Wartime considerations and political considerations influenced the location of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean . The fleet's carriers did not experience a serious degradation of their readiness to perform wartime missions during the crisis .
 The greatest concern arose from the transfer of large quantities of U.S. military equipment and munitions to Israel, which depleted United States war-reserve stocks and left some units without sufficient equipment and supplies to carry out wartime missions .
 There was no tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions in the Liberty incident . Sixth Fleet response to the attack was small-scale and of short duration .
 There was some tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions in the 1035 Pueblo incident . The incident occurred during World War II .
 Initial response to North Korean attack on Pueblo had to be made with United States forces in and around Japan and South Korea . The limited time available for taking action meant that the U.S. had to work with the North Korean response .
 Maintaining readiness for wartime missions had greater impact on the decision whether or not to retaliate against North Korea . The decision was made by the U.S. President Barack Obama on Monday .
 The heavy commitment of United States forces in Vietnam limited the options available to U.S. military commanders . The President and Secretary of Defense are reluctant to take wetiioes against North Korea that could result in another military conflict . North Korea is a major threat to North Korea .
 None of the three political-military tensions was present in the Stark incident because the incident was brief and the attack was known to have been inadvertent . The Stark incident was not the first of three political and military tensions in the U.S.
 There was great risk of U.S. ships being attacked inadvertently or deliberately, and equally 1036 risked political embarrassment to the United States 4f civilian of friendly military aircraft were shot down .
 The dependent variable is the outcome of crisis interactions; specifically, whether or not tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a crisis . Contingent Generalizations are based on the outcomes of an incident involving the United States .
 Inadvertent escalation originally was defined as any mer ene in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their TCs orders .
 Escalation of the crisis arises from deliberate aeedki ons made by national leaders, rather than from uncontrolled tactical-level or strategic-level interactions, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The escalation is inadvertent because national leaders did not intend to escalate the crisis and did not anticipate that their moves would provoke escalation by the adversary, the president says .
 Inadvertent controlled escalation and deliberate escalation can halt short of war or continue on to war . The U.S. military says it has a long history of unintended escalation . Inadvertence controlled escalation or deliberate escalation is key to avoiding war .
 In the third and fourth patterns--momentary decoupling and decoupled interactions followed by disengagement--tactical-level interaction halts without significant escalation .
 Crisis Interaction patterns are defined by crisis Interaction Patterns . Disengagement short of war, or deliberate escalation to war, is short of War .
 These six patterns constitute a typology of crisis military interaction . The patterns appear to cover the full range of interactions that could occur in a crisis .
 No claim is made that the six patterns constitute the universe of possible crisis military interactions . However, because they were identified through an analytical-inductive process, rather than deductively, no claim was made that they constitute a universe of potential military interactions.
 Additional patterns could be identified through further empirical research . Additional patterns of patterns could also be identified by further research .
 More tran sne of the patterns of patterns of . crisis military interaction can occur in a crisis . More . military interaction .
 The first four patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction and momentary decoupling of interaction, decoupled interactions followed by disengagement, and inadvertent tactical-level escalation--can an 1h 1h sequence in a crisis .
 Changes in the seven independent variables affecting oe tary interactions determine which pattern occurs . The pattern occurs when a pattern occurs is determined by the number of independent variables .
 At any given moment in a crisis, some of the independent variables could have values allowing more than one of the five patterns to occur, experts say . At any time in crisis, more than five patterns could occur .
 Events that are inherently unpredictable, such as communications failures or military accidents, can determine which pattern arises . Communications failures, military accidents or communications failures can determine the pattern .
 Assessments of the likelihood of 1040 inadvertent escalation must be made in probabilistic terms . Assessment of the risk of escalation must therefore be made of probabilities, rather than patterns of patterns .
 Contingent generalizations will be formulated for the six patterns of crisis military interaction, offering a distinct causal pattern for each type of interaction . The generalization will offer a specific causal pattern to each type .
 Each of the causal wl egns is produced by specific variations in seven independent variables . Each of these variables is based on specific variations on seven independent factors .
 These seven independent variables were identified in the case studies as significant in determining the outcome of crisis military interaction .
 The first step in formulating the contingent generalizations will be to define the seven independent variables and describe the range of variation of each variable .
 Sfacrisis Military interaction and ee causal patterns will then be described . The six types of interaction will be described in this article .
 Political-level control of tactical-level military operations will be described as direct, indirect, or loss of control . Political control will be defined as direct or indirect control of military operations .
 Direct control means that national leaders can direct changes in military operations as necessary to support their strategy for managing a crisis . Direct control is a form of direct control of military operations .
 National leaders must have capability to intervene in the conduct of military operations on a real-time basis when necessary for crisis management . National leaders do not have to make every operational decision .
 Indirect control means that national leaders are relying primarily on mechanisms of indirect control to coordinate the actions of military forces . Indirect controls are often used to coordinate military operations .
 National leaders normally have some capability to direct changes in military operations in order to ensure that those operations support their crisis strategy . Under indirect control, national leaders usually direct military operations .
 Communications or other constraints preclude constant, realtime, direct control of tactical-level military operations, forcing delegation of control and reliance on mechanisms of indirect control .
 Loss of control means that national leaders are not able to direct changes in military operations in order to support their crisis strategy . The loss of control is important for national leaders to be able to control military operations .
 National leaders can experience loss of control even while in direct communication with the on-scene commander . National leaders may be at risk of losing control even if they are in direct contact with the commander .
 The second independent variable is the scale of crisis military operations being conducted by the U.S. armed forces . The scale of these operations is also a factor .
 The scale of military operations partially determines three other factors, including the size of the military operation .
 First, it affects the ability of political-level officials to control tacticallevel military operations . Second, it will affect the ability to control military operations in the United States .
 The larger the scale of operations the more difficult it is for national leaders to maintain direct control over all the operations being conducted . The larger scale of operation the more likely it is that decoupling will occur .
 Second, it affects the opportunity for military interactions with the other side of the line . It affects the chance for military interaction with the opposing forces, it says .
 The larger the scale of operations, the greater the number of tactical interactions between the forces of the two sides, the larger the size of the operation, the author says .
 Third, it affects the opportunity for inadvertent military incidents to occur, it says . It affects the chance for accidental military incidents .
 The larger the scale of Operations, the greater the likelihood of inadvertent military incidents . The larger scale of operations, the larger the . likelihood of accidental military incidents, military officials say . The largest scale of . Operations, however, is the smaller scale of the operations .
 The scale of military operations will be described as local, theater, or global . It will be called the scale of operations in the U.S.
 Local operations cover a relatively small, well-defined geographic area, and involve relatively small forces--a single navy task force, army division, air force air task force or joint task force of roughly equivalent size .
 Joint task force that invaded Grenada in 1983 represents the approximate maximum size of local-scale operations . Grenada was invaded by a joint task force in 1983 . The Grenada invasion was the largest in the history of Grenada .
 Forces larger than this generally require theater-level control in order to coordinate operations . Forces bigger than this usually require theater level control to coordinate .
 Theater operations involve a substantial portion of the conventional forces in a particular theater . Theater operations are theater operations that involve a large portion of conventional forces .
 The operations may not cover the entire theater, but require theater--level coordination . The operations require theater-level coordination, and may not always cover the whole theater .
 Forces that participated in operations against Cuba during the Missile Crisis (including preparations for air strike and invasion contingencies) represent the approximate maximum size of theater-scale operations .
 The erie independent variable is the intensity of tactical-level interactions between the military forces of the two sides in acrisis . In acrisis, the level of interaction between military forces in the two countries is key to success .
 This independent variable is separate from scale of operations because large scale operations do not necessarily result in intense interactions . Large scale operations don't necessarily result from intense interactions.
 The adversary may choose not to initiate 1045 operations on a similar scale, or take precautions to reduce contact with the other side's forces .
 Although the U.S. Navy conducted extensive operations off the coast of the mainland, the Communist Chinese did not exploit those opportunities and were careful to avoid incidents with us forces .
 The intensity of tactical-level military interactions is also affected by geography, the operations being conducted, and the political signals being sent, say experts .
 Geography includes such factors as the presence of national boundaries to separate ground forces and the amount of sea room available for naval forces to maneuver . Geography is also a factor in the size of the sea room in which naval forces can maneuver .
 The nature of the operations being conducted can affect how close the forces are in proximity to each other and the threat they appear to present toward each other .
 U.S. destroyers escorting convoys in the Persian Gulf are brought into more frequent contact with Iranian forces than are a carrier battle group maintaining a presence in the Gulf of Oman .
 The nature of the political signals being sent with military forces also affects the frequency of contacts and apparent level of threat . Political signals also affect the frequency and level of contact .
 Forces used to signal reassurance and an intent not to resort to force tend to be moved away from the scene of the crisis and tend to conduct less threatening operations . On the other hand, forces used to indicate a lack of threat tend to move away from scene of crisis and .
 The intensity of interactions will be described as routine, heightened, or intense . The intensity is described as 'routine, heightened or intense'
 Routine intensity of dnteraction is the level normally experienced in peacetime . The intensity is the same level of intensity normally experienced during peacetime.
 It includes normal peacetime surveillance activities and, for naval forces, normal level of peacetime contact among vessels at sea .
 Heightened intensity of interaction includes increased surveillance activity . Increased surveillance activity, closer proximity of forces, and tactical positioning of some forces for the possibility of combat .
 An example would be Soviet anticarrier forces moving to within missile range of U.S. carrier battle groups . An example of Soviet forces moving within range of United States carrier groups .
 Severe intensity of interaction includes deliberate harassment, constant surveillance and targeting activities, and frequent maneuvering by both sides to maintain and improve positions .
 The fourth independent variable is the perceived threat of attack held by tactical-level military commanders . The perceived threat to attack is perceived by commanders .
 Tactical-level commanders (also referred to as onscene commanders) are those directly commanding forces at the scene of a crisis . Onscene commanders are those commanding forces in the event of a major crisis .
 Tactical-level commanders include commanding officers of ships and commanders of task groups and task forces . For naval forces, tactical-level commander includes commanding officers, ships and task groups . The U.S. Navy is one of the world's most powerful military powers .
 Tactical~level commanders are constantly assessing the threat to their forces on the basis of their tactical situation relative to the adversary's forces . Commander: "Tactical level commanders assess their threat to their forces"
 The on-scene commander must at all times be prepared for a sudden outbreak of fighting . His assessment of the adversary’s intentions is heavily influenced by the actions the adversary's forces are taking .
 This is a particular form of the military practice of assessing intentions on the basis of capabilities . This is an assessment of intentions based on capabilities, rather than capabilities .
 On-scene commanders do not base their assessment of the adversary's intentions only on the basis of what adversary forces are capable of doing, they say . This factor plays a much larger role at the tactical level of interaction than it does at the political level of interactions .
 The threat perceptions held by tactical-level military commanders can range from being entirely accurate to being acute misperceptions . The perception of threat is a matter of concern for the military .
 The on-scene commander could accurately perceive that the adversary's forces are unlikely to attack, or that they are making final preparations for an imminent preemptive attack . The commander of the scene could be able to anticipate the enemy's intentions .
 Commander 1048 might misperceive military actions taken by the adversary to send political signals or improve defensive capabilities as indicating an intent to attack . But the on-scene commander 1048 may also miss out on military actions by the enemy .
 Many of the actions a state takes in a crisis in order to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of its adversary . Many of these actions are often taken to increase security of a state to improve its security .
 The fragility of platforms relative to the destructiveness of weapons dictates tactical emphasis on shooting first . This dilemma is particularly acute in naval warfare, where platforms are fragility .
 Many of the actions taken with naval forces in crises to increase a nation’s security and improve its bargaining position inherently increase the vulnerability of the adversary's naval forces .
 Another possibility is that the on-scene commander could be deceived into thinking that an attack is unlikely by adversary efforts to cover an imminent surprise attack with secrecy and deception .
 In this situation the on-scene commander misperceives the threat of attack as being unlikely, when in fact an attdck is imminent . In fact an attack is imminent. In this case an attack was unlikely.
 An on-scene commander might not have sufficient information on the level of hostility being shown by the adversary outside the immediate vicinity . This could lead to a misperception that the threat of attack is less than it actually is .
 The threat perceptions held by tactical-level military commanders can 1049 range from highly accurate to acute misperceptions . Thus, the threat perceptions .
 The perceived threat of attack held by tactical-level military commanders will be described as unlikely, possible, or imminent . Military commanders will also describe the perceived threat as unlikely or possible .
 These are terms commonly used by military forces to designate threat warning levels . The terms are commonly used to designate military forces' threat levels . These terms are used to refer to the highest threat level .
 The perception that threat of attack is possible means that the adversary has the capability to launch an attack in the near future, but there is not sufficient information to determine that it is in fact his intention to attack .
 The perception that threat of attack is imminent means that the adversary has the capability to launch an attack, and the apparent intention of launching an attack in the immediate future . The perception of an imminent threat is the perception that the threat is imminent .
 The fifth independent variable is the relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions . The relationship is the result of political and tactical perceptions of threats .
 Political-level authorities can hold threat perceptions much different from those held by tactical-level military commanders . Political authorities can also be wary of the threat they pose to the public .
 The two groups of decisionmakers are making their assessments in much different environments and often on the basis of different information . The assessment is often made in a very different environment and often based on different information, experts say .
 National leaders focus primarily on the overall political and strategic picture, including communications with the adversary . National leaders often focus on overall political, and strategic, political and economic objectives .
 To national leaders, the tactical situation at the scene of the crisis is but one element in constructing the overall picture . The tactical situation is one of the key elements in constructing an overall picture.
 On-scene commanders focus on their immediate tactical situation, particularly the behavior of the adversary's forces in the vicinity . On-site commanders, on the other hand, tend to focus on the tactical situation .
 On-scene commanders normally have only limited information on the overall political-military situation . They use that information to assess the local picture .
 A military move that is only a political signal to the national leaders can be seen as a seriously threatening change in the tactical situation by the on-scene commander . The move can be a serious threat to the security forces, says the commander .
 Such differences in perceptions are what is what is meant by stratification of threat perceptions . Such differences are what are meant to stratify threat perceptions, says author .
 Political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions are important because they create the stratified crisis security dilemma . Such differences in political-level . and tactical . perceptions create a complex security . dilemma .
 The stratified crisis security dilemma is that the security dilemma can arise independently at different levels of interaction, affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level . The dilemma can be solved at the highest level of interaction .
 Tactical level military commanders can perceive a severe threat of imminent attack while political level authorities perceive little likelihood of attack . For example, military commanders may perceive a threat to imminent attack .
 Decisionmakers at one level may not be aware that decisionmakers at the other level hold much different threat perceptions, 1051 . Further, decisionmakers may not even be aware of the threat 1051 perceptions .
 The likelihood of serious fighting erupting and escalation occurring can be different at the different levels of crisis interaction . Thus, the likelihood of significant fighting erupts and escalation occurs at different levels .
 The relationship between political-level and tacticalllevel threat perceptions will be described as convergent, similar, or divergent . The relationship is often described as 'congruiting' or 'similar'
 Convergent threat perceptions occur when decisionmakers at the political and tactical levels of interaction hold essentially the same threat perceptions, even though their focus may be different . Decisionmakers at political, tactical and political levels of interact with each other .
 Threat perceptions would be convergent when national leaders perceive that the adversary has decided to resort to war and that war cannot be averted by further diplomatic efforts . On-scene commanders perceive that attack by the adversary's forces at the scene of the crisis is imminent .
 Divergent oreeat perceptions are significantly Gifferent at the political and tactical levels of interaction . Divergent perceptions are significant at political, tactical levels, interaction. Divergent perception is significantly different at political and military levels .
 Historically, the tendency is rex tacticallevel decisionmakers to perceive a greater threat of attack than do political-level decision makers . The tendency is that tactical level decisionmakers perceive greater threats of attack, rather than political leaders .
 The sixth independent variable is the strength of the factors inhibiting escalation . The strength of these factors is a key factor in preventing escalation, experts say .
 There are six internal and two external escalation-inhibiting factors . As discussed earlier in this chapter, there were six internal factors .
 The internal factors are military prudence, caution and restraint on the part of 1052 on-scene commanders . National leaders structuring the tactical environment to dampen military interactions . accurate and timely tactical intelligence on friendly and potentially hostile forces .
 The external factors are tacit rules of crisis behavior observed by the two sides, and communications between the sides in a crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The strength of the factors inhibiting escalation will be described as strong, weak, or lacking . The strength will be determined by the strength of these factors .
 Strong inhibiting factors prevent escalation from occurring other than as the result of a deliberate decision by national leaders . The U.S. military has been involved in the Iraq conflict since 2003 .
 Lack of the inhibiting factors can allow escalation to arise fram an inadvertent Military incident and gain momentum, exceeding the ability of national leaders to control it . Lack of an inhibiting factor allows escalation to occur when an engagement first breaks out .
 The seventh independent variable is the impact of inadvertent military incidents on stratified interactions . The seventh variable is impact of accidental military incidents, such as accidental incidents .
 Inadvertent military incidents include unanticipated authorized actions, military accidents, and unauthorized actions . Inadvertently military incidents are unanticipated unauthorized actions and military accidents .
 Inadvertent military incidents can trigger decoupling of tactical-level military interactions from political-level crisis management objectives . This is the start 1053 of an escalation sequence at the tactical level of interaction .
 Decoupling and escalation are not inevitable consequences of inadvertent military incidents, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama: "Decoupling is not inevitable, it's not inevitable"
 Whether or not decoupling and escalation occur is a function of the ability of national leaders to exercise direct control over tactical-level military operations, the author says . The strength of the factors inhibiting escalation is also a factor, he says .
 The significance of inadvertent military incidents can vary widely, and they generally are not particularly dangerous . Thus, the significance of accidental military incidents vary widely .
 The impact of inadvertent military incidents will be described as minor, moderate, or significant . The impact will be classified as either significant, moderate or significant, depending on the type of incident .
 Inadvertent military incidents have little effect on stratified interaction . They do not occur often, are not likely to cause decoupling when they do occur, and do not impede re-establishment of control when decouplings do occur .
 Moderate means that impact of inadvertent incidents can vary widely, depending on the circumstances in which they occur . Moderate means means that the impact of accidental incidents vary widely from the circumstances of which they are .
 The impact can range from momentary decoupling to an uncontrollable escalation sequence . The impact of the incident can be seen in a sequence of moments .
 Significant means that inadvertent military incidents tend to have a major impact on stratified interaction . Significant military incidents are often inadvertent incidents that can have a big impact on social interaction .
 Significant incidents tend to cause decoupling of tactical-level Military interactions from political-level objectives . This is to prevent rapid re-establishment of political-levels control, and to trigger escalation sequences .
 In this pattern, political-level leaders exercise direct control over tactical-level military operations . The pattern is similar to that of U.S. President Barack Obama, who was in office in 2009 .
 There were no examples of this pattern of crisis military interaction in case studies .
 The fact that the pattern was not actually observed suggests that its occurrence is improbable, particularly in a military establishment as large and complex as that of the U.S. The pattern is unlikely to have been observed .
 If the crisis escalates to war, it would be through deliberate decisions by national leaders . The crisis could be triggered by deliberate national decisions by leaders .
 This does not mean that national leaders preferred war to diplomatic efforts from the beginning of the crisis, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This doesn't mean that war is not the end of the war, but it is the end result of the conflict"
 They may opt for war with great reluctance and apprehension, out of desperation rather than hope for decisive gains . They may--particularly in the age of nuclear weapons--opt for war out of fear, not hope for victory .
 The level of violence at the tactical level reflects the strategy being pursued at the political level . That is, says the author of the book, "level of violence" reflects the political strategy of the Syrian government .
 Political-level control] of tactical level military operations is the most significant independent variable determining whether this pattern occurs, the U.S. military says .
 Small-scale local military operations favor occurrence of the pattern . National leaders tend to shift from direct to indirect control as the scale of military operations increases .
 Declaring a worldwide alert (DEFCON 3 or higher) puts great pressure on direct control by setting 1056 in motion a large range of military operations that can generate military interactions with the other side of the opposing forces . Declaring an alert puts a large number of operations in motion
 Routine to heightened intensity. of tactical-level interactions between the two sides eases the difficulty of exercising direct control over military operations .
 As the intensity of interactions increases, national leaders are increasing left out of the tactical picture . National leaders should be left out, says President Obama .
 On-scene commanders must increasingly make their own decisions to keep pace with rapidly-changing tactical circumstances . The U.S. military has been in the grip of the White House since 2001 .
 Any level of tactical-level threat perceptions, whether unlikely, possible, or imminent, can cause unified interactions . The U.S. military says it's a good example of unified interactions in the world .
 An example of convergent threat perceptions would be for national leaders to perceive that the adversary intends to resort to war, while on-scene commanders perceive that an attack by the other side is imminent .
 Convergent threat eee ae occur when national leaders perceive that the adversary intends to seek a diplomatic solution to the crisis and onscene commanders perceive that an attack is unlikely .
 Convergent threat perceptions tend to prevent tactical~level interactions from becoming decoupled from political-level 1057 control .
 Unified interaction do not exclude the possibility of war resulting from misperception, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Unified interaction don't exclude possibility of conflict resulting from misunderstanding .
 When misperceptions occur, they are convergent--national leaders incorrectly perceive that the adversary intends to resort to war, while on-scene commanders incorrectly perceive an attack is imminent . National leaders mistakenly perceive that an attack will be imminent .
 If the factors inhibiting escalation are strong, they contribute to the occurrence of unified interactions . But such factors do not have a major causal role because of the independent variables already mentioned tend to prevent escalation pressures .
 Tacticallevel military commanders tend not to feel greater pressure to escalate than do political-level leaders . Political-level commanders tend to feel less pressure than tactical leaders, experts say .
 The internal factors inhibiting escalation tend to prevent tactical-level interactions from Aerating bottom-up escalatory pressures . Aerating escalatory pressure is the key to avoiding escalation . The U.S. military has a long history of escalating pressures .
 External factors inhibiting escalation become important only when national leaders begin contemplating escalatory military options . The external factors are important only to national leaders consider escalatory options .
 The impact of inadvertent incidents must be minor for the unified interaction pattern to occur . The impact must be small enough for the pattern to be consistent .
 Inadvertent incidents do not trigger decoupling of tactical-level interactions . National leaders retain direct control of national leaders .
 The most important independent variables causing unified interactions are direct political-level control of tactical-level Military interactions and convergent threat perceptions . The most significant independent variables are the political level control of the U.S. military .
 In this pattern national leaders retain control over the escalation and de-escalation of conflict . National leaders keep control over escalation and escalation of conflict, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The separate interaction sequences at the political and tactical levels evolve in parailel, in the sense of reflecting the same overall strategy toward the adversary . The different interaction sequences evolve in a way to reflect an overall strategy, the author says .
 National leaders do not control every operational decision made at the tactical level, but the decisions made by on-svene commanders support the crisis management strategy of national leaders . National leaders don't control operational decisions made at tactical level .
 Political-level control of tactical-level military interaction is the most important independent variable in this pattern . Political control of the U.S. military is the key to the pattern, the author says .
 Political level control is indirect, rather than direct, as in the unified interaction pattern . Political-level control is direct, not direct, in the pattern .
 National leaders rely primarily on mechanisms of indirect control for ensuring that tacticallevel interactions support their strategy for managing the crisis . National leaders use indirect control to manage crises .
 For this reason crisis interactions are stratified, rather than unified, say experts . Crisis interactions are 'strategorically different' for each crisis, they say . For this, crisis interactions must be stratified .
 Local to theater scale of operations favor occurrence of the pattern . National leaders tend to have greater difficulty controlling tactical-level military operations as their scale increases .
 The likelihood of tactical-level interactions becoming decoupled from political-level objectives tends to increase as the scope of military operations increases, experts say .
 Smaller scale operations contribute to stratified interactions being parallel . Smaller-scale operations thus contribute to smaller-scale interactions .
 Routine to heightened intensity of tactical-level interactions between the two sides makes the task of controlling the military pene one feasible .
 As the intensity of interactions increases, national leaders are increasingly left out of the tactical picture . 1060 commanders must make their own decisions to keep pace with rapidly~changing tactical circumstances .
 Intense tactical-level interactions tend to increase the likelihood of decoupling and inadvertent military incidents . This is one of other patterns of crisis military interaction . Intense interactions can lead to inadvertent military incidents .
 Any level of tactical-level threat perceptions, whether unlikely, possible or imminent, can cause parallel stratified interactions . The U.S. military says it's not just about the threat, but it's about how it reacts to it .
 Threat perceptions held by political-level leaders and tactical military commanders are convergent . As in the unified interaction pattern, the more important independent variable causing the parallel stratified interaction pattern .
 Convergent threat perceptions tend to keep ee 1ere1 interactions parallel with political-level interactions when national leaders are not exercising direct control of military operations .
 When misperceptions occur, however, they are convergent--national leaders incorrectly perceive that the adversary intends to resort to rr while on-scene commanders mistakenly perceive that attack is imminent .
 If the factors inhibiting escalation are strong, they contribute to the occurrence of parallel stratified interactions . But such factors do not have a major causal role because the independent variables already mentioned tend to prevent stratified escalation pressures .
 Tactical-level commanders tend not to feel greater pressure to escalate than do political-level leaders . Tactical commanders tend to feel less pressure than political leaders to escalate, experts say .
 The internal factors serve only to prevent escalation of tactical-level interactions, they do not prevent escalatory pressures from arising separately at the political level of interaction . Internal factors only serve only . But internal factors do not stop escalation of .
 Most dangerous situation under conditions of parallel stratified interactions is for escalatory pressures to arise simultaneously at all three levels in the chain of command-political, strategic, and tactical . The most dangerous situation is if escalatory pressure to arise simultaneous at three levels of command .
 This is a convergence of perceptions at the three levels that escalation of the conflict is the only course of action that can forestall unacceptable damage to vital national interests . The U.S. government has been in touch with the U.N. with the Syrian President Bashar Assad .
 All levels in the chain of command perceived the North Vietnamese attacks as deliberate provocations warranting strong retaliation . This type of convergence is essentially what occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident, in which all levels believed the attacks were provocations .
 Doubts about the circumstances of the attacks and whether retaliation was appropriate were not thoroughly explored . A broad consensus supporting an escalatory response was not explored .
 The impact of inadvertent military incidents must be Minor for the parallel stratified interaction pattern to occur . The impact must be Major for the Minor to occur, says the author .
 1062 tec inadvertent incidents support the itetsiniete cote nt strategy being pursued by national leaders . That is, the essence of parallel interactions .
 The most important independent variables in the parallel stratified interaction pattern are indirect political-level control of tactical-level military operations and convergent threat perceptions .
 The third pattern of crisis military interaction is momentary decoupling of interaction . Momentary Decoupling is a pattern of military interaction in crisis .
 In this pattern Mational leaders temporarily lose control of military teractions. but are able to quickly re-establish control of the situation .
 There is a brief period in which national leaders are not controlling tactical-level military interactions . Rigasander: "The actions taken by the on-scene Rigasanders do not support the actions of national leaders"
 The actions could well be authorized under guidance under guidance contalawd in the mechanisms of indirect control, but nevertheless complicate political and diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis .
 This aces not mean that the on-scene commander was “wrong” to take the actions . This does not mean the commander was "wrong’t" to take actions .
 He may have been compelled to use force in self-defense as authorized in his rules of engagement . For example, he may have used force to protect himself from harm . He may also have been forced to use self defense .
 The use of force could well have been necessary to avert an attack, appropriate to the tactical circumstances, and fully justified under international law, 1063 . But still have interfered with crisis management efforts, it has been claimed .
 The key point is that tactical-level interactions not controlled by national leaders occur, and that those actions complicate or interfere with political-level crisis management efforts . "The key point" is that the key point of the problem is that those interactions are not controlled .
 National leaders lose effective direct or indirect control of military operations . Military leaders lose control over military operations when they lose control .
 The important feature is that whatever causes decoupling is not permanent, it does not prevent national leaders from quickly re-establishing control . The important thing is that decouplings are not permanent .
 Local to theater scale of military operations favor the occurrence of momentary decoupling by increasing the likelihood that national leaders will be able to to to reestablish control over Caasunenewel military interaction .
 Global-scale operations make it more difficult for national Peeders to re-establish control over tactical-level military interaction after decoupling occurs . The U.S. military says it will be difficult for PEDs to regain control of global operations .
 At the lower intensities, decoupled tacticai-level interactions are less likely to gain a momentum of their own . At the same time, national leaders have less difficulty keeping abreast of the tactical 1065 situation--both of «sshich facilitate the re-establishment of
 The tactical-level threat perception that favors the eccurrence of momentary decoupling is that attack is unlikely or possible . The threat perception is that attacks are unlikely, or possible, to be attacked .
 Momentary decoupling can result from technical problems with communications systems even when the on-scene commander views an attack as unlikely . On-scene commanders view an attack on the scene as unlikely.
 Momentary decoupling can also result from actions taken in response to a perception that attack is possible . But it also can result from taking action to prevent it from happening .
 The perception that attack is imminent tends not to be associated with momentary égaeu pluie pluuie wsecatec 1t prompts more intense tactical interactions, which prevent leaders from immediately re-establishing control .
 A relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions that is convergent or similar favors the occurrence of momentary decoupling . A relationship . between political and tactical threats that are convergent .
 "Conversgent or similar threat perceptions" helps national leaders re-establish control over tactical-level military operations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Divergent threat perceptions tend to cause tactical-level interactions to maintain momentum . Maintain their own momentum, resisting control by national leaders . Divergent threats tend to resist national leaders' control .
 Strong internal factors inhibiting escalation facilitate the ability of national leaders to re-establish control over tactical-level military operations . The U.S. has not been able to engage in military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 On-scene commanders normally reach the limits of their authority under the mechanisms of indirect control early in an engagement, and turn to the chain of command for further guidance . For example, on-scene commander often reaches the limit of his authority under indirect control .
 This Creates an opportunity for control to be re-established if communications channels are open and top-level officials have a grasp of the tactical situation . This creates an opportunity to re-establish control of the situation if communications are open .
 The external factors inhibiting escalation also facilitate reestablishment of control by slowing the pace of action and preventing tactical-level interaction from gaining momentum during the period of control is lost .
 When inadvertent military incidents have a significant impact on crisis military interactions, they tend to cause the initial decoupling of tactical-level military interactions from political-level objectives . Inaccidental military incidents tend to decouple military operations from political objectives .
 Most common incident is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side . The most common type of incident is an unplanned authorized action .
 An example would be use of force in selfdefense under the rules of engagement . An example of selfdefense would be self-defence under the Rules of Engagement .
 The use of force is both necessary and authorized, but had not been directly ordered by national leaders and results in an engagement 1067 over which they have no control . Use of force in the U.S. has not been ordered by leaders .
 This situation has arisen several times in the Persian Gulf when Iranian forces ae eatened U.S. Navy ships or aircraft .
 On-scene commanders halted the engagement when the immediate needs of self-defense were met . Commanders sought guidance from higher authority concerning retaliatory attacks, commanders said .
 In some instances the President was able to issue order on retaliatory attacks within minutes of an engagement . This is an example of direct control being re-established after 'decoupling'
 Accidents and unauthorized actions can also trigger momentary decoupling . There were no instances of this occurring in any of the case studies .
 In summary, two of the independent variables cause decoupling to occur, while the other five cause the decouplings to be momentary .
 The independent variables that cause decoupling are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military operations and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction .
 Independent variables that cause the decoupling to be momentary are local to theater scale of military operations, routine to heightened intensity of tactical-level military operations . Strong escalation-inhibiting factors are also factors, such as political-level threat perceptions, and strong escalation inhibiting
 1068 patterns that are marked by decoupling of tactical-level military interaction from political-level objectives . Momentary decouplings is the most cosson of the four crisis military interaction 1068 .
 The fourth pattern of crisis military interaction is decoupled interactions followed by disengagement . Decoupled Interactions Followed by Disengagement .
 This pattern begins with decoupling of tactical-level interaction from political-level control . This pattern is similar to that of the U.S. President Barack Obama's election cycle .
 National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problens, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment . National leaders may not be able to quickly regain control of the situation .
 The initial tactical-level engagement between the two sides does not gain momentum and escalate, it loses momentum and the forces disengage . But the initial tactical level engagement does not escalate, says the author .
 By the time national leaders re-establish control, the shooting has stopped, the shootings have stopped . The shooting was the first time the shooting had stopped in the U.S.
 Tactical disengagement can be a requirement for political-level control to be re-established, especially in a fast-paced tactical environment . Political-level disengagement is a key to re-establishing political control in the U.S.
 The Tonkin Gulf incidents of August 2 and 4, 1964 are examples of decoupling followed by disengagement . The incidents occurred in the Gulf of Vietnam in August 1964 .
 President Johnson and his advisors had not been paying close attention to the USS Maddox prior to the first North Vietnamese attack, and were not able to control the engagement .
 The White House was paying much closer attention to events in the Tonkin Gulf at the time of the second incident . United States communications capabilities still did not permit top-level officials to control the engagement .
 United States naval forces disengaged as soon as threat of attack by North Vietnamese appeared to have been countered, rather than being ordered to disengage by national leaders . U.S. naval forces were not ordered to engage by leaders, but were ordered to do so .
 On-scene commanders consulted with higher authority on retaliation . President Johnson made the decision on further military operations against North Vietnam .
 Although escalation occurred after the second Tonkin Gulf incident, it was was deliberate escalation . Thus, although escalation occurred in the aftermath of the incident, the escalation was deliberate . The incident was not the first time the U.S. troops had been involved in the second incident .
 National leaders tend to lose ntrol because they are remote from the scene of action and e on-scene commander does not have time to consult with gher authority .
 A fast paced-tactical vironment eae luded direct White House control over the gagements between U.S. Navy and Iranian forces in the . Gulf in 1987 .
 improved mmunications contributed to the President being able to ke speedy decisions on retaliation against Iranian forces, lowing retaliatory attacks to commence soon after Iranian ovocations .
 The primary effect of improved communications has been to make it easier to re-establish control ter an engagement begins, making the momentary decoupling tern more likely than the decoupled followed by sengagement pattern .
 The scale of military operations tends not to be a gnificant independent variable causing the decoupling of 1071 followed by disengagement pattern . Loss of control is primarily caused by the nature of the local tactical environment, says author .
 The pattern can occur during military operations of any scale when the local tactical environment is the cause of decoupling . The pattern is similar to that of any military operations in any scale .
 It is possible that this pattern of crisis military interaction could also be caused by communications or decisionmaking problems . No examples were found in the case studies .
 Such problems are more likely to arise as the scale of operations increases to theater and global . Such problems may arise as scale of operation increases to theaters and global, says CNN.com.com .
 The intensity of tactical-level military interactions is a significant independent variable causing the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern . This is the reason why the U.S. has decoupled and disengaged from Russia .
 Intense tactical-level interactions are more prone to cause loss of control and an initial engagement than are routine intensity of interactions . This makes it more difficult for national leaders to re-establish control before the forces disengage .
 Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent tend to cause aco vei tite and the initial engage-~ ment . This is when the initial response to an attack is not imminent .
 The tactical-level perception of threat can range from being completely accurate, as in the first Tonkin Gulf Incident, to being an acute misperception of the adversary's intentions .
 National leaders are not able to re-establish control over tactical-level interaction until the forces disengage . Regardless of the threat perceptions they may hold, national leaders are unable to regain control of forces .
 Strong escalation-inhibiting factors favor occurrence of the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern, rather than the two patterns involving escalation . The two patterns involve a decoupled and disengagement followed by decouplings .
 Spreading upward, becoming a larger battle involving additional forces . Internal BA EMORS ine vent the tactical-level engagement from Spreading upwards .
 The on-scene commander breaks off the engagement once the immediate threat to his forces is countered . The commander of the forces in the area is not required to engage in combat .
 External factors can also contribute to the forces of the two sides disengaging rather than escalating after the initial engagement . External factors such as external factors can contribute to disengagement .
 The most important external factor is adherence to tacit rules of crisis behavior, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Even when the adversary instigates an incident with a deliberate provocation, he could well decide that escalation of the resulting ieee would not serve his interests . Even when an incident is instigated, the adversary may well decide not to escalate .
 The adversary's leaders could also be decoupled from their forces, leaving the escalation decision to the 1073 adversary's on-scene commander . The escalation decision could be made by the adversary's commander .
 In either case, observance of tacit rules of crisis behavior by the adversary contributes to disengagement rather than escalation being the result of an incident .
 The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors occurrence of the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern .
 Inadvertent military incidents can trigger the decoupling of tactical-level inter-actions and the initial engagement between the forces of the two sides . The U.S. should not be surprised if it happens to be an accidental incident .
 The most Picts pattern is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side, as in use of force in self-defense under the rules of engagement .
 Military accidents or unauthorized actions could also trigger this pattern of decoupling, but no examples were found in the case studies .
 In summary, four of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur, one of the . independent variables causes disengagement to occur without tactical-level escalation . The independent Petite ere not significant causes of the pattern, and two are not significant factors .
 The independent variables that cause decoupling ae the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military operations . Loss of political level control is one of the factors that decouples military operations, such as intense military operations and threat perceptions that attack is
 The independent variable that causes decoupled tactical-level interactions to disengage rather than escalate is strong escalation-inhibiting factors . Strong escalation-related factors are the factors that can cause escalation and escalation disengage .
 The independent variables that have no significant role in causing the pattern are scale of military operations and relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions . The scale of operations and the relationship between threat perceptions are no significant factors in the pattern .
 Decoupling followed by disengagement pattern occurs less often than momentary decoupling pattern, but more often than the two decouplings patterns involving escalation pattern .
 The fifth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent tactical-level escalation . Inadvertent Tactical-Level Escalation is a pattern of military interaction .
 This pattern begins with decoupling of tactical-level interaction from political-level crisis management objectives . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis-management crisis crisis in recent years .
 National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment . National leaders cannot re-institute control because of communications problems .
 The initial tactical-level engagement gains momentum and escalates, increasing in violence and involving an increasing amount of each side's forces . The initial . tactical . level engagement . escalates .
 The third scenario-national leaders halting tactical-level escalation after losing control--is unlikely . The extreme difficulty of maintaining direct control of forces once they are engaged in battle is unlikely .
 There were no examples of this crisis military interaction pattern in the case studies . No examples of such a pattern were shown in the cases studies .
 The possibility of decoupled interactions being followed by tactical level escalation can be inferred from observed variation in the independent variables .
 The most significant independent variables are loss of political control of tactical-level military interaction, divergent threat perceptions, and weak factors inhibiting escalation, the authors say .
 Loss of political-level control of tactical-level military interaction causes decoupling to occur . Decoupling allows escalation that is not controlled by national leaders to occur, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Loss of control can be caused by communications and information flow problems, impairment of political-level decisionmaking, a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, ambiguous orders, or tactically inappropriate orders, i Aeentoetiste guidance .
 Inadvertent tactical-level escalation could even occur while national leaders are in direct communication with the on-scene commander if they are incapable of staying abreast of a rapidly changing tactical environment .
 Theater to global scale of military operations are normally significant in causing the inadvertent tacticallevel escalation pattern . Theater to . global scale . operations are usually significant in . causing the . inadvertent . tactical escalation patterns .
 Larger-scale operations can cause loss of control arising from communications and information flow problems or impairment of political-level decisionmaking . Communications and information 1077 flow problems can be caused by larger scale operations .
 Inadvertent tactical-level escalation can also occur during smaller-scale military operations . The cause of decoupling is a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders, or inappropriate guidance .
 Intense military interaction contributes to causing the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern by causing loss of political-level control of military interaction . It makes it more difficult for national leaders to re-establish control of the military, author says .
 Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is a tend to cause decoupling, the initial engagement, and the tactical-level escalation . The U.S. military says it will not be surprised if the U.K. does not respond to a threat that is perceived as a threat
 A perception that attack is imminent can prompt the on-scene commander to use force . Gonsulting with higher authority or without waiting for a top-level decision after reporting his intentions .
 The tactical-level perception of threat can range from being completely accurate to being an acute misperception of the adversary’s intentions .
 A divergent relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions is an important independent variable in the inadvertent tactical escalation pattern . The U.S. military says it has a "tactical-level escalation pattern"
 Divergent threat perceptions inhibit the 1078 re-establishment of political-level control over tacticallevel interaction, but also help prevent inadvertent strategic-level escalation from causing inadvertent or deliberate political escalation . Divergent threats inhibit the re-establishing of political level control over the tactical level
 A divergent relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions contributes to escalation remaining limited to the tactical level of interaction . A diverging relationship between the political and tactical levels of threat perceptions thus contributes to escalating .
 Weak escalation-inhibiting factors favor occurrence of the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern . The U.S. has a history of unintended escalation patterns in the military .
 Neither internal nor external escalation-inhibiting factors are sufficient to prevent tactical-level escalation from occurring . The U.S. military says it will not be able to use the U.K. military to prevent escalation in response to an escalation .
 The internal and external escalationinhibiting factors prevent escalation from spreading upward to the strategic and political levels, the author says .
 Both sides adhere to tacit rules of Crisis behavior that inhibit escalation . Communications between the two sides may be used to avoid escalation and hasten tactical disengagement .
 The escalation-inhibiting factors are too weak to prevent tactical-level escalation, but are strong enough to S amerit inadvertent strategic~level escalation or deliberate escalation .
 The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors 1079 the occurrence of the inadvertent tactical-level interaction pattern . 1079 favors the occurrence .
 The most common pattern is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side, as in use of force in self-defense under the rules of engagement .
 Military accidents or unauthorized actions could also trigger this pattern of decoupling . Military accidents and unauthorized actions may also trigger the pattern .
 In summary, four of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur . Two of the en tident variables zause tactical-level escalation to eccur, and two of the . independent variables allow tactical escalation to occur but prevent it from causing inadvertent strategic-
 The independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military Operations . Loss of political level control is one of the factors that cause the initial engagements to occur .
 The independent variables that cause decoupled tactical-level interactions to escalate are intense military interaction, and a tactical threat perception that attack is imminent, the author says .
 The independent variables that allow tactical-level escalation 1080 but prevent inadvertent strategic level escalation or Geliberate political level escalation are independent variables . Geliberation is a divergent relationship between political-level threat perceptions and weak escalation-inhibiting factors .
 The sixth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent strategic-level escalation . Inadvertent Strategic-Level Escalation is the result of inadvertent escalation .
 Inadvertent strategic level escalation arising from tactical-level escalation was the path examined in this study . The study focused on military interaction, which focused on tactical level military interaction .
 Inadvertent strategic-level escalation could arise from inadvertent military incidents (unanticipated authorized actions, military accidents, and unauthorized deliberate actions) involving strategic level forces . The U.S. military says it has no plans to respond to any military incidents .
 Many of the factors affecting tactical-level interaction probably also affect strategic level interaction, but such strategic level factors were not addressed in this study .
 The remainder of this discussion will address only inadvertent strategiclevel escalation arising from tactical-level escalation . The rest of the discussion will be limited to tactical escalation .
 Inadvertent strategic-level escalation arising from . tactical-level 1081 interactions decoupling from political-level control . The escalation begins with tactical . level 1081 interaction .
 National leaders are unable to immediately re-establish control over tactical-level interaction due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment .
 The tacticallevel escalation spiral generates escalatory pressures at the strategic level, reinforcing perceptions that the adversary is preparing for war and is not interested in a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 Fighting rapidly grows to the theater level and spreads to other theaters, possibly becoming global in scope . The scope of fighting rapidly grows .
 The spread of the escalatory spiral to the strategic level of interaction is eeeugh deliberate decisions made by strategic-~-level military commanders . It is considered to be inadvertent because it was not directly ordered by national leaders and did not .
 First, 1082 inadvertent escalation to war could occur when tacticallevel and initial strategic-level escalation is misperceived as initiation of war by the adversary . Second and third, the U.S. could be at risk of escalation in 1082 .
 Strategic level military commanders then order wartime operstisns under the authority delegated to them to act in such situations . Strategic-level military commanders order wartime operations under authority .
 This would appear to be the most likely circumstances for inadvertent escalation to war . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 Second, inadvertent escalation to war could arise from strategic-level military commanders misperceiving that national leaders desire that Wartime operations be initiated, but are for some reason incapable of issuing the order .
 Based on the findings of this study, this would be the least likely path for inadvertent escalation to war .
 Deliberate escalation to war occurs when inadvertent strategic-level escalation prompts national leaders to make a deliberate decision to initiate wartime operations . Deliberated escalation occurs when national leaders decide to initiate war operations .
 The final decision for war is a deliberate one made by national leaders, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The decision for war could be based on an accurate assessment to that the adversary intends to initiate wartime operations, or has already done so, but could also be . based on a misperception of the adversary'’s intentions 1083 and the causes of the tactical-level and
 There were no examples of inadvertent strategiclevel escalation pattern of crisis military interaction in the case studies .
 The possibility of decoupled interactions being followed by escalation spreading to the strategic level can be inferred from observed variation in the independent variables affecting military interaction .
 Pattern pattern not observed suggests that its occurrence is improbable . However, the fact that the pattern was not actually observed suggests it is unlikely .
 The most important independent variables causing this pattern are loss of political-level control of tactical-level military interaction, convergent threat perceptions, and lack of escalation-inhibiting factors, say experts .
 Loss of control can be caused by communications and information flow problems, impairment of political-level decisionraking, a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, or inappropriate guidance .
 Decoupling could occur while national leaders are in direct communication with the on-scene commander if they cannot stay abreast of a rapidly changing tactical environment . Decouplings could occur if national leaders fail to stay in touch with the commander .
 Global-scale Military operations tend to favor the occurrence of the inadvertent strategic-level escalation 1085 pattern . The pattern tends to be more likely to occur in the future .
 Larger scale operations make loss of political control over tactical-level and strategic-level interactions more likely . Larger-scale operations provide opportunity for a tactical engagement to rapidly — to theater and strategic forces .
 The most acute danger is when the military forces of both sides are at a high level of alert, maintain-~ ing readiness to commence combat operations on short notice .
 Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is dmminent tend to cause decoupling, the initial tactical engagement, and tactical-level escalation . The U.S. military says the perception that an attack is imminent tends to decouple and escalate .
 A perception that attack is imminent can prompt the on-scene commander to use force without consulting with higher authority or without waiting for a top-level decision after reporting his intentions . A perception of an imminent threat can prompt a commander to take action .
 A convergent relationship between strategic and tactical-level threat perceptions is an important independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern . The U.S. has been in the midst of an inadvertent escalation pattern.
 The spread of escalation to the strategic level results from strategic-level military commanders perceiving that war with the adversary is imminent and unavoidable, the authors say .
 Causing deliberate escalation to war to result from inadvertent strategic-level escalation . Further, a convergent relationship between political -level and . strategic -level . threat perceptions is important in determining the outcome of a war . Causing escalation to . war to . result from accidental escalation to
 National leaders make a 1086 deliberate decision to initiate wartime military operations, rather than halt strategic-level escalation . Previous tactical-level and strategic escalation appears to confirm their suspicions that the adversary is not interested in a diplomatic solution to the crisis .
 Convergence of threat perceptions is a significant independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern of crisis military interaction . The U.S. military says it has a ‘significant independent variable’ in the ‘escalation pattern’
 A lack of escalation-inhibiting factors is also a significant independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern . The U.S. military says it will not be able to repeat the pattern .
 Internal factors that would ordinarily prevent escalatory pa aaa from spreading upward are nullified by convergent threat perceptions . The internal factors are nullifying by converging threat perceptions, such as the threat perception .
 On-scene commanders and the chain of command have little incentive to react with military and political Caution . National lealers shaze their worst-case perceptions of he adversary's intentions .
 A lack of, or erosion of, tacit rules of crisis behavior causes the two sides to react to tactical-level escalation with strategiclevel escalation, rather than restraint . Communication between the sides are not used or not effective in preventing misperceptions of intentions and arresting the escalation spiral .
 The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors 1087 the occurrence of the inadvertent strategic-level interaction pattern . 1087 favors the occurrence .
 Inadvertent military incidents can trigger the decoupling of tactical-level interactions and the initial engagement between the forces of the two sides . This can also contribute to the spread to the strategic level of escala-~ tion .
 Accidental launch of a strategic nuclear weapon could trigger strategic-level escalation by appearing to be preemption by the other side . For example, accidental launch in the midst of a tactical-level . escalation could well trigger strategic . escalation .
 In summary, five of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur, five cause tactical~-level escalation to result in inadvertent strcetegic level escalation . In addition to tactical escalation, five  independent variables also cause tactical escalation .
 The independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over ad leve) military operations, global-scale military Operations, intense tactical-level military interaction, and intense military interaction . Inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on tactical-
 Variables that cause tactical-level escalation are loss of political control over strategic-level military operations, global-scale military operations and a lack of escalation-inhibiting factors, and inadvertent incidents .
 The inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern appears to be the pattern least likely to occur . The accidental escalation pattern is likely to be a crisis interaction pattern, the author says .
 The dependent variable in the theory of stratified interaction is the outcome of crisis military interaction . The degree to which and the manner in which tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a crisis is a key factor .
 BearMacion can halt short of war or continue on to war . Inadvertent controlled escalation and deliberate BearMacions can halt before war . BearMaconsi: "BearMacionsi is not going to war. It is not a war"
 The patterns were identified through an analytical-inductive process, rather than deductively . However, because they were identified, additional patterns could be identified through empirical research .
 More than one of the patterns of crisis military interaction can occur in a crisis . The U.S. has a history of military interaction with the world's largest powers .
 The patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction and momentary decoupling of interaction, decoupled interactions followed by wr disengagement, and inadvertent tactical-level escalation--can occur in various sequences in a crisis .
 Contingent generalizations were formulated for the six patterns of crisis military interaction, offering a distinct Causal pattern for each type of interaction . The Causal Pattern was created for each of the six types of interaction.
 Each of the causal patterns is produced by specific variations in seven independent variables that were identified in the case Studies as significant in determining the outcome of crisis .
 The seven independent variables that 1090 determine the nature of crisis military interaction determine the likelihood of escalation are the degree of political control over tactical-level military interaction, the scale of military operations, the intensity of military interactions, the perceived threat of attack at the tactical level, the relationship between
 Independent variables are lettered in the Sequence given at the top of this page . Independent variables include independent variables lettered by the Sequence .
 Independent variables are lettered in the sequence given at the top of the page 1090. stratified interactions become decoupled, and the degree to which decoupling interactions result in escalation of a crisis .
 1092 decoupled interactions followed by disengagement, inadvertent tactical-level irit@eaect ion: inadvertent strategic-level interaction, and unified interaction . 1092 decoupled interaction followed a momentary decoupling .
 The independent variables that most affect this ranking are political-level eontrol of tactical-level interaction and the strength of the escalation-inhibiting factors . The independent factors most affect the ranking are the political level of interaction between the two teams .
 Direct political-level control of tactical-level cinan een operations is difficult for U.S. leaders due to the size and complexity of the United States armed forces, making the unified interaction pattern rare .
 The escalation-inhibiting factors are generally quite strong, preventing escalation even when decoupling occurs . Momentary decouplings and esiang followed by disengagement is much more common than inadvertent tactical-level escalation or inadvertent strategic level escalation .
 What do these findings imply for the analytical value of the theory of stratified interaction? And what do they mean for the theory?
 Second, what are the implications of these findings for the practice of crisis Management? What are the consequences of the findings? What do the implications for crisis management? We ask you to share your thoughts .
 Third, to what degree can these findings be generalized to crises involving forces other than naval forces? Third, the findings were generalized to those involving forces outside of naval forces .
 The next chapter will offer overall conclusions on the theory of stratified interaction . These issues will be addressed in the next chapter, which will offer the implications of these findings for crisis management .
 The theory provides differentiated explanations for a variety of crisis military interactions . It allows policymakers to diagnose specific situations in which crisis management and crisis stability problems can eee .
 This essential requirement for crisis management has also been identified as a potentially serious problem area . Crisis management is also a 'potential problem area' for the NHS, the government says .
 The existing literature on crises and crisis Management by and large has not progressed beyond identifying general requirements for crisis management . But the existing literature does not have a clear idea of how to deal with crises and crises .
 Policymakers need an enhanced ability to diagnose specific situations in which particular crisis management and crisis stability problems can arise . Policymakers must also be able to identify specific situations where crisis management, crisis management can arise, experts say . The UK has been in the throes of a crisis crisis crisis
 Policymakers cannot operate effectively only on the basis of general requirements for 1093 ‘1094 crisis management,’s crisis management . Policymakers need to be able to operate effectively effectively only if they have the right to respond to crises .
 The general requirements of crisis ishagement apply in the particular crises they face, rather than the general requirements . They need to be able to judge how to deal with crises in particular crises, says David Cameron .
 Contemporary crisis management theory has poor diagnostic power when applied to a particular crisis situation . Crisis management theory can be used in a crisis crisis situation, says John Defterios . Crisis theory is a form of crisis management that has no diagnostic power .
 Scholars engaged in formulating crisis management theories generally have not attempt to develop a differentiated typology of situations in which crisis Management and crisis stability problems can arise . Scholars have not been able to find out how crisis management can be applied to crisis management .
 Most scholars megagea in formulating crisis management theory have been insufficiently concerned with explanatory, as opposed to prescriptive, theory . Most scholars are not concerned with explaining the crisis management of crisis management .
 What is needed is an explanatory theory that is policy-relevant without being prescriptive . What is really needed is a theory that can be useful for policy-makers, not just for politicians .
 Earlier studies have not succeeded in identifying theoretically relevant variation in crisis military interaction . Earlier studies failed to identify theoretically relevant variations in military interaction, study finds .
 Crisis management and crisis stability problems can arise in different ways, causing crisis management to fail for different reasons . Crisis management problems can be different ways to deal with crisis management and stability .
 It must be capable of offering different explanations for a variety of patterns of crisis military interaction . That is, it must be able to offer a different explanation for patterns of military interaction. That's what the U.S. needs to do to deal with the world's most pressing pressing issues
 A differentiated explanatory theory is possible by formulating contingent generalizations, which identify regularities that occur only under certain specific conditions . A differentiated explanation is possible for a different explanatory theory .
 The objective of this study was to identify different causal patterns associated with variation in crisis military interaction . The objective was to find out different patterns of military interaction in crisis situations .
 An analyticalinductive procedure was used to analyze four historical cases of crisis naval operations and four cases of peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships . For this purpose an analysis of four historical naval operations was used .
 This inductive procedure yielded a typology of crisis military interactions, each linked with a somewhat different causal pattern . This typology was found to be the result of a series of crises involving military personnel .
 Dependent variable was whether on not inadvertent escalation occurs in an international crisis . The dependent variable is whether the escalation occurs during a crisis, the study found .
 For purposes of this study, inadvertent escalation was defined as any increase in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their orders .
 The specific phenomena explained in the study were the interaction of military forces in crises . The impact of such interactions on crisis stability was studied .
 Analysis defined discrete patterns of tactical-level crisis interaction, each associated with a particular causal pattern . The analysis defined a series of tactical patterns of crisis interaction .
 The patterns of tactical-level interaction were arrived at empirically, the patterns identified in this study probably do not cover the universe of interaction patterns . Additional patterns could well be identified through further empirical research .
 Both sides in a crisis sought to advance vital national interests, or at least had vital interests at stake that they were unwilling to sacrifice for the purpose of avoiding war . The first was that both sides sought to protect er er er . national interests .
 Both sides took military actions intended to support crisis bargaining and to counter Military moves by the other side . Both sides were taking military actions to counter military moves by other sides .
 The second condition was that neither side desired war as the outcome of the crisis . Neither side needed war to avoid the possibility of war, the government said .
 National leaders on each side limited their objectives and restrained their military moves to avoid provoking a war . National leaders in both countries limited their military objectives .
 Both sides sought to avoid inadvertent escalation of the crisis while deterring escalation by the other side . Both sides were seeking to avoid accidental escalation, but not accidental escalation .
 A small number of cases were examined using the method of structured focused comparison . That, in turn, required a research design in which a small number was examined . The research was carried out using statistical methods to identify significant causal variables explaining outcomes .
 The Theory of Stratified Interaction . Previous studies of international crises have viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence .
 Multiple interaction sequences arise when national leaders do not make all operational decisions themselves, but must delegate significant decisionmaking authority to subordinates . This is when leaders delegate significant decisions to subordinates, such as the president .
 Decoupling occurs to the extent that O99 decisions on the employment of military forces differ from the decisions political level decisionmakers would have made to coordinate those military actions with their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis .
 Neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow . Crisis stability exists to the extent that neither side has a reason to strike .
 The security dilemma is stratified, arising from interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately . The risk of war at each level is dependent on interaction processes between the two levels .
 An important implication of the stratified crisis security dilemma is that tactical-level military commanders can perceive incentives to preempt while political-level leaders do not . Political-level commanders may be tempted to preempt .
 Tactical-level commanders can be delegated authority to order certain types of preemption under the doctrine of anticipatory self-defense . Preemption is a form of pre-emptive pre-emption in the United States .
 Such tactical-level preemption could well set in motion an escalation sequence that is at least temporarily beyond the control of national leaders . Such escalation sequence could be beyond national leaders' control of events .
 War can also arise inadvertently through escalation process, where the two sides take increasingly threatening military and diplomatic moves in an effort to gain leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions . War may also arise accidentally through escalation .
 Accidents and other inadvertent military actions contribute to escalation process . Accidents, other unintended military action contribute to the escalation process.
 The escalation dynamic is driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail . An escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles, says the author .
 This escalation dynamic increases tensions and hardens resolve until it results in a deliberate or preemptive decision for war . It increases tensions until it leads to a decision to go to war .
 When signalling adversaries, the dilemma is between inadvertent signals of hostility and inadvertent Sigmar cr acquiescence . Sigmar: "When signalling adversaries you have to be careful not to signal hostility or signal hostility."
 When signalling an ally or friend, the misperception dilemma is between inadvertent signals of encouragement and PecpenCiment . PecPenCiment is a word of support for a friend or ally .
 Misperceptions can arise at one level without other levels necessarily being aware of them . This provides a mechanism by which stratified interactions can become decoupled .
 Crisis management literature is based on an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises . The crisis management literature has a view of how military forces can be controlled in a crisis .
 This description is essentially correct, but it fails to grasp the complexity of military command and control . It leads to inaccurate assessments of the crisis management problems arising from the employment of military forces in crises .
 Military commanders are delegated significant authority to make operational decisions on the employment of their forces . Even in crises, military commanders are delegating significant authority on the use of force .
 Under certain circumstances military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking permission from higher authorities . Military commanders can also use weapons without needing permission .
 The interaction of political and military considerations when military force is employed as a political instrument in crises generate tensions~----actual and potential 1103 conflicts between political and . military considerations .
 The second is tension between the need for top-level control of military options in a crisis and flexibility . The need for tactical flexibility and instantaneous Miiision-naked at the scene of the crisis, the author says .
 The third is tension between performance of peacetime political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions . The tension is between peacetime and wartime missions .
 Three tensions between political and military considerations affect the HeglSe to which stratified interactions become decoupled in a crisis, thus having a significant impact on Crisis decision-making and crisis stability . These three tensions are key to the stability of a crisis .
 Significant delegation of decisionmaking authority is common in large organizations . Mechanisms of Indirect Control Organization and management studies show that . Studies show that significant delegation of . decisionmaking . authority is . common .
 Organization and management studies show that tension between autonomy and control is always present in public and business organizations, particularly those consisting of independent operating units .
 Pressures toward secenenels ced control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations, and by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative .
 The new rules relieve the burden of monitoring details of military operations . They relieve higher authorities of 1106 of having to closely monitor the details of operations . Military operations can quickly exceed their {nformation processing and decisionmaking capabilities .
 Top-level authorities are better able to concentrate on monitoring the political-strategic situation, formulating and revising their strategy for dealing with the confrontation, and coordinating the overall execution of military operations .
 Collegial and nonhierarchical controls are relied upon heavily in military organizations . Military organizations rely heavily on non-military controls .
 Members of Bieter units are indoctrinated that their elite status requires that they meet superior standards of performance . The standards are typically discipline, endurance, aggressiveness and fighting skill .
 On the one hand, controls such as discipline, loyalty, and respect for the chain of command are essential for delegated control and mechanisms of indirect control to function at all . On the other hand, they are essential to delegating control and having indirect control .
 In large organizations, optimum performance is achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate--primarily collegial and nonhierarchical-controls-control .
 The issue as to what degree of centralization or decentralization is optimum for military operations was not directly addressed in this review of the military command system .
 The optimum degree of centralization can vary widely depending on the nature of the military Merstion being conducted and the political context of the operation .
 The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and indirect control . The U.S. armed forces relies heavily on direct or indirect control of its operations .
 The methods of control range from positive direct control and direct control by negation at the tight end of the ""tightness of control” spectrum to monitored delegated control and autonomous delegated control at the loose end .
 When a military commander delegates control of operational forces, he does not relinquish all control of those forces to his subordinate . When a commander delegate control of operations, he is not relinquishing all control to a subordinate, he says .
 Seti retains a certain amount of direct control, which varies widely in tightness . Seti has been in charge of most of the world's most successful sports teams .
 Mechanisms of 1109 indirect control are order:3, instructions, or detailed guidance issued to a commander prior to the start of a mission in order to ensure that the decisions he makes support the objectives and intentions of his superiors .
 As the method of control being used moves across the ""tightness of control” spectrum from tight to loose, as the subordinate is granted increasing freedom from direct control, the importance of indirect control increases .
 The United States alert system is based on five levels of Defense Readiness Condition . It defines the overall framework for controlling the readiness of United States forces . It provides a uniform system for all operational commands .
 Individual commands formulate alert procedures and readiness postures applicable to their forces . The Joint Chiefs of Staff has issued guidance from the Joint Chiefs' Staff .
 Much of the detailed guidance 1110 for operational forces is included in standing orders and contingency plans activated as higher levels of DEFCON are declared .
 Commanders must maintain minimum readiness level set by JCS . They can place their forces at a higher condition of readiness if warranted by specific threat .
 The U.S. military can select from among various readiness postures-tailored for different types of threats--within a given DEFCON level . They can also select among various postures to be prepared for different threats .
 Lower level emilee. alin do not have authority to order changes in DEFCON . They can also increase the readiness of their forces independent of the worldwide or theater .
 Standing orders are detailed guidance on operational procedures prepared on a routine basis during peacetime . Standing orders provide guidance on operations prepared for peacetime during the period .
 Mission orders include letters of intent, Operations plans or operations orders issued for a specific short-term operation . Operations plans and operations orders are used to initiate routine and non-routine operations . Stunde Gapes of orders used to start routine operations .
 Mission 1111 orders can range from being very detailed and specific to being very brief and general . Mission 111 1 orders can be very specific and specific, and can be ordered as specific .
 A mission order dneludes the objective of the operation, the forces assigned to it, the identity of the commander, and the time frame for the operation . At a minimum, a mission order details the objective, forces assigned, and time frame .
 Mission orders serve as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the details of an execution . Mission orders relieve a commander from exercising direct control of an execute .
 A mission order can specify which decisions must be referred to higher authority and which decisions the subordinate commander is authorized to make einer . Mission orders can be used to refer decisions to higher authorities, such as a mission order .
 Contingency plans are those operations plans prepared in advance for execution in the circumstances specified in the plans . Contingencies are those plans prepared to be executed in the conditions specified in plans .
 The only 1112 ‘direct orders that are needed are last-minute revisions to the contingency plan and the mission order directing that it ‘pe executed as modified.’ Only 1112 direct orders that need to be approved are last minute revisions to contingency plan .
 Rules of engagement serve as -a mechanism of indirect control by allowing top-level ‘authorities to specify policies on the use of force prior to situations in which direct control of the decision is not possible’
 Rules of engagement provides guidance on how to respond to threat of attack in peacetime and on limitations on fighting in wartime . The purpose of rules of engagement is to provide guidance to operating forces .
 Wartime rules of engagement place limits on military action when U.S. forces are engaged in an armed conflict . The rules govern the use of military action in the United States .
 Certain military options may be deemed undesirable in wartime due to escalation control, diplomatic, and humanitarian considerations . The U.S. military may not be able to use certain military options in wartime .
 An important escalation control function of wartime rules of engagement is to prevent incidents with the military forces of non-belligerents . For example, an important escalation function of the rules of . engagement function of war rules of. engagement is . to prevent . incidents with military forces .
 Wartime rules of engagement can also be eae prevent geographic expansion of a conflict when it is politically 1113 and diplomatically desirable to confine fighting to a limited area .
 Wartime rules of engagement allow military action under such circumstances only for self-defense . The adversary 4s are forced to make the decision to escalate or expand the conflict .
 The peacetime rules prohibit U.S. military commanders from using force in peace‘tine unless absolutely necessary for self-defense . The rules apply only to the United States .
 Special rules of engagement are issued to cover sensitive situations, such as operations near a country openly hostile to the U.S. and operations during an international crisis .
 The operational requirement of crisis management is that national leaders maintain close control over military operations can be exercised in a variety of ways, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One approach is to shift from methods at the loose end of the tightness of control spectrum--autonomous delegated control monitored delegated control--to the tight end . Direct control by negation and positive direct control could be used in the future, experts say .
 This is the approach commonly referred es in the crisis management literature . This is an approach commonly known in the literature of crisis management .
 This type of direct control has its costs, and can even hinder effective crisis management . It can be costly to have direct control of crisis management, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 National leaders typically focus on selected aspects of operations, which may not be the most important or dangerous evoluticns taking place . National leaders often focus on the most dangerous aspects of the operations .
 The need for close control must be weighed against the constraints on the ability of national leaders to exercise effective direct control of military operations . The need to close control thus needs to be weighed up against constraints on national leaders' power .
 A second approach to maintaining close control of ¢risis military operations is through the mechanisms of indirect control, such as indirect control . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis crisis in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Close attention to the rules of engagement is particularly important in this regard, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Excessive tightness in the ee ee of indirect control can be counterproductive--denying the on-scene commander the flexibility he needs to adapt to rapidly changing circumstances . As was also true with methods of control, excessive tightness is counterproductive .
 L235 between control and delegation lies is one of the inherent tensions in crisis management . Establishing precisely where the optimum balance L235 lies is key to finding the balance .
 The U.S. armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control that eroitaines | delegation of authority .
 Monitored delegated control is the method of control preferred by military commanders . When direct control is necessary, control by Repaleon is preferred .
 Primary emphasis is placed on use of mechanisms of indirect control rather than on the exercise of direct control . Primary emphasis placed on the use of . mechanisms of . indirect control .
 These preferences are strongest in the Navy, which has a long tradition of operational autonomy . The Navy has substantial authority to commanding officers, particularly in commanding officers .
 The 1116 can occur under delegated as well as direct control, and can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control . They can also be ordered directly over real-time communications links . They are ordered under delegated or direct control .
 Inadvertent military incidents are troublesome because decisionmakers may fail to realize they are umauthorized and perceive them as deliberate provocation, signal bistiowti1e intent or escalation of a crisis .
 Unanticipated authorized actions are military actions taken by military commanders in compliance with guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control, but not directly ordered or specifically approved by national leaders . Unanticipated military actions are taken by . military leaders in compliance .
 National leaders did not directly order the specific action, but did not anticipate it would result from 1117 guidance . National leaders can only react to unanticipated authorized actions and try to manage their impact on the crisis .
 The most common phenomenon appears to be that national Wales order a military operation without understanding the full range of specific military actions that military commanders can take in order to carry out that operation .
 Reliance on methods or delegated command and mechanisms of indirect control is the most important condition giving rise to the possibility of unanticipated authorized actions . Such actions can also occur when tighter methods of control are being exercised, say experts .
 National leaders exercising control by negation could tacitly approve a military action (by not vetoing it) without understanding what it entails .
 This could occur when a military commander misperceives the political-military context of the local tactical situation . This could be when a commander 1118 misperceive the political and military context of a military operation .
 He might misperceive aggressive enemy military moves as indicating that friendly forces are in imminent danger of attack, or even that war had started . He might order military actions that would have been authorized in these situations .
 The possibility of misperceptions underscores the danger inherent in simulating attacks on an adversary's forces during a crisis . The Soviet Navy conducted against the United States Sixth Fleet while United States forces were at DEFCON 3 in the 1973 Middle East War .
 U.S. Navy commanders in the Mediterranean either knew or presumed that the Soviets were only conducting an exercise and did not attack any Soviet ships . In this instance United States Navy commanders 16 the Mediterranean believed that the Soviet ships were conducting a military exercise .
 Under other circumstances, however, such forbearance could be difficult for on-scene commanders .
 Contingency plans can be a source of unanticipated authorized actions . National ieaders do not fully understand the operational implications of the plans or do not have the time or inciination to carefully review the content of a plan .
 U.S. military contingency plans contain a broad range of options for the employment of military forces in a crisis . But civilian policy-makers tend to view most predefined military options @s inappropriate .
 In practice, top-level military and civilian officials review and revise contingency plans to meet the needs of the specific crisis at hand prior to executing them .
 They may not be informed that a particular action has been initiated until it is too late to halt it or until it has already had an etictipated effect on the crisis . Further, they may be not informed until it's already had a significant effect on crisis .
 Ambiguous or ambivalent orders greatly increase the likelihood of unanticipated authorized actions by leaving the on-scene commander uncertain as to the objectives of his mission, the intentions of national leaders, and the actions he is authorized to take . Ambiguous orders often leave the commander uncertain of the objectives
 The President might not anticipate as resulting from his decisions, but which could raise tensions in a crisis . Movement of forces outside the scene of a crisis into battle positions, employment of weapons in self-defense in accordance with the rules of engagement, and stepped up surveillance of sensitive targets are all
 Military accidents are military accidents not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command . Military accidents occur when an incident is not deliberately initiated by a higher level in command .
 Almost any military action could conceivably be the result of orders from national leaders . An adversary may assume that those leaders ordered an action, that was, in fact, an accident .
 Military action can assume strategic importance if believed to have been conceived and personally supervised by national leaders . Thus, virtually any military action can be considered strategic importance .
 National leaders and even military commanders attempt to atettagaTet accidents from deliberate provocations or attacks . In practice, national leaders and military commanders try to avoid accidental accidents .
 One tactic is to assume (at least for diploMatic purposes) that an isolated incident was an accident, but warn that further such incidents would be viewed as deliberate provocations or attacks . Further such provocations would be seen as deliberate .
 Both of the superpowers have used the ""hot line"" to prevent incidents from becoming confrontations .
 The primary reason why exercises are cancelled is that the forces are needed for crisis operations . But exercises have also been cancelled to avoid potential political complications .
 Military chain of command advises on-scene commanders to act with caution and avoid provocative actions . The second reason for the rarity of accidents in erisis is that the military chain-command usually advises on the scene commanders to avoid provocative acts .
 Military prudence is occasionally violated by toplevel political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters . U.S. leaders have pe ce been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting in local conflict .
 These three factors countericce other factors--increased tempo of operations and adversary forces in close proximity~-that might otherwise contribute to the occurrence of inadvertent military incidents .
 Unauthorized deliberate actions are ordered or executed by tactical-level military commanders in violation of orders issued directly by national leaders, or by violation of operational guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control . The U.S. military has been involved in more than 100 percent of the world's most deadly
 This type of unauthorized action is especially likely when orders given to military forces are vague or ambiguous, leaving ample room for an on-scene commander to take his own actions .
 An on-scene military commander with an appreciation of the political objectives being pursued by national leaders could well decide to ignore orders that are inappropriate for the local situation and pursue a course of action better .
 A constructive unauthorized action is taken in the lief that actions called for in existing orders are inappropriate under the circumstances, and that the unauthorized ietion would better support the national objectives in the ‘risis,’ says .
 A well-intentioned action could seriously ‘omplicate crisis management efforts . Whether or not the outcome is constructive is a diferent matter,‘erent matter .
 The mark of a conitructive unauthorized action is an effort to inform the thain of command as soon as possible of the action taken and ‘he reasons for taking it’
 A malicious unauthorized deliberate action is taken jut of opposition to the objectives underlying specific orders, disrespect for the chain of comnznd or the method of control being usea@, or frustration with particular orders felt to be unnecessarily endangering .
 The mark of a malicious unauthorized action is an 2ffort to conceal the action from higher authority . Mark of malicious unauthorized actions is an attempt to conceal it from higher authorities .
 Incidents at sea wecigns’ weeiwas forms of harassment and other dangerous interactions between Soviet and American Raval forces . Incidents occurred at sea .
 Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the heory of stratified interaction were addressed in the case tudies . Findings of the Case Studies were based on the findings of the case studies .
 The pattern in the four case studies of U.S. naval operations was one of direct control being exercised electively and to a limited degree . The pattern bserved in the . four case . studies of United States naval operations is one of the four .
 Heavy reliance was laced on mechanisms of indirect control in all four cases, ithough the guidance contained in those mechanisms was not revised to reflect the specific circumstances of the risis at hand .
 Tactical-level military interactions rarely ere under the direct control of political-level leaders . The U.S. military has been involved in some of the world's largest military operations .
 Naval forces at scene of crisis were tightly upled in all four of the crisis naval operations case ‘udies’ The case 'udies' are tightly upped in each of the four naval operations cases .
 ictical-level military commanders have indeperdent access » intelligence and surveillance information on adversary xrces . However, the tightness of coupling between the wees of the two sides can vary significantly from crisis » crisis to a particular crisis .
 Naval forces end to react quickly to changes in the other side's perations, seeking to maintain or improve their tactical 2sition in the event of hostilities . As would > expected under conditions of tight coupling .
 Naval forces were sed by both sides for political signalling or related olitical functions in all four of the case studies on risis naval operations . Naval forces used by both parties for political purposes in four case studies .
 Use of naval forces for political purposes can bring naval units of the two sides in a crisis nto close proximity, creating a danger of military Ncidents . Use of military forces can bring military units of two sides to close proximity .
 In the 1958 Taiwan Straits isis, the United States relied on methods of delegated ntrol, United States and Chinese Communist military forces were ghtly coupled . Both sides used their forces as a litical instrument under conditions of acute crisis . teractions occurred at the tactical level
 The findings of is case suggest that stratification is not an isolute concept--there can be degrees of stratification . asures taken by both sides to prevent confrontations can greatly reduce opportunities for ictical-level interaction .
 The President sought to maintain close conol of military operations in the 1962 Cuban Missile ‘isisis . He relied heavily on methods of delegated control id communications problems . Communications problems constrained his ability to 'fectively exercise direct control'
 In certain operations lere was tight coupling between the forces and the forces of the two des. In some operations, lere is tight coupling .
 Both sides used their forces as a political istrument under conditions of acute crisis . Both sides are using their forces in an attempt to win back control of the situation .
 Interactions curred at the tactical level that were not directly ntrolled by American leaders . The U.S. government curbed some of the tactical exchanges with the Taliban .
 Navy 1128 orces encountered Cuban air and naval forces on several scasions without the President or McNamara controlling the ateractions .
 The President's attention was focused on a ery small portion of the overall operations that were in rogress, the President said . The President said he was focused only on a small portion .
 In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the U.S. and Soviet naval orces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled . Both ides used their forces as a political instrument under onditions of conditions of acute crisis .
 Interactions occurred at the tactical level that were not directly ontrolled by American leaders . Interactions between the U.S. and other nations occurred at a tactical level, not directly on American soil .
 For example, peesident ohnson had no control over whether or not the Soviet arassment of America on June 8 would produce a clash with the U.S. and Soviet navies .
 The stratified interction model of international crises, in which interactions volve in separate, semi-independent sequences at the Olitical, strategic, and tactical levels, offers a good escription of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 ArabSraeli War .
 In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the United States relied mn methods of delegated control . The United States and Soviet naval 1129 irces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled . Both countries used their forces as political instruments under an acute crisis .
 Significant and dangerous teractions occurred at the tactical level that were not iectiy controlled by American leaders . The U.S. military has been involved in the fight against ISIS in Syria .
 Nixon had no direct control over Sixth Fleet targeting of Soviet ships carrying encarehip cruise issiles .
 The most mmon cause of decoupling was communications problems or operly functioning communications that are simply too slow permit direct control of military operations . Communication problems are often the most common cause .
 The second most common use of decoupling was a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the 64 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the 67 Liberty incident, and the 1973 Arab War .
 Impairment of political-level 1cisionmaking was a factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . The Arab-Arab War was a major factor in Israeli victory .
 Three patterns of tactical-level interactions were found in the eight cases . Three patterns were found to be patterns in eight of the cases .
 Seciiemleaeian interacions were not directly controlled by political-level a but which generally supported their political objecives and crisis management strategy . Seciiiemleaean inter-acions that were . not directly . controlled by . political level a but supported their
 The pattern between instances | momentary decoupling is parallel stratified interacons. The pattern of decouplings is parallel to that of the interacons .
 Momentary decoupling was seen in the 1958 Taiwan raits Crisis, and possibly in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War .
 In this pattern, a tactical-level incident occurs where M is not directly controlled by political-level leaders . This does not support their objectives for the operation in ‘ogress’
 The incident leads to an armed clash, but then is ‘ted by the on-scene commanders without intervention by ylitical-level authorities’
 Decoupling followed by vent occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents . The incident occurred during the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident .
 This gestion addresses the second corollary to the theory of tratified interaction, that the security dilemma can become Tratified in crises . This is the theory that security dilemmas can be resolved in crises, such as terrorism, terrorism and terrorism .
 Milador-nakers at the political and tactical levels can have different perceptions of the offense-defense balance, ulnerability to preemption, and the need to strike first . The implication of this is that Milador nakers are aware of different perceptions .
 Threat perceptions were stratified in the 1962 Cuban issile Crisis and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Threat perceptions have been stratified since the Arab Spring .
 U.S. and Soviet eaders might not have been able to control until the nitial engagements were over . A umber of incidents could have Se eal an inadvertent aval battle in the Mediterranean .
 This question addresses the third corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that escalation ynamics can be stratified in a crisis . The question is whether this is true, and whether it is true .
 Research was done to identify es:alationnhibiting factors and the conditions that can cause those actors to break down .
 Six internal and two external escalation-inhibiting actors were identified in the case studies . The case studies looked at six internal and three external actors involved in escalation .
 The internal actors function within the government and military chain of 1133 mmand of one nation . They function in the government, military and government chain of one country .
 The internal factors are military udence (avoiding threat of surprise attack and combat der unfavorable circumstances) caution and restraint on e part of on-scene commanders . compliance by on-scenes mmanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of direct control .
 These factors tend to moderate the itensity of tactical-level interactions, prevent armed i sashes (Cou) occurring, and produce disengagement rather than escalation when clashed do occur .
 Tacit rules of crisis behavior are best developed Weveen the U.S. and the Soviet Union, but also mtributed to avoiding escalation in the 1958 Taiwan Crisis .
 Soviet naval forces have engaged in Rebedingly dangerous behavior--dangerous maneuvering at lose quarters and simulated attacks on United States naval forces-uring international crises .
 The 1972 Soviet-American Ge e 1134 icidents at Sea Agreement has only been partially iccessful in moderating such Sediree behavior . The 1972 agreement was only partially successful, but it is still needed to be moderated .
 The most ingerous situation arises in confrontations with nations yat the United States does not share tacit rules of crisis *havior, like Libya, Iran, and North Korea . The U.S. has a long history of dealing with nations like Libya and Iran .
 The findings of the eight case studies indicate that, mtrary to what the escalation dynamics theory predicts, vere is a tendency for naval tactical-level interaction to 9se momentum and for the forces involved to disengage after 2 initial incidents .
 Pauses tend to occur rallies in naval operations due to the need to regroup and repare for further action . Pauses often occur during rallies in the naval operations .
 Naval commanders are reluctant to initiate or sustain combat operations under circumstances ney cannot predict or control due to the risk of defeat in attle. Naval commanders were reluctant to engage in combat operations .
 Naval commanders quickly reach the limits of their uthority and need permission from higher authority to nitiate further combat operations . Naval commanders need permission for further operations .
 The perational requirements of crisis management, if being Ollowed, tend to accentuate the tendency toward disengageent by denying on-scene commanders tactical options (such S surprise attack and concentration of superior force) that an be crucial for successful combat operations .
 The rst condition is for national leaders and military commanra to be predisposed to take action against the adversary e to a long-term failures of diplomacy to resolve long-standing failures .
 Sustained hostility, harassment, or a history of gression by the adversary can generate a perception that e adversary's leaders are unreasonable, irresponsible, or interested in serious negotiations, reducing the incentive to pursue Giplomatic initiatives .
 The second condition is the immediate prior occurrence of 'one or more hostile acts against United States forces, tizens, or vital interests' The first condition is that the U.S. has not been attacked by hostile acts .
 Prior attacks can create an sppectation that further attacks will occur or that the iversary is likely to escalate the level of violence . Prior attacks may create an  apparent that further incidents will occur .
 Short-term expectations of irther violence could be entirely correct, but could also sult from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the iversary's objectives and intentions . As th long-term frustrations, short-term . expectations could also be due to insufficient intelligence .
 The short-term fects of immediate prior hostile acts can reinforce the long-term frustration with the adversary, 1136 pearing to confirm negative assessments of his itentions .
 Expectation of further attacks tends to ‘edispose national leaders and military commanders . toward ‘oader military options toward the adversary.’ The Pentagon says .
 The third condition that can erode the escalationihibiting factors is for all levels in the chain of ymmand, from the President to the on-scene commander, to ld similar views toward the adversary and the need for mediate retaliation for provocations .
 Inadvertent political signals may have been a factor nh some of the crises . But inadvertent military incidents ere not serious problems in the eight cases examined in his study .
 WS berCeptioiie of United States intentions or the urposes of U.S. naval operations may have been a factor in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and the 1968 Pueblo incident . WS bercussions may have
 United States naval operations in sponse to the four peacetime attacks on U.S. Navy ships pear not to have generated misperceptions . United States Navy operations have not been affected by the attacks .
 Level of control tensions were serious in the 1962 uban Missile Crisis and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Levels of control were moderate in the 1967 Arab-Israel War, and minor in the 1958 Taiwan Taiwan Crisis .
 The dependent variable in the theory of stratified interaction is the outcome of crisis military ie OSes GRAICHYs . Specifically, the degree to which and the manner in which tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a Crisis .
 In the third and fourth patterns--momentary decousiaing of interactions and decoupled interactions followed by disengagement--~tactical-level interaction halts without significant escalation . In the second and third patterns, the patterns are similar to those of the first and second patterns
 The first four patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction and Mentary decoupling of interaction--can occur in various sequences in a crisis . The first pattern-unify interaction is the first pattern of interaction in crisis .
 The seven independent variables that determine the nature of crisis military interaction and the likelihood of escalation are the degree of rained sittin’ control over tactical-level military interaction, the scale of military operations, the intensity of military interactions, the perceived threat of attack at the tactical level
 The seven independent variables determine the degree to which crisis interactions to become stratified, whether or not stratified interactions become decoupled, and the degree of escalation of a crisis .
 The causal pattern for unified interaction is direct political-level control of ee eee interaction, local scale of military operations, heightened intensity of tactical-level military interaction, and strong factors inhibiting escalation, are strong factors .
 There were no examples of the unified interaction pattern in the case studies . No examples of such an interaction pattern were found in the study .
 Second pattern of crisis military interaction is Parallel stratified interaction . The second pattern is Parallel Stratified interaction.
 The separate interaction sequences at the political and tactical levels evolve in parallel, in the sense of reflecting the same overall strategy toward the adversary . "The different interaction sequences are at the same level," says President Obama .
 National leaders do not control every operational decision made at the tactical level, but the decisions made by on-scene commanders support the crisis management strategy of national leaders . National leaders don't control every tactical decision made, but they control every decision made .
 The causal pattern for parallel stratified interaction is indirect political-level control of tactical-level military interaction, local to theater scale of military operations, routine-to heightened tadentates of tactical level military interaction . Strong factors inhibiting escalation, strong factors . and inadvertent military incidents that
 The most important independent variables in the parallel stratified interaction pattern are ieaieéet political-level control of tacticallevel military operations and convergent threat perceptions .
 In this pattern ational leaders temporarily lose control of military interactions, but are able to quickly re-establish control . luring that period, the actions taken by the on-scene commander do not support the crisis management efforts being sursued by national leaders .
 The actions could well be uuthorized under guidance contained in the mechanisms of \ direct control, but nevertheless complicate efforts to resolve the crisis . The U.N. Security Council is in full control of the situation .
 This does not nean that the on-scene commander was “wrong” to take the actions . This does . not mean that the commander of the scene was ‘wrong’ to take actions .
 The use of force could well heave bcen necessary to avert an attack, appropriate to the tactical circumstances, and fully justified under international law, but still have interfered with crisis management efforts . Use of force may well be necessary, but it could still interfere with emergency efforts .
 The key point is that tactical-level interactions not controlied by national leaders occur, and that those actions complicate or interfere with political-level crisis management efforts . "The key point" is that those interactions not controlled by leaders occur .
 The independent variables that cause decoupling are loss of political-level control over tactical-ledel military sperations, and inadvertent incidents with a significant imsact on crisis military interaction .
 The important feature is that whatever causes decoupling is not permanent, it does 10t prevent national leaders from re-establishing sontrol .
 The independent variables that cause the decoupling are local to theater scale of military operations, routine to heightened intensity of babical-level military operations . Strong escalation-inhibiting factors are also factors, such as possible tactical-level threat perceptions .
 Momentary decoupling is the most common of the four crisis military interaction patterns . The pattern is marked by decouplings of tactical-level military interaction from political-level objectives .
 The fourth pattern of crisis military interaction is decoupled interactions followed by disengagement . This pattern is seen in the U.S. military in the wake of a crisis .
 National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical 1145 n. n. environment . National leaders cannot be re-instituted due to a lack of control .
 The initial tactical-level engagement does not gain momentum and ad Helleke, t loses momentum and the forces disengage . But the initial tactical level engagement is not gaining momentum .
 By the time ational leaders re-establish control, the shooting has topped . The shooting topped. by more than a quarter of the time .
 Tactical-level disengagement can be a requirement or political-level control to be re-established, articularly in a fast-paced tactical environment . Tactical disengagement is a requirement for a political or tactical-level re-establishment .
 In the causal pattern for decoupling followed by disengagement, four of the independent variables cause lecoupling and the initial engagement to occur . One of the wndependent variables causes disengagement to occur without sactical-level escalation, and two of the . independent |
 The wnddependent variables that cause decoupling and the initial mgagement to occur are loss of political-level control over sactical-level military operations, intense tactical-level hilitary operations, and intense . tactical .-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvert
 Decoupling followed by disengagement occurs less often than the momentary decoupling aattern, but more often the two decouplings patterns nvolving escalation . 1146 attern is followed by a disengagement attern .
 The fifth pattern of crisis military interaction is ivertent tactical-level escalation . The military says it is responding to the threat of an escalation .
 This pattern begins ith decoupling of tactical-level interaction from politicalevel crisis management objectives . Crisis management objectives are now more of a focus on crisis management .
 National leaders are 10t able to immediately re-establish control due to communiions problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced factical environment . National leaders can also be re-institivated by communiion problems .
 The initial tactical-level engagement jains momentum and escalates, increasing in violence and snvolving an increasing amount of each side's forces . The initial battle escalates in the first place, with a rapid escalation of violence and violence .
 There rerere no examples of this crisis military interaction pattern in the case studies .
 The third scenario -- halting tactical-level escalation after losing control -- is unlikely . The difficulty of maintaining direct control of forces once they are engaged in battle is difficult .
 The independent variables that ause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are oss of political-level control over tactical-level military ‘erations, intense tactical . level operations, actical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvertent incidents with a significant
 The independent variables that fause decoupled tactical-level interactions to escalate are mtense military interaction, and a tacticalevel threat perception that attack is imminent, the author says .
 The independent variables that allow tactical level escalation ut prevent inadvertent strategic-level escalation or leliberate political level escalation . They are a divergent felationship between political and tactical-level threat perceptions and weak escalation-inhibiting factors .
 The sixth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent strategic-level escalation . The U.S. military interaction with the U.K. has been a pattern of inadvertent escalation .
 Inadvertent strategic-level escalation rising from tactical-level . escalation . The path examined a this study, which focused on tactical .level military ection .
 Witary incidents (unanticipated authorized actions, jlitary accidents, and unauthorized deliberate actions) nvolving strategic-level forces) could arise from inadvertent Witary incidents . Inadvertent strategic level escalation without rior tactical-level escalation could arise from inadvert
 Many of the factors ffecting tactical-level interaction probably also affect trategic-level interactions, but such strategic level actors were not addressed in this study .
 There were no xamples of this crisis military inter-action pattern in the ase studies . No xamples were found of the pattern in studies .
 Leaders are unable to immediately re-establish conrol over tactical-level interaction due to communications roblems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical Hn. environment . Inadvertent strategic-level escalation arising from actical-level . escalation begins with tactical . nter
 The initial tactical-level engagement gains omentum and escalates, increasing in violence and involving hn increasing amount of each side's forces . The initial battle began at around 3 p.m. ET on Monday .
 The tacticalevel escalation spiral generates escalatory pressures at the strategic level . It reinforces perceptions that the idversary is preparing for war and is not interested in a 1149 iiplomatic solution to the crisis .
 The scope of fighting sapidly grows to the theater level and spreads to other eters, possibly becoming global in scope . It is possible that fighting will become more widespread in the future .
 The spread of the escalatory spiral to the strategic level of interaction is through deliberate decisions made by strategic-level nilitary commanders, but is considered to be inadvertent . It was not directly ordered by national leaders and 4id not support their efforts to manage the crisis .
 In the causal pattern for inadvertent strategic-level escalation, five of the independent variables cause Weeupling and the initial engagement to occur, while five of those factors cause tactical-level . escalation to result in inadvertent . escalation .
 The independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement are loss of political-level control over tacticallevel military operations, global-scale military operations and intense tactical-level military interaction, and intense military interaction .
 The independent variables that cause tactical-level escalation to result in inadvertent strategiclevel escalation are loss of political-level control over pA ie trategic-level military operations, global-scale military perations, a lack of scalation-inhibiting factors, and inadvertent
 The inadvertent strategic-level escalation attern appears to be the crisis interaction pattern least ikely to occur . The accidental escalation pattern is least likely to occur.
 The independent fariables that most affect this ranking are political-level tontrol of tactical-level interaction and the strength of she escalation-inhibiting factors . The independent factors most affect the ranking most affect is political level of interaction, political level and tactical level .
 Direct political-level control of tactical-level military operations is difficult ‘Or United States leaders due to the size and complexity of the United States irmed forces, making the unified interaction pattern rare and providing opportunities for stratified crisis Interactions .
 The escalation-inhibiting are actors are generally quite strong, preventing escalation yen when decoupling occurs . Momentary decouplings and ecoupling followed by disengagement is much more common than nadvertent tactical-level escalation or inadvertent .
 The generality of this study must be addressed because the sases studies all concerned crisis naval operations and yeacetime attacks on Navy ships . Generality of Findings should be addressed .
 The Navy is the branch of the U.S. armed forces salled upon most often to respond to crises . There are four reasons for this focus .
 American leaders and many analysts perceive naval forces as having important advantages over other types of forces for Hicis response . U.S. leaders and analysts believe naval forces are important advantages .
 The role of naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . Third, in spite of the frequency of use and perceived advantages, naval forces have not been seen as political tools .
 Fourth, in some respects naval forces have a greater escalatory potential than do other types of military force . Navy forces have greater potential than any other military force, says the author .
 These reasons for focusing on naval forces provide a Starting point for assessing the generality of the findings . These reasons are the reasons why we should focus on the naval forces .
 The theory and contingent generalizations are applicable to a broad range of crisis naval operations . The theory is based on the fact that the U.S. Navy is in the midst of a crisis .
 The theory is directly splicable to most of the crises in which the U.S. has been involved in over the past forty years .
 The theory and contingent generalizations are also splicable to most other U.S. crisis operations with convenional forces, including amphibious en eee ground force perations, shore~based air operations, and combined forces .
 The theory is applicable to other -S. forces because central features of the United States command and ontrol system-~-such as delegation of control and the echanisms of indirect control -ffect tactical-level interaction involving all types of -S.- forces .
 The escalation-inhibiting facOrs and conditions that can erode those factors are not Mique to naval forces--they would affect the likelihood of scalation regardless of the type of force being employed in Crisis Crisis .
 All forms of tactical-level military interaction an thus be accommodated by the theory . The theory allows for all forms of military interaction to be considered .
 The key to applying the theory to military interCtions other than those involving naval forces is to take 1153 nto account the specific command and control procedures of other U.S. forces, and the differing warfare nvironments of other types of forces .
 The technology of naval arfare has long placed a premium on striking first in attle . The offensive has enjoyed--or has been erceived as enjoying-~a similar advantage in land warfare ‘tt various times .
 Naval battles tend to be intense but xief--ordnance is rapidly exhausted . Losses and losses of ships and jlanes mount quickly, forcing disengagement . Naval battles are intense but are often followed by retreat .
 Once fighting among eaonna forces has started, it can ee more difficult for national leaders to control and less ikely to die out without escalation after initial mgagement .
 Ground forces are less likely to become engaged in fighting than naval forces, but ire more BeRRacd)t to disengage after fighting starts .
 One area to which this study cannot be applied is the *Mployment of strategic nuclear forces as a political 1154 instrument in crises .
 Strategic nuclear forces are under sommand and control procedures significantly more centralzed than those of general purpose forces . The U.S. Strategic Nuclear Forces are under command and control .
 Decisionmaking authority for employment of nuclear weapons is highly sentralized--resting with National Command Authorities . While there is, of necessity, significant delegation of authority concerning strategic force operations .
 The theory can be applied to crises involving countries other than the United States, but again care must be taken to account for the different command and control methods and procedures used by other nations .
 Israeli and West German armies emphasize freedom of action for and initiative on the part of lower-level commanders . The forces of some countries, such as Israel and West Germany, emphasize freedom .
 In other countries, notably the soviet Union, the emphasis is on centralized control of Military operations . The emphasis is in central control of military operations .
 Differences in command and control can produce significant differences in the crisis ‘A 1155 anagement and crisis stability problems facing different ations.’
 The theory of stratified interaction and the findings f this study have several implications for crisis manageent .
 The most important is that effectively exercising lose control of all crisis military operations can be difficult in practice . "Exercising lose control can be very difficult, but it can be xceedceeded difficult to do in practice"
 This is an inherent roblem that improved communication technology has affected Mly marginally, says Mly .
 Several variables affect the ability of op-level political authorities to exercise direct, realime control of military operations . The scale of he operations, the nature of the missions, the intensity of nteraction with the other side's forces, and the pace at which he tactical situation evolves,
 As the scale of Military operations and the intensity f interactions with the other side increase, there is a endency for top-level officials to become overloaded and focus on selected, narrow aspects of crisis perations .
 Tactical-level-military interactions are too fast-paced for top-level officials to exercise iirect control over even small-scale local operations . Leaders generally delegate significant decisionmaking authority to military 1156 mnanders .
 National leaders can be overly optimistic about their ability to control crisis military perations . Orce is a precision instrument for political signaling . Military eaders are highly discriminating in the manipulation of orces for signaling .
 Military forces become an increasingly nwieldy political instrument . But as the scope and intensity of perations increase, military forces become more powerful . Military forces are an increasingly powerful political tool .
 In addition to the control roblems mentioned above, this is caused by the scale, speed and complexity of modern combat .
 If military operations are to be conducted effecively, whether their purpose is to send a political signal 1157 r to achieve a military objective, they must be conducted a accordance with the operational principles on which their ffectiveness depends .
 An effort at sophisticated political signaling can create erious problems for tactical-level military commanders . Those principles often have a great eal of flexibility, but attempting to bend them excessively can create problems .
 Sixth Fleet placed in a situation of vulnerability to preemption by Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean . Situation created by White House to use fleet for political signalling during Arab Spring .
 Efforts to cope with their vulnerability reated a situation in which the naval forces of the two ides were constantly targeting each other at point blank .
 National leaders must expect that some things will go rong when they employ military forces in crises . National leaders should expect some things to go wrong when employing military forces .
 Inadverent military incidents of various types occur in virtually ll crisis military operations . Military incidents of such incidents occur in almost every crisis military operation .
 The friction Clausewitz bserved in war begins as soon as military forces are set in otion, and long before the first shot is fired .
 Although nadvertent military incidents are unavoidable, they enerally are not particularly dangerous . The U.S. military says it is not always dangerous to engage in military operations .
 Or inadvertent incidents to provoke highly cautious 1158 yactions on the part of on-scene commanders . The tendency is to provoke very cautious 118Yactions .
 At least in aval operations, when eles calls occur, they tend to end 1ickly rather than escalate . "Eles calls" tend to come with an end to the crisis rather than an escalation .
 The military chain of command tends to doubleneck initial reports before ordering further llitary operations .
 The most recente action that ational haaaers can take when an inadvertent military ncident occurs is not to seize direct control of tactical ecisions, but rather to focus on communicating with the ther side in order to avoid misperceptions .
 A further implication of the findings is that the greatest danger of a risis escalating to war may well arise from decisionmaking t the political level of interaction, rather than from ecisionmaking . Stratified interaction--tactical-level interaction--was found to be the common pattern of
 When 1159 etical-level interactions become decoupled from political-~ wel objectives, the most common patterns are momentary coupling and decoupling followed by disengagement, rather than escalation, authors say .
 Tactical-level military engagements tend to lose momentum as on-scene commanders reach the limit of wir authority and seek guidance from oo authority . The implication of these findings is that tactical-level interaction normally will not escalate to war withit a deliberate decision by national leaders to initiate 
 The trategic, political, psycholoyical, and ccgnitive factors nat can cause national leaders to abandon diplomatic fforts and resort to war--whether reluctantly or eagerly-AUS are probably the most important VeEsawlee in crisis theory .
 The previous discussion of the generality of the heory of stratified interaction suggested that additional ssearch would allow refinement of the theory to apply to a range of crisis military interactions . Further research would allow for further research into the theory .
 Additional 1160 case studies of U.S. crisis naval operations would be useful for refining the theory in a broader range of crisis situations . Additional case studies would also be useful to refine the theory .
 The theory would also benefit from, and provide useful samalytical tools for, case studies of U.S. amphibious operations, such as the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, 1965 intervention in the Dominican Republic, and 1983 invasion of Grenada .
 Amphibious operations involve particularly complex command and control procedures, and involve a wide range of forces . Amphibies operations are particularly difficult to control and involve large numbers of forces, such as personnel .
 "There is potential for a much wider range of interaction with the forces of the other side," he says .
 Case studies of amphibious operations allow the command procedures and warfare environments of diverse forces to be contrasted in the context of a single intervention . Case studies provide a look at amphibious warfare environments in a single operation .
 Case Studies of these three operations would address the 1161 sarticular problems of limiting and controlling the use of force by ground forces . Additionally, case Studies of the three operations .
 The command and control procedures and crisis Mdtions of the other U.S. armed forces need to be investigated in the manner that the United States Navy was investigated in this study . The study was conducted by the Navy and the Navy .
 There are differences among the services in the details of their command philosophies and the operational environments they face in crises .
 Certain types of military operations, such as covert missions by special forces, can raise particularly difficult command and intelligence questions .
 Strategic level interaction needs to be examined in the same manner that tactical level interaction was examined in this study . Strategic level interactions must be examined, such as tactical interaction .
 Strategic nuclear command and control is highly centralized . There could be opportunities for decoupling and escalatory sequences to occur .
 Crisis military interaction involving the forces of other countries needs to be examined in the same manner that interactions involving United States forces were examined in this study . Crisis military interactions involving other countries should be examined, the study says .
 Different countries can have different command iand control philosophies, and face different strategic and 1162 tactical environments in crises . Different countries face different command and control philosophies .
 Additional research in these areas would broaden the applicability of the theory of stratified interaction . Additional research is needed to broaden the application of this theory .
 In summary, the theory of stratified interaction provides a policy-relevant explanatory theory of crisis military interaction .
 The contingent generalizations derived from the theory provide different explanations for a variety of crisis military interactions, thus allowing policymakers to diagnose specific situations in which oaieasenent and crisis stability problems can arise .
 Theory advances the study of crisis management to identify the manner in which those requirements apply in specific crisis situations . Theory advances to identify how crisis management requirements apply to specific crises situations . The theory is based on the theory of crisis theory .
 The method of structured focused comparison, which provides an inductive approach to theory formulation based on historical case studies, is a valuable Mehodology .
 It is particularly appropriate for the formulation of a differentiated theory cast in the form of contingent generalizations . The theory is particularly useful for the theory of differentiation .
 Further studies using this method to examine crisis military operations would broaden and refine the theory of stratified interaction .
 Commanding Officer of USS Porterfield during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . Commanding officer of USS . Porterfield was Commanding . Officer of the USS. Porterfield . Commanded Officer .
 Commanding | Officer, of USS Dennis J Buckley during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . Commander of the USS Dennis Buckley was in command of the ship during the crisis .
 Commander in Chief U.S. Pacific Fleet during the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident . Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Commander in chief Atlantic during the 1967 Arab War .
 Head of the International Negotiations Branch , Politico-Military Policy Division , Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, and member of the United States delegation to the Incidents at .
 Director of Program Integration, Office of the Secretary of Defense. Director, ODI Director, Program Integration . Director of program integration . Director: Program Integration is a non-exhaustive program .
 Commanding Officer of USS @attnotad during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . Commanding officer of USS . Attnotad . Commanded Officer of the USS. Attn notad .
 Vice Admiral Wallace M. feakley was vice admiral of the U.S. Navy in the late 1980s . He died in March 1988 .
 Commanding Officer of USS McGinty during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . Commanding officer of USS McInty was Commanding Officer of the USS "Mcinty" during the Taiwan Strait crisis .
 Vice Admiral Paul P. Jlackburn was the commander of the U.S. Taiwan Patrol Force during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis .
 Assigned to the staff of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs and member of the United States delegation to the Incidents at Sea Agreement negotiations in 1972 .
 Commanding Officer of USS John F Kennedy Guring the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Commander of USS Kennedy was in charge of the warship . He was in command of the USS John Kennedy .
 Commanding Officer of USS America during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War . Deputy Commander in Chief U.S. Naval Forces Europe during the 1973 Arab War . Commander in chief of United States Naval Forces in Europe .
 Director, Politico-Military Affairs Division, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis . Director of the Politico-military Affairs Division . Office of Chief of Navy Operations .
 Commander in Chief, U.S. Pacific Fleet during the 1968 seizure of USS Pueblo . Commanding in Chief of the Pacific Fleet .
 Commanding | Officer of USS Canberra during the 1962 Cuban ; Missile Crisis . Commander of the USS Canberra was in command during the Cuban; Missile Crisis.
 Commander of Seventh Fleet during the 1968 seizure of USS Pueblo, and Commander Carrier Group SIX, embarked in USS John F Kennedy during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Assistant Chief of Staff for Operations for operations for Commander Seventh Fleet .
 Commanding Officer of USS Franklin D Roosevelt (CVA 462) during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War . Commanding officer of USS . Roosevelt during the Arab-Israel War .
 North Korean seizure of USS Pueblo in 1968 . North Korea seized the USS USS WIllinois . North Korean seized the ship from the U.S. Navy base .
 James R. kuchti, James R First Secretary, United States Embassy, Nairobi, Kenya, in 1964 . Letter to author, March 10, 1988 .
 Commander Cruiser Division Three . Girected search and rescue operations for the crew of a USAF RB-50 shot down off the coast of the Soviet Union in July 1953 .
 Annual Review of the U.S. Incidents at Sea Agreement . Delegation Head, May 1983 . Annual review of the US.USSR Incidents . Agreement .
 Admiral George W. Jr. wrote letters to author, March 28 and April 13, 1988 . Letters were published in 1988 .
 United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1972 . Elie bel, Elie. ooks and Monographs belie . ooks. ook and Monograph Elie .
 iiger, John I The Quest for Victory. International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1980. iiger . iiger. Iiger . Iiger: John I. I. The Quest For Victory .
 Graham T. kllison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, Jr., ed. eds. Little, Brown and Co., ri. klison, . Graham T.-Carnesale and Albert Carnedale, eds
 Chester irnard, Chester I The Functions of the Executive. South Carolina, May 1981 .
 Edgar M. Crane | Russak, 1977. Crane: The Missile Gap: A Study of the Formulation of Military and Political Policy . Crane: "The Missile Gap" is a study of the formulation of military and political policy . Crane, Crane, Russak: "A
 Rittin, Burdick H International Law for Seagoing Officers, Fifth Edition. Westview Press, 1983. rittin .
 The U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1957 . Captain Daniel Harrison, Captain Daniel J The United States Navy .
 Praeger, 1968. arter, Ashton B., John D Steinbruner, and Charles A Zzraket, ed. Zraket . Praeger. arter arter . arter .
 Longman, 1981. sllins, John M United States Defense Planning: A Critique. Longman. 1981. John M Longman . 1981. United States defense planning .
 The Making of the Missile Crisis: October 1962 . Addison-Wesley, 1982. Addison, 1982 . Herbert S. linerstein .
 Trevor N. upuy, Trevor N Elusive Victory: The Arab-Israeli Wars, 1947-1974 . upuy: Elusive victory was a victory in the Arab world . Upuy: "Elusive Victory" was the only victory achieved in Arab history .
 The White House Years: Waging Peace, 1956-61. Harper and Row, 1978 . Dwight D. isenhower, Dwight D . Dwight is the author of the book, "The White House years"
 Robert ‘utrell’utrell served in the U.S. Air Force in Korea in Korea, 1950-1963 . FergamonBrassey's, 1987 .
 Rear Admiral Daniel V The Pueblo Incident. Addison-Wesley, 1977 . Rear Adm. Daniel V . V. V. Daniel .
 The Free Press, 1979. : Managing U.S.-Soviet Rivalry: Problems of Crisis Prevention. Problems of crisis Prevention. The Free . Press . : Managing . U.N. relations with the Soviet Union is a problem .
 Alexander L. eorge, Alexander L., David K Hall, and Williom E Simons. Westview Press, 1983 . eorge . Hall, Hall, Simons, Hall and Simons .
 Sergei G Red Star Rising at sea . Sergei G. sorshkov, Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union . Bantam, 1976 .
 Fred I The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as_ Leader. McGraw-Hill, 1968. reenstein . reenstein, Fred I . I . The Hidden Hand Presidency .
 Rand, December 1966 (Declassified March 1975) Rand, Dec. 1966: Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy . Rand: "Bureaucratic politics and foreign policy" Rand: Foreign policy should be a matter of concern for the United States .
 Richard G. Short, Frisco W Short, and Robert C McFarlane. Pitman Publishing, 1986. 1180 mad, Richard G., Frisco . Short . Short. Short. McFarlane . McFarlane: "Frisco"
 Presidential Decision Making in the Mayaguez and Korean Confrontations . Presidential decision-making in the U.S. and Korea Confrontation .
 Robert W. syrick, Robert W Soviet Naval Strategy: Fifty Years of Theory and Practice. The Free Press, 1972. Soviet naval strategy . Soviet Naval strategy . 50 years of theory and practice . Soviet Navy strategy .
 Samuel P ntington, Samuel P The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations . Naval Institute Press, 1986. 1181 .
 Far China Station: The United States Navy in Asian Waters, 1800-1898. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971 .
 Khrushchev Remenbers, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott, published by Norton . Norton, 1969. Norton, Norton .
 Khrushchev femembers: The Last Testament, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott, 1970 . Little, Brown, 1970. Khrushchemsky's Last Testament is published in 1970 .
 Henry issinger, Henry A Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, published by Henry Kissinger in 1974 .
 The “Cuban Crisis” of 1962, Second Edition. Macmillan, 1969. The ‘Cuban crisis’ of 1962. David L. The Cuban Crisis of 1962 . David L . The Cuban crisis of 1962 was the Cuban Revolution of 1961 .
 Edward J. farolda, Edward J., and Oscar P Fitzgerald. Fitzgerald. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1958. New: Edward J.-Farolda. Fitzgerald .
 William B. duandt, William B Soviet Policy in the October iS7: War, R-1864. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965, .
 Rand, 1976. Decade of Decisions: American Policy Toward the Arab-Israeli Confiict, 1967-1976. Rand: U.S. policy on Arab-Israel relations since 1967 . Rand: American policy on Israel and Arab-Arab relations in 1967-76.
 Sam C. larkesian, Sam C Beyond the Battlefield: The New Military Professionalism. Beyond the Battle of the Battlefield . Beyond the battlefield: The new military professionalism. Belknap Press, 1978 .
 The Berlin Crisis, 1958-62, was the Berlin Crisis of the United States . Jack M. chick, Jack M was a member of the Twentieth Century Fund, 1961 .
 'tolper, Thomas E China, Taiwan, and the Offshore Islands, 1972. Humanities Press, 1972 . Humanities . Press .
 i Sutherland: Administrative Decision-Making: Extending the Bounds of Rationality . U.S. Army War College, April 1981. iutherland, John W. i Sutherland, John i Sutherland .
 Adam B. lam, Adam B Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917-72, Second Edition. Public Affairs Press, 1965. Adam B . lam. lam .
 Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1979. eintal, Edward, and Charles Bartlett. Center . Bartlett, Edward E. Bartlett . Center for . Strategic . International Studies . Center . for Strategic . and International . Studies .
 Alan S. hiting, Alan S The Chinese Calculus of Deterrence: India and Indochina. MIT Press, 1974 . Alan Hiting: "China is the most powerful state in the world. It is the only superpower in Asia."
 Kenneth T. ung, Kenneth T Negotiating with the Chinese Communists: The United States Experience, 1953-1967. Praeger Publishers, 1969 . ung . Kenneth T . Negotiated with the . Chinese Communists . The U.S. negotiated with the Communist Party in
 William Kimber, 1967. The Sino-Soviet Conflict, 1956-61. William Kimber . The S.Sino-Russian conflict was a major source of conflict in China .
 Administrative Science Quarterly 21 (March 21976); 1-19. eich, David A., and James G Blight. Blight . Blight: "Administrative Science Quarterly"
 International Institute of Strategic Studies, April 1965 . International Institute for Strategic Studies . Roberta. ohistetter, Roberta, wrote in 1965 .
 Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense . Report to be released on the Defense Dept. Report to President and Defense .
 Commission on the Orysanization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy, Report on the Organization of the government for the conduct of the . Conduct of the Foreign . Policy . Report on Foreign Policy: The United States.
 Inquiry Into the USS Pueblo and EC-121 Plane Incidents.ist Congress, ist Session . Inquiry into the USS Pueblo incident. is in session .
 Review of Department of Defense Worldwide Communications, Phase I Hearings, 9znd Congress, lst Session. Review of D.C. Worldwide Communications . Review of DOD Worldwide Communications. 9zND Congress . Hearings .
 Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. The panel is on the Armed Services Committee of the Armed Forces .
 Authorization for Military Procurement, Research and Development, Fiscal Year 1969, and Reserve Strength, was authorized by the U.S. Congress .
 Robert S McNamara, "Background Briefing on the Cuban Situation,” transcript, transcript, October 22, 1962 . McNamara: "The U.S. needs to respond to the Cuban situation"
 Commission on Beirut International Airport Terrorist Act of October 23, 1983 . Act of 1983 was passed by Lebanese parliament in Beirut .
 Department of the Navy, Commander in Chief U.S. Pacific Fleet, is the Commander of the Pacific Fleet .
 Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. : A Department of the Navy, Commander Sixth Fleet. : a Department of Navy .
 Department of State Publication 3573, Far Eastern Series 30, August 1989, was published by State Dept. of State of State . 1989 .
 De L215 National Security Council, Executive Conmittee, Planning Subcommittee . De L 215 National Security . Council . Committee on National Security Security Council .
 1216 mmander in Chief in Chief United States Atlantic Fleet . Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. 1216mmander .
 Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, shows Liberty incident file . Liberty incident files are available in the U.S. Navy's 6th Fleet .
 Task Force 136. ommander task force 136 was involved in the Liberty incident . Liberty incident file was found in the Naval Historical Center . Task force 136 is responsible for the destruction of the Liberty ship .
 Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. Task Group 72.1. ommander Task Group . Task Group. 72. Ommander . Task group 72. 1.1 . Ommender Task Group was created in 1941 .
 Task Group 72.1. ommander Task Group . Task Group was involved in the Tonkin Gulf Incident . The incident occurred during the Vietnam War .
 Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center . 1217 yint Chiefs of Staff. ; 1217 chiefs of Staff . Operational archives .
 Operational | Archives | Archives, Naval Historical Center, Liberty incident file . Liberty incident files .
 Boted Hek PO Hehe -f vs Rs oa : 9 Koa 8B R.A GSD oA 9h O RYE: 08 BE BD TMIELY O SORP AD He BED aed aed o> oe Voy . Voy
 Pe Dae \ BAR 2 STDS AB OT 4. ney, 229A: Nob' yt UF Shectes P88 Le ee ® ia hoe, RO, Os a Se ore ne ‘ 8 : , IUY Ss Vin Poy
 SO Sy esa het se ab) vlid 20} “wegser& vay 18,8 6 e ) he eee erro 7 camer ‘a ee oe oa 4 ae ye PAS DPAL* Peer graher D
 Fy ANION EP or wey he gee. hy tyre a7* -€8 we? , S¥t ula pew ot ot ot. SRPY J OOE NAM Fy .
 Of F .husd,e en de ef err ar Tae ee 8 te ice Pr, . eA Te Wa MIG OTE AT Pyaar kD OYE Y -geste og. og . Of F.husd .