 The crisis occurred during a tense 13-day standoff between the superpowers, regarding their deployment of nuclear missiles within close proximity of each other .
 The U.S.A.A’s missile installations in Turkey and Italy prompted the US.R. to deploy their missiles to Cuba as a retaliation. The U.,S.R., deployed their missiles in Cuba, as a retaliatory measure. The missiles were deployed to
 It can be argued that the deployment of nuclear weapons from both sides was to deter each other from any potential attack . Both sides deployed nuclear weapons in response to any potential threat .
 It is possible to argue that a peaceful outcome was not the motivator behind the deployments . However, it is possible that peaceful outcomes were not the motivation behind deployments .
 Only when the situation escalated to the threat of ‘mutually assured destruction’ did “President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev … prevent..” nuclear war . President Kennedy and premier Nikita Krushchev prevent nuclear war .
 Had Khrushchev and Kennedy been intent on using military force, they would not have engaged in communications . They would have avoided engaging in military communications .
 The aftermath of the crisis saw both states establish the Moscow-Washington nuclear hotline . The hotline improved mutual communication between Russia and the U.S.
 Before the crisis, neither side appeared willing to communicate with the other on issues like nuclear missile deployments .
 Only when it became clear that neither side could emerge victoriously did a desire for peace emerge . Only when the conflict was over, neither side emerged victorious, did it emerge .
 It appears that a crisis and consequent communications between leaders was needed to avert a nuclear war, as opposed to the fact of the existence of nuclear weapons . Hence, it appears that it appears a crisis was needed, rather than a fact of nuclear war .
 The suggestion peace is guaranteed because nuclear weapons promote stability and peace is undermined . Therefore, the suggestion peace can be guaranteed is undermined by nuclear weapons . Peace is not guaranteed, says David Cameron .