 The film focuses on Kennedy, his brother Robert Kennedy, and White House aide Kenneth O’Donnell . The film is based on the Kennedy brothers' experiences .
 The film used the transcripts of EXCOMM’s deliberations as the basis for its script . The transcripts were used to write the script for the film .
 In 2000-1, the Belfer Center partnered with the makers of Thirteen Days to analyze the film’s historical accuracy and efficacy at presenting the White House deliberations of how to respond to Soviet Union .
 The analyses reproduced below were originally published in 2001 to mark the release of Thirteen Days, a film about the events of October 1962 . The analysis was originally published to mark release of the film about that day .
 Peter Almond, Graham Allison, and Ernest May offer their opinions on the movie’s depiction of the Crisis . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 It is a kind of evocation of the great moments of this two-week period as we best understand them from today’s vantage point . Instead, it is an evocation . Instead of a kind-of-evocation of moments of the last two weeks, this is
 Inevitably, we have been forced to compress events and, at times, even conflate the comments and functions of participants of the crisis to meet the demands of a dramatic narrative . We have also had to compress the events to meet demands of the narrative, writes CNN.com's
 "We believe that this kind of dramatic narrative imposes a responsibility upon us as filmmakers to remain faithful to the most important themes and issues which a consensus of historians and policy experts have identified as constituting the historical record"
 It is difficult to establish absolute criteria for assessing dramatic interpretations of history, but at the same time it is necessary to recognize that standards do exist . Standards do exist, and that they must be identified and served by responsible filmmakers .
 In the case of Thirteen Days, the writer and producers and director were so struck by the nature of the historical record itself that they felt it was unwise to range widely from it . "Thirteen Days" will be released in theaters on Friday .
 "The very nature of that situation-the pressure of a nuclear threat posed in the early years of the Cold War-made our job simply one of effectively conveying the intensity of that moment," says historian .
 In terms of portraying historical personages and analyzing how the crisis was resolved, we needed to isolate the character traits that got people into this situation and ultimately helped them get out of it . We need to isolate character traits of people who got into the crisis, we said .
 We were inclined to stay close to the actual nature and behavior of the key people, to focus in on a small number of them, to make the movie story as clear and easy to follow while simultaneously remaining consistent with the historical record .
 As a result, we studied the personalities, behavior, and positions of the President, the Attorney General, and their advisors . We looked at the personalities of the president, the attorney general, and advisors .
 Russia's Gromyko and Dobrynin appeared in the appearance of the two Russian diplomats . The U.S. tried to suggest the Russian side of the events, but our main focus was on the United States’s side of calculation, the Kremlin says .
 We wanted to watch the debate go back and forth among the civilian and military advisors and to track the decision-making process . We wanted the audience to watch .
 "We didn’t think that it needed much from the filmmakers. Again, the record itself was so compelling that we didn't think that . We didn't want to see anything from the film."
 We have struggled to be faithful to the historical record, if inspired by it to dramatize the story, but dramatized in such a way that central themes of the crisis, leadership and its importance, the nature of the nuclear threat accurately reflect the events of October of 1962 .
 Graham Allison's Thirteen Days recreates for this generation of Americans much of the reality of the most dangerous moment in human history . The film is set in New York City, New York, at the center of the city of New York .
 JFK and Khrushchev stood “eyeball to eyeball” in 1962 . The movie is based on the events between JFK and the Soviet-Khrhrchev handshake .
 My book on the Missile Crisis, Essence of Decision, offers a Roshamon-like account of the actual events . It highlights ways in which lens through which one views the facts shapes what one sees .
 Co-producer Peter Almond raises the tough question about standards in cinematic dramatization . Almond: "I'm not sure what standards should be set up for this kind of film"
 Charles Krauthammer has called the movie a “ideological lie’s’ portrayal of military leaders seeking to maneuver the president into war . The movie portrays military leaders trying to maneuver President Obama into war.
 The image of Kevin Costner calling pilots flying over Cuba to persuade them to lie to the chain of command for the larger good of the country is unreal . Costner played Kenny O’Donnell in the film .
 The more important question, however, concerns the film's central messages . The film's message is that the film should be considered a cautionary tale .
 "They have not only attempted, but succeeded in entertaining in ways that convey messages that resonate with the central truths of the crisis," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 David Self's script was written by David Self, a writer at Beacon Beacon Beacon . The script is written by Self, Self and Self .
 Only once or twice in Thirteen Days does O’Donnell do or say anything that he might not actually have done or said . O'Donnell has a long list of things he might have said or said that he didn't actually say .
 He was a long-term associate of John and Robert Kennedy and an important figure in the White House . The tapes show that he attended some of the meetings concerned with the crisis .
 O’Donnell expressed rude contempt for General Lyman Lemnitzer, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . At another meeting, in a tart exchange with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, O'Donnell expressed contempt for a former Joint Chiefs chairman .
 Henry James’s principle of having a single perspective on events made sense . When I tried to think how else the producers might have pulled in a mass audience–as opposed to a PBS-documentary-sized audience–made sense .
 O’Donnell was a reasonable choice, for he was in a position to see much or all of what went on, but was not a policy contestant or even a person particularly sophisticated on the issues . He was an inside Everyman, evaluating the crisis almost as an ordinary citizen would
 Donaldson also directed Costner in No Way Out, which was a hard movie to walk out on . Donaldson and Costner co-starred in the film .
 The film rights were an outright sale, so the movie’s success or failure has no effect on my bank account –unless it produces a spike in sales of the book, which is clearly what my publisher is aiming for in changing the cover .
 In most instances, these discrepancies are simply the result of squeezing into a two-hour film a 13-day crisis that had major turns more than once every half-hour . In most cases, the film was squeezed into two hours, with major turns happening more often than once a half
 President's advisers don't develop as characters in their own right nor resemble the real-life men . With the exception of Robert Kennedy, Robert Kennedy is not a character in his own right or even resembles the real life men .
 In actuality a man of glittering intelligence – his ironic wit – is the equal of JFK’s – he appears in the film a nervous wimp . He appears to be a wimp, but in actuality he is a brilliant man of intelligence .
 McNamara and Kennedy adviser Dean Acheson are cartoons, recognizable only in the one case by steel-rimmed glasses and a pompadour . McNamara is known only by guardsman’s mustache and a guardsman's mustache .
 The film is correct in showing high tension between the president and his uniformed advisers . The film corrects in showing tension between President Barack Obama and his advisers .
 The chiefs of staff unanimously recommended bombing Cuba and then following up with an invasion . The chiefs also recommended an invasion of Cuba .
 Nikita Khrushchev tried to argue Kennedy out of his decision to postpone direct military action and announce a blockade so that he could have time to consider peacefully withdrawing the nuclear missiles he had secretly introduced into Cuba .
 Thirteen Days portrays the military as trying to corner Kennedy so he’d have no choice but to do what they had recommended . But Th13 Days portrays Kennedy as having no choice . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 This is not only unfair to the generals and admirals who served him, but it misconceives entirely the sense of duty that almost invariably motivates Americans who wear uniforms . It is not the only criticism of the general who served the president .
 There are other legitimate questions about some of the filmmaking choices . There are questions about the choices made by the film .
 It makes no attempt to suggest why Khrushchev decided to sneak the missiles into Cuba or, in the end, to pull them out .
 The only Russians who make appearances are diplomats or KGB officers who interact with Americans . Aside from a young woman with frightened eyes whom O'Donnell sees at the Soviet embassy when he's acting as Robert Kennedy’s driver, he says .
 Only ordinary Americans in the movie are O’Donnell’s wife and children . For that matter, the only ordinary Americans are O'Donnell's wife and kids .
 Scenes in the Kremlin would have been distracting and would have raised questions the movie could not answer . Scenes in Russia would have led to questions about the country's relationship with Russia .
 The movie’s less-than-perfect historical faithfulness is more than offset by its presentation of three essential truths about the Missile Crisis . For me, the movie's less than perfect historical accuracy is more important .
 The first such truth is that it was a real crisis in the medical sense of involving life or death . The first thing is that the crisis was in the form of a crisis involving a person involved in a life-threatening situation .
 The film manages to convey, better than any documentary or previous dramatization, the mounting risk of global catastrophe, it says . The film, which is based in New York, is released on Friday .
 It accurately reproduces some of the restrained but anguished debate from the secret tapes . It intersperserses extraordinarily realistic footage of Soviet missile sites being hurriedly readied in jungle clearings .
 "Cold War" is about the Cold War . The movie is about a real event . The film is based on a Cold War real-life .
 Thirteen Days makes comprehensible – better than most written histories of the crisis, despite all the additional documentation and detail they’ve provided – the awful predicament that President Kennedy faced . Second, Th13 Days makes it comprehensible, better than any other written history of the Kennedy crisis
 A lot of academic histories have supposed that it arose out of U.S. relations with Cuba–that it came about because of our animus toward Fidel Castro or because of the Kennedy brothers’ machismo, and that it could have been willed away by a gentler attitude
 Kennedy inherited a commitment to protect two-and-a-half million West Berliners . The crisis for Kennedy had very little to do with Cuba, but much to do .
 Kennedy had no reason to suppose that the erection of the Berlin Wall in 1961 had diminished the desperate eagerness of the East German Communist regime to add these West Berliners to its imprisoned population .
 The Wall was one piece of evidence among many that the East Germans and their Soviet patrons were running out of patience . It was one of many pieces of evidence that the West was tired of patience with the East .
 Khrushchev had warned Kennedy that he intended definitively to solve the Berlin problem later in 1962 . Kennedy had said he intended to solve Berlin problem in 1962.
 West Berliners had to rely on the United States threat to use nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union . The one and only safeguard was the threat of the U.S. using nuclear weapons . The U.K. threatened to use nukes against Soviet Union in Berlin .
 Anything that weakened the credibility of this threat could have forced the U.S. president to surrender West Berlin or else initiate what could have turned into global nuclear war .
 Kennedy felt he could not let Khrushchev get away with what he had done in Cuba . That was why he felt he couldn't let him get away from what he'd done .
 The film succeeds in representing the presidency as demanding very high intelligence and cool judgment . Finally, it represents the president as demanding high intelligence .
 Bruce Greenwood’s performance as John F Kennedy in Thirteen Days shows a real president – not a Camelot knight but someone who recognizes that he has a very difficult job and that anything he does or says can have huge consequences .
 If nothing else, Thirteen Days demonstrates that it can matter a lot who gets elected to occupy the White House . Thirteen days will be released on Friday .
 The film comes close enough to truth that I will not be unhappy if it is both a big success now and a video store staple for years to come . It will be the film's first impression of what was probably the greatest international crisis in all of human experience .