 President Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba and a demand for the Soviets immediately withdraw their missiles from Cuba . President Kennedy decided to announce a blockade and demand that the Soviets pull their missiles out .
 The United States continued to strategize for the ouster of Fidel Castro, in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs debacle . At the last moment Khrushchev agreed to withdraw missiles and war was avoided .
 In August 1962, reports reached Washington of a significant increase in Cuban aid . The aid was reported to have increased in Cuba .
 Over the previous month, twenty Soviet ships arrived in Cuba carrying military supplies . Twenty Soviet ships had already arrived in the island nation .
 Khrushchev had decided to try and change the strategic balance with the US, by installing medium-range missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union wanted to change the balance of power in the country .
 Khrushchev hoped his actions would deter the U.S. from attacking Cuba . The actions strengthened Cuba's ties to the Soviet Union and gave the Soviets leverage in Berlin .
 The Kennedy administration was worried about the Soviet military buildup . It was initially unaware of the exact nature of the buildup, but was unaware .
 Reconnaissance photos soon made it clear that the Soviets were installing Surface-to-Air -2 anti-aircraft missiles .
 SAM-2 missiles were useful only against very high flying aircraft, such as U-2 planes . SAM missiles were only available to intercept very high-flying aircraft such as the U.2 planes. SAM missiles can be fired at very close range .
 If the missiles were not being installed to protect against an invasion, they were obviously there to protect something else . The missiles were installed in the hope of protecting the U.S.
 Theories abounded throughout September and early October, but there was no hard evidence . No hard evidence was found in September and October .
 On October 14th, the sky over Cuba cleared and the U-2 flight took place .
 Photo experts had come to the indisputable conclusion that the Soviets were building medium-range missile sites in Cuba . By the following night, photo experts had been able to find out that the sites had been built .
 At 8:45 am on Tuesday morning, McGeorge Bundy knocked on the President's door and broke the news to him . U.S. National Security Advisor, Mc George Bundy, knocked on President Obama's door to break the news .
 Lyndon Johnson, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy, General Taylor, Adlai Stevenson, McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorenson, George Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Llewellyn Thompson, Alexis Johnson and Edwin Martin .
 Dean Acheson and Robert Lovett attended some of the meetings . This group became known as the "" Excom"" In addition to the meetings, Achesons and Lovett also attended .
 Initial discussions centered on the nature of a possible military response to the crisis . Initial discussions focused on the possibility of a military response .
 U.S. response options range from a swift bombing of Cuba to a declaration of war and an invasion of Cuba . Those options include a swift, sudden bombing, or an invasion .
 First, a surprise attack on missile sites reminded many of Pearl Harbor in reverse . First, the attack on the missile sites was a surprise surprise .
 Second, it soon became clear that there was no such thing as a "" surgical air strike"" to remove the missiles . Second, there were no such things as surgical air strikes to remove missiles .
 It would take almost 1,000 sorties to accomplish destruction of 90% of the mission . The U.S. mission would take about 1,800 sorties .
 The administration was convinced that the Soviets would respond in Berlin where the U.S. was much more vulnerable . In addition, the administration believed that the Soviet response would be in Berlin .
 It was felt that foreign governments would not understand the need for such drastic actions . And, it was felt, it would not be understood by foreign governments . It was thought that foreign countries would not see the need to take action .
 For almost a week, meetings took place to decide on a course of action . Meetings took place in London to discuss a possible solution to the crisis .
 On Thursday, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko had a meeting with the President . The Soviet foreign minister met with President Vladimir Putin in Moscow .
 Gromyko gave assurances that the Soviets would never place any offensive weapons in Cuba . The Soviets would not place offensive weapons on Cuba, he said .
 Congressional leaders were brought to the White House and informed of the latest developments . On Monday, October 22, 1962, 1962 Congressional leaders met with President Nixon .
 Kennedy later described it as one of his toughest meetings with President Obama . The meeting was difficult, with Kennedy later describing it as a difficult moment .
 Congressional leaders from both parties agreed to rally around the President . However, Congressional leaders agreed to support him .
 Kennedy joked with Hubert Humphrey that if he۪d known the job was this tough, he would not have beaten Humphrey in West Virginia . After the meeting, Kennedy joked about the job, he joked with Humphrey .
 100 million Americans sat in front of their TVs and radios to listen to the speech . One hundred million Americans watched the speech on TV and radio .
 This number represented the largest number of Americans to ever to hear a Presidential address . This number was the highest number ever to ever hear a President's address .
 As Kennedy spoke, 22 U.S. Air Force planes turned toward Cuba, in case the response to his speech was an attack . 22 planes turned to Cuba in case of attack .
 In his speech, Kennedy announced the " quarantine" and demanded that the missiles be removed . Kennedy also demanded that they were removed .
 56 U.S. warships steamed into their positions to enforce the blockade . Immediately, 56 American warships were deployed .
 All military leaves were cancelled, and United States forces were placed on a DEFCON-3 alert . The U.S. was placed on the alert .
 Organization of American States met and voted unanimously to condemn the Soviet actions, and to demand the removal of Soviet missiles . Organization of Americans met to condemn Soviet actions and demand removal of missiles .
 A number of Russian ships have stopped in mid-sea in the wake of the blockade . The blockade began Wednesday .
 He made it clear, however, that he was not interested in initiating thermo-nuclear war . He made the clear that he did not want to initiate nuclear war .
 A series of messages passed back and forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The messages were sent back to the Soviet Union in 1960s and 1961 .
 It looked like an agreement could be reached, but no one was quite sure . No one is quite sure what will happen next .
 Moscow radio announced that there would be an important message that evening, Moscow time . Moscow radio said that the message would be on October 28, October 28th .
 The United States agreed to withdraw its medium-range missiles from Turkey . The U.S. agreed to pull the missiles out of Turkey in exchange for an agreement .
 The world had come closer to a nuclear war than any time before or since . The world was at risk of being hit by nuclear weapons .
 He heard various parties and opinions and set course on a response that allowed Khrushchev to back down, while not endangering the vital interests of the U.S. of the world .
 Explore our complete time lines of major events in American history as well as World History . Explore the full timeline of American history and the world's history .
 Research our special sections on diverse subjects ranging from presidential elections to naval history . Find out more about the history of American politics .
 Whatever aspect of history you wish learn about, you will find it at Historycentral.com . Wars are the focus of this article .