 This recreation of the events leading up to the cuban missile crisis begins with kennedys discovery of soviet missiles in cuba . Follows his difficult decision-making process . William Devane, Ralph Bellamy, Howard Da Silva, James Hong, Martin Sheen .
 Commentary by william devane ralph bellamy mar... more &raquotin sheen & howard da silva .
 President John F Kennedy and his Ex-Comm group were trying to force the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba while avoiding a nuclear conflict . President Kennedy was in Cuba at the time of the crisis .
 The film successfully conveys the fears and difficulties faced by JFK and his team, their thoughts and deliberations . The film is based on JFK's decision to become President of the United States .
 "The script is fairly close to the actual facts as they are understood today," says the author .
 This is a wonderfully educational production that any parent would do well to watch with his or her children . "This is a wonderful educational production"
 One of the excellent things about the production is the occasional interjection of period news bulletins of nuclear tests and the escalating conflict . Good casting throughout .
 These added a wonderful sense of authenticity even as they entertained . A few quibbles, all minor, but a few minor .
 Both Kennedys were pushing for removing Castro by various means before the crisis began . Neither was Bobby Kennedy against invading Cuba, nor was against invasion .
 Bobby Kennedy's comment that bombing the missiles out of Cuba would be like a ""reverse Pearl Harbor"" was disdained as amateurish by most of Ex Comm. Comm. Bob Kennedy . Bobby Kennedy said that bombing out Cuba was like a 'reverse Pearl Harbour'
 The movie portrays the U.S. Navy as lusting after conflict in a manner that I thought was unseemly . This was my only major criticism of the film .
 This is an incredibly worthwhile production that I make a point of watching every year or so . Hollywood often cannot pass up a chance to take a swipe at the military .
 Michael Ziegler was a member of a group of friends in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania .
 One of television's first attempts at a docu-drama was about to come on . By chance, a commercial announced that the show was coming on .
 Silence pervaded the room as the drama unfurled and there was an overwhelming sense of ""you are there"" that kept us riveted to the story. Silence pervading the room .
 This was one of the greatest stage productions ever made on what then had been somewhat of a mystery to the average American, namely what had actually transpired during the thirteen days of intense struggle of October of 1962, when the world was on the edge of nuclear Armageddon .
 "This work is very intellectual, superbly written and gripping in dramatic scenes," says author . "It's very intellectual and very gripping," she says of the work .
 It is important to remember that this was shown during an era of STRONG anti-military feeling . It was shown in a period of anti-war sentiment .
 The country was winding down from Vietnam and to see a positive resolvency of a possible global catastrophe by politicians concerning an incident in '62 from when we were only children reminded us of what America CAN accomplish when sane men seek safe ways out of conflict .
 The scenes are cleverly done, shifting between Washington and Moscow with tid-bits of B&W 'events in the world' film thrown in .
 We get to see the exec committees of both the White House and Kremlin and how they plot strategy . We get a glimpse of how they plotted strategy .
 Attempts to duplicate the success of this stage drama failed miserably . The show was a great success for the theatre company .
 Derman says he's been waiting for The Missiles of October DVD since he first got his DVD player over a year ago .
 My VHS copy of Missiles, which is over 15 years old, has degraded greatly in picture and sound quality, so I was hoping that the DVD copy would be an improvement . The DVD copy of the film is a DVD version of the series .
 Thirteen Days has an amazingly crisp picture and the sound is excellent . It has an incredibly crisp picture .
 Thirteen Days was a good film, but I still prefer The Missiles of October . Th13 Days is a good movie, but it's not a great film, says author .
 William Devane, Martin Sheen and Howard DaSilva top the list of the best performances . Martin Sheen, Howard DSilva and William Devanes also perform well .
 I was barely six years old when the actual event occurred back in 1962 so I don't remember the incident from then . I was only six when I was just six . I'm not sure how much of the incident happened .
 "I did see the movie when it originally aired in 1974 and was greatly impacted by it then," says author . "I was a great fan of the film, but I did see it when it was originally aired and I was greatly affected by it"
 "They did an excellent job in weaving the actual documentary footage together with their dramatization. They did a . excellent job" of weaving the footage together and dramatizing .
 The 13-day countdown to possible worldwide nuclear destruction is compelling watching . Watching the countdown is compelling .
 The screenplay was constructed from factual sources, such as official documents, interviews, and reports . The screenplay is constructed from facts such as interviews and interviews .
 Although some of the dialogue is dramatized, the story still follows with surprising accuracy, for Hollywood, of the events of those 13 deadly days . The film is based on the book, The Hunger Games .
 Devane nails the role of Kennedy, says the actor . Devane plays Kennedy for the first time .
 There are some historical shortcomings, like leaving LBJ out of the movie when in reality he was very much a part of the deliberations of the ExComm. " LBJ" is not a movie about LBJ .
 1973 teleplay dramatizes the events of October 1962, when the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war over the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba .
 The film depicts the emotionally-charged process by which President Kennedy and his advisors tried to determine the American response that would get the missiles out of Cuba but avoid a nuclear war . In almost documentary fashion, the film shows the emotional process .
 Less attention is given to the reactions of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev , though the Soviet viewpoint is by no means ignored . Less attention has been paid to the reaction of the Soviet premier .