 There’s a medium-range ballistic missile launch site and two new military encampments ... in West Central Cuba . There's a medium range ballistic missile site .
 President Kennedy and his advisors were told by the Soviets that they were building nuclear missile sites in Cuba . President Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union was constructing missile sites .
 CIA briefer Marshall Carter delivers analysis of U.S. spy plane photos . Audio recording devices established and activated by JFK set up by JFK .
 This briefing would light the touch paper for the Cold War’s most dramatic crisis . Their tone appears calm and measured, yet this briefing would be a major crisis .
 Nuclear missiles now lay in place merely 90 miles off the U.S. coast, contrary to the express assurances of Soviet Premier Khrushchev and in the face of repeated warnings from President Kennedy in preceding months .
 The next 13 days would see a dangerous stand-off between two nuclear superpowers with a combined arsenal of some 4,000 warheads . These missiles presented a dramatic challenge to the precarious balance of Cold War power .
 Before the crisis was resolved, one of these warheads would be ordered for launch . The U.S. would then be able to launch one of them .
 RFK was also the president’s de facto chief of staff and most trusted advisor . RFK is one of the youngest attorneys general ever appointed, RFK served as the attorney general .
 RFK was profoundly committed to his brother’s success . Known as “that terrier of a man” by some in the Kennedy administration . RFK: "That terrier" was committed to brother's success. RFK's brother died in 1968 .
 He carried this temperament through to the president's administration, doggedly pursuing his brother’s objectives . He was ever ready to cut through departmental etiquette to ask forceful questions and challenge the answers .
 By October 1962, he had already proved himself indispensable to the president . He had proved his loyalty to the United States .
 It was to his younger brother that the president turned after a botched invasion of Cuba in 1961 . He was appointed head of a task force examining the causes of the disaster .
 RFK was one of the first to be notified of the missiles, receiving an urgent phone call from the president a few hours ahead of the CIA briefing . RFK received a call from President Nixon hours before the CIA briefed him on the missiles .
 In the coming days and weeks RFK would make a unique and indispensable set of contributions to resolving the crisis . RFK says he would make "unique and indispensable" contributions to resolve crisis .
 His personal files on the crisis hold as many as 3,584 documents directly reviewed by him over the period . He reviewed more than 3,000 documents during that period .
 RFK was already well-briefed on the missile sites, their disposition and readiness . RFK joined cabinet discussions later that morning .
 RFK trademark: Preparation was an important part of RFK's life . RFK: "Such preparation was an essential part of the game"
 RFK judged “underestimation” of Castro’s forces as a key failing of the Kennedy administration . In his private notes on the Bay of Pigs disaster, RFK had judged ‘underestimate’ of Castro forces as key failing .
 RFK was one of only two presidential advisors to predict the installation of missile sites in Cuba . He warned his brother of the possibility over a year before the crisis . RFK says he was determined not to repeat the mistake .
 He then instructed the Departments of State and Defense to investigate possible responses . He then outlined his own proposals in interdepartmental security briefings .
 RFK’s proactive, terrier-like energy, helped government prepare for Cuban missile crisis . Government departments tasked with handling the crisis had been remarkably well-prepared in contingency thinking and intelligence .
 As the crisis developed, RFK continued to seek new information and advice, acting as his brother's eyes and ears . RFK was able to go where he could not, to source frank perspectives unhindered by presidential deference .
 At times this meant spotlighting another advisor’s counsel in cabinet meeting . At others summarizing a loud mess of opinions into a coherent range of actionable options for president .
 In a few unique circumstances, it even meant playing up a blunter edge to his persona, asking the sort of direct questions the president could not answer .
 RFK held a number of pivotal one-on-one conversations with fellow advisors during the crisis . RFK also relays these back to the president in a series of private discussions .
 RFK met privately with the president throughout the crisis . RFK: "We know, from diary entries, references in official memoranda and the tapes themselves, that we know"
 One-on-ones gave the president a chance to talk through options freely, and RFK the chance to bring new information and advice to the president outside of busy group meetings . RFK: These were frank one-in-ones .
 On one evening at the height of the crisis, the two brothers even discussed JFK’s possible impeachment . On another evening, the brothers discussed JFK's possible impeachment, according to the brothers .
 RFK jumped far ahead in the first days of the crisis, coldly calculating and interrogating the possible U.S. response . RFK was the president of the United States during the Korean War .
 He insisted that an invasion remains on the table, and even pushed for a reduction in the lead time required to initiate one .
 Until recently this approach was held up as evidence for a belligerent, hawkish advisor, promoting the sort of military action that would have led to dangerous escalation . Until now, this approach has been seen as evidence of a hawkish, belligerent advisor .
 He saw his role as pressing for all alternatives, regardless of where they might lead . He said: "I'm looking forward to all possibilities, even if they might be wrong."
 RFK would subsequently put his weight behind the famous blockade plan . The blockade plan was designed to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 Although he did not conceive the plan, he was instrumental in convincing other advisors of its merits and, ultimately, the president . He was instrumental to convince other advisors to support the president's plan .
 In both cases he was seen as balancing resolve with restraint . He bridged the more forceful approach advocated by the military and Joint Chiefs with the optimistic diplomacy pushed by dovish advisors .
 RFK took this balanced approach into secret, back-channel meetings with the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin . RFK met with Dobrynins in secret, secret meetings .
 The president sought a quick resolution to the crisis through more direct channels . Frustrated by the equivocations of the State Department, the president sought to take action . The State Department has not responded to the president's request .
 RFK personally tasked RFK to meet with Dobrynin in an attempt to convey the voice of the president directly to Soviet Premier Khrushchev . RFK was tasked with trying to convey his voice directly to the Soviet Premier Premier Krushchev.
 The President trusted Khrushchev would interpret RFK in this way, having deployed him in a similar fashion a year earlier . RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 RFK’s privileged role made clear to Khrushchev via his son-in-law Alexei Adzhubei . RFK had also made his privileged role clear to the Soviet premier's son- in-law .
 Soviet documents record this being relayed directly to Khrushchev and taken seriously, despite the jokey tone . Soviet documents show this was taken seriously by the then-Krushchev . Documents record this was relayed by the Soviet leader despite the joking tone .
 Both brothers felt only negotiation from strength would work with Soviet Premier Khrushchev, that appearances contribute to reality .
 Dobrynin and RFK’s accounts of their meetings were surprisingly consistent . RFK was successful in striking the right tone, and his accounts of the meetings were remarkably consistent .
 Both note RFK’s warnings of military action if the Russians did not withdraw their missiles, of “a chain reaction” that could quickly start and be very hard to stop .
 Dobrynin’s trust that the president was speaking through RFK, and his instinctive grasp of the truth in RFK's eyes, that carried such power .
 JFK himself once remarked, “We’ve got more guys around here with ideas.” JFK himself himself once said, ‘We've got more . around here . with ideas .
 Khrushchev's 'Trollope Ploy' was a bold strategy for navigating two very different proposals from Khrushchevs . The ‘Trollop Ploy’ was designed to deal with the crisis as it drew to the end of its second week .
 The first was private and conciliatory, promising to remove the missiles in return for an American assurance not to invade Cuba . The second was a promise to remove missiles in exchange for an assurance that the U.S. would not invade .
 The second was announced publicly, only committing to remove the missiles in return for the Americans also removing their missiles from Turkey . The agreement was reached in exchange for the removal of missiles in Turkey .
 This second proposal would have been incredibly difficult for President Kennedy to deliver, and a challenge to NATO unity . President Kennedy's proposal was incredibly difficult to deliver .
 In truth, he did not conceive the ploy—but it would not have been possible without him . "In truth, I didn't conceive of the ploy," he said .
 RFK took hold of the situation, assuming the leadership mantle but doing so selectively . RFK assumed the mantle but did so selectively, taking it out of the role . He said, "I don't think it's OK"
 This assurance was kept secret, though strongly suspected by experts on the crisis, until 1989 . It is believed to have been kept secret until the end of the crisis .
 RFK delivered his final-chance message to Dobrynin on the evening of October 27 . RFK's final message was delivered on the night of the night .
 At 10 AM the following morning, Radio Moscow read out a letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy . The letter was read out at 10 AM, the next day .
 There were many pivotal moments in the crisis, a good number of which cannot be attributed to statesmen, says David Cameron . "There were many crucial moments in this crisis," he says . Cameron: "A good many of the key moments in crisis are not attributed to statemen"
 Deputy commander of a Russian nuclear submarine averted near-launch of a nuclear warhead . He countermanded his superior’s orders to prepare for launch .
 The wrong leaders, with the wrong advice, taking the wrong actions, could have tipped the world into nuclear war . But fundamentally this was a crisis in which the wrong leaders took wrong advice and took wrong actions .
 In this context, historians must ask if President Kennedy could have succeeded without his younger brother .
 We can only look to a telling exchange between the brothers, some five months after the crisis .
 A committee had been convened to investigate the apparent failure of the U.S. intelligence community to predict the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 An intimate language of their own can be heard on a late-evening call, clearly rooted in a deep and abiding trust between the two brothers . The two brothers speak in intimate language, their own .