 He said the bases could handle missiles carrying nuclear warheads up to 2,000 miles . The bases could also be used to carry missiles with nuclear warheads, he said .
 One was its direct thrust at the Soviet Union as the party responsible for the crisis . Another thrust was aimed at the Communist Party responsible for its role in crisis .
 Mr Kennedy treated Cuba and the Government of Premier Fidel Castro as a mere pawn in Moscow's hands . He drew the issue as one with the Soviet Government . Mr Kennedy's government of Cuba was one of Russia's most powerful powers .
 The other aspect of the speech particularly noted was its flat commitment by the U.S. to act alone against the missile threat in Cuba .
 The launch of a nuclear missile from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union against the U.S. He said the launch would be considered an attack on the United States .
 The President recited in an 18-minute radio and television address of a grimness unparalleled in recent times . All this was a grim moment in the country's history .
 He read the words rapidly, with little emotion, until he came to the peroration--a warning to Americans of the dangers ahead . He said: "I'm not going to be afraid of the future, but I'm going to tell the truth"
 One path we shall never choose is the path of surrender or submission . And one path we will never choose will be the path to surrender or submissibility .
 The President's speech did not actually start the naval blockade tonight . Instead, it was just a speech from the President .
 The State Department will issue a formal proclamation late tomorrow . That may delay the effectiveness of the action as long as another 24 hours . To meet the requirements of international law, the State Department may issue a proclamation .
 The speech laid before the American people a crisis that had gripped the highest officials here since last Tuesday, but had only begun to leak out to the public over the weekend . The crisis had gripped officials in Washington since Tuesday .
 President Obama says he got the first firm intelligence report about missile sites in Cuba . He says he was briefed on the missile sites on Cuba on Tuesday .
 Last month, the Soviet Government publicly stated that its military equipment for Cuba was ""exclusively for defensive purposes"" and that the Soviet did not need retaliatory missile bases outside its own territory .
 Gromyko told him in a call at the White House that the Soviet Union would never become involved in building any offensive military capacity in Cuba . The Soviet Union said it would not be involved in the building of any military capacity .
 President's personal letter from him to Mr Khrushchev was delivered to Soviet government in Moscow .
 Mr Kennedy disclosed that he was calling for an immediate meeting of the Organ . of Consultation of the Organization of . American States . to consider the crisis .
 The O.A.S. promptly scheduled an emergency session for 9 A.M. tomorrow morning . The emergency session will be held at 9 a.m. tomorrow .
 State Department officials say they are confident of receiving the necessary 14 votes from the 20 nations represented . State Dept. officials said they were confident they would receive enough votes to win the vote .
 This was taken as an allusion to a possible summit conference with Mr Khrushchev . This was thought to be a reference to a potential summit conference .
 This meant that the United States was determined on this course no matter what any international organization--or even U.S. allies-might say . The United States' allies might say, but the U.K. was determined to go its way .
 Congressional leaders of both parties gave him unanimous backing . Support from Congress also came from Congress .
 Mr Kennedy outlined the nature of the military threat in Cuba, and this country's response . Mr Kennedy went into considerable detail in his speech .
 Intelligence indicates that Cuban missile sites are of two types, he said . He said intelligence indicates that the sites are two types of missile sites .
 One kind of kind would be capable of handling medium-range ballistic missiles . One kind would have a range of missiles capable of carrying missiles . The U.S. is developing a similar type of missile that could be used in the future .
 The President said such missiles could carry nuclear weapons more than 1,000 nautical miles . The missiles could reach Washington, the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral or Mexico City, he said .
 The second category of sites would be for intermediate range ballistics missiles, with a range of more than 2,000 miles . The sites would include intermediate range missiles with a more than two,000 mile range .
 The President said they could hit ""most of the major cities in the Western hemisphere"" from Lima, Peru, to Hudson's Bay in Canada .
 He said the Soviet Union's action was ""in flagrant and deliberate defiance"" of the Rio Pact of 1947, the United Nations Charter, Congressional resolution and his own public warnings to Soviet Union . He added that the action was in flagrant defiance .