 This addendum consists of 14 pages . NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 NOVEMBER 2017 ADDENDUM . This addamam contains 14 pages.
 The source below outlines Fidel Castro's negotiations with Nikita Khrushchev about the deployment of missiles in Cuba . The source also outlines the negotiations between Castro and Khrushche .
 By 1962 Castro's Cuba was well established as an enemy of the United States . By 1962, Cuba had been established as a major ally of the U.S.
 Eisenhower administration hired members of the Mafia to assassinate Castro . Eisenhower administration had begun training anti-Castro Cuban exiles for invasion of homeland .
 The Kennedy administration inherited the project that led to the Bay of Pigs . The project was inherited from the Kennedy administration . It was the first time the project was launched in Cuba .
 Castro turned to the Soviet Union as Cuba's protector . Castro, again not unreasonably, turned to them as a protector . The Soviet Union was Cuba's only ally .
 He hoped, through a proclamation or an alliance or Soviet conventional military aid, to deter American aggression . He hoped to deter U.S. aggression, he said .
 The Soviet Union had every right under international law to send the missiles to Cuba, the author says . After all, it was every right to receive the missiles, he says . Cuba was the only country in the world to receive missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev did not follow Castro's advice . Fortunately for the imperialists, he didn't follow his advice .
 Had he done so, it would have been far harder to force the missiles out of the area, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Kennedy intended to take steps against deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . It outlines the steps that Kennedy wanted to take .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine , reckless and provocative threat to world peace and stabilise relations between our two nations . I call on Chairman Khruschev to end this clandestine and reckless threat to the world peace .
 "I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination," he writes . "He should withdraw these weapons from Cuba by refraining from any action which will widen or deepen the present crisis," he says .
 Khrushchev stated that he was prepared to withdraw missiles from Cuba on condition that the U.S. of America stopped the blockade of Soviet missiles to Cuba . The United States of America also stopped the Soviet missile blockade .
 You say that it worries you because it lies at a distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the Unites States .
 We agree to move weapons from Cuba which you regard as offensive weapons . The Cuban government has agreed to move the weapons from the island .
 The source below highlights how various Angolan liberation movements were assisted by foreign powers after the collapse of the Alvor Agreement . The source also highlights how foreign powers aided the liberation movements in Angola .
 Both the Alvor Agreement and the coalition government had been strongly endorsed by other African states through the OAU (Organisation of African Unity) but without results . Both the agreement and coalition government were strongly endorsed .
 Heavy fighting broke out among the three former liberation movements in July 1975, and the coalition government collapsed . Each movement turned to its old allies from the struggle for independence for military hardware and personnel .
 Foreign powers became increasingly involved in the situation in Angola, rapidly expanding into an East-West power struggle and an extension of the Cold War . The question of 'who came first' has been the subject of much debate .
 Agostinho Neto is the leader of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola . Neto was visiting Dar es Salaam when he was in Tanzania .
 Cuban delegation sent list of the urgent needs of the organisation . The list of urgent needs is sent to the Cuban delegation .
 The establishment, organisation and maintenance of a military school for cadres. The establishment of the school for Cadres.
 We urgently need to create a company of security personnel, he says . We also need to prepare the members of our military staff, he adds .
 We need to rent a ship to transport the war material that we have in Dar es Salaam to Angola, says the government . The war material is being transported to Angola by a ship in the country's capital .
 The delivery in Angola, if this were a Cuban ship, could take place outside of Angola's territorial waters .
 Comrades, accept our revolutionary greetings and convey the good wishes of the combatants of the MPLA and of the new Angola to Prime Minister Fidel Castro .
 MPLA sent a battalion of regular troops and anti-tank weapons to help the Angolan patriots resist the invasion of the South African racists . MPLA: "At the request of the MPLA, the leadership of our party decided to send with great urgency"
 This was the first Cuban troop unit sent to Angola . Cuba alone bears the responsibility of taking that decision, says the Cuban president .
 The USSR had always helped the people of the Portuguese colonies in their struggle for independence . It provided besieged Angola with basic military equipment and collaborated with us when imperialism had cut off practically all our air routes to Africa .
 The USSR is extraordinarily respectful and careful in its relations with Cuba . The USSR was extremely careful in Cuba's relations with the Cuban people . It was extremely cautious in its dealings with Cuba.
 Ford and Kissinger lie to the people of the U.S. and to world public opinion when they try to place the responsibility for Cuba's action in solidarity with Angola on the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was responsible for the Cuban action .
 The extract below outlines Stokely Carmichael's explanation regarding the philosophy of Black Power . Carmichael explains the philosophy in the extract below .
 The concept of Black Power is a call for black people in this country to unite, to recognise their heritage, to build a sense of community . The concept is called 'Black Power'
 There has been only a 'civil rights' movement, whose tone of voice was adapted to an audience of middle-class whites . There has only been a 'Civil Rights' movement whose tone has been adapted to a white audience .
 It served as a sort of buffer zone between that audience and angry young blacks . "It served as ... a buffer zone," she says of the black community .
 "It claimed to speak for the needs of a community, but it did not speak in the tone of that community," says the mayor . "It was not a community that spoke for that community. It was a community," he says .
 "None of its so-called leaders could go into a rioting community and be listened to," says CNN.com's John Defterios . " None of its leaders could ... go into ... rioting communities," he says .
 In order to have a decent house or education, black people must move into a white neighbourhood or send their children to a white school . It is based on complete acceptance of the fact that in order to get a decent home or education .
 This reinforces the idea that 'white' is automatically superior and 'black' is by definition inferior . This reinforces, among both black and white, the idea of 'white being superior'
 For this reason, 'integration' is a subterfuge for the maintenance of white supremacy . 'Integration' was a 'substance' for white supremacy, says the author of the book .
 It outlines the need for African Americans to take up arms to fight for their freedom . African Americans need arms to defend their freedom, the book says .
 We suffer political oppression, economic exploitation and social degradation, all from the same enemy . We suffer from political oppression and economic exploitation, all of them from the enemy, she says .
 1964: 1964 and you're walking around here singing 'We Shall Overcome', the government has failed us . 1964: 'Anytime you live in the twentieth century, 1964, and . you're . walking around . here singing "We shall Overcome", the government have failed us
 Cassius Clay can sing, but singing didn't help him to become the heavy-weight champion of the world . Clay can also swing, but swinging helped him become the world champion . Clay is the son of legendary boxer Floyd Mayweather .
 This government has failed us, the government itself, and the white liberals who have been posing as our friends have failed us. This government, this government and these white liberals, are failing us, we say . This government is failing us. It is failing all of us. We are
 "Once we see that all these sources to which we've turned have failed, we stop turning to them and turn to ourselves," she says . "We turn to each other, and we're not going to rely on other sources," she adds .
 We need a self-help programme, a do-it-yourself philosophy, an it's already-already-too-late philosophy . It's already already too late for us, we need self help programmes, we say .
 This is what you and I need, and the only way we are going to solve our problem is with a self-help programme . This is not what you need, it's what we need, we need. We need a self help programme. This is the only thing we need
 Before we can get a self-help programme started, we have to have a 'self-start philosophy' Self-help programmes must be self-started .
 On the government payroll they supplied explosives to Black Panther members and sought to incite them to blow up public buildings . The government also promoted kangaroo courts encouraging Panther members to torture suspected informants .