 The crisis began when the Soviet Union began putting missiles in Cuba and ended when the missiles were removed . It was considered an unambiguous triumph achieved by a president more hawkish than some of his advisers .
 Robert Kennedy notified former Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that U.S. missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . The withdrawal was imperative (obviously for American domestic political reasons) that it was not announced .
 Rusk’s letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, President Kennedy would have complied . Rusk: If the Soviets had insisted, Kennedy would've complied .
 On Aug. 1962, five weeks before the aanilllisuauuu uiatuvcicu me nuadiics, Sen. Sen. Richard Nixon was elected to New York City .
 President Kennedy wanted to practice appeasement but calculated incorrectly, he says . Thus it is fascinating that he says, in praise of the former president, that Kennedy wanted a deal with Obama .
 Even assuming Sorensen is wrong, Schlesinger’s romanticizing is not right . Even if Sorennsen was wrong, it's not right to romanticize the film . Schlesingers' romanticizing of the film is wrong .
 In 1978, MiG-2ps (nuclear-delivery vehicles far more menacing than the 1962 missiles) were introduced into Cuba . In 1978 they were introduced to Cuba by Soviet Union .
 Most “peace plans"" for Central America postulate the moral equivalence of United States and Soviet involvements in the region, another legacy of the missile-crisis “triumph” that killed the Monroe Doctrine .
 Stevenson never got over the hurt from the incident, according to a close friend . Stevenson, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1952 and 1956, was hurt by the incident .
 When construction of the Cuban missile sites was confirmed on Oct. 15, 1962, there was a widespread view in the NSC that air strikes should be launched at once and an invasion of Cuba prepared . This was barely three weeks before congressional elections in which the Republicans had made Cuba a big
 NSC ‘hawks’ initially insisted on launching air strikes, then settled for a naval “quarantine” of Cuba . The NSC "hawks” initially insisted that air strikes would be launched, but settled on a naval quarantine .
 The idea of withdrawing missiles from Turkey as a quid pro quo for the Soviet Union, remained appealing to the president . But the idea of withdrawal from Turkey was appealing to President Obama .
 Robert F Kennedy proposed to Soviet ambassador to Turkey in Oct. 1962 . If Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, U.S. would withdraw, he would withdraw Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 It was essential, he told Dobrynin, that it should not appear that such a deal had been struck, he said .
 If Khrushchev had not accepted the deal Robert Kennedy offered to Dobrynin, Rusk revealed in his letter . President Kennedy was willing to go farther and publicly agree to withdraw United States missiles in Turkey .
 Rusk dictated the proposal to Cordier and told him to deliver it upon receipt of an agreed signal . Rusk told Cordier to deliver the proposal after receiving a signal from Rusk . Cordier delivered the proposal when he received a signal .
 When Khrushchev accepted the Kennedy-Dobrynin deal, the signal was never sent . The deal was never made, and the deal never went ahead .
 The 15 Jupiters technically belonged to NATO, not the U.S., not the United States . The Kennedy administration perceived the missiles as obsolete, but at the time of the missile crisis no NATO decision had been taken to remove them .
 Rusk prepared his letter for a meeting last March of experts on the Cuban crisis held in Hawk’s Cay, Florida . Rusk: "The Cuban crisis is a very serious matter of human rights"
 One of the conference participants -was George Ball, Kennedy's undersecretary of state . The conference was held in New York City, New York .
 Bundy: It's easy to laugh now about some of the bloopers that came out of the crisis . Bundy: Transcript will show that there is still considerable tension between the "hawks" and "doves" Bundy: The transcript will show the tension still exists between the “
 One involved General Thomas Powers, commander of the Strategic Air Command . One of the greatest moments of the war was when Powers was in charge of the Air Force Command .
 Powers inadvertently put out an uncoded message over a clear channel that his nuclear bomber crews should go to a war-alert status . Powers inadvertently sent the message over the channel .
 C LIO is in bed with a splitting headache, prostrated by the task of trying to correct misunderstandings of the Cuban missile crisis .
 There was not much By George F Will of a brink, and no triumph worth celebrating . Actually, there was not Much By George Will of the brink . But there was no triumph of the day worth celebrating.
 The meeting was held at a Florida resort with the wonderfully inapt name of Hawk’s Cay .
 In the crisis, Robert Kennedy notified Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that U.S. missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . It was imperative (obviously for domestic political reasons) that the linkage of the withdrawals not be announced .
 Mr Rusk’s letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, Kennedy would have complied . Kennedy would not have complied with the request .
 JFK succeeded because his militaiy advantage was huge and his goal was tiny . Kennedy succeeded because he had a huge advantage in his military advantage and a tiny goal was small .
 The Soviet Union was not going to war at a time when the U.S. advantages were three to one in long-range bombers, six to one . in loncr-rancre missiles and 16 to one warheads . The United States had advantages in bombers, lon
 Kennedy sought only removal of the missiles from Cuba . Kennedy had advantages that would have enabled him to insist on severance of Soviet military connectiops with Cuba .
 Ted Sorensen, the aide closest to Kennedy, made the revelation at the Kennedy family reunion . The stunning revelation in the report is not Mr Rusk’s letter; it is something said at the reunion .
 Kennedy’s non-invasion pledge guaranteed the survival of the first communist regime and makes attempts to remove or reform the second seem disproportionate . The pledge guarantees the survival*^ this hemisphere's first . communist regime .
 Reagan administration talks about deling with Nicaragua by "going to tfte source” — Cuba, is reduced to dating for piddling sums for the contras, a recipe for another tenure . Reagan administration began by talking about going to Nicaragua by ""going to TFte source"
 Most “peace plans” for Central America postulate the moral equivalence of U.S. and Soviet Involvements in the region . Most ‘peace’ plans’ for Central . America’s relations with the Soviet Union are a legacy of the missile