 Less than 12 hours later, on the morning of Oct. 27, 1962, an American U2 spyplane crashed near the base .
 President Kennedy assumed the Soviets had shot down the U2 with a missile from that base . President Kennedy and his advisers did not know of the firefight at the Cuban base . The U2 was shot down by the Soviets in 1961 .
 The significance of the military skirmish in Cuba shows the Cubans were more independent of Moscow in the crisis than the Kennedy administration thought possible . Seymour Hersh is a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and author of "" The Target Is Destroyed .
 Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev may not have had complete control of the SAM battery that shot down the U2 .
 Kennedy administration assumed Khrushchev had direct control of all surface-to-air missile batteries in Cuba . U2 shootdown was one of the most emotional issues of the crisis . Kennedy administration's assessment of the shootdown is shaped by its assumption .
 President Kennedy sent brother Robert to see Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . The U2 shootdown was a factor in President Kennedy's decision to send his brother to see him . Robert Kennedy’s posthumous memoir was published in October 2013 .
 The Soviets should begin dismantling the missiles within 48 hours or the United States would strike . The U.S. would strike if the Soviets did not dismantle the missiles .
 Khrushchev agreed to an immediate withdrawal of the Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in return for a private American commitment to remove Jupiter missiles within five months from Turkey and Italy . In return, the U.S. agreed to a public pledge not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev had toughened his demands for a settlement of 'the crisis' in Cuba . He demanded that any withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba be publicly-linked to the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey .
 Cuban-run antiaircraft batteries had opened fire on two low-flying American rbfcbnhaissance aircraft, without causing setfoijs damage . There were questions in the ExComm, according to the minutes, about the extent of Khrushchev's control over the ant
 Rudolph Anderson Jr., whose flight two weeks before h&d been theTirst to bring back photographic evidence of ‘the Soviet missile installations.’ Anderson Jr. was the pilot of the first flight to fly over the Soviet Union to photograph the missile installations .
 T he firsirchallenge to American assumptions about the U2 shootdown came about T8'‘months later, in early 1964, when analysts atlhe National Security Agency succeeded in breaking a Soviet code .
 The Soviet code system, known to some in the U.S. as ""Silver," had been in widespread usage by Soviet forces stationed in OubSln 1962 .
 He reported that he was advancing with troops and that, three soldiers were killed and 15 other were wounded . He subsequently reported that, 3 soldiers died and 15 others wounded .
 The commander, identified by the NSA as an officer named* Mal'tsev, also issued a call for surgeons; Seven physicians were ^pnt to the scene that night, j Other NSA v intercepts showed that Mal's advance was apparently a counterattack against Cuban troops .
 Gen. of Aviation Victor Davidkov, apparently the senior Soviet commander at the time in Cuba . Gen. Gen. Davidkov was apparently the main Soviet commander in Cuba during the war .
 NSA analysts quickly reached the obvious conclusion that the fighting was between Soviets and Cubans . The intercepts; which made clear that Soviet soldiers had been shot and wounded, did hot specifically name the attacking forces as Cuban .
 The intercepts suggested Chat .the attack had ended by the morning of Oct. 31, but the NSA analysts were finable to preclude the possibility that the SAM site at Los Angeles may not have been fully under Soviet control .
 By early 1964, there was clear evidence that the Cuban military — and thus Fidel Castro — had been in direct control of the many antiaircraft batteries scattered throughout the island at the height of the crisis . A former official who was at the top of an intelligence agency at the time,
 There was no available evidence linking Khrushchev to an order to shoot down Maj. Maj. Gen. Maj., he said . Furthermore, he said, there was no known evidence linking him to a shoot-down .
 Cuban accounts of the crisis are contradictory, and it remains unclear why Cubans would have attacked the Los Angeles SAM site . It is unclear why the attack occurred .
 An American who recently visited Havana said that a senior Cuban official had told him that he had no knowledge of such a firefight in October 1962 . An American said he had been told by a Cuban official that he was not aware of the incident .
 If such an incident took place, he said, it could have been Russians fighting Russians; However, an American professor said in an interview last week that during a research trip to Cuba several years ago, he had been told that the Cubans indeed had taken over a Soviet military base by
 T he implication that policy-makers had made a serious miscalculation during the missile crisis 18 months earlier was kept under tight wraps inside the National Security Agency . T he highly classified communications intelligence, with its implication that . policy makers had . made a significant mistake during the . missile crisis
 Conversations in recent weeks with former members of the ExComm, including McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy’s national security adviser, indicated that none of the key Kennedy administration actors in the missile crisis had been briefed on the material .
 The report of the firefight at Banes did not surface again until 1979 . William B Bader, an assistant deputy undersecretary of defense for policy, initiated an exhaustive study .
 Carter administration learned of Soviet 'brigade' in Cuba only to learn it had been in place since resolution of missile crisis . Carter administration was then in embarrassing position of having called public attention to the so-called Soviet "brigades" in Cuba .
 Bader asked intelligence community in 1979 for all of its files on Soviet forces in Cuba . Bader, in a recent interview, recalled asking intelligence community for files on Cuba .
 Bader is now a vice president of a think tank called SRI International . He only realized much later the significance of the 1964 intelligence report .
 Daniel Ellsberg was working on a highly classified study for the Rand Corp. during the Cuban missile crisis in 1964 . He was the first person to understand the significance of the intercepts .
 He didn't disclose his special knowledge of the missile crisis until April 1986 . He was interviewed by WGBH, a Boston public television station, for a documentary on the crisis .
 Ellsberg recalled that the Los Angeles site had been under ground attack on Oct. 31, apparently by Cubans, with a fierce Soviet counterattack . A ccording to a transcript of the transcript, he recalled that he recalled the attack on October 31, .
 Ellsberg did not mention in the television interview that his information about the firefight came from communications intercepts . He said the information came from a communications intercept from the Pentagon .
 Only a few of the scores of books and academic studies on the missile crisis have raised any doubts as to the extent of Khrushchev’s control over the SAM sites in Cuba . The few doubters invariably suggested that the downing of the U2 had been ordered behind Kh
 Ellsberg told more of his account of the firefight at Banes . He was informed recently that a reporter had obtained independent corroboration for his account .
 His crisis-communications study was undertaken for W Walt Rostow, then State Department counselor . Rostow gave him enormous access to America’s most closely held secrets as well as members of the ExComm .
 Ellsberg also had been deeply involved in the missile crisis in 1962 . He worked with a group planning the Cuban air strikes .
 Robert Kennedy told of his extraordinary meeting with Dobrynin on the evening of Oct. 31, after the U2 shootdown . Robert Kennedy was among those interviewed by Ellsberg in early 1964 .
 Khrushchev's letter in which he demanded that the Jupiter missiles be pulled out, with an official announcement, as part of a settlement . That meeting also came after the receipt of Khrushche's letter .
 Kennedy, obviously aware that his remarks were meant only for a highly classified internal government study, told Ellsberg of his ultimatum to Dobrynin . Kennedy was obviously aware of his remarks .
 Kennedy's memoir of the crisis, ""Thirteen Days," was published in 1969 . That ultimatum would not become publicly known until Kennedy’s memoir, “Thirteen days,” was published .
 The Soviets were told that the U.S. would attack the missile sites inside Cuba by Tuesday morning, Oct. 31 . Unless there was some evidence within the next 48 hours that the sites were being dismantled, the sites would not be attacked .
 Soviet officials already had learned that American planning for a full-scale invasion was underway . D-Day was set for early Tuesday morning .
 Ellsberg: Kennedy told Dobrynin he had 48 hours to act . Kennedy was specific in recalling that he had told him to act on the issue . Ellsenberg: Kennedy was very specific about the timing of the decision .
 The shooting down of the U2 was “a most serious turn of events,"" he quoted himself as telling the Soviet ambassador . He quoted himself saying: “The shooting down was a most serious turning of events"
 Kennedy assumed Khrushchev had control over the SAM sites in Cuba, including the many antiaircraft batteries there, including those gun emplacements that had fired on two lowflying American reconnaissance planes .
 In Ellsberg's view, Khrushchev understood what Kennedy did not -- that he, perhaps even Fidel Castro, could not stop the firing of the antiaircraft batteries .
 He had no reason to believe that Khrushchev was going to be so reckless as to shoot anything else down, he says .
 Ellsberg didn't find out until April 14, 1964, about a month after his meeting with Kennedy, of the new intelligence finding . T hat hat fact also didn’t occur to him— until he was informed on April 14 .
 Khrushchev didn't have control and that’s why he backed off right away"" — within 12 hours instead of taking the next 48 hours and attempting to improve his bargaining positon. "Krushchev backed off"
 Ellsberg theorized that Khrushchev knew that the U.S. would send more reconnaissance flights at first light the next morning . He also knew that he could not guarantee that the Cubans manning the antiaircraft guns would not shoot down another aircraft .
 Castro acknowledged that he had given his antiaircraft forces blanket authority to shoot at low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes . Castro said in an interview published last year that on Oct. 31, 1961, he had agreed to shoot down the Americans . Castro: "On Oct.
 Only ""the inexperience of our artillerymen,"" he said, led them to miss that day . Only the inexperience led to the miss, he said .
 Garthoff, who wrote many key memoranda during the crisis as a State Department officer, reports new details about the extent of Soviet-Cuban estrangement in his new book .
 The first telephone message, dated Oct. 31, was from Adlai Stevenson, the American ambassador to the United Nations . Stevenson relayed Thant’s account of a meeting in Havana with the Soviet ambassador and a young brigadier general .
 Statsenko introduced himself as the commander of Soviet forces in Cuba . Statsenko was a Soviet commander in Cuba during the Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 All of the antiaircraft weaponry auu SAM sites on Cuba are 'manned by Cubans' Thant quoted the officer, according to Stevenson .
 Statsenko’s statement to Thant suggested that the Cubans were manning the SAM sites as of Oct. 3, three days after the only known firing of a SA2 SAM missile had taken place . Statsenko's statement suggested, as Ellsberg understood, that the
 Statsenko's comment seemed to mean that the Soviets had permitted Cubans to operate SAM sites at least since the 27th . The U2 had been shot down and Khurshchev had agreed to no longer attack American reconnaissance aircraft .
 Ellsberg received a second phone call from undersecretary of state George Ball . Ball reported on a conversation he had with Thant’s military adviser, Indian Gen. Gen. Jan. Ravi Thant . Ball said the message came from Ball's conversation with Rusk
 Rikhye described a conversation with Fidel Castro in which the Cuban premier was quoted, as relayed by Ball, as saying that Castro talked as though he had all the antiaircraft and he did boast that it was the Cubans who had shot down Maj. Maj. Gen. R
 Rusk and other members of the ExComm had been provided with evidence within days of the shootdown from both the Cubans and the Soviets in Cuba that the U2 probably had not been attacked on orders from Khrushchev . Rusk: "The U2 was not attacked on
 Everyone in the government assumed that the spyplane had been shot down by a Soviet' SA2 missile in the control of the Soviet forces on • the ground — and thus by Khrushchev . But senior officials could not see the significance of the information .
 Castro himself has provided varying accounts of who was in control of the shooting down of the U2 . Castro has said Soviet troops had been manning the SA2 missiles at the time .
 The strong assumption of Soviet control inside Cuba made it inevitable that the information provided by Thant and his military adviser also would be overlooked . U.S. intelligence officials acknowledged that the United States government had no hard information as of Nov., 1962, as to how Maj. Maj. Th
 George Ball, in a telephone interview from 1 his office in Princeton, N. J., confirmed that he had held a conversation with Rikhye . Ball said he had spoken to the former president .