 At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials . Study sheds new light on thinking of U.S. military leaders at height of Cuban missile crisis .
 The Pentagon’s case for ‘provocation’ JFK and Air Force General Curtis LeMay, one of the Joint Chiefs in October 1962 .
 Document sheds light the profound differences between JFK and the Pentagon as Kennedy’s presidency entered its final year . The document sheds news light the differences between the Pentagon and JFK .
 The exact report, held in the Office of the Secretary of State, remains heavily redacted . The exact same report is still heavily redacted.
 Nearly 40 percent of the millions of pages of documents reviewed, most of which are over 40 years old, have been withheld on national security grounds . According to a recent NDC report, nearly 40 per cent of the documents reviewed have been held back .
 In August 2011, the leaders of the NDC said they would not make a priority of declassifying 1,100 CIA records related to JFK’a assassination .
 Those documents will not be made ublic until October 2017, at the earliest .
 At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials” David Regan .
 John Kennedy was the first president to be seriously confronted with a nuclear war . He was the president of the U.S. during the Cold War . John Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 The peaceful settlement of the Cuban Missile crisis and the removal of missiles by the Soviet Union from Cuba and the U.S. from Turkey turned Kennedy steadfastly against nuclear proliferation . Kennedy was steadfastly opposed to nuclear proliferation.
 If there is a connection between Cuba and the murder of JFK that is the connection, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "If there is there is any connection, that's the connection"
 Nuclear weapons in Israel were no different than nuclear weapons in Turkey, says Israel's president . Israel's nuclear weapons are no different from those in Turkey's borders, he says . Israel has a history of testing of nuclear weapons for nuclear weapons .
 Operation Northwoods never really went away, despite Kennedy’s opposition to it . You can see that Operation Northwood never really go away, even though Kennedy was against it .
 In 1962-63, the U.S. had an overwhelming advantage in nuclear missiles, and the hawks were certain that the United States could launch a surprise attack and beat the USSR easily .
 Just another piece of evidence against the real culprits behind the JFK assassination . JFK assassination. JFK's assassination .
 A lot of blame has been cast upon the CIA for JFK's assassination, and rightly so, in my opinion .
 I look at the Bethesda autopsy as a MILITARY operation, with LBJ and Hoover assisting and supporting this operation . LBJ, Hoover and Hoover were involved in the operation, and LBJ was involved .
 I wouldn’t rule out some of the top military helping to set up the Dallas shooting gallery at Dealey . Maybe in a supporting technical role, maybe in a technical role .
 The reason I mention Bethesda specifically however is because of the generals and top brass directing everything, you could say micromanaging the autopsy down to the smallest detail . Bethesda's top brass is directing everything in the game's development process .
 History has shown many times the threat that a powerful military can be to a non-military or in modern day lingo, “civilian” government . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful military in recent years .
 The Romans were well aware of the threat to Rome and tried to keep a separation, as did our original Framers, who tried to address the problem in 1787 . The Romans tried to separate Rome from Rome, and the Framers tried to fix the problem .
 They could not foresee the explosive growth of intelligence and a permanent military in general, grown to tumor-like size after WW2 . The military is feeding off large corporations and permanently installed in Washington .
 Escalante’s book doesn’t go far enough if it suggests that VIA operations against Cuba stopped in 1962 .
 CIA Covert Operations 1959-62 says that the CIA was continually involved in such plans throughout the period 1959 to 1962 . The CIA was constantly involved in the planning of such plans during the period .
 It discusses a whole series of proposals for dealing with the missiles, and lists the advantages and disadvantages of each . From an all-out invasion to much more limited options, the options are discussed .
 It does include a remarkably short reference to the assassination of Cuban and Russian officials but I can only shrug with respect to the proposed assassination of Cuba officials . Yes it does include short reference .
 There is of course debate whether JFK/RFK were witting of the events that continued even after the end of the missile crisis .
 Russian leaders have been accused of being assassinated in the past . The suggestion is startlingly off-hand suggestion of the assassination of Russian leaders, says CNN's Richard Quest .
 I invite reader comment if CIA had contemplated assassination of RUSSIAN leaders . I am not aware and I invite comment if the CIA had ever contemplated the assassination of leaders .
 Our assassination of Russian leaders would surely have done so. Granted, other actions might have escalated into a clash between the super-powers but our assassination of Russia leaders would have done .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff believed the U.S. could fight a nuclear war and win . Joint Chiefs believed the United States could win a war and survive .
 They opposed directives that reduced their authority to decide when to go nuclear . They stubbornly opposed directives to reduce their authority .