 Statesmanship, strategy, and serendipity gave you this opportunity to learn from this dramatic crisis, says author . Statesmanship and strategy gave you the chance to learn, he says .
 Blight and Lang also make clear that the genesis of the confrontation began long before October 1962 . Cuba’s threat calculus and behavior had an effect on the both the crisis and its aftermath, they say .
 The Armageddon Letters will deeply engage both students and general readers . It uniquely focuses on the emotions of Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro as they faced what each perceived to be no way out of Armageddon .
 James Blight and janet Lang, two innovative scholars who have long studied the crisis, have written a book that is a giant step toward rendering the events of October 1962 too memorable, too frightening, and too personal ever to be forgotten .
 Kennedy and his father's inclination was not to shoot first, then think, but was to do the opposite, to think once more, and do not shoot at all . We were lucky that the inclination of the leaders of the U.S. and USSR, Kennedy and my father,
 Had either of them “shot first,” we would not be alive today . We would not have had an opportunity to read this excellent book, says author .
 The portraits of President Kennedy, my father, Nikita Khrushchev, and Cuban leader Fidel Castro are intimate, totally believable and instructing . The portraits are intimate and totally believable .
 Based on decades of careful research, this is a work of sober history that reads like a horror novel with an almost miraculously lucky outcome . The book is based on a series of decades of painstaking research .
 An Inside Account of the Man and His Era, by His Son, Sergei Khrushchev, is published by the Russian-Krushchev family . The book was written by his son, the son of the former Soviet leader .
 In these crafty but wondrously expressive ""Armageddon Letters"" pen-pals Kennedy and Khrushchev were writing the bedrock literature of the nuclear age . The letters were the work of the Cold War .
 There's a great gain of intimacy in this telling of the story, and no sacrifice of absurdity . There's no slighting of the essential madness in the nuclear fantasy in the film .
 Blight, Lang & Company are reminding us that the fantasy is not dead, the trap is still lethal, the danger is not over . A tiny fragment of the world's nuclear arsenal could explode and end life on the planet .
 Jim Blight and janet Lang have earned the gratitude of scholars and the interested public by highlighting and preserving the human dimension of the Cuban missile crisis, the most dangerous moment of the century .
 In The Armageddon Letters, James Blight and janet Lang provide readers with a front row seat to one of the most terrifying horror stories of all time . Khrushchev, Castro & Kennedy, 1958-1964 .
 The leaders of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba inadvertently brought the world within a hairs breadth of nuclear catastrophe . For 13 harrowing days in October 1962, the leaders of three nations inadvertently brought a world closer to nuclear catastrophe.
 Beneath the seemingly stable veneer of the Cold War lies the chaos of the Cuban missile crisis . The crisis was the height of the missile crisis in the early 1950s .
 Approximately 22,000 nuclear weapons can still be found in nine countries . The risk of catastrophe will remain as long as nuclear weapons exist .
 Kingston Reif is director of the Center for Arms Control and Nonproliferation . He says thermonuclear war seemed all but inevitable . Reif: We may not be so lucky next time .
 Based on a quarter century of research, you see the crisis not only from Washington, but also from Moscow and Havana . The crisis is based on the findings of a quarter-century of research .
 Manga meets the Missile Crisis in this compelling book . Pakistan, America and the Future of the Global Jihad are at odds .
 The book offers a sophisticated applied psychology that reads like a Stephen King horror novel, but is thoroughly and painstakingly grounded in the historical record . They demonstrate the inadequacies of analyzing the crisis in traditional ways .
 "Blight draws creative connections that grab our attention," says author . "The authors achieve their heartfelt intention of saturating us with warnings about a nuclear disaster," she says .