 KAAY’s on-air date of Labor Day weekend 1962 was only a few weeks prior to the October 1962 standoff between U.S. President Kennedy and Khrushchev of Russia .
 Russia’s actions in Cuba brought the world to the brink of all out nuclear war . The Batista government in Cuba had recently been overthrown by Castro's revolutionaries, and Khrushchev was in power in Russia .
 American school children were being taught about nuclear attacks and how to 'Duck and Cover' in classrooms . American children were taught about how to duck and cover .
 Khrushchev was a belligerent international bully, and he saw Cuba as a natural extension of Russia's nuclear arsenal . Cuba is 90 miles from Florida .
 Khrushchev was supporting the new Communist regime in Cuba with aide and money and military materiel . He was behind the new Cuban regime with aid and money .
 KAAY was in a unique position because of its powerful night-time signal into downtown Havana . Russian ""advisors"" had taken up permanent residence in Cuba . Russian 'advisors' had been living in Cuba for years .
 KAAY was a brand new radio station, still getting on its feet and building a new business with new advertisers . The station was a new station still in its early years .
 KAAY has been asked to participate in the VOA broadcasts to Cuba . There were a number of factors pulling the new staff in opposite directions . In private conversations with AJ, he gave some insight into behind the scenes activity .
 KAAY staff agreed with the station's role in broadcasting to Cuba is an understatement . To say that everyone on staff at the station agreed with their role, it was an understatement. The station is now broadcasting to the island nation of Cuba .
 Some on the staff held sharply divided opinions, and some vigorously objected to anything having to do with the Cuban broadcasts . Those opposed were motivated in part by the practical aspects of getting the new station on its feet .
 KAAY, after all, had just gone the air just a few short weeks before . KAAy, after just weeks beforehand, had gone on air just weeks ago .
 Broadcasting to Cuba meant that local advertising could not be sold, eliminating part of the vital revenue stream needed to keep the new station on the air . Local advertising was not allowed to be sold in Cuba .
 The other rationale was the simple fear of getting directly involved in a situation that could potentially result in the physical harm to people or themselves, and possibly jeopardize the radio station itself . Other rationale was to not get directly involved .
 Americans, including the KAAY staff, had every right to be very afraid of the potential consequences . Both of these were good reasons ""not"" broadcast to Cuba . Americans were also afraid of potential consequences of the broadcast .
 The Russians were building nuclear missile launch sites in Cuba, aimed at the U.S. mainland . They were building sites aimed at Cuba . The sites were built in Cuba to launch missiles at the United States mainland .
 Americans were rightly afraid that Khrushchev's USSR would act on their threat to launch nuclear missiles onto the U.S. mainland . Americans were right to be afraid of the threat .
 President Kennedy had no choice other than to call the bluff of Khrushchev and Castro . U.S. Air Force planes overflew Cuba daily taking pictures of missile launchers .
 A United States Navy blockade was formed to prevent any shipping from reaching Cuba . U.S. Navy ships ""surrounded"" Cuba, to prevent ships reaching Cuba from reaching the island .
 The blockade enraged Khrushchev and tensions escalated to an impossible level . The blockade was the height of tensions between the two countries .
 It truly appeared that we were on the verge of an all out nuclear war with Russia, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 KAAY had the second strongest American radio signal into downtown Havana at night at night . We had tiptoed up to the brink. It was well known .
 The VOA broadcasts in Spanish went on the air nightly nightly . KAAY was sought and brought into action .
 Cuban ex-pats listened to KAAY in Spanish, and of Cuban attempts to jam those broadcasts . We have heard anecdotally from ex-cuba ex-patents from those days .
 Many continued to listen to KAAY after the jamming was lifted . KAAy was their source of American music and information .
 The crisis devolved over a period of days, and both the U.S. and USSR were able to announce a diplomatic resolution had been reached .
 KAAY was the only radio station in the state with a 50kw transmitter, and therefore the only . radio station that could cover the entire state with news and information in the event of a national emergency .
 The transmitter would be able to stay on the air for ""days"" at full power in the event of a national emergency . The generator set and underground fuel tank would insure that the transmitter would stay on air for days .
 A fallout shelter was built on the ground floor of the transmitter building . It was provisioned with several weeks’ food and water supply . The shelter was set up in the transmitter's ground floor .
 A small studio was also built in the fallout shelter . A basic telephone line was installed to the downtown studios using a magneto crank phone . The transmitter itself and assorted support equipment were fitted with a ""EMP"" kits to protect it from Electromagnetic Pulse radiation .
 I was expecting to record the Rob Robbins Show, and when it didn't air, there is a loud clunk when I switched off the tape . Rob Robbins show was supposed to be Rob's show, but it was canceled .
 I knew the cause was good, but I didn't understand a word of the Spanish broadcasts . I knew it was good. I knew there was a good cause, but it was not easy to understand .
 Cuban broadcasts were not aired at the same time each night each night . I was disappointed because I think the Cuban broadcasts weren't aired in Cuba . The Cuban broadcasts are not aired in the U.S. each night.
 Vietnam Radio Stories and KAAY News Promos from Phil North . From Jerry Sims ""Paris In The Spring"" Lyrics Tommy Armstrong Checks In Jerry Sims's elephant ride . Tommy Armstrong checks in Jerry Sims' elephant ride in Vietnam .