 Educators go through a rigorous application process, and every answer they submit is reviewed by our in-house editorial team . Educators submit every question they submit are reviewed by the team .
 Fidel Castro became the premier of a new Cuban government on January 1, 1959, and announced Cuba's conversion to Communism in 1960 . Fidel Castro was the prime minister of the new government in Cuba .
 As he organized the takeover of privately owned businesses and signed treaties of cooperation with the Soviet Union, many Cubans fled and came to the U.S. Many Cubans escaped and moved to the United States .
 The exiles, with the support of the United States, formed a guerrilla army with plans to invade and take control of Cuba . The invasion at the Bay of Pigs was a disaster .
 Castro asked the Soviet Union for nuclear missiles with which Cuba could protect itself from another U.S.-led invasion attempt . After this failed effort, Castro asked for nuclear missile missiles . Castro asked Soviet Union to provide them with missiles to protect Cuba .
 Soviet missiles were shipped to Cuba and installed in missile sites built with Soviet assistance . Soviet Premier Nikita Khurshchev agreed and agreed to send missiles to Cuba .
 Aerial reconnaissance photographs taken on October 14, 1962 gave visual proof of the construction of the sites and installation of missiles aimed at the United States . The images were taken by aerial reconnaissance photographs .
 On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy, in a nationally televised speech, informed the American public and the world of the situation . President Kennedy made a national televised speech to the nation on October 22 .
 U.S. listed treaties and agreements that were being violated by the Soviet-sponsored build-up of attack weaponry . The arms were being installed for offensive purposes, according to the author .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated"" to halt this offensive buildup, he says .
 With the help of Robert Kennedy, the Soviet Union agreed to remove all nuclear missiles from Cuba in return for United States agreement to remove missiles stationed in Turkey after the Cuban missiles were gone . The deal was a compromise suggested by Robert Kennedy .
 Khrushchev agreed to this arrangement, with an announcement on October 28 that the Cuban missile site would be disabled . The missile site was the first to be disabled by the Soviet Union .
 The exiles, with the support of the United States, formed a guerrilla army with plans to invade and take control of Cuba . The invasion at the Bay of Pigs was a disaster . Castro asked the Soviet Union for nuclear missiles with which Cuba could protect itself .
 Aerial reconnaissance photographs taken on October 14, 1962 gave visual proof of the construction of the sites and installation of missiles aimed at the United States . President Kennedy, in a nationally televised speech, informed the public and the world of the situation .
 To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . The Soviet Union agreed to remove all nuclear missiles from Cuba in return for U.S. agreement to remove missiles stationed in Turkey after the Cuban missiles were gone .