 North Korea has reprocessed the 8,000 spent fuel rods frozen under the 1994 Agreed Framework to produce enough plutonium for six nuclear weapons . North Korea reprocesses the material since January 2003, while U.S. attention has consumed by Iraq .
 It has restarted its nuclear research reactor at Yongbyon, which is now producing an additional two bombs worth of plutonium annually . It has resumed its research reactor, which has been producing plutonium for years .
 North Korea has sold and delivered missiles to Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Egypt, Syria and Yemen . Despite efforts to prevent North Korean exports, it is continuing to sell and deliver missiles .
 Americans think of Mr Bush as decisive and quick to act . His calculation about possible American responses would include judgments about U.S. capabilities to determine the origin of a terrorist nuclear weapon .
 Kim Jong Il's experience with this president has been quite the opposite . North Korea's president is expected to meet with the North Korean leader in Pyongyang .
 Bush administration reacted mildly, but the world moved on . Mr Kim crossed each of these red lines, the Bush administration says .
 North Korea could have doubts about U.S. capabilities to identify the source of a nuclear weapon brought to an American city by terrorists . Kim has stiffed Bush without consequences .
 The danger of a nuclear explosion in a U.S. city would increase drastically . The United States government should act now to convince Mr Kim that North Korea will be held accountable for every nuclear weapon of North Korean origin .
 Mr Bush can take a page from President John F Kennedy in the Cuban missile crisis . To do this, Mr Bush should take a similar page from the Kennedy .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union was installing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union installed the missiles in 1962 .
 Some worried that weapons might fall under the control of a young, hotheaded revolutionary leader named Fidel Castro . After careful consideration, Mr Kennedy issued an unambiguous warning to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev .
 The Bush administration should announce a new policy of nuclear accountability . The explosion of any nuclear weapon of North Korean origin on the U.S. or our allies will be met by a full retaliatory response .