 The United States' perspective of the crisis is discussed with regard to what is described previously from the perspective of supporters of the Castro regime and the now collapsed Soviet Union . Toward the end of the paper, the U.S. perspective is discussed . The paper concludes that the United States
 The Japanese vowed to never become a nuclear state after the devastation of World War II . After the devastation that the bombs left in Japan at the end of the war, the Japanese vowed never to become nuclear .
 The U.S. secretly stockpiled atomic bombs on Okinawa as early as 1954 . The United States occupied Japan, it was able to secretly stockpile atomic bombs there .
 In 1956 the United States begins stockpiling nuclear bombs and sending ballistic missiles to other Japanese islands . The U.S. stockpiles nuclear weapons and launches ballistic missiles in Japan . The United States began sending missiles to Japan in 1956 .
 Okinawa would be an obvious target in the event of a nuclear war between the Soviet Union and the United States . Okinawa is a key U.S. ally in the Cold War, according to experts .
 During this time, the Soviet Union is also stockpiling nuclear missiles . The Soviet Union also stockpiled nuclear missiles during this time .
 The U.S. is placing intermediate nuclear bombs in the Philippines, Greenland France and Turkey . The bombs are capable of reaching the Soviet Union's major Western cities . They are also being placed in Greenland France, Turkey and the Philippines .
 The year is 1959 and the U.S. government lies to the people and the United Nations, denying accusations that the United States is deploying nuclear weapons worldwide . The U.N. is accused of using nuclear weapons in a nuclear war .
 In 1959 the Soviet Union deploys the missile that they intend to send to Cuba . The missile was intended to be sent to the island of Cuba .
 During the same time frame it deploys the world's first intercontinental ballistic missile . During the time frame, the U.S. deploys a similar missile to launch a similar launch .
 The missile has sufficient range to launch in northern Russia and reach the northern U.S. It can be launched in Russia and the United States . The missile is capable of launching in Russia, Russia and North America .
 Fidel Castro led his soldiers into a Santiago de Cuba barracks on New Year's Day 1959 . The Bay of Pigs was the first Cuban invasion of Cuba in the 1950s .
 General Fulgencio Batista had murdered over 20,000 workers and peasants, leading his supporters to Miami, Florida . Cubans imprisoned and deported by Batista are welcomed back home . Batista's supporters are welcome back to Cuba .
 Construction on a new Cuban state begins aimed at providing better rights for peasants and workers . But it is not a declared socialist state, yet it is still not declared socialist .
 Two Congressmen attack the new Cuban government for its trying and executing of war criminals . With this, the U.S. and Cuba establish diplomatic relations; however two Congressmen attacked the new government .
 By January 21, 1959 Castro takes to the streets condemning U.S. policy and its financial support and political non-interference with General Batista, Cuba's now ex-dictator . Castro condemns United States policy .
 Castro accuses the U.S. of supporting a campaign against the people of Cuba, who want economic and political freedom . Castro says the United States is behind a campaign to undermine Cuba's freedom .
 Castro vows to cancel foreign monopolies brought into the country by Batista . Castro vowed to cancel the foreign monopoly brought in by the former dictator .
 Cuba demands that the United States leave its military base at Guantanomo . Within two days, Cuba demands the U.S. leave its base . Cuba has demanded that the base be removed .
 Castro reduces rates on rent, phone service and medicine, making life easier for Cubans . Castro reduces prices on rent and phone service to make life easier in Cuba .
 In April 1959, Castro visits the United States on behalf of the new Cuban Republic with the intent of meeting with President Dwight D Eisenhower . Castro visited the U.S. in April 1959 with the intention of meeting President Eisenhower .
 After the meeting Nixon reports that he believes that Castro is a Communist . Nixon says he believes Castro is the Communist .
 The U.S. Senate and the majority of the public believe that Castro is good for Cuba . The agreement offers technical cooperation for Castro's goal of reforming Cuba's agrarian sector .
 Castro quickly removes foreign landowners, turning over the land to Cubans who would otherwise not be able to own land . Castro quickly removed foreign landowners from the land .
 Other countries' landowners agree to settlements while U.S. landowners refuse any negotiations . American landowners refuse to negotiate with other countries .
 In July 1959, amidst diplomatic chaos the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency puts a contract on Castro's life . Castro was killed by the United States in 1959 .
 Castro is aware of this, he continues to attempt to come to a peaceful settlement with the U.S. He is aware that this is not the case . Castro continues to try to reach a peaceful agreement with the United States .
 In October of the same year, three U.S. covert raids attacked sugar mills in the Pinar del Rio and Camguey provinces . The raids were carried out by the United States .
 Britain withdraws offer after the U.S. discovers the agreement and warns Britain against it . At first, Britain agrees, but withdraws the offer once the United States discovers it .
 Cuba takes back 70,000 acres of land that U.S. sugar companies own . The following year, Cuba takes control of the land . Cuba says it will return the land to Cuba in 2015 .
 The United States responds with military bombers camouflaged as counterrevolutionary Cuban aircraft . The U.S. responds to the U.K. response with military bomber camouflage .
 The bombers drop napalm bombs on oil refineries and sugar cane fields, followed by bombings on Havana . The bombs were dropped on Havana, Cuba, and the Philippines .
 Castro and Soviet Deputy Prime Minster Mikoyan sign trade and loan agreements . Cuban authorities continue to seek peaceful solutions with the U.S.
 In May of 1960, Cuba and the Soviet Union re-establish diplomatic relations . The relationship severed after General Batista's coup in 1952 . Instead the United States plans to invade and overthrow the Cuban government .
 Congress has terminated selling America's oil to Cuba as well as eliminating Cuba's sugar quota . In addition, the United States Congress also terminated selling U.S. oil as well .
 Cuba nationalizes Texaco, Esso and Shell refineries and all U.S. business and commercial property . Cuba also nationalizes the Texaco and Esso refineries .
 The Soviet Union agrees to buy the sugar that the U.S. has cut off . The United States has cut Cuba's sugar supply . The USSR agrees to defend Cuba, buys the sugar .
 Cuban government has converted army barracks into more than 10,000 new schools . A program of urban reform guarantees Cuban workers home ownership . The new Cuban government is converting army barracks to schools .
 Cubans have universally armed all workers, including women, to defend the country . In addition, all workers are armed to defend their country . Cubans also have universal armed forces to defend themselves .
 Rumors of an impending U.S. attack on Cuba are rampant and denials by the Eisenhower administration are rampant . The Eisenhower administration is also rampant with denials of an attack on the island .
 The assassination attempts against Castro continue as President John F Kennedy takes office . Castro was assassinated as President Kennedy took office .
 Should Cuba break off ties with the Soviet Union, the U.S. promises to aid Cuba's ""free" government . The United States promised to aid the Cuban government if it broke off ties to the USSR .
 The invasion of Cuba began in April 1961 in violation of a Charter issued by the United Nations, Charter of the Organization of the American States and Rio Treaty . The invasion began in direct violation of the charter .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk gave an emphatic ""no"" to the question of whether the United States was or had plans to attack Cuba .
 On April 18, Kennedy receives a letter from the Soviet Khrushchev advising that it was not too late to avoid the irreparable . The Soviet Union's position was that it would render Cubans all the help necessary . Kennedy receives the letter .
 Following the Bay-of-Pigs incident and Cuba's victory, Castro tried to make peace with America again . Castro again attempted peace with the U.S. but failed to find a way out .
 Relations between the United States and the Soviet Union are strained over American and Soviet-occupied city of Berlin . In the meantime, relations between the U.S. and the . Soviet-American relations are strained .
 The missiles that the U.S. has deployed to Turkey become operational . The missiles are now operational in Turkey .
 To keep the U.S. at bay, he considers deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba . He considers deploying nukes to keep the United States at bay .
 Khrushchev discusses the idea of sending missiles to Cuba and is met with opposition . Yet he sends a mission to Cuba to ascertain whether Castro would agree to send missiles there .
 Throughout May 1962, the United States military began an exercise designed to intimidate and practice for a full military invasion of Cuba . The exercise was designed to prepare for an invasion of the island nation .
 Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders,"" 20 November 1975. Alleged assassination plots involving foreign leaders, "Alleged Assassinations Plots," "20 November 1975"