 The Détente Decade of To the dismay of Henry Kissinger, By John T Correll his masterpiece. Henry Kissinger .
 Khrushchev’s power play failed when his missiles in Cuba were discovered before they were operational and ready to use . The missiles were discovered by the Soviets in Cuba before they could be operational .
 Although the Soviet Union might inflict massive casualties, it could be wiped off the map in a nuclear exchange . The Soviet Union could wipe the map of the world with a nuclear strike .
 The superpowers came away from the experience heading in opposite strategic directions . Superpowers came from the superpowers heading towards each other in opposite directions .
 The Soviets, determined not to be humiliated again, pushed their nuclear buildup with unrelenting vigor . The Soviets were determined to avoid a repeat of their humiliating defeat .
 The United States stopped building its forces and cut back on nuclear programs . The U.S. stopped building forces and ended its nuclear program .
 U.S. policymakers had developed doubts about strategic superiority . United States had doubts about the strategic superiority of the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy understood the need for military strength, but also saw it as provocative . President John F Kennedy saw the need to strengthen the U.S. Armed Forces .
 Kennedy and his advisors looked more closely at events that had led to World War I . They believed that a sequence of mutually threatening mobilization plans and actions had gotten out of hand and escalated into war in 1914 .
 The CIA’s National Intelligence Estimate for 1964, one of several later proved to be faulty, reported no evidence of a Soviet force buildup . The estimate was one of a series of errors by the CIA .
 The emergence of ICBM technology had simplified the fielding of long range nuclear strike capability, so the loss of United States nuclear superiority was probably inevitable . The United States abandoned the effort and decided unilaterally to accept parity in strategic weapons .
 The Minuteman missile program was cut by half, the B-70 bomber was canceled, and a unilateral limit was imposed on the ICBM fleet . The Minutseman program was . cut by . half .
 In 1965, McNamara promulgated Mutual Assured Destruction, or MAD, as the planning base . The strategic force requirement was set at no more than what was necessary to inflict reciprocal destruction on the enemy .
 In the next four years the Soviets would draw even with the U.S. on numbers of strategic missiles . The Soviets would then pull significantly ahead .
 Not everyone saw the benefits of any attempt to regain superiority as destabilizing . Defense cutters in Congress opnot everyone saw benefits of the U.S. military .
 Vietnam War was making money in the defense budget scarce for anything else . Besides, the ongoing Vietnam War made money scarce for other things .
 Richard M Nixon promised to restore “clear-cut American military superiority” over the Soviet Union . But that was wishful thinking . In October 1968, during the presidential election camAP photo by Chick Harrity paign .
 It fell to Nixon, the consummate Cold Warrior, to confirm the new balance of power in the doctrine of détente . Nixon, a Cold War leader, confirmed the new role of the U.S. in the Cold War .
 Once he had stated sufficiency as a principle, Nixon never again raised the goal of strategic superiority . Nixon said sufficiency was a principle of principle, but he never again said it .
 Nixon had depth in foreign affairs in his own right, but the high priest of détente was Henry A Kissinger . Kissinger overshadowed both Secretary of Defense Melvin R Laird and Secretary of State William P Rogers .
 Congress was not willing to keep pace with the Soviet nuclear buildup, much less seek to recover dominance . Congress did not want to keep up with the Soviets' nuclear buildup .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks became “the flagship of détente,” said Raymond L Garthoff, senior arms control specialist at the Brookings Institution .
 The SALT I treaty in 1972 was concluded on Nixon’s watch . Preliminary discussions had begun in the Johnson Administration .
 SALT froze strategic nuclear forces at existing numbers --deployed or under construction -- for five years . SALT freeze strategic nuclear force numbers at existing number of units .
 Since the Russians were ahead in ICBMs, they got a three-to-two advantage in launchers . The Russians also had a three to two advantage in missiles and launchers .
 Kissinger defends the agreement in a briefing to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . Kissinger defended the agreement during a Senate hearing on Thursday . Kissinger says the agreement is a good example of American diplomacy .
 The United States was not going to increase its ICBM force with or without SALT I . The treaty might have some restraining effect on the Russians, who continued to add to their missile force .
 The U.S. stopped building during the Johnson Administration; we had no new missile program in production and the Vietnam-era Congress would not have approved . In this 1973 political cartoon, the United States and Russia are proud one .
 Parents to détente, holding an olive branch, holding olive branch . For us the sacrifice was theoretical. For us, for us, it was theoretical . Parents to parents to démente .
 Henry M “Scoop” Jackson was Nixon’s first choice for secretary of defense, 1970 . The Soviet Union surpassed the United States in the took exception .
 Kissinger did not regard the loss of superiority as all Jackson . Schlesinger thought that Kissinger was giving that important . Like Kissinger did, he thought that it was important .
 Brezhnev had his own reasons Soviet Union and Third World audiences as well as wanting to tone down confrontation .
 Détente had begun as the best available adjustment to a rift with China, which triggered a redeployment of deteriorating situation, but had evolved into the centerpiece forces to the Soviet-Chinese border .
 Détente made this of foreign policy and Kissinger would defend it aggresreallocation easier by reducing the pressure elsewhere against all challengers . Kissinger would use this to defend his policy by reducing pressure elsewhere .
 The Foibles of Ford included a nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union and Nixon’s presidency was cut short by Watergate, and Geracceptance of the Soviet presence in central Europe . Ford, who succeeded him in August 1974, did not introduce “linkage”
 He insisted that all aspects of the US-Soviet relationship Kissinger and deferred to him in affairs of state . He was dependent on Kissinger .
 Kissinger steered Ford into the Helsinki Accords, tling the Vietnam War something of a condition for advance a 35-nation agreement that recognized the “inviolability of frontiers” in Europe . Kissinger said, “We made progress in set .
 Kissinger argued that drafters of the NIEs were trying to minimize the Soviet greater restraint on the power possessing the largest land strategic buildup because of its implications for détente” army” than it did on the democracies . Kissinger: This “posed a much clination
 The Warsaw Pact and that Soviets leaders were, beyond a reasonable doubt, hailed it as a great triumph . reaching for strategic superiority. reaching for the strategic superiority reaching for .
 “All hell broke loose,” Kissinger said. National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski took a ‘hell broke loose’ Kissinger said .
 President Carter himself was also chief spokesman of U.S. foreign policy sided with the inclined toward détente . President Carter was also a spokesman of American foreign policy .
 Kissinger tried stretched out the MX ICBM, and slowed down the Trident to blame it on a scheduling problem . Kissinger said the meeting submarine-launched ballistic missile would have been “disadvantageous” at that particular point . Kissinger tried stretching out the ICBM .
 Schlesinger’s clash with Kissinger, and by extension and expressed hope that the principles of détente might be with Ford, worsened and in November 1975, Ford fired . Ford fired resumed at some later date, but resumed at a later date .
 Donald H Rumsfeld recast ‘Essential Equivalence’ as “Rough Equivalentence,” which made no difference except to put his name on the terminology . Donald H. Rumfeld’s name was added to “Essential
 I don’t believe that the Romanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union . I don't believe that Romanians are dominated by Soviet Union. I believe that they are not dominated by it, he says .
 I don't believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union. I don’t think that the Polish Republic is dominated by Soviet Russia, he says . The Poles are proud of their achievements, he adds .
 Soviets concentrated on increasing the accuracy and throw weight of their missiles . SALT had imposed a limit on launchers, so the Soviets focused on increasing accuracy and weight .
 In 1973 alone, they tested four new ICBMs, three of them with MIRVs, or multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicles .
 The CIA’s National Intelligence Estimates, perceived as reflecting the bias of the liberal and academic communities, downplayed the challenge . The CIA has been criticized for being biased in intelligence estimates .
 The 1975 NIE was especially President Jimmy Carter, followed by Secretary of Defense . The 1975 "NIE" was especially egregious .
 It said that the best of the Soviet missiles were Harold Brown, Harold Brown . Harold Brown was not accurate enough to threaten the United States Minuteman silos .
 Carter was inclined toward détente, but fell out with the Soviets over Afghanistan . Carter was in favor of peace, but was opposed to a denteente pact with Russia .
 In 1976, Director of Central Intelligence George H W. W. Brown said that no matter what the U.S. did, the Soviet buildup continued . Brown: "No matter. what the United States did"
 Reagan could hardly be accused of categorically opposing arms reductions . Reagan was president of the United States during the Cold War .
 At the Reykjavik summit in 1986, he proposed mutual elimination of all ICBMs and SLBMs . At the 1986 summit in Iceland, he said: "At the end of the 1980s, we need to find a way to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons in
 The deal fell through only because Mikhail Gorbachev insisted that the ‘Star Wars’ Strategic Defense Initiative be included in the deal . Reagan refused to include the deal because he was opposed to the idea . Reagan's deal with the Soviet Union fell through after Gorbache insisted that
 Ten years after Reagan pronounced the end of détente, the Soviet Union was gone . The Soviet Union disestablished in the dramatic close of the Cold War .
 Reagan critics would say his actions had nothing to do with the USSR's decline . Critics would say that the USSR was already in deep decline . Reagan critics say that Reagan's actions were not to blame for the decline .
 In 1982, Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. Jr. returned from a trip to the Soviet Union with the conclusion that “those who think the President Ronald Reagan addresses the nation in a televised Soviet Union is on the verge of economic and social collapse event in support of his proposed defense
 D.C. revoked détente, saying the Soviets had treated it as a oneway street . Reagan are kidding themselves, Reagan said .
 Critics said Reagan had been more lucky than prescient, but whatever it was, it seemed to work . The critics said he was more lucky . Reagan had to be more lucky or prescient .
 There was a “dangerous asymcollapse, confirmed Reagan’s perspective to a considerable metry,” he said . There was also a ‘dangerous collapse’ in the 1980s, he added .
 In some years, Soviet military expenditures reached 25 to 30 percent of our gross national product, Gorbachev said . Reagan said if the U.S. made a serious effort at is, five or six times greater than analogous military spending rearmament, the Soviets could not afford to
 Kissinger said Reagan At his first press conference as President in January “had only a few basic ideas” and that his conception of the 1981, Reagan revoked détente, Kissinger said . Kissinger said in 1994, In Diplomacy, published in 1994 , Kissinger said that Reagan
 John T Correll was editor in chief of Air Force Magazine for 18 years . Reagan’s critics were outraged, declaring that Reagan years were the Reagan years . Correll is now a contributor on CNN iReport .
 "A Halt on the Elbe" appeared in the July issue of this year's issue of the European Union .