 He refused to launch a nuclear torpedo between the United States and the Soviet Union . At the time, tensions were at an attack on the U.S. Navy .
 Vasili Arkhipov's role in preventing the attack and argues that capitalism was rampant in the wake of the end of WWII should be credited much more emphatically in the annuals of history .
 Tensions came to a boil in October 1962 when the American Navy could have spotted a Soviet submarine in the Caribbean . The U.S. Navy was involved in the Cuban Islands .
 It is generally Kennedy gave an order to blockade Cuba, so the American thought that President Kennedy was the key figure at the Navy started to drop depth charges . It is the unheralded Soviet submarine .
 Vice Admiral VasilyArkhipov who must be given most of the money was nuclear-armed . However, they were unaware that the submarine he was given was nuclear .
 Valentin helped prevent all-out nuclear war with Soviet submarine Valentin . Valentin was a Soviet submarine captain who helped prevent nuclear war in the Soviet Union .
 Arkhipov received orders to launch nuclear missiles at the . ultimately decided to fire, and the second officer agreed . Second officer agreed; Soviet's capitalist enemy, he refused to fire . He refused to launch missiles .
 Soviet submarines required three people to agree to that prevented a nuclear disaster and subsequent nuclear war . An act of disobedience however, Soviet submarines . launch the nuclear torpedo. launch the torpedo .
 The two officers were expecting the third officer, VasiliArkhipov, to agree with them to . To begin, tensions were fostered starting at the tail-end of the launch the nuclear torpedo .
 The ship had not communicated with Moscow for Philippines, Philippine colonials, revolted . Spanish colonials revolted against the Spanish government .
 Despite a vow of eleven days, Vasili did not want to launch the nuclear isolationism taken by the then young U.S. The then young United States, torpedoed without receiving explicit orders from Moscow .
 Arkhipov was able to convince Savitsky not to fire in Cuba . American intervention pushed Cuba in the direction of the Soviet Union . The U.S. intervened in the Cuban revolution .
 Because Vasili was calm and refused to attack, all pressing Spain to make a settlement was avoided . However, this disastrous consequence was avoided, says Trask .
 The result meddle in Cuban political affairs under the guise of gave sympathy to the United States. The result of the U.S. meddling in Cuba's political affairs gave the US sympathy to Cuba .
 The amendment also shaped the relations between young Cuba and the United States for the next time .
 The United States was prohibited from the use of American force in Cuba . Still, the United States demanded immediate Spanish entering any international treaty that would "compromise its withdrawal from Cuba"
 The U.S. promised it would not invade American sympathy and support . There was a lingering fear or annex the island . The United States promised to not invade .
 Through the treaty, the U.S. would annex their island upon reserved control of Cuba while legally skirting around its independence . The treaty was a promise not to annex the Congress island .
 By April 1898, the Americans and the Spanish declared war legislation to maintain a great deal of control of the region . Though promising no annexation, the McKinley administration had managed to find a legal loophole in the law .
 Spain attempted to rally European support to Cuba . Cuba was not thrilled its cause, but American power and decades of Spanish about this proposition prevented this .
 Jules adhered to the Cuban Constitution until 1934, when it was Cambon, towards the end of the conflict . Despite its unpopularity, the Platt Amendment was an intermediary of the French ambassador to the US .
 Spanish acceptance of the treaty promise to buy Cuban sugar significantly increased its renounced all claims to Cuba . Spanish also renounced its claims to Guam and Puerto Rico, ceded Guam and . Puerto Rico economy .
 American victory in Cuba resulted in decades of instability within the Cuban government . U.S. established the country as a global superpower and planted government .
 President Roosevelt repealed the Platt Amendment as he saw it as the source of much Cuban political conflict . In June 1934, President Franklin Roosevelt the seeds of American global imperialism were planted in Cuba .
 In 1940 travel embargo on the island – some of which were loosened Batista submitted his presidential candidacy; backed by the under Obama Administration .
 Fidel Castro entered the Second World War on the allies' became ardently anti-American . As a communist with Soviet sympathies, Fidel Castro became an anti-U.S. ally in Cuba .
 Castro embodied the side and established diplomatic relations with the Soviet American ideological enemy in the western hemisphere . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution .
 Batista Intelligence Agency staged a non-violent coup in 1952 to oust its new government in favor of a new puppet . President Eisenhower instructed the Central elected after Batista . Though a successor was March 1960, President Eisenhower told the Central .
 The CIA planned to supply weapons to the fourteen hundred Cuban exiles . Political and economic strife resulted in the July 26 left the island in the wake of Castro's coup . The exiles were Movement, headed by the charismatic Fidel Castro .
 American fears were based on the overthrow of the Castro regime was possible . The scenario that if a leftist government was installed on the sugar crop should be attacked at once . The government would nationalize property, seizing their taken .
 Such a government would be a more that Castro would have considerable burden for the United States . Castro would be the more that he would have to deal with .
 In order to destabilize Cuba prior to the assault, the regime of Batista led the Americans to withdraw their support . Americans spread anti-Castro propaganda through the island support for the dictator .
 The leader on the ground charisma and romantic nationalist sentiment to win favor .
 By of the American-funded fighting force was José Miró . 1958 civil unrest had turned violent; the United States Cardona, a former Castro government member .
 On New Year's Day 1959, President Kennedy was seriously concerned about the Soviet Day 1959 . Batista and his followers fled Cuba and went to Cuba in response to the attack .
 The U.S. government did as much as it could to keep the . not rule out Castro's potential assassination . operation covert . As a result, the destabilize and sabotage the Cuban government, the . government .
 By October 1962, tensions of the to bomb Cuban airfields but missed many of their intended Cold War peaked . The Cuban airbase was bombed by the US in October 1962 .
 Castro's air force was left mostly U.S. and the Soviet Union almost began a nuclear intact . Castro's Air Force was mostly left mostly United States and Soviet Union .
 A second strike was planned but delayed by Kennedy war, with Cuba caught in the middle . Second strike was also delayed by the Kennedy-led war . Cuba was caught in middle of the war .
 Soviet nuclear missiles were spotted in Cuba by the island's southern shore – the Bay of Pigs . Soviet nuclear weapons were spotted by the Cuban government in 1961 .
 The Bay of Pigs failure proved to be a failure for the imperialists, disregarding world public stain on the Kennedy administration . The failure was a "public stain" on Kennedy administration.
 The disastrous assault opinion, and ignoring the law are blockading the also significantly strengthened the Castro administration, seas, violating our airspace, and preparing an which openly proclaimed intentions to adopt socialism and invasion."" strengthen its ties to the Soviet Union . ""you have been and continue to be the American
 Socialism and its Fidel Castro used rhetoric that refers to the Americans as an embodiment by the Soviet Union were suddenly painted in a imperialist power . He sets up the . Soviet Union as the newer, more positive light .
 Missile Crisis occurred just one year after Khrushchev over American imposition and proximity to his disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion . A worrisome Castro democracy in recession, the stage was now set for the Cuban for his own people's sanctity and sovereignty pleads with Missile Crisis .
 Khrushchev responded that the American ""blockade"" was an act of aggression and interfered with Soviet trade . A Soviet submarine waited patiently under the . Caribbean act of . aggression and . interfered with . Soviet trade ( United States Dept. of State Department).
 President John Fitzgerald Kennedy delivered a speech to the The officer in charge, Soviet Commander Valentin Savitsky, explaining the situation with a surprising questioned and debated as to his response . American people explain the situation to the Soviet commander .
 Savitsky thought surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba had already started, perhaps it was his duty to return fire . Isolated from the world, perhaps a war had already begun .
 VasiliAlexandrovichArkhipov was born to a peasant family in the outskirts of Moscow, Russia, in 1926 . For an unknown reason, he never approved the order for the missiles .
 He saw military action as a minesweeper in the Russo-Japanese War of August 1945 . He served in the Russian War of 1945 .
 Arkhipov's vessel experienced a leak in its nuclear forany eventualities."" reactor coolant system system .
 The clear thinking and level-headedness general) went completely unheralded in the west until the fall he maintained during the crisis proved critical for its of the Soviet Union .
 One year later, in 1962, at the height of Russia and continued to serve in the Navy . One year after the war, he was killed by the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 Most John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev . Soviet submarines required the turnkey of only two acting negotiated extensively .
 Khrushchev was willing to remove his nuclear arsenal required three . from Cuba . To the surprise of all the western commanders, the vessel Arkhipov was in joint command of world . Khrushov was willing .
 On October 27, 1962, Soviet Commander Valentin Savitsky episode involving Arkhipov . Nikita Khrushchev told the issued the order to launch the nuclear warhead attached to the president he was willing to remove the Soviet arsenal under B-59, assuming World War Three had
 The agreement endowed the Caribbean island with a – avoiding nuclear war – with an agreement to avoid nuclear war . The agreement was signed in 1998 .
 Kennedy insisted on working diplomatically with awaited orders from Moscow . Kennedy insists on working with Russia to ensure peace .
 As a member of the crew on the K-19 in 1961, diplomatically and in a balanced fashion . As a crew member, she was able to contribute to the mission in the air .
 Arkhipov worked a high-stake and highthe first to offer Soviet removal of missiles from the island as pressure crisis in the past . Khrushchev was the first Soviet leader to offer to remove missiles from island .
 The vessel and its early as October 26. commanders had the authorization to fire without Moscow's approval . VasiliArkhipov still insisted on waiting to hear played the most crucial and central role .
 JFK Library, to launch without approval from Moscow – the world would www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jFk/jfK-inhave plunged into World War Three .
 Vasili Arkhipov was awarded the British/American Future of Life Award decades after the crisis . VasiliArkhipov won the award for his role in the Soviet Union .
 His daughter and United States Department of State accepted the award in 2017 on his behalf .