 Kennedy’s choice of a blockade hinged on the narrative ‘suppression” of its most dangerous possible consequence, namely the perils of a later attack against operational missiles . This is something accomplished through omission, self-censorship, ambiguation, uptake failure, and
 The article makes the very first connection between the dynamics of conversation and decision making in times of crisis . It offers a novel processual account of one of the most fateful decisions in human history .
 President Obama assembled his top advisers in the Cabinet Room . This group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The ExComm is now known as "ExComm"
 After listening to an intelligence report about the incriminating U-2 photographs, the group launched into the first of many discussions about the extent of the missile deployment, Soviet intentions, and possible U.S. responses . The group then began to discuss possible United States responses .
 Those ranged from immediate military strike to doing nothing whatsoever, with various forms of diplomacy, some with the threat of military action attached, in between . Diplomatic options include immediate military strikes, immediate diplomacy and other diplomacy .
 The president announced a naval blockade of Cuba on October 22 . He then made a succession of equally consequential decisions regarding enforcement of that blockade and negotiations involving NATO missiles .
 The last meeting of the ExComm was on October 28, when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in return for a public pledge from the U.S. not to invade Cuba . Kennedy would remove missiles from Turkey sometime soon thereafter, the last meeting took place .
 Janis Janis famously argued that the Bay of Pigs deliberations were spared from the ‘groupthink’ that marred the latter . Janis argued that those deliberations with those prior to the invasion of the U.S. were spared .
 Allison’s Essence of Decision hypothesizes that the positions taken by ExComm members can be traced to their bureaucratic positions in the State Department and the Department of Defense . Another well-known account is in Allison's Essentials of Decision, which hypothesizes the positions of ExComm can
 Both Janis and Allison worked from a position of evidentiary disadvantage, however, for neither knew what was actually said in the ExComm meetings .
 ExComm came to consider the blockade palatable, thereby giving Kennedy a way forward . This points to the central puzzle, of how the ExComm decided to consider a blockade .
 Past research has almost entirely ignored the conversational medium through which these deliberations were conducted, and thus what the main interactional obstacles were and how the ExComm found its way around them . I begin with a more extended consideration of past research on ExComms deliberations .
 Next I review research on how stories about the past are collaboratively constructed . I anticipate some of the distinctive characteristic of stories about events that have not yet come to pass .
 These practices were in turn effective due to the episodic and even ‘amnesic’ quality of future stories, which could end differently on different occasions without anyone seeming to be concerned about this fact .
 In the discussion section, I offer a processual interpretation of the findings that replaces the question of why the group favored the blockade with the question how a favorable view of that option emerged through time .
 I consider implications of the findings for our understanding of decision making . Then consider the implications of this decision making. Then consider how important it is to consider the findings .
 Contrary to the widely held view that decisions culminate from a gradual process of information processing and judgment, my analysis points to a process that is much more fragmented, iterative, and contingent .
 The ExComm consisted of select members of Kennedy’s cabinet, their immediate subordinates, the director of central intelligence, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, and a number of other top-level advisers .
 The ExComm discussed a wide range of topics, including the U.S. response to the Soviet provocation, the interpretation of the photographs . Plans for additional surveillance, the number of sorties needed for each variation of the air strike .
 Given that, one might wonder whether the ExComm’s deliberations actually shaped Kennedy's perceptions and ultimate decisions . Kennedy's ultimate decisions may have shaped his perceptions and perceptions, he says .
 It seems unlikely that Kennedy would have spent more than 20 hours with his advisers during the most significant crisis of the Cold War . Kennedy was determined in the opening days of the crisis that the ExComm’s work remained secret .
 At each stage Kennedy seemed unsure of what to do, and at 2 there was some disagreement about this . Kennedy seemed to be unsure what he would do .
 If votes occurred, they were infrequent, informal, and, of course, not binding upon the president . Suffice it to say, if votes were held, they would be infrequent and informal .
 The same can't be said of many theoretical treatments, such as those written from a gametheoretic or more psychological perspective .
 It is the bureaucratic politics model that speaks to what was actually said in the ExComm meetings . It is not the only way to explain what happened in the meetings, it is the way bureaucratic politics is played .
 Essence of Decision was impossible to test this theory against the statements of participants for lack of reliable and detailed information about what was actually said during the meetings .
 Based on memoirs, Janis argues that the ExComm escaped the dangers of groupthink . Janis says critical thinking yields to pressure for consensus .
 This, he says, was the result of efforts to transform the decision-making process following the Bay of Pigs invasion . Janis takes as a prime instance of that particular pa365 American Journal of Sociology thology .
 The features of the ExComm’s deliberations that allegedly contributed in this direction included an openness to dissenting opinions, the systematic examination of the consequences of each course of action, and the continuous gathering and processing of new information, all conducted in a conversational environment .
 Though the president nominally chaired these meetings, discussion was egalitarian and informal . Discussion was fairly egalitarian, informal and informal.
 Janis relied on the accounts of people with an interest in putting the best possible spin on events . That said, Janis relies on people who want to take most credit possible for a good outcome .
 Scholars began suspecting the reliability of the memoirs once some of the transcripts became available . Welch says the ExComm only gave sustained consideration to two options, a blockade and an air strike . Welch: The ExComm shortchanged both purely diplomatic options and the possibility of doing nothing .
 Even the option Kennedy ultimately selected hardly received the sort of systematic and cumulative exploration that Janis supposed . Further, I will show that even the option that Kennedy ultimately chose hardly received an exploration of the issue .
 Anderson made a significant advance in his analysis of detailed notes taken by National Security Council staff members at four ExComm meetings, notes that were unavailable to Janis Janis .
 Anderson argues that the ExComm’s actual decisionmaking process involved a succession of yes-no choices on binary options . Each choice shaped the options subsequently encountered, Anderson argues . Anderson: The ExComm's actual decision-making process was based on calculations about expected outcomes .
 The ExComm spent a great deal of time deliberating between competing (and not merely binary) options, including distinct military options . In particular, the ExComm deliberated between air strikes against missiles, against missiles and airfields, or invading .
 There is no reason to assume that stories about talk can stand in for the real thing . More generally, like Janis, he is trying to reconstruct what happened from what happened .
 The ExComm quickly realized that they had no good options for responding to the Soviets . As already indicated, the ExComm had no plans to respond to the Soviet threat .
 To do nothing, it was thought, would embolden Khrushchev to make aggressive moves elsewhere, including West Berlin, to do nothing . The U.S. was thought to be at risk of weakening the alliance that depended on resolute leadership .
 To stage an immediate air strike on the missiles (at first, the preferred plan) risked escalation and would be seen as a betrayal of America’s allies, leaving them unprepared for any Soviet response to any action about which they had not been consulted . The U.S. was
 To impose a blockade would not stop the Russians from developing the missiles already on the island, and indeed would give them the time needed to complete at least some of the missiles before an air strike that would probably be needed to remove them . This would greatly increase the risk to the United States
 In hindsight we are apt to say that Kennedy’s decision to implement a blockade, with the threat of additional military action if the missiles were not removed, was the right one, given the outcome, at the time this was far from evidently the case .
 It was achieved through the conversational telling, and retelling, of stories . And it was achieved by the retelling of stories.
 According to Dewey, genuine reflection begins with a problem or crisis that demands a choice between alternative courses of action . Dewey: "Realistic reflection starts with some interruption of taken for granted routine"
 When people deliberate aloud, together, this “dramatic rehearsal” takes the form of talk about possible futures . People deliberate aloud and talk about how events are likely to unfold within different scenarios .
 We know little about how people tell stories about the future but a great deal about how they construct stories about past . We also know how people construct stories of the past, and how they do so .
 A story’s coherence rests upon the plausibility of each of its clauses given all the clauses that preceded it . Second, a story's coherence depends on the coherence of each clause given the previous ones . A story is a story that tells the truth about the truth
 If I start to tell a story about a trip to a foreign country and then narrate a visit to a location close to home, my interlocutors will question either their understanding of my story or my intentions, honesty, or interactional competence . If, for instance, I
 Third, stories can be told by single individuals or, to varying degrees, collaboratively . Stories can be shared by individual individuals or by collaborative efforts . Stories are told by individuals or collaboratively, as well as single individuals .
 We will see that the basic chronological template of stories, and many of the associated narrative techniques,6 apply to stories about the future as well, with important differences . We will also see how the same template applies to stories of the future .
 Past-tense counterfactuals (if I had only asked her to marry me) have only an ancillary role in most stories about the past as the unrealized shadows of what did happen . Second, conditional if . . . then assertions are the stuff of stories about
 Future scenarios can spin off in entirely different directions, culminating in a world without nuclear weapons or Armageddon, an influenza pandemic or a lifelong flu vaccine, a happy marriage or a broken household . Future scenarios, in contrast, can also spin off into different directions .
 A future narrative is judged primarily according to its coherence in the sense defined above, in terms of the believability of each action or event in light of those that preceded it . That is, while stories about the past are constrained to converge at points where the historical record is thought
 The trajectory of a future narrative is especially sensitive to the events that get included in it along the way, making such stories highly path dependent, or contingent . Consequently, the trajectory of such a story is particularly sensitive to events that happen along the path .
 Three distinguishing characteristics of future stories are foreseeably consequential . These three distinguishing characteristics will be foreseeably significant .
 Path dependency heightens a story’s sensitivity to the vicissitudes of group conversation, such as the ever-present threat of interruption and overlapping talk, since either can downgrade a narrative clause to the point of inconsequentiality . Path dependency also heightens the sensitivity of a
 One important result of all of this is the heightened contestability of stories about the future, says CNN.com .
 Contestation can also occur within the chronological format, particularly when one narrates an undesirable consequence of some story in progress, or actively suppresses someone else's attempt at narrating such a consequence .
 The most important consequence was the possibility of a subsequent United States air strike against operational missiles that might then be fired against United States cities . When it came to the blockade scenario, the most important . was the . important consequence .
 JFK had secretly taped many White House meetings and telephone conversations . Then, in 1973, it was revealed that JFK's brother had taped many meetings and phone calls .
 Fursenko and Naftali draw upon them for insight into the American side of the crisis in their impressive One Hell of a Gamble .
 Allison and Zelikow found little in the transcripts that led them to significantly reconsider Allison’s original analysis . They were also important for the revised Essence of Decision (Allison and Zelkow 1999), though .
 Kennedy decided on the blockade on October 20, based on discussions from the 16th to the 20th; thus, these meetings are the focus of this article . The blockade began on October 16 .
 Not all of the ExComm meetings during this stage of the crisis were recorded, however, mainly because of efforts to keep meetings secret .
 Two meetings on the first day of the crisis were recorded, as was the 11:00m. meeting on the morning of the 18th . The meetings were held in the mansion, rather than the Cabinet Room where the microphones were hidden, to escape notice by the press .
 That several meetings were not tape-recorded is not a problem but not as much of one as it might seem . That is a problem, but it might not be as much as a problem as it may seem .
 After the meeting on the evening of the 18th, Kennedy dictated some notes, one being that the day had ended with consensus in favor of a blockade . Later both McNamara and Sorensen claimed that Kennedy had indicated in that meeting that this was his tentative decision .
 We have detailed minutes from the meetings of the 19th and 20th, and less thorough notes from the meeting of the 17th . We also have notes of the meetings from the 17 and 19th meetings .
 The main sticking point of the blockade plan was that it would exponentially increase the risks incurred by a subsequent military strike . The discursive neutralization of this concern was the sine qua non for Kennedy’s ultimate decision .
 The most important of these others was the long meeting of the 20th, when many of the debates were reopened and at the end of which Kennedy stood poised to make his final decision . Kennedy's final decision was made in the meeting of 20th .
 All episodes of explicit talk about the main options and their consequences were transcribed using the modified conversation-analytic conventions detailed in appendix B,10 summing to about 45 minutes .
 There are, consequently, more gaps in these transcripts than in those usually used by conversation analysts . There are more gaps between the transcripts and the ones used by analysts .
 I generally relied upon the published transcripts for speaker identities, there were times that I disagreed with those identifications . Also, while I generally used to rely on the transcripts, I also disagreed with the transcripts .
 The premise of conversation analysis is that such details are both revealing with respect to underlying conversational rules and practices, such as of 10 . These should be studied, including by those familiar with conversation-analytic orthography .
 In this article, such details will shed crucial light on, among other things, the phenomenon of suppression, whereby something that could have been said was not, or was not said successfully, say due to interruption or overlap .
 In several important respects, however, I deviate from conversationanalytic orthodoxy . In several respects, this is not the same as many others, but it's important to note .
 Second, I alternate between detailed analyses of the sort that a conversation analyst would undertake and a “bird’s-eye” perspective on the overall organization of statements for and against an air strike .
 Third, the reason that I undertake such an analysis is because of my interest in the way in which the mechanics of conversation were implicated in the development of understanding that culminated in a decision, he says .
 Talk was used to construct a “mental model” of the alternatives and their consequences, on the basis of which a difficult decision could be justifiably made .
 ExComm turned an unacceptable option, the blockade, into an acceptable one . Now I turn to the historical question of how, by means of such stories, the ExComm . The ExComm. turned an acceptable option into an unacceptable one .
 Central to the palatability of this option was the assumption that an air strike against the missiles would still be possible in the event that Khrushchev held his ground . The air strike was still a possibility in the case of an attack on missiles .
 Kennedy wanted the missiles out more than anything . Neither he nor anyone else thought that the blockade by itself would do the job, and hopes for a negotiated settlement were dim until much later .
 Secretary McNamara repeatedly stated that an air strike against operational missiles would have been unacceptably reckless, putting the United States at direct risk of a nuclear attack .
 There was no occasion on which anyone expressly denied that it could happen, or downplayed its likelihood or consequences, or made any reference to such a rebuttal being made, effectively or not, behind the scenes, in memos or in meetings not recorded .
 Even a small chance of this occurring should have made an attack on Cuba imprudent, since such a launch could have resulted in the deaths of millions of Americans . And from the perspective of a strict utilitarian calculus, even a small .
 There was no occasion on which the identification of this threat was immediately followed by further planning for a warning . More typical was a change of topic, a shift to consideration of a different response, or talk about general military mobilization .
 The ultimate palatability of the blockade option was due to the ExComm’s ability to tell stories in which the prospect of millions of dead Americans was not affixed to the blockade . The ExComm was not, therefore, due to some decisive counterargument, or any factual
 U.S. air strike against operational missiles could be a problem, analyst says . "What is most problematic about the blockade is not the blockade itself, but the possibility that it could eventuate in an air strike," he says .
 Estimates for how long it would take to ready missiles for launch ranged from a few hours to several days . This uncertainly was repeatedly acknowledged . The U.S. gave the Soviets advance warning prior to an air strike, which the blockade would provide .
 We need to focus on exchanges about the prospects and perils of an attack on operational missiles . The blockade plan was the principal beneficiary once those perils were suppressed, he says .
 Below the line are indicated all statements regarding the dangers of an air strike after a warning or after the missiles otherwise became operational . Also indicated are all instances in which the need for a surprise attack was taken for granted .
 Above the line are indicated all instances in which a story was told about a U.S. air strike against the Soviet missiles after a warning to Khrushchev, again .
 The dangers of a strike against operational missiles were incipient or projected but, in one way or another, suppressed . Also indicated are occasions when the dangers of an attack against operational missile missiles were not realized .
 This shift in what was said did not reliably reflect a shift in thought, however, however . It did not reflect a change in the meaning of what was thought, it said .
 Kennedy's blockade plan was interactionally divorced from its primary failing, allowing Kennedy to make a decision that was discursively warranted though no less perilous than the alternatives . Kennedy: "What happened was that, through various mechanisms—ranging from simple omission to aggressive interruption, ... the blockade plan
 American Journal of Sociology in detail instances in which the dangers of this plan were hearably imminent but omitted, or unsuccessfully articulated, or incipient but interdicted . American Journal Of Sociology details instances in detail .
 Minutes from the meeting of the 20th, the minutes from which bring us up to the moment of decision at the same time as they support— as well as such minutes can— my contention that that decision required the willful dissociation of the blockade from a nuclear attack on the United States
 McNamara voiced his belief that any air strike had to occur before the missiles became operational . McNamara said any strike would have to take place before missiles were operational .
 McNamara’s worry was less about a deliberate nuclear attack on the U.S. than an unauthorized missile launch, he says . McNamara: "No one could rule out" a possible attack on a nuclear weapon .
 The president was convinced that the missiles would have to be destroyed before they were ready to be launched .
 A short time later, after another warning from McNamara, Kennedy gave the first articulation to the warning-then-strike plan . This and the brief exchange that followed are in excerpt 1 from the exchange .
 For the germ of what became the plan that resolved the crisis, this had a fairly inchoate inception . The germ of the plan to resolve the crisis is still in its infancy .
 NATO allies “who have a right” to know (British Prime Minister Macmillan and French President de Gaulle), then suddenly he is talking about a “public statement” that would, by necessity, include the Soviets .
 Talk of an air strike after an announcement made relevant McNamara’s oft-repeated concern that operational missiles might be fired . I use the present tense when analyzing an excerpt .
 A possible explanation is that in retelling this story, Kennedy begins with the Saturday air strike and then adds the precursor, namely an announcement the day before . The day before, Kennedy began with an announcement that put the air strike slightly beyond easy reach for anyone looking to identify its consequences .
 McNamara might then simply have said, but once we warn them we really can’t do the air strike because of the risk of a missile launch, he said . Still, McNamara may have said: ‘Once we warn [the U.S.], we really
 In the first meeting it was uniformly assumed that any air strike would be a surprise air strike, in that no one attempted a story to the contrary . In the second meeting such a story was ventured but failed 15 . I adopt the common practice of referring to the attorney general by the familiar
 ExComm members met off-and-on throughout the next day for about five hours . Kennedy skipped these meetings to see to other business . The only record we have is a meager 3.5 pages of notes taken by CIA Director John McCone .
 There was also “an extensive discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of a military blockade” ( U.S. Department of State 1961– 63, 97, but no record of the arguments made on either side .
 At first, the midday meeting of the 18th, with Kennedy in attendance and the tape recorder rolling once again, seemed destined to go the way of the two meetings of the 16th . At first it seemed that the meeting was destined to be the end of the day .
 The context is a discussion of the air strike variation that would have targeted not only missiles but Soviet aircraft as well . The strike would have been aimed at Soviet aircraft .
 Kennedy just asked whether this would eliminate the threat of retaliation by those aircraft . Kennedy: "It's not clear whether this will eliminate the ... threat of ... retaliation," he said .
 The president responds by raising the question of nuclear weapons, but then dismisses this, essentially on the grounds that the Soviets would not want to start a nuclear war . The president also responds by saying that he does not believe in nuclear weapons .
 This was a change for McNamara and the joint chiefs, who originally resisted an invasion . But in saying this, Kennedy generalizes beyond nuclear bombs .
 McNamara said it might not be possible to locate and destroy all missiles from the air . When pressed by the president, he said that the new recommendation was necessitated by the discovery of additional missiles .
 This exchange shows that McNamara’s concern about bombing operational missiles persisted into the third meeting . McNamara was willing to directly challenge the president .
 Kennedy asked Thompson how he proposed to deal with the missiles already on the island . Thompson said the blockade option would be preferable to the blockade . Kennedy also asked how he would deal with missiles already in the country .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy checks that the strike would include Russian aircraft . Bundy talks about the timing of the announcement and air strike . Bundy also talks about how the Russian aircraft will be used in the strike .
 One interpretation is that each speaker hoped to thwart an objection from McNamara by denying him a well-formed narrative clause on which he could hang his objection . The casualness here is too consistent to be by chance, the casualness of the speaker's statements seems consistent .
 First three of these six stories delivered by someone other than the president . Second, the stories effectively ignored earlier worries about bombing operational missiles, as if they had never been expressed . Third, these stories ignored earlier concerns about bombing .
 Fursenko and Naftali are wrong in saying that Kennedy “overruled concerns—especially those expressed by McNamara—that any use of force implied taking the risk of an inadvertent nuclear war” This suggests that Kennedy declared them ungrounded, which is not
 McNamara had earlier warned of the danger of a nuclear response to an air strike following an advance warning, never occurred . In contrast, further planning for that scenario never occurred, he said .
 This is exactly the sort of path dependency anticipated in a previous section, with the trajectory of the story depending on whether someone narrated nuclear reprisal at the point at which the U.S. imagined bombing possibly operational missiles .
 The story also had to lack a disastrous ending as a precondition for the narrative backtracking needed to fill out the details of how to bring that story to pass . But now there is an added twist, that there is also a twist that the story had to be without a disastrous
 Talk of an air strike after a warning survived in spite of the fact that a strong objection to such a plan had been voiced repeatedly in this and the earlier meetings . Instead, what is surprising is that talk of such a strike after warning survived .
 McNamara said that the disadvantage from the loss of surprise “is not very great” (tape 30a, 06:01), without being called to account for contradicting all of his earlier warnings .
 I take this collaborative not-saying as one form of suppression, under the assumption that while one person can simply forget to make a pertinent observation when the opportunity presents itself, or for some reason find themselves fleetingly unable to do so . Something more deliberate is at work when many people
 Something else is at work here, for it is not merely that the earlier objection was not reraised, but, moreover, that subsequent talk proceeded as if that objection had never been voiced .
 This suggests that the primary narrative requirement was not to tell a story that was sensible and defensible given everything that had been said before, or even just very recently, but to make a story plausible taken in isolation . This suggests the primary requirement is to tell the story that is sensible and
 The immediate, episodic, even if amnesic, telling of stories was just about the only way hopeful stories could be told . More important than the long-term synthesis of information and perspectives, in other words, was the immediate and episodic stories .
 Kennedy raised the issue of the loss of surprise; see excerpt 4.5 . Kennedy: "Then, though, as if . remembering his defense secretary’s objection, Kennedy raised an issue of surprise"
 Sorensen had just questioned the need for an advance warning to Khrushchev . He proposed that the premier be notified of the attack at the time it commenced .
 excerpt 4 begins . Bobby and Rusk countered with the moral argument against a surprise attack against a small country . The moral argument begins with a moral argument .
 Kennedy responds by reviving the warning-then-air-strike scenario, which would have given Khrushchev time to get his people out of the way of U.S. bombs . Kennedy responds to the threat of air strikes .
 Kennedy’s “uh” in line 26 is two substantial pauses separated by his ‘uh’ line 26 . Instead there are two substantial pause between Kennedy and Kennedy's "uh" lines .
 For periods during which nothing was said, these are pregnant with meaning . Once again these were opportunities for anyone to raise the missile threat, yet no one did . For periods of silence, these were pregnant with meanings, for once again .
 Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Alexis Johnson changes the topic to the president’s upcoming meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko .
 Talk of advance warning made the threat of retaliation from aircraft and missile launch narratively relevant . Kennedy restricted himself to the former even as he anticipated, but failed to deliver, the second . He failed to induce anyone else to deliver the second, and failed to .
 Someone did try to raise concerns about an air strike against operational missiles, but was in some way foiled . But then, toward the end of the third meeting, there were three times on which someone did raise concerns .
 In lines 1–4, Kennedy and Bundy identify the argument for a quick strike, that any delay would give the Soviets the chance to ready some of the missiles for firing .
 Kennedy appears to embark on the familiar response, that the Soviets are unlikely to fire missiles from Cuba unless they are prepared for nuclear war . But then Kennedy says they could just as well fire them from somewhere else . Kennedy: "The Soviets are not likely to be prepared for war"
 Bundy attempts his own response, beginning somewhat belatedly but answering Kennedy as if he had finished his point while disregarding Taylor’s existing claim to speakership . Bundy attempts to respond to Kennedy's question with a belated response .
 Kennedy’s incipient suggestion that the Russians would never fire their missiles assumes their rationality . Kennedy had good reason to wonder at given the great risks the Soviets were running in placing missiles in Cuba to begin with .
 His point is interactionally lost, however, for it is engulfed by Taylor's . Taylor's point is lost, but his point is interjected by Taylor .
 Bundy’s response is the more pointedly relevant to Kennedy's line of argument . Bundy's response is that it is a response to the question: ‘What do you think?” Bundy said . Bundy said, “I don’t think it’
 The fact that Taylor is speaking at the same time makes it possible for Kennedy to avoid acknowledging the point or its relevance to the air strike versus blockade debate . It further helps that McNamara speaks after Taylor, putting more distance between Bundy's objection and Kennedy’s next turn-att
 In excerpt 6, Bobby asks for the best date for an air strike from the perspective of military planning and preparation . Bobby asks: "What do you think the best time for a strike?"
 Bobby attempts to point out that the missile sites could be completed in the meantime, apparently in response to the estimate from Taylor,19 with the implication that this would be a problem . Bobby then attempts to make the point that this is not a problem with the missiles being built .
 In this case, the danger arose not from giving the Soviets advance warning but postponing the air strike long enough that they could complete the missiles even without it . Bobby brings his turn 19 .
 Rusk is the next undisputed speaker and connects his remark to the importance of giving the military time to prepare (somewhat oddly under the circumstances, for fear that “somebody really gets hurt” that so concerned Taylor, effectively responding to the last person to successfully monopol
 Bobby attempts to resurrect McNamara’s earlier concern about the threat from the missiles . But conversational vicissitudes downgrade his remarks twice in succession, rendering them interactionally inconsequential .
 Excerpt 7 is from the end of the third recorded meeting, at which point the president was no longer in the room . The president was not in the meeting at the time of the recording .
 Bobby presses his point again but finds himself repeatedly thwarted by none other than McNamara, now determined to exploit the chronological nature of narratives and other turn-taking practices to suppress a narrative that otherwise threatens to derail the scenario .
 In the excerpt, Bobby tries to launch a future narrative about the consequences of a blockade . Bobby tries no fewer than eight times to launch an argument about the blockade .
 ExComm locate Rusk and Kennedy almost directly across the rectangular table from each other, so this seems unlikely . From the excerpt, it is ExComm . ExComm located Rusk, Kennedy and Rusk .
 McNamara, perhaps impressed with the difficulty of destroying so many missiles from the air, now strongly favors that plan . He imagines negotiations without the threat of later military action; rather, he imagines talks .
 McNamara has decided to suppress the frightening consequences of such an air strike lest they count against the blockade in the minds of other ExComm members, though those consequences had originally come from his very mouth . Virtually everyone else, though, assumes that air strike (and perhaps invasion) will
 McNamara accomplishes this suppression through effective use of four tactics . McNamara uses four tactics to suppress the opposition to the government .
 John Sutter says he exploits opportunities created by Bobby's penchant for asking him to affirm the narrative’s first step, namely that the Soviets would be permitted to complete some of the missiles . Sutter: “I’m not sure what I’ve done,
 Third, he resists the terms of Bobby’s questions and charges, offering “pseudo-responses” that begin as responses but then advance his own vision of the blockade-and-negotiate narrative . Fourth, he offers ‘pseudo responses’
 Third parties occasionally interject, forcing Bobby to restart his enterprise from scratch and on another forcing him to abandon it entirely . Third parties often interjects, forcing the actor to restart from scratch .
 The attempts, along with one lengthy interlude and one shorter side exchange, are demarcated by dashed lines in the excerpt . To help the reader follow along, the author uses dashed lines to help him follow along .
 Attempt 1 Bobby gets off to a convoluted start, apparently asking McNamara about the likelihood of surveillance detecting further progress on the missiles even after a United States ultimatum .
 McNamara agrees that this is a likely scenario . McNamara: "It's a good thing to say this is likely" McNamara says .
 McNamara’s “this goes back” then seems, at first blush, to introduce an attempt to diagnose the problem with missile development, in which missile development can be stopped through bombing, as well .
 McNamara seemed more interested in the actual use of force than in its threatened use . But then McNamara appears to misconstrue Bobby’s point, resisting the implication that the United States should threaten to use military force .
 Bobby asks the question more pointedly in lines 14 and 16 . Bobby's first attempt to answer the question was unsuccessful .
 McNamara advances his version of the blockade-and-negotiate narrative rather than accepting the terms of the yes/no question put to him . McNamara accepts the floor and again advances his story .
 The story is worded in terms of what the U.S. will “tell them they can” do . Then comes the story’s first step again, though worded not what the Soviets will do but what the United States will do .
 Bobby is less concerned with what the Soviets are told than with what they actually do, so his use of “we tell them” requires analysis .
 One possibility is that Bobby is being drawn into McNamara’s way of describing United States actions in terms of what the Soviets are told, either unconsciously or as a way of trying to overcome a persistent rhetorical divide .
 More likely, Bobby intends "we tell them" not to denote a communicative event, but to underscore U.S. responsibility for blockade, he says .
 The formulation affords McNamara an immediate foundation for sharp dissent, followed by his prepared version of what the U.S. will literally say to the Soviets . McNamara: "The missiles are unacceptable"
 He makes a fifth attempt at his own story, now formulated as a blunt prediction of Soviet behavior . Then he makes a fourth attempt at telling the story, he says, "I'm going to tell the truth"
 McNamara is unfazed and simply narrates a counterannouncement by the United States that returns the narrative to the blockade-and-negotiate track (lines 45– 47), derailing Bobby’s narrative again .
 Excerpt 7 is dedicated to Bobby’s attempt to construct a narrative that follows from the strategy favored by McNamara . The most part of the excerpt 7 is devoted to Bobby's attempt to thwart that narrative, and that of McNamara's .
 At the end of line 69, Bobby has regained the floor, just as McNamara is poised to enumerate other options, and finding his narrative seriously disrupted, restarts it . Attempt 6: "Bobby has lost the floor"
 U.S. will tell the Soviet response to a blockade, he says, what the United States will “tell them” they can do . And then, tactically speaking, he repeats one of his earlier mistakes, framing a prediction of a Soviet response as what the U
 McNamara appears to exploit Bobby’s “uh,” which marks trouble in turn production, as an excuse to take the floor before Bobby can produce a complete turn . In this case, McNamara takes advantage of Bobby's ‘uh’ as a chance to
 Bundy announces he has to leave, and then Bobby departs, for while Bundy, McNamara, Taylor, and Sorensen continue talking . Bundy is not heard from again .
 The attorney general clearly wants to tell a story about the blockade that will narrate the deleterious consequences of giving the Soviets the opportunity to complete work on the missiles already in Cuba .
 He could do that best were he to be given solitary speaker privileges for the duration of his story .
 This appears to be his undoing, for it is not for lack of total speaking time that he is unable to make his case . This is not the case that he has not been able to make a case .
 A blockade in which cause and effect are made plain will be made plain . Presumably his objective is to tell a convincing story about the consequences of a blockade .
 McNamara interjects with his own narrative . That effort is subverted every time someone interrupts, especially McNamara .
 This is because were Bobby to then simply pick up where he left off upon regaining the floor, his further narrative could be heard not as a continuation of his earlier, interrupted narrative, but of whatever competing story had been developed in the interim .
 The meeting on the evening of the 18th was not tape-recorded, nor were minutes taken . The meeting was not taped-recorded or minutes taken.
 The minutes from this day’s meetings are not especially detailed, but one thing is directly relevant to my analysis . The minutes of the meetings started at 11:00m. and ran off and on throughout the day .
 In the course of the afternoon discussion, the military representatives came to expressing the view that an air strike could be made some time after the blockade was instituted in the event the 22 . A comparable interactional strategy is described in Molotch and Boden’s article on the Watergate
 Attorney General favors blockade as first step . Other steps were not precluded and could be considered . Attorney General said it was now pretty clear what decision should be .
 It seems that this was mainly McNamara’s opinion, perhaps with some support from Gilpatric and Nitze, and one not based on any new intelligence that Taylor was aware of . Taylor was not aware of any new information .
 This is consistent with my earlier speculation that McNamara decided to change his strategy in order to safeguard the blockade plan against the very objection he had earlier raised against it . McNamara's decision to change strategy was consistent with his earlier speculation .
 Bobby Kennedy: "This was an important development, including in the eyes of the minute taker and Bobby Kennedy, supporting my claim that the primary stumbling block for the blockade plan was the difficulty of a later air strike"
 McNamara lists the advantages and disadvantages of the alternative . The president was handed a document by Sorensen laying out the “blockade route,” McNamara said .
 McNamara envisioned negotiations (possibly including an offer to remove nuclear missiles from Italy and Turkey) rather than a threat of, or preparations for, military action . Missing from the former was any risk of later having to bomb operational missiles .
 Kennedy pointed out, apparently in response, that during the blockade some missiles would be operational, as a result of which “the threat would increase” ( U.S. Department of State 1961–63, p.9; no. in fig.) Kennedy also pointed out that
 President Kennedy asked Taylor about the effectiveness of an air strike early in the week . Taylor responded, evasively, that “the risk of these missiles being used against us was less than if we permitted the missiles to remain there” Later, the president was handed a document laying
 Kennedy suggested giving the Russians two hours advance notice . Taylor indicated that from a military point of view 24 hours would be acceptable,25 and Kennedy increased his recommendation to seven hours .
 Even seven hours would, by some estimates, have given the Soviets time to ready some of the missiles for firing . The proposal is subsumed under no. , as an instance of a story involving advance warning before an air strike .
 Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon proposed a 72-hour wait between the start of the blockade and an air strike . This might sound like an instance of the kind of overt cost-benefit analysis that we otherwise find lacking in these discussions .
 Taylor may have believed this statement, but the calculation suggested by it would not have been taken at face value by other ExComm members . Thus, while Taylor's statement may have been believed, the calculation would not be taken as face value .
 In each instance, no objection was recorded, though it had been alluded to only minutes before . The objection was not recorded, but it was alluded to minutes before.
 U.S. State Department of State 1961–63, 132; no. in fig. 26 . Dillon, however, admitted that “the limited use of force involved in a blockade would make the military task much harder”
 Thompson stated his support for a blockade followed by an air strike (no.1) Thompson stated he supported a blockade . Thompson stated that he would like to see a military strike on the Syrian border .
 Kennedy seemed to have made up his mind to go with the blockade with preparations for military action . With the next to last of the last of these .
 President Obama says air strikes could be a surprise surprise strike in Syria . But he was back talking about the possibility of a surprise air strike soon after .
 There was some concern that Khrushchev would turn control of the missiles over to the Cubans . Most ExComm members thought this unlikely . Though we cannot expect the minutes to 26 to 26
 Dillon may have misspoken here, or perhaps this was a mistake on the minutes taker .
 Kennedy made a deliberatively warranted decision, but he was not persuaded that an air strike could be safely conducted days after the Soviets were alerted to the U.S. knowledge of the missiles .
 There were a dozen or so occasions on which the possibility of an air strike was mentioned without a single expressed concern about the danger that operational missiles might be fired . Yet when the ExComm seriously resumed planning for a strike on the 25th, amid evidence of accelerated work on the missiles,
 This is consistent with what began happening during the third taped meeting, when such an attack became the elephant in the room that ceased to be narrated though nothing had been said to alleviate the need to worry . Though puzzling taken by itself, this is not the only explanation for what happened .
 ExComm had even more on its plate, including talks at the UN, questions about surveillance, the interception of ships at the blockade line, and, on the 27th, Khrushchev’s contradictory offers (see Gibson, in press, chaps) and the downing
 There seems to have been a sense that the initial decision in favor of the blockade, with the threat of military action, had set the U.S. on this path . The ExComm could do was plan for the air strike, even as it hoped for a diplomatic breakthrough .
 This apparent willingness to “forget’t earlier objections is a striking finding,’s author says . This is an apparent willingness, or ability, to ‘forgive’ earlier objections, he says .
 If we assume that when people talk about something happening they are simultaneously imagining it happening, it follows that it will appear increasingly less likely when it is not talked about, it will be less likely to happen again .
 This would explain why so many people started telling this story in the third meeting once McNamara stopped warning against it, if they were attracted to the blockade because it did not immediately escalate the crisis but needed the dangerous consequence to fade from view before they could sign on .
 But it would not explain the more overt and even strenuous work of suppression and ambiguation that was involved in keeping the blockade and its most damning risk apart .
 What we need to explain, then, is the systematic and largely consensual nonsaying of something that could have been said, or its only vague saying, and the complicity in its suppression when someone like Bundy, Bobby, Taylor, or Dillon tried to give it articulation .
 The ExComm’s practical problem shifted from finding a solution to the problem of seeming to find a solution . I propose that, faced with no good options, the ExComm's practical problem shifts from finding . to finding a . solution to . the problem . of finding . a
 The White House has been in the throes of a major overhaul of the White House budget . The president is expected to make a decision on a range of options .
 Kennedy: "The need to take some action may have become paramount once the goal of divining the best action proved elusive" Kennedy: The need for action became paramount after the goal was elusive .
 The ExComm took full advantage of this, retelling stories until such a time that one, involving a blockade with preparation for military action, was discussed without the threat of a nuclear response being narratively affixed to it . That threat had been repeatedly stated not long before, though some
 The dangers of an immediate air strike were stated repeatedly, and without letup . Had they done so, that might have been Kennedy’s choice, but the dangers of such a strike were said repeatedly .
 It is tempting to fall back upon the conventional explanation that Kennedy felt compelled to do something and feared that a surprise air strike could send the crisis spiraling out of control . There is probably some truth in this, but there is probably truth in some truth .
 A processual explanation, and one more faithful to the data, changes the question from why Kennedy chose a blockade to how the blockade option emerged from the fray as viable .
 This provides interactional form to what Cerulo calls “positive asymmetry,” whereby the possible benefits of a course of action receive more consideration than its risks . Far from determined by 28, the world is not determined by what is determined by the law .
 These findings have important implications for our understanding of decision making, particularly in times of crisis, say experts . The findings are important for us to understand how to make decisions .
 Scholars of decision making hardly ever give serious thought to talk, that is, to what people say when they make decisions together .
 Vaughan’s analysis of the decision to launch the doomed Challenger space shuttle is a standout exception . Vaughan's analysis includes a meeting of NASA and contractor engineers at which the decision was made to go ahead .
 Analysis of ExComm meet403 American Journal of Sociology ings suggests a very different picture, one more fragmented and iterative .
 Once again, the ExComm cycled in and out of talk about particular scenarios, revisiting each repeatedly with little express recognition of having “been here before” and thus little concern that stories about, in particular, ended differently on some occasions than on others .
 This made it possible for one scenario to eventually be liberated from its primary failing, through omission and even more overt forms of suppression . This made the scenario of one scenario eventually liberate from it through omission .
 This was the only way that consensus, or the appearance of consensus, could be attained, given that all options looked bad . And this, I have suggested, was just about the only . way . of reaching consensus, he has suggested .
 In place of Anderson’s “decision-making by objection,” we have ‘decision by suppression’ as something we should expect when the alternative, paralysis, is judged least acceptable .
 The decision-making theory to which this bears the greatest affinity is garbage can theory, but with a new twist .
 In Cohen, March, and Olsen’s original statement of the theory, solutions float around an organization looking for problems with which to pair, even when the fit is imperfect . In the original statement, the theory is that problems float around organizations looking for solutions .
 This was an important inversion of the traditional idea that problems generate the search for solutions . This is an inversion to the idea that . problems generate a search for a solution, rather than solutions .
 This article takes the argument further, into the domain of face-to-face interaction, by introducing solutions that need to avoid problems that they create in order to carry the day . Speakers can choose to fuse them together, like DNA base pairs, or keep them separate .
 When all solutions have problems, perhaps the only way forward is to keep one solution and its problems apart, especially during the critical minutes before a decision has to be made . Perhaps the best way forward would be to keep the problems apart .
 In this regard, the rest of the crisis unfolded differently, and the comparison tells us much about the way in which the temporal characteristics of an unfolding crisis interact with the temporal properties of talk . The comparison shows much about how the timing of a crisis unfolds and how it unfolded .
 After Kennedy announced blockade, ExComm had to decide which ships to intercept . ExComm decides which ships will be intercepted .
 A few hours later, during the 10:00m. meeting, the ExComm considered stopping it belatedly ( United States ships had been trailing it), but again no decision was reached, and the issue was tabled until the 5:00 m. meeting . The ExComm
 Khrushchev offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for a U.S. pledge to respect the island’s sovereignty . The very next morning, he changed the terms of the deal, demanding the withdraw of NATO Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 The group was under pressure to make a quick decision, for fear that Khrushchev would issue more demands or that NATO allies, scheduled to meet on the 28th, would make statements that would make a subsequent deal involving the Jupiter missiles impossible .
 Kennedy’s advisers (or at least the vocal ones) advocated that the U.S. accept the first offer and ignore the second one . Kennedy insisted that Khrushchev would not be satisfied with that, and that by proposing it, he would only be prolonging the crisis
 The effect of the former upon the latter is nicely captured by the idea of “environmental impatience,” which refers to the various ways in which an organization can be pressured by external actors to make a decision .
 When the environment demands an answer before that process is complete, the result can be inaction or, alternatively, a decision that reflects unresolved narrative contention, and that is potentially seen as incoherent or indecisive . It can be the result of inaction or a decision reflecting unresolved narratives .
 The ExComm may have had more time to contemplate its response to the missiles, challenges to the blockade option might have been successfully resurrected and rechampioned . However, it may be that had the ExComm had more . time to . contemplate its . response to . the . missiles
 Perhaps the appearance of a rational choice ultimately depends on two things . The appearance of an appearance of rational choice depends on the fact that it's not a decision .
 When deliberation is performed with others, it assumes the form of storytelling about the future, or the collaborative attempt to map out roads that have not yet been laid . The result of deliberation can be described as a collaborative effort .
 While we might learn something about the nature of talk from such settings, such as how normal conversational procedures are adapted for institutional ends . The decision itself probably does not hinge on the contingent and situationally sensitive unfolding of particular exchanges .
 The perception of a correct answer is an interactional outcome, something achieved through conversation and subject to its rules and vicissitudes rather than discovered by means of it . In contrast, to the degree that there is no “right” answer, power differences are suspended, and vested
 One implication is that things could have turned out otherwise, both in terms of the decisions that came out of those discussions, and in the course of events in the wider world . One implication: Things could have been different if they had been avoided .
 If Kennedy had been forced to make his decision on the 16th, he might have ordered a surprise air strike instead of bombing .
 In either scenario, Khrushchev might have felt compelled to retaliate . Both leaders feared their inability to untie the knots of war once they were pulled tight .
 Even were we to assume that people come to an encounter predisposed to make certain kinds of statements, how those statements are elicited, articulated, strung together, and interpreted will always be contingent and underdetermined in advance .
 The temptation to deny this sort of indeterminacy is great, especially at the end of analyses that purport to explain decision outcomes as the natural result of structure, culture, or the interplay of interests . Up close, things rarely seem as inevitable as they seem from afar, after
 The world is at a turning point at which it can never return once the die has been cast . Another is when an adversary is poised to respond very differently to one decision rather than another .
 There are presumably other conditions still that explain when backroom encounters between activist leaders translate into demonstrations that topple governments . And there are presumably more conditions still to explain when demonstrations turn violent .
 Whatever the complete list of such conditions, that events of tectonic importance are sometimes at the mercy of much more fluid and contingent processes at the very bottom of the micro-macro continuum is disconcerting . The events of such events sometimes are sometimes the mercy .
 One thing demonstrated by this article is that such processes are not immune to sociological investigation . One thing . demonstrated that this article, however, is that . such . processes are . not immune from sociological investigations .
 Sociologists are only rarely provided with accurate and fine-grained record of what transpired . The likes of sociologists are rarely provided. But such an investigation requires an accurate and accurate record of the events .
 Ex-Ambassador to Soviet Union: CIA officials responsible for opening intelligence briefings . Ex-CIA Director Gen. Michael Hayden: Intelligence briefings will be limited to CIA officials .
 UN representative Adlai Stevenson and Special Assistant to the President Kenneth O’Donnell attended the October 20 meeting . Also present at the meeting were UN representative .
 A: percent  Vertically aligned partial brackets indicate overB: that’s right lapping speech. A: ﾾﾼ That’�s ﾼ that'sﾾ that�
 Numbers in parentheses indicate pauses in secwithin three days onds, measured to one decimal point . Numbers indicate pauses within three days measured in seconds, measured in decimal points . I might but might but I might .
 Inhaling is indicated with a leading period, and exhaling with the lack of a period . In exhaling indicates a lack of an exhaling period . Exhalation is indicated by leading and leading periods .
 Breathing was only transcribed when its producer,generally the person currently speaking, was apparent . Breathing is only recorded when the producer, the person, is apparent .
 I Single parentheses contain the transcriber’s guess as to speech that cannot be discerned clearly . The transcriber's guess is that speech cannot be clearly heard clearly .
 Double underlining means more than one other person is speaking in this (unintelligible and unidentifiable) manner . Double underlined means that more than a single person is talking in this manner .
 Underlined pause means that someone can be heard speaking during a lull in the named speaker’s turn . An underlined pause is a pause during a conversation between the speakers .
 Ellipwarning them ses enclosed in this way indicate talk omitted from a given speaking turn . Ellipwarnings indicate that talk is omitted during a given turn .
 Talk turns to air strike options, seeming to assume a surprise attack . Then talk of air strikes seems to assume an air strike .
 Robert Kennedy then raises the possibility of an invasion, and talk turns to military preparations . Robert Kennedy says he is concerned about the threat of invasion .
 A warning would secure more “political support” (tape 28, 95: 15) from U.S. allies, but would come at the cost of loss of surprise, he says .
 JFK then continues to waver about whether to make an announcement before a strike . JFK then wavers on whether to announce whether to strike before strike .
 Warning could allow Soviets time to complete the missiles and increase the chance of Soviet bombers attacking the East Coast . Warning could also increase the risk of Soviet planes attacking the east coast . Warning would allow Soviets to complete missiles and also increase chance of bombers attacking East Coast.
 Then there is a period of talk about U.S. vulnerability to such bombers, and whether they might carry nuclear weapons . Then there are also talk about United States vulnerability to bombers .
 Robert Kennedy: U.S. surveillance planes could monitor missiles after an announcement . Robert Kennedy then asks whether United States surveillance planes can monitor missiles . Kennedy: Surveillance planes could be used to monitor missiles in the future .
 Ball proposes that only close allies be informed . Dillon then challenges the wisdom of an announcement, and Ball challenges that it should be made public . Dillon: "Only close allies should be informed"
 Rusk then turns to an OAS vote backing U.S. action and then the dangers of the alternative, a surprise air attack, he says . Rusk: "The dangers of a surprise attack" is the risk of an air strike .
 McNamara argues that the missiles do not change the balance of power but do present political problems and might also embolden Khrushchev . McNamara goes on to argue that the missile could embolden the Soviet Union .
 Thompson seems about to say that the U.S. would threaten to attack Cuba after the imposition of a blockade “if they’re made operational” when he is interrupted . Thompson is interrupted by interrupting his remarks .
 JFK and Thompson then argue about the threats and demands Khrushchev would make in response to a blockade . JFK: "I don't want to see what would happen to the Soviet Union and what it would do to stop a blockade"
 Bundy then interrupts to speculate about when Khrushchev intends to announce the missiles . Bundy then speculates about when the missiles will be announced . Bundy: "Krushchev's missile announcement will be made in the fall of the year"
 Taylor expresses concern that the warning would give the Soviets time to hide ‘the planes and so on” before a strike . Taylor then expresses concerns that the Soviets may have been hiding planes and planes .
 An announcement before an air strike sacrifices surprise, but Russian aircraft carrying nuclear bombs can be shot down . An announcement of an attack sacrifices surprise .
 Alexis Johnson changes the topic to the president’s meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko . Alexis Johnson then changes the conversation to the foreign minister's meeting with the president .
 JFK says that the Soviets would not fire missiles in the event of an air strike after a warning . Bundy responds “if they were rational,” but in overlap . Bundy says JFK would not have fired missiles if he had been given a warning, but if he was rational .
 Taylor says that the best day for an air strike would be on Tuesday . Taylor: "Best day for air strike, from the perspective of military preparations, would be Tuesday" Taylor says .
 There’s general agreement that Khrushchev would be approached before any air strike . There's general agreement . Khrushchchev would have been approached before air strike, says historian .
 The ExComm split into subgroups to analyze options, and plans for the next meeting . Then follows an exchange about the ExComm splitting into sub groups to analyze possible options .
 President Obama made remarks about the advantages of a blockade, and soon thereafter about the need for OAS support . Then there were several remarks .
 Bobby Kennedy tries to tell a story about the dangers of allowing the missiles to be readied but is continually thwarted by McNamara . Bobby Kennedy is shown trying to tell the story but is constantly thwarted by the McNamara.
 After Taylor advocated an air strike on Tuesday, “Secretary Rusk asked General Taylor whether we dared to attack operational strategic missile sites in Cuba," he said .
 President Kennedy suggested giving the Soviets a few hours advance notice before an air strike . President Kennedy suggests giving them advance notice of a strike . Kennedy: "Give the Soviets advance notice"
 Bobby Kennedy advocated a blockade followed by an air strike if needed . Bobby Kennedy said a blockade would be followed by air strikes if necessary . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dillon suggested waiting 72 hours after the instituting of a blockade before an air strike . Dillon suggested a 72-hour blockade should be followed by air strike. Dillon suggested that a strike should take place within 72 hours .
 McCone suggested waiting 72 hours between the start of a blockade and an air strike . McCone also suggested waiting for 72 hours before a strike began .
 Gilpatric then stated his support for a blockade while acknowledging that it would probably come at the expense of later military action . GilPatric then said he would support a blockade but acknowledged that it probably would come at a cost .
 Basten, Ulrike, Guido Biele, Hauke R Heekeren, and Christian J Fiebach. Basten . Basten: Ulrike . Biele: "Basten" and "Fiebach" have been together for 10 years .
 Dennis J. Devine, Dennis J., Laura D Clayton, Benjamim B Dunford, Rasmy Seying, and Jennifer Pryce. Pryce . Devine was the author of the new book, The Hunger Games .
 Studies in Conversation Analysis, edited by John Atkinson and John Heritage, John Heritage .
 Pp.7–34 in The Micro-Macro Link, edited by Jeffrey C Alexander, Bernhard Giesen, Richard Munch, and Neil J Smelser .
 In Honor of Robert Hopper, edited by Phillip Glenn, Curtis D LeBaron, and Jenny Mandelbaum. In honor of Hopper. Hopper .
 Pp.5–250 in Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations, edited by James G March and Johan P Olsen . The study was published by March and Olsen .