 "This card has expired. Please enter a valid email address . Use the ex-card to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 "The supplied billing address is incorrect. Please try again with a different payment method"
 "The card's security code is incorrect. Please check the card's address or try again with a different card."
 "The card number is incorrect. Please check the security code or try again with a different card"
 The card number is incorrect. Please check the card number or try again with a different card .
 "The card's postal code is incorrect. Please check the card number or try again with a different card" "Please check your card number"
 The card's postal code is incorrect. Please check the postal code or try again with a different card .
 "The card's security code is invalid. Please check the postal code or try again with a different card."
 This worksheet can be edited by Premium members using the free Google Slides online software . Edit this worksheet to show you how much work you've done .
 On January 1, 1959, after overthrowing dictator Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar through a revolution, Fidel Castro took over the military government in Cuba . Fidel Castro aligned himself with the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets provided military and economic aid to Castro’s government . In fact, the Soviets provided economic and military aid to Cuba .
 For the next two years of Castro’s presidency, he reduced American influence in the Cuban economy by nationalizing major American industries like sugar and mining . Castro's presidency was the first to reduce American influence on Cuba .
 Americans banned the importation of Cuban sugar to the U.S. until the USSR agreed to buy the imports . As a result of the ban, the sugar industry collapsed .
 The U.S. State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency attempted to end Castro’s power . In addition, the United States State Department tried to end the Castro regime .
 In April 1961, the CIA launched an all-out invasion of Cuba through 1,400 American-trained Cubans who had fled to the U.S. after the revolution . The invasion was carried out by 1,000 American trained Cubans .
 President Kennedy ordered the installment of nuclear missile sites in Turkey and Italy . After the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the U.S. President John F Kennedy ordered a series of missile sites .
 At the same time, the U.S. and the USSR were engaged in the Cold War, which lasted until 1991 . The United States and the Soviet Union was engaged in a Cold War .
 The Cold War, which started in 1945, was a series of political, technological and economic clashes between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 On October 14, 1962, an American U-2 spy plane operated by Air Force Pilot Richard Heyser passed over Cuban airspace and photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile . The missile was a Soviet missile .
 JFK gathered together a group of officials and military advisors to form the executive committee, also known as ExCom . ExCom was formed in October 1962 .
 Members of the ExCom felt the urgency of the situation since the missiles were installed just 90 miles south of Florida . The ExCom said the missiles are installed in Florida .
 From the launch point, missiles could easily target any parts of the eastern U.S. States, experts say . They analyzed that from the launch .
 USSR Chairman Nikita Khrushchev sent missile installations to Cuba . Nikita wanted to increase nuclear strike capability . USSR Chairman Khrushchekchev sent missiles to Cuba in order to increase missile capability .
 American missiles located in Western Europe and Turkey were targeting them . They leveled the playing field since U.S. missiles were located in Europe, Turkey and Turkey .
 After failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Khrushchev saw a great opportunity to lessen U.S. aggression in Cuba . After the failure of the failed invasion, the Soviet Union was able to lessen American aggression in the country .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko on October 18, 1962 . Kennedy was informed that the Soviets were only aiding Cuba in growing crops .
 Robert Kennedy informed his brother, who was in Chicago, about the ExComm suggestion . Robert Kennedy told his brother about the idea .
 JFK made the announcement on October 22, 1962, that a missile installation was discovered in Cuba . President JFK addressed the American people that the missile installation had been discovered .
 In response, he ordered a naval blockade and removal of missiles on the Soviet end of the Soviet-Russia border . In response to the blockade he ordered an evacuation of missiles from the Soviet side .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to stop in the Atlantic to avoid confrontation with the U.S. Navy . The incident occurred on October 23, 1962 .
 JFK accused JFK of initiating nuclear war with the blockade . After a day, however, he refused to remove missiles in Cuba . JFK accused him of starting nuclear war .
 By October 25, the United States Air Force had increased flights over Cuba while the ExComm suggested an invasion of Cuba . The ExComm suggests an invasion .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if JFK agreed not to invade Cuba . On the 27th of the month, JFK agreed that the missiles would be removed if he did not invade the country . JFK was killed by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Kennedy agreed to the proposal and also quietly removed missile installations in Turkey . Kennedy agreed with the plan and quietly removed missiles from Turkey .
 The 13-day tension between the USSR and the U.S. was diffused through diplomatic communications . Both leaders constantly communicated through exchanged letters and other means .
 On October 28, Khrushchev went live on Radio Moscow announcing his agreement with JFK, thus ending the crisis . The agreement was announced on October 28 . On October 31, JFK and JFK signed an agreement .
 In order to prevent similar situations in the future, a direct hotline was installed between Washington and Moscow the following year . The hotline was set up in order to facilitate direct communication .
 Castro was upset with Khrushchev because he was not consulted before removing the missiles in Cuba, which deteriorated Cuba-Soviet relations . As a result of the move, Castro was unhappy with Khruschev's decision .
 The Soviets were perceived to be retreating from the situation causing the downfall of Khrushchev two years later . The Soviets saw the situation as a retreat . The Soviet Union was perceived to have retreated from it .
 Operation Anadyr was the Soviet code name for secretly installing missiles in Cuba . The code name was used to secretly install missiles in the Cuban territory .
 Operation Mongoose, also known as the Cuban Project, was a CIA operation commissioned during the last year of President Eisenhower . The Cuban Project was commissioned by the CIA during the Eisenhower administration .
 JFK authorized the invasion after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion . The invasion was meant to remove Communist power in Cuba . It was officially authorized by JFK .
 Maskirovka was a strategy employed by the Soviets for Operation Anadyr . The strategy was used in the Soviet invasion of Crimea in the 1980s .
 Blockade is an act of sealing a place or territory to prevent goods or people from entering or leaving . Blockades are a sealing of places or territories to prevent people or goods from entering .
 A naval blockade was enforced by JFK but they preferred to use the word ‘quarantine’ to avoid declaration of war terms . JFK preferred the word 'quarantine' to avoid declaring of war .
 You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own students' ability levels and curriculum standards . You can also edit them to suit your own student ability levels .