 The integrated Covert Action Program for Cuba, approved by Higher Authority in June 1963, provided for ""support of autonomous anti-Castro Cuban groups to supplement and assist in the execution" of the other courses of action approved under this program .
 The concept of autonomous groups was. first voiced in September 1962 in Mr Walter Rostow's proposal for a ""Track Two"" approach to Cuban operations .
 The leadership would posse™ a degree of operational self-determination which in certain 'circumstances, such as during the recent overflight crisis, could conflict with United States security interests .
 If this coat in lives becomes unacceptable to the United States conscience, autonomous operations can be effectively halted by the withdrawal of U.S. support . Once halted, they cannot be resumed, they can't be resumed .
 Ml autonomous operations will be mounted outside the ■kot-i'i-kory of the United States. Ml autonomy operations will also be mounted .
 The United States presence and direct participation in .the operation would be kept to an absolute minimum . The U.S. presence would be limited to a minimum, officials say .
 Before entering into an operational relationship with a group, the U.S. representative will make it clear that his Government has no intention of intervening militarily, except to counter intervention by the Soviets .
 He may be expected to influence but not control the conduct of operations . He may not be able to influence, not control, operations .
 The Standing Group agreed -that the paper would be presented with an affirmative recommendation of the Group to Higher Authority . The paper would then be presented to the higher authority of the group .
 Higher Authority approved the program as presented and approved by the Standing) """""""" Group. Higher Authority .
 The question of the disappointingly premature publicity concerning our autonomous operations with ARTIME was raised .
 The discussion centered around means of counteracting this premature publicity and several suggestions to do so were made . Several suggestions were made to counteracting premature publicity .
 SOMOZA believed that Castro might launch an offensive against Nicaragua . The U.S. Special Group . believed that would bring forth United States intervention .
 The Special Group agreed ARTIME should shift the main weight of his operation to Costa Rica without breaking with SOMOZA . The State Department would give as much encouragement as possible to Costa Rican support of ARTIME without showing undue United States . interest in ARTIME's activities .
 ARTIME agreed to make greater use of Costa Rica in addition to using Nicaragua . ARTIME has agreed to use Costa Rica more in the future .
 EVB 0""7 12 Nov 1963 Meeting at the White House to review the Cuban program . Meeting at White House . Meeting was held to discuss possible support to the autonomous anti-Castro exile .
 A status report on the 6-point integrated program against Cuba was presented . A full status report was presented on the program .
 Manuel ARTIME and the MRR has made substantial progress and expects to mount his first operations in December . Specific point of point was made that ARTIME is making substantial progress with the project .
 The Agency is now supporting Manuel RAY to the extent of $25,000 per month . The Agency has not progressed to the point that ARTIME has .
 Mr Bundy commented that when the autonomous grcfup started operations this might cause some problems due to the acknowledged lack of tight control . During this discussion Mr McGeorge Bundy commented .
 In the course of the briefing which included the autonomous operations, Higher Authority asked the cost of these operations and he was informed the total was about $5,000,000 . The total cost of the operations, he was told, is about $5000,000.
 He also asked the cost of Cuban operations for the current year and was informed it was about $21 or 22 million . The cost of the Cuban operations in the past year was $21 to 22 million, he said .
 6 March 1964 Letter to Mr McGeorge Bundy reviewing various operational problems in connection with Cuba . Letter was sent to discuss problems in Cuba .
 Our support to the autonomous exile groups headed respectively by Manuel ARTIME and Manuel RAY was again reviewed and a short status report given . The status of the exiled groups was also reviewed .
 The problem of suspending autonomous operations was also briefly discussed . The problem was also discussed .
 The problem of .these groups and their potential for continuing operations on their own and the momentum of these groups even after support was cut was also discussed . The problem was discussed .
 It was clear that the groups headed' by ARTIME and RAY constituted a potential threat, it was clear . Artime and Rays were headed by Artime .
 Mr Mann stated that he leaned away from CIA-conducted raids and towards autonomous operations . Mr Mann said he leaned towards autonomous raids .
 Higher Authority was fully brief edon the present status of autonomous operations including the fact that ARTIME was planning to launch his operational program on 12 April .
 This memorandum .notified Special Gr*up members of the planned 17/18 April raid by ARTIME's autonomous group against Santa Cruz del Sur . ARTIME is an autonomous group in the region .