 The Soviets agreed to remove the weapons in return for a U.S. agreement not to invade Cuba and a secret assurance that American missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn . It ended when the Soviets agreed that the weapons would be removed in exchange for an agreement that the United States would not invade
 The confrontation stemmed from ideological rivalries of the Cold War . The confrontation began in the 1950s and 1960s .
 It raised a real threat of nuclear war but was a turning point given that, in its wake, U.S. and Soviet leaders adopted more sober attitudes to East-West relations . It was the turning point of the Cold War .
 The crisis accelerated the development of a more complicated, polycentric world, with some of Washington and Moscow’s respective allies charting a more independent path after 1962 .
 Practically every minute of the missile crisis has been scrutinized intensely . The missile crisis was the height of the crisis in the 1980s .
 Crisis participants and journalists dominated the literature in the first few years, tending to laud Kennedy’s response to the Soviet challenge . Crisis participants, journalists and journalists have been critical of Kennedy's response .
 Kennedy, exhibiting immaculate judgment, forced the impulsive and blustering Khrushchev to concede . Thus, the cool, heroic Kennedy, exhibited immaculates judgment .
 Kennedy compromised by agreeing to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey, some say . Such accounts neglect to point out that Kennedy agreed to remove United States missiles .
 The 1970s and 1980s saw a growing number of criticisms of the U.S. administration . Questions were raised about how Kennedy appeared to obstruct quiet diplomacy in favour of public muscle-flexing .
 The greater openness that accompanied the end of the Cold War in the late 1980s led to growing acceptance that Khrushchev placed missiles in Cuba in part to defend the island from American aggression, which had been demonstrated by the US-sponsored attack by Cuban émigrés at the Bay
 Several conferences in the late 1980s and early 1990s involving missile crisis veterans brought the long-overlooked Cuban perspective more to the fore .
 Fidel Castro wanted to protect the island and strengthen the international socialist camp . This included accounting for why Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, accepted Soviet missiles .
 In the late 1980s, suspicions about the reason for the removal of the U.S. Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1963 were confirmed . Furthermore, suspicions were also confirmed in the late 80s, when the missiles were removed .
 The 1990s saw the accelerated declassification of material from the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, the U.S. National Archives, and the Central Intelligence Agency .
 There are no signs of the literature of the missile crisis drying up, as shown by a fresh wave of publications on the 50th anniversary of the crisis .
 Nuclear weapons were involved in both the origins and the resolution of the confrontation . First, nuclear weapons were used in the origins of the conflict and resolution .
 Khrushchev stationed nuclear missiles on Cuba in part to boost the position of the Soviet Union in the nuclear arms race as well as to protect his ally . Both him and Kennedy resolved the confrontation peacefully in large part due to fear of how matters might escalate .
 The literature has emphasized how easily the missile crisis could have escalated in recent years . Soviet nuclear-armed submarines in the Caribbean in the 1980s were key to the crisis .
 Critics argue deploying nuclear weapons is against international law because it is disproportionately destructive . Critics argue that deploying nukes is against the law because of its destructive nature .
 Kennedy was sobered by a briefing in 1961 that indicated that within the first few hours of a full-scale nuclear exchange hundreds of millions of people would be dead . Kennedy had been warned of the dangers of a nuclear attack .
 There are significant gaps in knowledge about the missile crisis . Second, there is significant gaps of knowledge about missile crisis. There is also significant gap in knowledge of missile crisis, experts say .
 While there is a great deal of U.S. documentation available, the picture is far from complete . The picture is still not complete .
 The Cuban government has released few documents, but the recent thaw in Cuban-American relations may lead to improvements in this regard . President Obama’s visit to Havana in 2016 could lead to improved relations in the country .
 There is still much to be learned about the contributions and perceptions of countries beyond the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba, not least from Latin American and former ‘Iron Curtain’ states .
 The fact that certain areas of the missile crisis, such as the deliberations in the White House, are so well documented, provides continued opportunities to construct theoretical models to explain state behaviour and top-level decision-making . At the same time, the fact that . certain areas . such as
 There has been a tendency among historians to play down the contributions of individuals, but the missile crisis suggests that this approach can be misplaced .
 Kennedy’s admirers were right to point out that he remained remarkably cool and composed throughout the confrontation . Despite his appreciation of the danger of global nuclear war, Kennedy remained cool . Kennedy's admirers say he remained composed throughout .
 He was willing to listen to a range of options from his ‘ExComm’ advisers, without surrendering his willingness to take decisions . He said: ‘He was listening to a variety of options, but not surrendering to surrendering .
 Khrushchev showed more strain, but he too was gravely aware of the danger . He kept open the channels of communication with his adversary . The Soviet Union had a long-standing relationship with the Soviet Union .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev were willing to compromise, even at considerable political cost to themselves . Both demonstrated empathy and demonstrated empathy .
 The question of personality and fitness for high office has been prominent recently in relation to the U.S. presidential contest .
 It seems doubtful that there will be a crisis as grave as that of October 1962, but if one occurs, then one hopes that the next White House incumbent has the qualities required to navigate it safely .
 Nikita Khrushchev and Zoya Mironova at the United Nations, September 1960 by Warren K Leffler . Khrushchevitch and Zironova met at the U.N.
 Jonathan is a historian of American and British foreign policies during the Cold War . He has taught and published widely in this area . Jonathan is the author of numerous books on Cold War policy .