 I5I.ANTON South Pacific Ocean Arctic Ocean . New Zealand / ^onduraa^ EISalv/dor'^""™S“'‘ ''to S^^nams St. Louis St. I5 .
 Charles William Kegley, Shannon Lindsey Blanton are featured in this week's "Trend and Transformation" edition . Suzanne Jeans, Carolyn Merrill, Rebecca Green, Katie Hayes, Laura Hildebrand, Caitlin Holroyd Sr. are featured .
 Marketing Communications Manager: Heather Baxley Sr. Amy Whitaker Marketing Coordinator: josh Hendrick . Josh Hendrick: "It's been a great year for this team. It's a great time for everyone."
 For product information and technology assistance, contact us at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706 For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions .
 Permission requests can be emailed to permissionrequest@cengage.com . Further permissions questions should be asked at permissionrequest.com.
 Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd. Pier Design Cover Image: iStockphoto .
 Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred online store www.CengageBrain.com .
 In a globe undergoing constant and rapid change, it is imperative to accurately describe, explain, and predict the key events and issues unfolding in international affairs .
 World citizens and policy makers can harness this knowledge and ground their decisions on the most pragmatic approaches to global problems available . These intellectual tasks must be performed well so that world citizens can harness the knowledge .
 Only informed interpretations of world conditions and trend trajectories and cogent explanations of why they exist and how they are unfolding can provide the tools necessary for understanding the world and making it better .
 Trend and Transformation provides the tools necessary for understanding world affairs in our present period of history, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments .
 Trend and Transformation aims to put both changes and continuities into perspective . Trend and transformation aims to show how the world has changed in recent years .
 It provides a picture of the evolving relations among all transnational actors, the historical developments that affect those actors' relationships, and the salient contemporary global trends that those interactions produce .
 The major theories scholars use to explain the dynamics underlying international relations . Realism, liberalism, and constructivism, as well as feminist and radical interpretations, frame the investigation .
 This book resists the temptation to oversimplify world politics with a superficial treatment that would mask complexities and distort realities . That said, this . said, "This book resists . the temptation of oversimplifying world politics"
 The text refuses to substitute mere subjective opinion for information based on evidence . It purposefully presents clashing and contending views so that students have a chance to critically evaluate the opposed positions .
 It fosters critical thinking by repeatedly asking students to assess the possibilities for the global future and its potential impact on their own lives . Students must also assess the potential impact of the future in their own life .
 To facilitate student learning and provide the tools and information for analyzing the complexities of world politics, this book is organized into five parts .
 It introduces the leading theories used to interpret international relations . The theory of international relations is based on the theories of world's leading statesmen .
 It looks at relations and interactions between them, and now considers the processes and procedures by which transnational actors make decisions . It also looks at the processes by which they make decisions and how they are made .
 Changes to Structure, Presentation, and Pedagogical Aids . In order to keep you and students abreast of the latest developments .
 World Politics has always changed in response to the unfolding developments across our world . World Politics is always changing, and we need to change our view of the world .
 Since the publication of the twelfth edition update of this book in February 2009, numerous changes have taken place . The book has been updated since February 2009 .
 2010-2011 edition includes the latest developments in global events and scholarly research findings . Students will have access to the most current information .
 Changes to this edition include a significant reorganization of the material that consolidates coverage of previously dispersed topics, alters the thematic order of the chapters, and more fully integrates theoretical perspectives throughout the book . The new edition of this edition of the book will be published in September 2015 .
 As a result, there are now five parts and seventeen chapters, with chapters focusing on armed aggression and the military now preceding those on economics, human security, demographics, and the environment .
 Discussion of theoretical contributions of constructivism and feminism are enhanced and highlighted across the book’s chapters . Discussion of the theoretical contributions to constructivist and feminism is enhanced .
 There has been a reduction in the overall length of World Politics this week . The depth of coverage remains unchanged .
 The 2010-2011 edition retains the streamlined chapter-openers Preface XIX with traditional chapter outlines . Students can preview and review the material presented . The book is published in 2010-11 editions .
 It continues to incorporate thoughtprovoking quotations throughout each chapter so as to broaden awareness of competing ideas and to stimulate interest in the insightful opinions of authors .
 The number of featured quotations has been reduced, and they are placed strategically at several key points in the chapter in order to enhance the relevance of the material and avoid distracting the student from the rest of the text .
 Addressing classic dilemmas in international affairs and the most heated current debates . Addressing the most pressing issues in the world's most heated debates. Addressing both classic dilemas and current debates.
 One of the most popular pedagogical features of the text, the illustration program, has been revised to broaden the book’s coverage . Illustrations will enable students to visualize the central developments and most recently available data . The illustration program was revised to include more recent data .
 The 2010-2011 edition includes more than six dozen new photographs, maps, tables, and figures that have been selected to introduce the timeliest topics and include detailed captions .
 Students today are often woefully uninformed about world geography, and the extensive map program helps remedy this problem .
 Key terms continue to be highlighted with bold-faced text and glossed definitions in the margins where the terms are first introduced .
 Each term is glossed only the first time it is introduced, and a single definition is used to familiarize students with the broadest and most common meaning of the term . Now, however, each term will be glossed .
 If a term is used again in subsequent chapters, the term is identified in italics the first time that it appears within a given chapter . It is a reminder to students that they can find the definition of the term in the glossary at the end of World Politics .
 This reference tool appears at the end of the text, so students can more easily access terms they may not remember from previously assigned or unassigned chapters .
 New terms have been added to keep students up-to-date with key concepts in the study of world politics . Students at the University of Cambridge will study world politics at the university .
 There is also a new prompt at the conclusion of each chapter encouraging students to take an online quiz to assess their knowledge of the material presented .
 The changes just listed highlight only the most salient structural modifications in the 2010-2011 edition of World Politics . Changes to Content by Chapter include changes to content by chapter and by chapter .
 The text continues to take pride in identifying and reporting the most recent developments in international affairs .
 The 2010-2011 edition includes new coverage on the most important issues on the global agenda . From instability and the eruption of armed conflict to the continued poverty and oppression of people across the globe, the issues are covered .
 The updated twelfth edition was released in February 2009 . The entire text has been revised to address the most important changes and reflect the most current information available since 2009 .
 This new edition includes twenty-seven new maps, figures, and tables . 2009 updates to most of the existing ones . New edition includes new maps and figures .
 There are fifty-two new pictures as well as the accompanying background information . There are also fifty-second new pictures and information .
 Discussion of foreign policy and international relations has been consolidated . Material has been updated to incorporate recently available information on current events .
 Also more clearly presented is the book’s approach and new organization . The book's approach and organization is more clearly explained .
 As a compelling alternative to the traditional realist and liberal theoretical interpretations of world politics, the presentation of the feminist critique and radical theory has been enhanced as well . The presentation of feminist critique has also been enhanced, as well as radical theory .
 Discussion of realism has been revised and now distinguishes between offensive and defensive realism . Discussion now distinguishes from offensive realism to offensive realism .
 The chapter introduces the concepts of security dilemma and diplomacy . Additionally, the chapter introduces concepts of a security dilemma .
 There is a new section on the Post-Cold War period, and the chapter includes a new discussion of the future of great power relations .
 There is new discussion of the concept of ‘small powers’ and the legacy of mistrust between developed and developing countries . There is a new discussion about the concept .
 Focusing on relations between the Global South and Global North today . There is enhanced coverage of the impact of the global financial crisis, constraints on democratization, and continuing instability in many developing countries . Attention also paid to the possibilities for narrowing the growing divide between wealthy and poor .
 A new Chapter 5, “Nonstate Actors and the Quest for Global Community,” consolidates material on intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations that was previously spread across two chapters . A new chapter 5 consolidates information on Intergovernmental organizations .
 The discussion of the United Nations has been updated and streamlined . The European Union has also been updated to reflect on the EU .
 Greater distinction between ethnic groups and indigenous peoples is provided . Discussion on religious movements, terrorism and postmodern terrorism, issue-advocacy groups, and corporate social responsibility enhanced .
 Coverage of decision making as rational choice, the bureaucratic politics of decision-making, and the role of leaders in making international decisions has been revised .
 Discussion of prospect theory and two-level games has expanded . Includes a constructivist critique of constructivist theory . Discussion has been expanded .
 There is also new discussion of the potential influence of gender on decision making . Constructivist and feminist perspectives are being considered in the study .
 This provides a fluid transition from the theoretical discussions in previous chapters to that on global conflict and peace . This is a transition from theoretical discussions to that of that of the previous chapters .
 Chapter 7, “The Threat of Armed Aggression to the World,” begins with updated data on armed conflicts and failed states . Chapter 7 includes updated data about armed conflicts, failed states and armed conflicts .
 There is enhanced discussion of aggression within states, and expanded coverage of the diversionary theory of war, terrorism, counterterrorism, and conflicts in Afghanistan .
 Chapter 8, “The Military Pursuit of Power through Arms and Military Strategy,” introduces the core premises and policy prescriptions underlying realist approaches to war and peace in general . Chapter 8 introduces the concept of the military pursuit of power through arms .
 The latest international trends in military preparation are captured in updated data and coverage on military spending, the weapons trade, and the proliferation of chemical weapons .
 There is expanded discussion on nuclear proliferation and the nuclear capabilities of rogue states . New perspectives from antiwar feminism are also discussed .
 The chapter also includes enhanced discussion of missile defense and new discussion of robotic military technologies . The chapter is also updated to reflect on the importance of the missile defense .
 Chapter 9, “Alliances and the Balance of Power,” places emphasis on realist interpretations regarding the stabilizing influence of arms control on the preservation of the balance of power .
 A constructivist perspective on the U.S. as a global hegemon has been added to the discussion of the prospects for the United States as a hegeman .
 There is new coverage of balancing by “emerging markets,” and the enhanced geopolitical emphasis on Eurasia .
 New coverage of U.S. efforts to renew global partnerships is also included in this edition of this week's edition of our weekly Newsquiz .
 The emphasis on the liberal theoretical tradition has been retained, and supplemented with greater incorporation of constructivist theory throughout the chapter . Constructivist theory has been incorporated into constructivist theories .
 There is a new section on the judicial framework of international law . There is also enhanced discussion of the International Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice .
 A continued emphasis on the approach to international security most strongly advocated by liberals . Constructivist and feminist perspectives on disarmament and international institutions .
 There is expanded coverage on regional IGOs, common moral values and norms, and global trade ties . There is also expanded coverage of the region's IGOS and common moral norms .
 Chapter 12, “The Globalization of International Finance,” expands discussion of globalization and its implications for international finance . Chapter 12 is a discussion of the implications of globalization .
 New discussion of the global financial crisis includes insights from a broad array of theoretical perspectives . There is enhanced coverage of the financial institutional framework, and a new discussion of global financial .
 The chapter concludes with consideration of the prospects for global finance reform . The chapter ends with consideration for global financial reform .
 There is expanded discussion of the globalization of production . There is enhanced emphasis on the contest between liberal and mercantilist economic philosophies .
 The chapter proceeds with a new look at the globalization of labor, and a new section on trade and global politics . It includes discussion of trade policy, economic sanctions and commercial peace .
 Consideration of economic organizations is enhanced . A new discussion of the linkage between trade, the financial crisis, and its aftermath is included .
 Chapter 14 examines the coverage of trends in population changes that are becoming an increasingly global challenge . Chapter 14, “The Demographic and Cultural Dimensions of Globalization,” examines the Demographic . and Cultural dimensions of globalization .
 There is enhanced discussion of the demographic divide between the Global North and the Global South . There is an emphasis on variances in birth rates that lead to pressures generated by a youth bulge in some countries and an aging population .
 Chapter 15, now titled “The Promotion of Human Development and Human Rights,” updates and expands the treatment of human development and human rights . Chapter 15 is now titled "The Promotion and Human Development"
 There is a revised discussion of the divide in human development between the Global North and the Global South . There is also a discussion about the divide between the North and South .
 New coverage of gender inequalities and the status of women, with a new section on human trafficking, is included . New section draws heavily on constructivist and feminist theories of international relations .
 There is a new section on children and human rights, as well as one on the human rights legal framework . There is also a section on the legal framework for children's rights .
 The global community’s response to human rights abuse and the challenges of enforcement are given expanded attention . Finally, the global community's response to rights abuse will be given expanded .
 Chapter 16, retitled “Global Responsibility for the Preservation of the Environment,” has been significantly reorganized . Chapter 16 puts into perspective the entire range of global ecological issues, including climate change, ozone depletion, deforestation, and biodiversity .
 There is enhanced discussion of ecopolitics that addresses the challenges of energy supply and demand, water shortages, and the struggle for advantage regarding access to the resources under the Arctic sea .
 The chapter concludes with consideration of the possibilities for sustainability, and efforts at both global, national, and local levels to counter environmental degradation .
 The chapter inventories insights from philosophers and policy makers about the interpretation of the global condition . The chapter includes six of the leading issues being debated about the global future .
 The chapter concludes with a challenge to students to formulate their own ideas about the possibilities for our global future . Students will be challenged to come up with ideas about their global future in the book .
 You will have access to a set of PowerPoints with outlines specific to each chapter of World Politics as well as photos, figures, and tables found in the book .
 You can also add your own materials to create a powerful, personalized, mediaenhanced presentation .
 Political Polling questions simulate voting, engage students, foster dialogue on group behaviors and values, and add personal relevance . Results can be compared to national data, leading to lively discussions .
 Visual Literacy questions are tied to images from the book . Add useful pedagogical tools and high-interest feedback during your lecture . Use these questions to help students with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 Save the data from students’ responses all semester . Track their progress and show them how political science works by incorporating this tool into your classroom .
 Use WebTutor™ to provide virtual office hours, post your syllabus, and track student progress with quizzing material . Use the webTutor’s quiz tool to test students’ knowledge of the curriculum .
 For students, WebTutor™ offers real-time access to interactive online tutorials and simulations, practice quizzes, and Web links . All these activities are correlated to World Politics . For more information, visit World Politics.com .
 These resources include podcasts by the text’s authors; simulations that can be assigned as homework . Case studies consist of Internet exercises and activities that correspond to instructor goals and challenges . Key term flashcards; and videos, all corresponding with concepts taught in each chapter .
 Premium Website also offers interactive timelines and maps, and NewsNow.com . Website also includes interactive timelines, maps and more .
 NewsNow is a combination of Associated Press news stories, videos, and images that bring current events to life . Available in both student and instructor versions of NewsNow .
 For students, a collection of news stories and accompanying videos is served up each week via the Premium Website that accompanies their international relations text . Students can also download a selection of videos and news stories from this week's site .
 For instructors, an additional set of multimedia-rich PowerPoint® slides is posted each week to the password-protected area of the text’s Preface xxvii companion . For more information, visit the Preface to read the text .
 Instructors may use these slides to take a class poll or trigger a lively debate about the events shaping the world right now . Instructors can also use the slides to help students understand the world's current events .
 Students will find open access to learning objectives, tutorial quizzes, chapter glossaries, flashcards, and crossword puzzles . All correlated by chapter .
 Free when bundled with a Wadsworth textbook, this atlas offers maps of the world showing political organization, population statistics, and economic development . Maps highlighting energy production and consumption, major world conflicts, migration, and more .
 Students will find it useful for understanding world events and supplement their studies in international politics . Students will be able to use it as a tool to understand world events .
 Those who made the greatest contributions to making this, the 2010-2011 edition, better include the following, whose assistance is most appreciatively acknowledged . xxviii
 Kegley co-directed with Don Puchala in 2003, 2004, and 2005 Fulbright American Studies Institute .
 The always helpful and accommodating project manager Christian Holdener with SdCarlisle Publishing Services and photo Researcher Jaime Jankowski with Pre-Press PMG made valuable contributions .
 Executive Editor Carolyn Merrill and Development Editor Rebecca Green exercised extraordinary professionalism in guiding the process that brought this edition into print .
 Wadsworth’s Political Science Marketing Manager Amy Whitaker is Wadsworth's skilled Political Science marketing manager . Gratitude is also expressed to the always instructive advice of Amy Whitakers .
 Charles William Kegley is the Vice Chair of the Board of Trustees of the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs . Shannon Lindsey Blanton is the author of the new book, "Shannon Blanton," which is published by Shannon Shannon .
 Kegley is a recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award in Eoreign Policy of the International Studies Association . He has widely published his primary research in the leading scholarly journals .
 She oversees all undergraduate programs and provides leadership in curriculum planning, general education . She also leads the Center for International Programs and Services, the Honors Program and the Learning Communities .
 She is a past department chair and undergraduate coordinator, and has served nationally as a facilitator for leadership development in higher education . She says she is a former department chair .
 She specializes in the areas of international relations and foreign policy, with an emphasis on human rights, democracy, international political economy, and the arms trade .
 She has served on a number of editorial boards, including those for three of the discipline’s foremost journals . She has also served on the editorial boards of three journals .
 International Studies Quarterly, Foreign Policy Analysis and International Studies Perspectives, is published on International Studies . International Studies quarterly: Foreign Policy . Analysis and Perspectives Perspectives.
 Her work has been published extensively in leading scholarly journals, including the American Journal of Political Science, Journal of Politics, International Studies Quarterly, and Journal of Third World Studies .
 Heatwaves and droughts have spread across the glohe, such as that in Allahahud, India . Among those that pose a serious threat are the heatwaves that have spread around the world .
 Arresting global warming is one of the many global challenges that face humanity . Arresting climate change is a global challenge that faces humanity .
 "It opens a window on the many trends that are unfolding, some of them in contrary directions," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The combined force of these trends may transform many aspects of international relations, even though they may persist, they may still be powerful .
 There are obstacles that prevent us from understanding world politics accurately . We need to be able to understand world politics better, says Julian Zelizer .
 Chapter 1 explains how our perceptions of global realities can lead to distortions, and suggests how to get beyond these barriers . Chapter 1 provides four keys to understanding world politics as well as an outline of the book's thematic approach and organization .
 Chapter 2 introduces the major rival theories that scholars have developed to help policy makers and citizens better describe, explain, and predict the evolving nature of international relations . Chapter 2 of the book includes the major theories that have been developed by scholars .
 It also illuminates two powerful critiques of these mainstream theories; radicalism and feminism . The book is a powerful critique of the mainstream theories of radicalism .
 Such theories are important tools that can help you construct more accurate images of the complexity of world politics and better interpret emerging trends .
 The CHALLENGE OF J f f f & f INVESTIGATING WORLD AFFAIRS is the latest in a series of investigations into world affairs . Find out what you need to do with the challenge .
 As viewed from newspaper headlines, “world politics’s looks much different . “World politics” is much different from ‘world politics,’ says CNN.com .
 I magine myself returning home from a two-week vacation on a tropical island where you had no access to the news . I magined yourself returning home after two weeks of vacation . Chapter 1 5 .
 The trip gave you a well-deserved break before starting a new school term . The trip was a good break before the start of the new school year .
 The “coalition of the willing” is comprised of the United States alone . They indicate that there is a downsizing of resources and troops from the insurgency in Iraq . The U.S. alone is responsible for the downsizing .
 The focus has turned to the battle against A1 Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and parts of Pakistan . Violence and deaths have increased sharply in the region, where violence has increased sharply .
 The role that information technology is playing to sustain the protests in Iran is playing a key role in the unrest . The protests have taken place in Iran since the election of Iran's president .
 HlNl swine flu virus continues to spread . Countries around the globe are closely monitoring infected individuals and setting vaccine priorities in anticipation of winter months .
 There are signs that the economic decline in the U.S. is leveling off, though Europe continues to suffer from record unemployment levels . Africa is beginning to feel the sting from reduced foreign investment .
 You hope that conditions improve before you graduate before you go on the job market . You hope to be able to find a job after graduation .
 CNN shows footage commemorating the life of Corazon Aquino, who served as a popular president of the Philippines . CNN also shows footage of the death of the popular former president . CNN's iReport: CNN.com will feature the best moments of the day .
 CNN’s report concludes with an announcement that tensions continue to simmer between Russia and Georgia . Georgia accused of stoking violence in South Ossetia, CNN says .
 There may be a prospect for ongoing dialogue between the U.S. and North Korea in the wake of successful negotiations to release two imprisoned journalists from North Korea . The two journalists were freed in exchange for their release .
 The events identified record what actually occurred during the month of August 2009 . August 2009 is the year of the year when the world's most significant events occurred .
 Undoubtedly, many individuals experienced fear and confusion during this turbulent period . Undoubtedly many people experienced fear, confusion and confusion .
 The world matters and that those changes in it affect your circumstances and future powerfully . Putting this information about unfolding events together, you cannot help but be reminded that the world matters .
 The ‘news’ you received is not really new, because it echoes many old stories from the past about the growing sea of turmoil sweeping contemporary world circumstances . The “news” you received isn’t really new. It echoes old stories of the past, because
 The temptation to wish that this depressing kind of chaotic world would just go away is overwhelming . Nevertheless, the temptation is overwhelming. Nevertheless, it is overwhelming, and I wish it just goes away .
 Interpreting World Politics long enough for a sense of predictability and order to prevail . If only the unstable world would stand still 6 Interprets World Politics . Interprecinging World Politics is an attempt at predicting the future of the world .
 World politics is the study of how global actors’ activities involve the exercise of influence to achieve and defend their goals and ideals, and how it affects the world at large . You cannot escape the world .
 We are all a part of this world, and this world is an integral part of each of us . We are not alone, but we are all part of the world, says author .
 If we are to live adaptively amid the fierce winds of global change, we must face the challenge of discovering the dynamic properties of world politics . Hence, if we are . to live . adaptively .
 All can benefit by investigating how the global system works and how changes are remaking our political and economic world .
 We must perceive our times accurately in order to best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s 6. billion people . We need to perceive our time accurately to understand the world's 6 billion people, says David Cameron .
 Interpreting the world in which we now live and anticipating what lies ahead for the globe’s future—and yours—presents formidable challenges . Interprepreceptions and anticipating the future of the world are challenging .
 We are constantly bombarded with a bewildering amount of new information and new developments . We're constantly bombarding with new information, new developments. We need to keep up with the latest developments.
 Forging a meaningful understanding of the messages about world affairs we receive every day could be the most difficult task you will ever face . Forging understanding of world affairs could be a difficult task .
 Albert Einstein believed the task was extremely challenging . This is the task that, as the seminal scientist Albert Einstein said, is extremely challenging.
 People resist unfamiliar information and ideas that undermine their habitual ways of viewing and thinking about world affairs . Another part of the challenge stems from the tendency of people to resist unfamiliar ideas and ideas . The challenge is to change people's view of the world's affairs .
 We know from repeated studies that people do not want to accept ideas that do not conform to their prior beliefs . We know that people don't want to believe in new ideas that don't conform to beliefs .
 A purpose of this book is to help you to cultivate a questioning attitude about your preexisting beliefs about world affairs and about the many actors on the world stage . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 We will ask you to evaluate rival perspectives on global issues, even if they differ from your current images . To that end, we will ask for you to share your own views of the world .
 "We will expose you to schools of thought prevailing today that you may find unconvincing, and possibly repugnant," says CNN.com's John Sutter . We will expose us to schools we may find 'unconincing' and 'repugnant'
 Many people make these views the bedrock of their interpretations, and these viewpoints accordingly enjoy a popular following . Because many other people make such views, many people make them their interpretations .
 Some visions of world politics with which even your authors may not agree, so that you may weigh the wisdom or foolishness of contending perspectives . For this reason, this text will describe some visions of the world politics . Even your own authors may disagree with these visions .
 The interpretive challenge, then, is to try to observe unfolding global realities objectively, in order to describe and explain them accurately . The challenge is to observe and explain the world's unfolding realities .
 We begin with a brief introduction to the role that subjective images of reality play in understanding world politics . To appreciate how our images of . reality shape our expectations, we begin with an introduction to . the role of subjective images .
 This will be followed by a set of analytic tools that will help you overcome perceptual obstacles to understanding world politics . The book will also help you to more capably interpret forces of change and continuity that affect our world .
 We already hold mental images of world politics, although we may not have attempted to explicitly define our perceptions about the world in our subconscious . It is the tragedy of the world that no one knows what he doesn't know .
 Our images simplify ‘reality’ by exaggerating some features of the real world while ignoring others . But whatever our levels of self-awareness, our images perform the same function . They simplify “reality”
 Many of our images of the world’s political realities may be built on illusions and misconceptions . Many of these illusions may be based on illusions or misconceptions, says David Cameron .
 Images that are now accurate can easily become outdated if we fail to recognize changes in the world . Even images that are accurate can become outdated can easily be outdated .
 The world’s future will be determined not only by changes in the ‘objective” facts of world politics, but also by the meaning that people ascribe to those facts, the assumptions on which they base their interpretations, and the actions that flow from these assumptions and
 The Nature and Sources of Images is inevitable and even necessary . The effort to simplify one’s view of the world is inevitable .
 Each of us inevitably creates a ‘mental map’ to make sense of confusing information . Cartographers’ projections simplify complex geophysical space so that we can better understand the world .
 Mental maps are neither inherently right nor wrong, they are important because we tend to react according to the way the world appears to us rather than the way it is . Although mental maps are not inherently right or wrong, it is important because of how we react to them .
 How we view the world determines our attitudes, beliefs, and behavior, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: How we see the world affects our attitudes and beliefs .
 Schemical reasoning is the process of reasoning by which new information is interpreted according to a memory structure, a schema, which contains a network of generic scripts, metaphors, and simplified characterizations of observed objects and phenomena . As Richard Ned Lebow warns, “Policymakers
 Most of us look for information that reinforces our preexisting beliefs about the world, assimilate new data into familiar images, equate what we believe with what we know, and deny information that contradicts our expectations .
 We rely on learned habits for viewing new information and for making judgments . These “schema’s” guide our perceptions and organize information for us, says author .
 Research in cognitive psychology shows that human beings are “categorizers” who match what they see with images in their memories of prototypical events and people when attempting to understand the world by schematic reasoning .
 The absentminded professor, the shady lawyer, and the kindly grandmother are examples of “stock” images that many of us have of certain types of people . The absent minded professor and shady lawyer are examples .
 Many people assume that seeing is believing without questioning whether the ways they have organized their perceptions are accurate . This is not the case for many people, but it's important to question whether they are seeing and believing .
 Students of perception argue that what you see is what you get, and that two observers looking at the same object might easily see different realities . Students say two observers can see different reality .
 perceptual psychologists are fond of displaying the following drawing, which, depending on how the viewer looks at it, can be seen as a goblet or two faces opposing each other .
 People can vary greatly on how they will view international events, actors, and issues . This principle has great importance for investigation of international relations, where, depending on one’s perspective, people vary greatly .
 To appreciate the controversies that can result when different people see different realities even though they are looking at the same thing, consider something as basic as viewing the location and size of the world’s continents .
 There exists a long-standing controversy among cartographers about the ‘right" way to map the globe, that is how to make an accurate projection .
 The accuracy of their rival maps matters politically because they shape how people view what is important . It's important to ensure the accuracy of rival maps are accurate .
 All maps of the globe are distorted because it is impossible to . perfectly represent the three-dimensional globe on a two-dimensional piece of paper . All maps are distorted .
 The difficulty cartographers face can be appreciated by trying to flatten an orange peel . The difficulty of flattening a peel can be seen in the difficulty of cartographers .
 You can only flatten it by separating pieces of the peel that were joined when it was spherical . You can flatten the peel by separating the pieces of peel that joined when the peel was spherical.
 Cartographers who try to flatten the globe on paper, without ripping it into separate pieces, face the same problem . Cartographers face the problem of flattening the globe without ripping into pieces .
 There are a variety of ways to represent the three-dimensional object on paper, all of them involve some distortion .
 Cartographers must choose among imperfect ways of representing the globe by selecting those aspects of the world’s geography they consider most important to describe accurately, while making adjustments to other parts . Cartographers have to choose among the imperfect ways to represent the globe .
 Cartographers’ ideas of what is most important in world geography have varied according to their own global perspectives . Cartographers' ideas of the most important things in world history have varied from their own perspectives .
 Four maps depict the distribution of the Earth’s land surfaces and territory, but each portrays a different image . These four maps (Maps 1.1,1.2, 1.3, and 1.4) depict different landscapes .
 Mercator projection was popular in sixteenth-century Europe and presents a classic Eurocentric view of the world . The projection was named for the Flemish cartographer Gerard Mercator .
 It mapped the Earth without distorting direction, making it useful for navigators . The map was created by Google Maps of the Earth in 2007 .
 The distances were deceptive, placing Europe at the center of the world and exaggerating the continent’s importance relative to other landmasses . However, distances placed Europe at center of world were deceptive .
 Europe appears larger than South America, which is twice Europe’s size . Two-thirds of the map is used to represent the northern half of the world . Only one-third the southern half is used .
 In the Peter’s projection, each landmass appears in correct proportion in relation to all others . But it distorts the shape and position of the Earth's landmasses . The projection is based on the size and shape of the world .
 More than three-quarters of the world’s population lives today in the Global South . In contrast with most geographic representations, it draws attention to less developed countries .
 The orthographic projection is centering on the mid-Atlantic . It conveys some sense of the curvature of the Earth using rounded edges . The projection is based on the Earth's curvature .
 The sizes and shapes of continents toward the outer edges of the circle are distorted to give a sense of spherical perspective . The shapes and sizes of continents are distorted in the shape of the circles .
 Many factors shape our images, including how we were socialized as children, traumatic events we may have experienced growing up that shape our personalities and psychological needs . The opinions about world affairs expressed by our frequent associates such as close friends and co-workers .
 We try to keep that image consistent without other beliefs and, through a psychological process known as cognitive dissonance , reject information that contradicts how it portrays the world . Accordingly, we try to . keep that . image consistent .
 Our perceptions depend not only on what happens in daily life but also on how we interpret and internalize those events . In short, our minds select, screen, and filter information; consequently, our perceptions depend on our perceptions .
 We must be careful not to assume that what applies to individuals applies to entire countries . We should not equate the beliefs of leaders, such as heads of states, with the people under their authority .
 Leaders' images of historical circumstances often predispose them to behave in particular ways toward others, regardless of ‘objective’ facts . Still, leaders have extraordinary influence, and leaders’ images of history predispose .
 The loss of twenty-six million Soviet lives in the “Great Patriotic War” (as the Russians refer to World War II) reinforced a long-standing fear of foreign invasion, which caused a generation of Soviet policy makers to perceive U.S. defensive moves with suspicion
 America’s impulse to isolate itself (its disposition to withdraw from world affairs), and its determination to reform the world in its own image whenever global circumstances become highly threatening . America's desire to reform itself (and withdraw) is reflected in its decision to reform world in own image .
 The former led the United States to reject membership in the League of Nations after World War I . The latter gave rise to the U.S. globalist foreign policy since World War II .
 Most Americans see only good intentions in active U.S. interventionism . Most Americans, thinking of their country as virtuous, have difficulty understanding why others regard such far-reaching international activism as threatening .
 Leaders and citizens are prone to ignore or reinterpret information that runs counter to their beliefs and values . Mutual misperceptions often fuel discord in world politics, especially when relations between countries are hostile .
 Distrust and suspicion arise as conflicting parties view each other in the same negative light . This is, as mirror images develop . Distrust, suspicion arise when conflicting parties see each other negatively .
 Each side saw its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as hostile . Both sides erroneously assumed their counterparts would misinterpret the intentions of their own policy initiatives .
 Psychologist Urie Bronfenbrenner was amazed to hear Russians describing the United States in terms that were strikingly similar to the way Americans described the Soviet Union . Each side saw itself as virtuous and peace-loving, whereas the other was seen as untrustworthy, aggressive, and
 Mirror-imaging is a property of nearly all enduring rivalries —long-lasting contests between opposing groups . Mirror-image is a long-lasting contest between rivalries, and mirror-images are common .
 Both sides demonize the image of their adversary while perceiving themselves as virtuous . In rivalries such as Christianity against Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages, Israel and Palestine since the birth of the sovereign state of Israel in 1948 .
 Self-righteousness often leads one party to view its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as negative and hostile . Selfrighteousness is often self-righteous and self-destructive .
 Opposing sides have different preferences for certain outcomes over others . They do not see the underlying issues in the same light . The opposing sides do not agree on certain outcomes, they say .
 The mirror images held by rivals tend to be self-confirming . Eurther complicating matters is the mirror image held by rival rivals . The mirror image of rivals tends to be that of themselves .
 When one side expects the other to be hostile, it may treat its opponent in a manner that leads the opponent to take counteractions that confirm the mirror images . enduring rivalries are fueled by deep-seated mutual hatred that leads opposed actors to feud and fight over a long period of
 Fostering peace is not simply a matter of expanding trade and other forms of transnational contact . Clearing up mutual misperceptions can facilitate negotiations between the parties . Fosting peace not simply expanding trade or bringing political leaders together in international summits .
 It is a matter of changing deeply entrenched beliefs about foreign policy the decisions governing authorities make to realize international goals . Rather, it is the issue of changing the beliefs of the U.S.
 Although our constructed images of world politics are resistant to change, change is possible, it is possible. Change is possible in the world of politics .
 Overcoming old thinking habits sometimes occurs when we experience punishment or discomfort as a result of clinging to false assumptions . Overcoming thinking habits often occurs when people experience discomfort or discomfort .
 Dramatic events can alter international images, sometimes drastically, sometimes dramatically . Dramatic images can be altered by events in the Middle East .
 Vietnam War caused many Americans to reject their previous images about using military force in world politics . The Vietnam War saw the rise of the Vietnam War as a major source of conflict in the world .
 The defeat of the Third Reich and revelations of Nazi atrocities committed before and during World War II caused the German people to confront their past as they prepared for a democratic future imposed by the Allies .
 The use of atomic bombs against Japan in the waning days of World War II caused many to confront the horrors of modern warfare and the immorality of weapons of mass destruction .
 Rising human and financial costs of the prolonged U.S. war in Iraq have led many policy makers to reexamine their assumptions about foreign policy priorities . The cost of the Iraq war has led policy makers and political commentators to rethink priorities .
 Often, such jolting experiences encourage us to construct new mental maps, perceptual filters, and criteria through which we may interpret later events and define situations . Often we construct mental maps and filters, such as perceptual filters .
 As we shape and reshape our images of world politics and its future, we need to think critically about the foundations on which our perceptions rest . Determining Foreign Policy is a key part of our world's future .
 Rethinking our images is one of the major challenges we face to avoid prejudice . Prejudging what we see in world affairs is based on misguided opinions, like a person with his nose pressed against the mirror .
 Questioning our images is one of the major challenges we all face in confronting contemporary world politics . Questioning ourselves is a major challenge we face today's world politics, says David Cameron .
 There are no sure-fire solutions to ensure accurate observations, no ways to guarantee that we have constructed an impartial view of international relations . Chapter 1 15 .
 There are a number of tools available that can improve our ability to interpret world politics . However, there are a few tools available to improve our understanding of world politics.
 As you undertake an intellectual journey of discovery, a set of intellectual roadmaps will provide guidance for your interpretation and understanding of past, present, and future world politics . As you embark on a journey to discover the world politics, the roadmaps provide guidance .
 Trend and Transformation advances four key keys to aid you in your inquiry . Trend and transformation advances four keys to help you in an inquiry . The book "Trend and Transformation" is published by John Defterios .
 A primary goal of this text is to introduce you to the vocabulary used by scholars, policy makers, and the “attentive public’s” who routinely look at international developments . Introducing Terminology is a primary goal .
 You will need to be literate and informed about the shared meaning of common words used worldwide to discuss and debate world politics and foreign policy .
 Some of this language has been in use since antiquity, and some of it has only recently become part of the terminology employed in diplomatic circles, scholarly research, and the media .
 These words are the kind of vocabulary you are likely to encounter long after your formal college education has ended . These words will likely be used long after you have finished your college education .
 It is also the terminology your future employers and educated neighbors will expect you to know . The terminology will be used by future employers, educated neighbors .
 Some of these words are already likely to be part of your working vocabulary, but others may look new, esoteric, pedantic, and overly sophisticated . Some of the words you need to know are likely to already be familiar .
 Your use of them will facilitate your ability to analyze and discuss world affairs . Use them to mark you as a knowledgeable, educated person .
 Learn these words and use them for the rest of your life . Not to impress others, but to understand and communicate intelligently . Use them to communicate with others .
 Certain words are printed in boldface in the text, and a broad definition is provided in the margins . To guide you in identifying these terms, the terms are printed with a bold definition .
 In cases when a word is used again in a different chapter, it will be highlighted at least once in italics . The marginal definition will not be repeated .
 In all cases, the primary definition will appear in the Glossary at the end of book .
 The globe is a stage, and the players in the drama are many . Distinguishing the Primary Transnational Actors is important .
 It is important to identify and classify the major categories of actors who take part in international activities . It is also important to classify and categorise the actors involved in international events .
 The essential building-block units, of course, are individual people—all 6. billion of us, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Every day, whether each of us choose to litter, light a cigarette, or parent a child affects in small measure how trends in the world will unfold . Each of us chooses to litter and light cigarettes every day .
 All of these combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate the power of each expanding group . All of the choices in these collectivities are based on people's choices, choices .
 Such groups often compete with one another because frequently they have divergent interests and goals . Such groups compete with each other because of diverging interests .
 For most periods of world history, the prime actors were individual groupings of religions, tribes whose members shared ethnic origins, and empires . empires or expansionist centers of power .
 When they came into contact, they sometimes collaborated with each other for mutual benefit . More often they competed and fought over valued resources, says the author .
 The Emergence of the Nation-State System . The more than eight thousand years of recorded international relations provided the precedent for the formation of today’s system of interactions .
 The Peace of Westphalia in 1648 ended the Thirty Years’ War in Europe . The modern state system was not born until 1648 . It was a network of relationships among independent territorial units .
 Thereafter rulers refused to recognize the secular authority of the Roman Catholic Church, replacing the system of papal governance in the Middle Ages with geographically and politically separate states that recognized no superior authority .
 The concept of state sovereignty —that no other actor is above the state — still captures these legal rights and identifies the state as the primary actor today . The concept still captures the legal rights of the state, and identifies it as a primary actor .
 The Westphalian system continues to color every dimension of world politics . It provides the terminology used to describe the primary units in international affairs .
 Although the term nation-state is often used interchangeably with “state-state” and “nation-state,” technically the three are different . “Nation-states” are different from “states’s” or “nations
 A state is a legal entity that enjoys a permanent population, a well-defined territory . State is a state that enjoys permanent population and a well defined territory .
 A nation is a collection of people who, on the basis of ethnic, linguistic, or cultural commonality, so construct their reality as to primarily perceive themselves to be members of the same group, which defines their identity . A nation's identity is defined by people who share a commonality
 The term nationstate implies a convergence between territorial states and the psychological identification of people within them . Thus, the term nationstates implies convergence of territorial states with people in them .
 There are few independent states comprising a single nationality . However, in employing this familiar terminology, we should exercise caution because this condition is relatively rare .
 Most states today are populated by many nations, and some nations are not states . Most states are now populated by people who live in many nations .
 These “nonstate nations” are ethnic groups without sovereign power over the territory they live . Ethnic groups such as Native Americans in the U.S. and Sikhs in India, Basques in Spain, or Kurds in Iraq, Turkey, Iran, and Syria .
 History of world politics has largely been a chronicle of interactions among states that remain the dominant political organizations in the world . The rise of nonstate actors in the past has been a major factor in the history of the world's political movements .
 States’ interests, capabilities, and goals are the most potent shaping forces of world politics . States are most powerful shaping forces in world politics, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The supremacy of the state has been severely challenged in recent years . However, the state's supremacy has been seriously challenged .
 International organizations carry independent foreign policies and therefore can be considered global actors in their own right . Such international organizations carry out independent foreign . policies, such as the U.S. government .
 Individual people band together to form coalitions of private citizens in order to participate in international affairs . In addition to individual people banding together, individual people also band together .
 Nonstate actors push their own agendas and increasingly exert global influence . Diverse in scope and purpose, these nonstate actors also push own agendas . They are diverse in scope, purpose, purpose and influence .
 In thinking about world politics and its future, we shall probe all these ‘units’ or categories of actors . We shall probe the “units” or “categories” of actors in world politics .
 The emphasis and coverage will vary, depending on the topics under examination in each chapter . The coverage of each chapter will be different depending upon the content of the chapter .
 All actors are simultaneously active today, and their importance and power depend on the trend or issue under consideration . But you should keep in mind that all actors are currently active today .
 Nation is a collectivity whose people see themselves as members of the same group because they share the same ethnicity, culture, or language . Nation is primarily defined by a sense of sharing a common ancestral nationality, language, cultural heritage, and kinship .
 When we describe international phenomena, we answer a “what’s the question. Distinguishing Levels of Analysis is a key part of our analysis .
 When we move from description to explanation, we face the more difficult task of answering a ‘why’ question . We face the harder task of explaining why .
 One useful key for addressing such puzzles is to visualize an event or trend as part of the end result of some unknown process . A useful key is to visualize an event and trend as a result of an unknown process.
 This encourages us to think about the causes that might have produced the phenomenon we are trying to explain . This is the first time we have seen a phenomenon such as a phenomenon in the past .
 Most events and developments in world politics and its future are undoubtedly influenced simultaneously by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of causal linkages . The world's future is likely to be influenced by many factors, such as climate change and the economy .
 To make interpretive sense of the multiple causes that explain why international events and circumstances occur, make an interpretive statement . To make it clear of the various causes, make a sense of how international events happen .
 World Politics provides an analytic set of categories that suggest where to look for information about a puzzle by organizing it in terms of an inventory of possible explanatory causes . World Politics is available on CNN.com/World Politics .
 International events or developments can best be understood by separating the multiple pieces of the puzzle into different categories, or levels, for analytic purposes . This analytic distinction conforms to a widespread scholarly consensus that international events are best understood by separation of multiple categories .
 To predict which forces will dominate the future, we also must recognize that many forces are operating at the same time . We must also recognize that we must also be aware of the fact that many of these forces are working together at the moment .
 The future is influenced by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of linkages . The future will be shaped by many factors, such as climate change, say experts .
 These may produce stability by limiting the impact of any single disruptive force . Collectively, these may be able to produce stability in the world .
 If interacting forces converge, their combined effects can accelerate the pace of change in world politics, moving it in directions not possible otherwise . The interaction of interacting forces can be accelerated in the world's political landscape .
 The individual level of analysis refers to the personal characteristics of humans, including those responsible for making important decisions on behalf of state and nonstate actors, as well as ordinary citizens whose behavior has political consequences .
 We may locate the impact of individuals’ perceptions on their political attitudes, beliefs, and behavior . Here, for example, we may find the impact on people’s perceptions of political attitudes .
 We may also explore the questions of why each person is a crucial part of the global drama . The study of world politics is relevant to our lives and future .
 The factors that shape states’ foreign policies and the decisions of all other global actors can be categorized at three basic ieveis . The factors are that shape state’s foreign policies can be viewed at three levels .
 At tbe giobai ievei are those structurai features of tbe internationai system sucb such as tbe prevalence of civil wars and tbe extent of trade interdependence . At tbai ivei are the structurai . features of the
 At the state level are internal or domestic influences such as the state’s type of government or the opinions of its citizens . At state level, influence is also seen as a result of the state government or its citizens' opinions .
 At the individual level are the characteristics of leaders -- their personal heliefs, values, and personality . At individual level, leaders are their personal values, values and personalities .
 All three levels simultaneously affect decisions, hut their relative weight usually depends on the issues and circumstances at the time of the decision .
 The state level of analysis consists of the authoritative decision-making units that govern states’ foreign policy processes . The internal attributes of those states (e.g., their type of government, level of economic and military power, and number of nationality groups) shape and constrain leaders�
 The processes by which states make decisions regarding war and peace and their capabilities for carrying out those decisions, for instance, fall within the state level of analysis .
 The global level of analysis refers to interactions of states and nonstate actors on the global stage . The behaviors ultimately shape the international political system and the levels of conflict that characterize world politics .
 The capacity of rich states to dictate the choices of poor states falls properly within the global level of analysis . Rich states should not be able to dictate their choices, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 State level of analysis is an analytical approach that emphasizes how the internai attributes of states influence their foreign policy behaviors . global level is a global level analysis that emphasizes the impact of worldwide conditions on foreign policy behavior and human welfare .
 Global trends and issues are the product of influences at each level of analysis . Examples abound of the diverse ways in which global trends are the result of analysis at different levels .
 Protectionist trade policies by an importing country increase the costs to consumers of clothing and cars . Policies by importing countries reduce the standard of living of citizens in the manufacturing states . The cost of clothes and cars can also be reduced by the cost of importing countries .
 For some developments and issues, factors and forces emanating primarily from one or two particular levels provide more analytical leverage than do those from the other level . Of course, for some developments, issues, can be more analytical .
 As we confront specific global issues in subsequent chapters, we emphasize those levels of analysis that provide the most informative lens for viewing them . Accordingly, as well as the analysis, we . emphasize those . levels of . analysis provide the best informative lens to view them .
 Distinguishing Change, Cycles, and Continuities is useful to place them in a chronological sequence .
 Anyone who owns a combination lock knows that the correct numbers must be entered in their proper order to open the lock . The correct numbers are entered in the proper order, and the correct order is entered into the lock.
 To explain why something happened in world politics, we must determine how various individual-, state-, and global system-level factors fit together in a configuration that unfolds over time . Similarly, to explain why an event happened, we need to determine how it happened in the world .
 One key to anticipating probable human destiny is to look beyond the confines of our immediate time . One key is to anticipate probable human fate is to think beyond current time .
 It is important to appreciate the impact of previous ideas and events on current realities . It is also important to remember the impact on previous ideas, events and current realities.
 To understand the dramatic changes in world politics today and to predict how they will shape the future, it is important to view them in the context of a long-term perspective . Transnational patterns of interaction among actors have changed and how some of their fundamental characteristics have resisted change .
 We discuss how the differences between continuities, changes, and cycles in world history can help you orient your interpretation of history .
 Every historical period is marked by some extent by change . Chapter 1: Every historical event is marked to some extent with change .
 The pace of change seems more rapid and its consequences more profound than ever . Now, however, the pace of the change seems much more rapid .
 To many observers, the cascade of events today implies a revolutionary restructuring of world politics . Many observers say this implies a revolution in world politics.
 The countries of the world are drawing closer together in communications and trade, producing a globalized market . The countries are bringing closer together to produce a greater globalized economy .
 " disintegrative trends paint a less promising picture. Yet at the same time, disintegrative trend paint a far more promising picture," says CNN.com .
 Weapons proliferation, global environmental deterioration, and the resurgence of ethnic conflict all portend a restructuring fraught with disorder . Weapons proliferation and environmental deterioration are among the reasons for a restructuring .
 To predict which forces will dominate the future, we must recognize that no trend stands alone . Divergent trends may produce stability by limiting the impact of any single disruptive force, experts say .
 It is possible for converging trends to accelerate the pace of change, moving world politics in directions not possible otherwise . It is also possible for convergence of trends to move the speed of change in world politics .
 It appears that the world is now going through a transition period in world politics . The world appears to be in transition period, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The opposing forces of integration and disintegration point toward the probable advent on the horizon of a transformation . But distinguishing true historical watersheds from temporary change is difficult .
 The moment of transformation from one system to another is not immediately obvious, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Students of world history can recognize that certain times are especially likely candidates . Nevertheless, another useful key for students is to recognize certain times, especially likely candidate .
 In the past, major turning points in world politics usually occurred at the conclusion of wars with many participants, which typically disrupt or destroy preexisting international arrangements . The U.S. has been involved in many of the world's most recent wars .
 World Wars I and n and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink the premises underlying their interests .
 Many people concluded that the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 produced a fundamental transformation in world affairs . Similarly, many concluded that 9/11 produced a profound transformation in the world .
 To analyze change in world politics, it is equally important to look also for the possibility of continuity amidst apparent transformation, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says to analyze change, it's important to also look for continuity .
 Despite all that may appear radically different since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, much also may remain the same . Consider how, despite all that appears radically different, much still may remain a part of the world .
 Decades-old flash points remain, including the conflicts between India and Pakistan, North Korea and North Korea . It appears that one “global system” has replaeed another .
 We often expect the future to bring changes automatically, and later are surprised to discover that certain patterns from the past have reappeared . We often often expect to see changes automatically - and later discover that they have reappear .
 It is dangerous to assume that a major transformation in world politics is under way, says David Cameron . Given the rapid changes that are occurring alongside enduring continuities, it is not possible to assume a major change is underway .
 The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center’s Twin Towers on 9/11 is widely regarded as a revolutionary date in world history, producing a sea change in world politics . The attack on September 11, 2001, is regarded as the most significant date in the world history .
 Time will tell whether this event will rank alongside the hirth of the nuclear age on August 6, 1945, when the United States homhed Hiroshima, or the November 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall, which signaled the end of the Cold War .
 These criteria might lead us to conclude that a new system has now emerged . These criteria may lead to the conclusion that new system of policing has emerged .
 New trade Chapter 1 23 partnerships have been forged in Europe, the cone of South America, North America, and the Pacific Rim . These trading blocs may behave as unitary, or independent, nonstate actors as they compete with one another .
 International organizations such as the EU flex their political muscles in contests with individual states . Transnational religious movements such as Islamic extremist groups challenge the global system itself . The EU now flexes its political muscles against individual states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 International law still defines this system as being composed primarily of each state consisting of various nationality groups who perceive themselves as unified by a common language, culture, or ethnic identity . International law defines each state as consisting of different nationality groups .
 First, territorial conquest is no longer states’ predominant foreign policy goal . Second, territorial conquests are no longer state’s predominant goal, they say .
 Instead of military methods of exercising influence, focus has shifted from military to economic means . The U.S. has been in touch with the Middle East since 2001 .
 The ideological contest between democratic capitalism and Marxist-Eeninist communism no longer comprises the primary cleavage in international politics, and a major new axis has yet to become clear . Meanwhile, the ideological battle between capitalism and communism of the Cold War era is no longer dominant .
 Third, proliferation of weapons technology has profoundly altered the damages that enemies can inflict on one another . Third, the proliferation of weapon technology has changed the damage inflicted on each other .
 Great powers’ prosperity depends on economic circumstances throughout the globe, reducing their ability to engineer growth . Increasingly, however, the great powers' prosperity depends upon economic circumstances .
 The profound changes in recent years of the types of actors and goals, goals, and capabilities have dramatically altered the hierarchical power ranking of states . But the hierarchies themselves endure, and they are still powerful .
 The economic hierarchy that divides the rich from the poor, political hierarchy that separates rulers from the ruled, resource hierarchy that makes some suppliers and others dependents, and the military asymmetries that pit the strong against the weak—all still shape the relations among states .
 The perpetuation of international anarchy, in the absence of institutions to govern the globe, and continuing national insecurity still encourage preparations for war and the use of force without international mandate, says the author .
 Change and continuity coexist, with both forces simultaneously shaping contemporary world politics . Thus, change and continuity of politics coexist .
 The interaction of constancy and change will determine future relations among global actors, say experts . The interaction will determine how relations will develop among global players, they say .
 Historically minded observers may experience global system the predominant patterns of behaviors and beliefs that prevail internationally to define the major worldwide conditions that heavily influence human and national activities . anarchy is a condition in which the units in the global system are subjected to few if any overarching institutions to regulate their conduct . anarchy
 World Politics provides some guideposts to help you travel on your journey to discovery . Prepping for your journey into world politics is a guide to accurate perceptions of international relations .
 This introduction concludes with a brief outline of the book’s thematic approach and organizational roadmap . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 Some view the world through a macropolitical lens, meaning they look at world politics from a “bird’s eye view” and explain the behavior of world actors based on their relative position within the global system . Others look at the world from a bird's eye view
 Other scholars adopt a micropolitical perspective that looks at world politics from the ‘ground-up’ meaning the individual is the unit of analysis from which aggregate behavior is extrapolated .
 By looking at world politics from a macropolitical perspective, we can see why actors that are similarly situated within the system may behave alike, despite their internal differences . We can see how actors in the same system behave, despite differences .
 World Politics will inspect the major macro trends in world politics that set the boundaries for action, the values, interests, and capabilities of the individual actors affected by these global trends, and the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances .
 This analytic approach looks at the dynamic interplay of actors and their environment as well as how the actors respond and seek to influence each other’s behavior . Chapter 1 25 . Chapter 25: "This analytic approach takes an analytic approach to actors' behavior"
 The approach outlined here can open a window for you not only to understand contemporary world politics but also to predict the likely global future . The approach is outlined here .
 The approach has the advantage of taking into account the interplay of proximate and remote explanatory factors at the individual, state, and global levels of analysis . It avoids dwelling on particular countries, individuals, or transitory events whose long-term significance is likely to decrease .
 World Politics attempts to identify behaviors that cohere into general patterns that measurably affect global living conditions . World Politics is based on the behavior of people around the world that affect their lives .
 You will explore the nature of world politics from a perspective that places historical and contemporary events into a larger, lasting theoretical context, to provide you with conceptual tools that will enable you to interpret subsequent developments later in your lifetime .
 Chapter 1 explains how our perceptions of global events and realities lead to distorted views . It suggests how to move beyond the limited scope of those views by providing four keys to understanding world politics .
 The chapter also provides an outline of the book’s organization and thematic approach . The book will be published in 2015 .
 Your journey continues in Chapter 2 with an overview of the realist, liberal, and constructivist theoretical traditions that scholars and policy makers use most often to interpret world politics .
 It also considers the radical and feminist critiques of these mainstream traditions . The film is based on the work of American cinema cinema and television .
 The comparison of contending theories provides the intellectual roadmap for the description and explanation of the issues and developments treated in the remaining chapters of this chapter .
 Chapter 3 covers the great powers (those wealthy countries with the largest militaries) and their current national security strategies and relationships . Chapter 3 will cover the great power (those with the biggest military might) and the relationship with the world's most powerful nations .
 Chapter 4 incorporates into the picture the place of the weaker states, that is, the less developed countries of the Global South . It explains how the fate of this group of states is shaped by their relations with great powers the most powerful countries .
 Chapter 5 expands the account to cover IGOs such as the United Nations and the European Union . Chapter 5 will also cover the U.N. and the EU .
 It captures the impact on world politics of NGOs as ethnic groups and indigenous peoples, transnational religious movements and terrorist groups, multinational corporations, and issue-advocacy groups .
 This coverage describes how IGO and NGO actors interact with states and increasingly challenge the supremacy of all states, including even the great powers . This coverage includes how these actors challenge states’ sovereign control over destinies .
 Your understanding of world politics is further strengthened in Chapter 6, which introduces three ways of looking at international decision-making processes by all transnational actors . Chapter 6 introduces a three-way-view of international decision making processes .
 It concludes by focusing on the global and domestic determinants of states’ international behavior . It concludes that states remain the principal actors in world politics .
 Chapter 8 reviews realist theoretical accounts of power in world politics, trends in military spending and capabilities, military strategies, and coercive diplomacy through military intervention abroad . Chapter 8 discusses realist theories of power and military strategies .
 The picture is completed in Chapter 9, which explores the role of alliances in world politics, with an emphasis on the realist perspective . Chapter 9 explores the importance of alliances and the role they play in politics .
 Chapter 10 looks at both the negotiated settlement of disputes through diplomacy and the legal control of armed aggression . Chapter 10 will look at both diplomacy and military control of aggression .
 Chapter 11 focuses on arms control and disarmament, the maintenance of collective security through international organizations, and the creation of a shared international moral consensus through the expansion of free trade and democratic institutions . Chapter 11: Arms control, disarmament and collective security .
 Chapter 12 explores the international financial system and issues surrounding the worldwide flow of capital . Chapter 12 of the IMF's new book, The International Reporting Agency, is published by Simon Tisdall . Chapter 11 explores the world's financial system .
 Chapter 13 follows with a discussion of trends in the globalization of international trade, and the various strategies pursued in the quest for wealth and power . Chapter 13 includes the discussion of the strategies pursued by the rich and powerful .
 Coverage continues in Chapter 14 by inspecting population change, migration patterns, the global health crisis, and the global information age as agents of the information age . Chapter 1 27 explores the global transformation .
 Chapter 15 examines relative levels of human rights and security and the expanding global commitment to protecting and improving the human condition . Chapter 15 looks at the expanding commitment, as well as the inherent difficulties, to protecting human rights .
 Chapter 16 probes the multiple environmental challenges facing our world today, and the consequences that they pose for our continued survival and well-being . Chapter 16 explores the multiple challenges facing us today, including the consequences for our survival .
 Chapter 17 considers contending perspectives about the probable shape of the global future . Chapter 17 focuses on some of the most hotly debated questions on the global agenda . Chapter 16 considers the future of the world .
 These dilemmas are likely to dominate discussion of world politics during the next decade, says David Frum . The world's future is likely to be dominated by the challenges of the Middle East .
 As you begin your journey of discovery to extend your knowledge of world politics, it is important to be aware of the images that you hold and be open to new experiences .
 Take full advantage of all of your opportunities to study and learn about tbe global community . Take advantage of the opportunities to learn about the global community.
 Ellis, David C “On the Possibility of”’�’International Community’,” The International Studies Review 11 :l-26. Ellis . Ellis: “The International Community” is a model for a global community . Ellis says the
 How Superpowers, Populations, and Globalization Will Change the Way You Live and Work. How to live and work in the U.S.
 We need theories to make sense of the blizzard of information that bombards us daily, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 We live in a world of ever-changing international conditions . We are faced with the challenges we face in the world of international affairs .
 Many trends are unfolding, some in contrary directions, and obstacles exist to understanding world politics accurately, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Many trends are emerging, some of them are unfolding in the wrong direction"
 As you begin your study of trend and transformations in world politics, your challenge is to interpret theoretically the meaning of a changing world . Your challenge is: interpret theoretically, theoretically, to understand the meaning in the world .
 You are scheduled to deliver the State of the Union address on your views of the current global situation and your foreign policy to deal with it .
 You face the task of both defining those aspects of international affairs most worthy of attention and explaining the reasons for their priority . You also have to define what matters most important in the world .
 To convince citizens that these issues are important, you must present them as part of a larger picture of the world . You must convince them that they must be part of the larger picture, he says .
 "You must think theoretically. Therefore, based on your perceptions of world politics, you must think theoretical," says David Cameron .
 CNN.com: "Your interpretations will necessarily depend on your assumptions about international realities that your citizens might find questionable" "At the same time, you must be careful, because your interpretations must be very careful," he says .
 The effort to explain the world, predict new global problems, and sell others on a policy to deal with them is bound to result in controversy . Even reasonable people often see realities differently, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 When leaders face these kinds of intellectual challenges, they benefit from various theories of world politics from which they can draw guidance . Leaders benefit from these theories, they can also draw guidance from theories of the world politics, he says .
 A theory is a set of conclusions derived from assumptions and/or evidence about some phenomenon, including its character, causes, and probable consequences, and their ethical implications . Theories are based on assumptions and evidence, such as some of the causes and consequences of some phenomenon .
 Theories provide a map, or frame of reference, that makes the complex, puzzling world around us intelligible . Theory provides a map of the world that makes it easier to understand . Theory is a framework for understanding the complex world and understanding it .
 Each theory rests on different assumptions about the nature of international politics, each advances different claims about causes, and each offers a different set of foreign policy recommendations . Choosing which theory to heed is an important decision, because of different assumptions .
 Rival theories of world politics abound, and there is no agreement about which one is the most useful . Theories abound, but there are no agreement on which is the best one .
 No single theory has proven capable of making international events understandable for every global circumstance . The reason is primarily because the world is constantly undergoing changes, and no single theory is proven to be able to make it understandable .
 There are fads and fashions in the popularity of international theories . They rise and fall over time in popularity and perceived usefulness, depending on the global conditions that prevail in any historical period .
 The history of the world is the history of changes in the theoretical interpretation of international relations . The world has changed dramatically in recent years, according to the historian .
 In any given era, a dominant way of looking at a particular subject such as international relations has arisen to influence judgments regarding which characteristics of the subject are most important, what puzzles need to be solved, and what analytic criteria should govern investigations .
 These paradigms, or “fundamental assumptions scholars make about the world they are studying’ (Vasquez 1997), tend eventually to be revised in order to explain new developments . “Fundamental assumptions scholar make about world they're studying” tend eventually be revised
 Theory is forever evolving in an effort to stay in sync with history’s pendulum . Cycles are embedded in history, and theory is constantly evolving .
 Throughout history, paradigms have been revised or abandoned when their assertions have failed to mirror the prevailing patterns of international behavior .
 Major wars have been especially potent in bringing about significant changes in the theoretical interpretation of world affairs . Major wars are especially powerful in changing the theory of the world's affairs .
 Three system-transforming wars dominated the twentieth century; World War I, World War II, and the Cold War; and likewise, the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001 shattered the preexisting international order .
 Each shaped policy makers’ perceptions of world politics, they say . Each provided lessons critical to developing policies to best preserve world order, the authors say .
 Theories that guide the thinking of policy makers and scholars in different historical circumstances tell us much about world politics itself . Thus, the theories that guide policy makers, scholars and policy makers' thinking should tell us of world politics, they say .
 The purpose of this chapter is to compare the assumptions, causal claims, and policy prescriptions of realism, liberalism, and constructivism . The most common theoretical perspectives policy makers and scholars use to interpret international relations are those of realism and liberalism .
 The chapter broadens coverage of the range of contemporary international theorizing . It introduces you also to the radical and feminist critiques of these three dominant schools of thought .
 Realism is the oldest of these three contending schools of thought, and has a long history that dates back to Thucydides’ writings about the Peloponnesian War in ancient Greece .
 Other influential figures that contributed to realist thought include Niccolo Machiavelli and Thomas Hobbes . The realist thinker is considered to be the most influential philosopher in history .
 Realism is a paradigm based on the premise that worid politics is essentially and unchangeably a struggle among self-interested states for power and position under anarchy . Each competing state pursuing its own national interests, Realism argues .
 Realism views the state as the most important actor on the world stage because it answers to no higher political authority . Realism, as applied to contemporary international politics, is the state's role in world affairs .
 States are sovereign; they have supreme power over their territory and populace . No other actor stands above them wielding the legitimacy and coercive capability to govern the global system . States should be sovereign, and no other actor is above them to govern global system, the author says .
 Realists depict world politics as a ceaseless, repetitive struggle for power where the strong dominate the weak and there is inherently a constant possibility of war . Given the absence of a higher authority to which states can turn for protection and to resolve disputes, realists depict a constant struggle for
 realism claims that prudent political leaders seek arms and allies to enhance national security . Each state is ultimately responsible for its own survival and feels uncertain about its neighbors’ intentions .
 International anarchy leads even well-intentioned leaders to practice self-help, increase their own military strength, and opportunistically align with others to deter potential threats .
 Realist theory does not preclude the possibility that rival powers will cooperate on arms control or on other security issues of common interest . The possibility of cooperation in arms control is unlikely to be ruled out .
 States worry about the unequal distribution of relative gains that can result from cooperation to the disadvantage of one of the parties and the possibility of cheating on agreements .
 Leaders should never entrust the task of self-protection to international security organizations or international law . Leaders should resist efforts to regulate international behavior through global governance, says Peter Bergen .
 World politics is a struggle for power —in the words of Thomas Hobbes, “a war of all against all” — and the possibility of eradicating the instinct for power is a hopeless utopian aspiration . Chapter 2: “World politics is . a struggle of power —
 Economic growth is important primarily as a means of acquiring state power and prestige . It is less relevant to national security than is military might, says Julian Zelizer .
 As a state builds up its power to protect itself, others inevitably become threatened . Others are likely to respond in kind to the threat posed by the state .
 An arms race is commonly seen as a manifestation of the security dilemma, for even if a state is truly arming only for defensive purposes, it is rational in a self-help system for opponents to assume the worst .
 Realists often question letting ethical considerations enter foreign policy deliberations . With their emphasis on the ruthless nature of international life, realists question the ethical nature of foreign policy .
 As they see it, some policies are driven by strategic imperatives that may require national leaders to disregard moral norms . They see it as a strategic imperative that may need to disregard morality norms .
 Embedded in this ‘philosophy of necessity’ is a distinction between private morality and reason of state . Private morality guides the behavior of ordinary people in their daily lives, but state morality governs the conduct of leaders responsible for the security and survival of the state .
 Actions that are dictated by national interest must be carried out no matter how repugnant they might seem in the light of private morality . Actions that must be taken in the national interest are carried out regardless of the morality of the nation, says David Cameron .
 Eor a national leader, “thinking with one’s heart is a serious offense,” he said . Eor said: “Think with one's heart is not a crime. It's a very serious offense.” Eor is a leader of the
 Security dilemma the tendency of states to view the defensive arming of adversaries as threatening, causing them to arm in response . balance of power the theory that peace and stability are most likely to be maintained when military power is distributed to prevent a single superpower hegemon from controlling the world .
 The Evolution of Realist Thought . Realist thought reaches back to ancient Greece . We have seen how the intellectual roots of realism reach back to Ancient Greece .
 In ffie Prince and The Leviathan Niccolo Machiavelli and Thomas Hobbes argued for basing international decisions on self-interest, prudence, power, and expediency above all other considerations . The Arthashastra, an Indian treatise 34 Theories of World
 Modern realist thinking accepts the drive for power over others as necessary and wise statecraft . Kautilya, Han Fei and Shang Yang wrote works on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE .
 Kellogg-Briand Pact was a multilateral treaty negotiated in 1928 that outlawed war as a method for settling interstate conflicts . Kellogg and Briand Pact outlawed war on interstate conflicts in 1928 .
 Modern realism emerged on the eve of World War II, when the prevailing belief in a natural harmony of interests among states came under attack . Realistic realism emerged in the wake of the Second World War .
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact renounced war as an instrument of national policy in 1928 . Just a decade earlier, this belief had led numerous countries to sign the Kellogg and Briand Pact, renouncing war as a national policy .
 In an effort to counter what they saw as a utopian, legalistic approach to foreign affairs, the U.S. tried to take a legalistic foreign policy approach .
 Reinhold Niebuhr and Hans J Morgenthau painted a pessimistic view of human nature . Reinhold Niebuehr and other realists painted a pessimism in their view of humanity .
 In the tradition of St. St. John Paul, St. Paul wrote a book about the conflict between passion and reason . The book was published in 1883, and the book was translated into a novel .
 St. Augustine: Material appetites enabled passion to overwhelm reason . They stressed that material appetites enable passion to overpower reason .
 For them, the human condition was such that the forces of light and darkness would perpetually combat for control . For them they were such that they would constantly fight for control of the world .
 The onset of rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and the expansion of the Cold War into a wider struggle between East and West, and the periodic crises that threatened to erupt into global violence all supported the realists’ emphasis on the inevitability of conflict .
 Classical realists sought to explain state behavior by examining assumptions about peoples’ motives at individual levels of analysis . The next wave of realist theorizing emphasized the global level of analysis, says Julian Zelizer .
 Kenneth Waltz, the leading proponent of neorealism, proposed that international anarchy explained why states were locked in fierce competition with one another .
 The absence of a central arbiter was the defining structural feature of international politics, says David Cameron . He says the absence of an arbiter has been a key feature in international politics for decades .
 Vulnerable and insecure, states behaved defensively by forming alliances against looming threats . Vulnerable, insecure states formed alliances with each other to protect themselves .
 According to Waltz, balances of power form automatically in anarchic environments . Waltz: Balance of power forms automatically in an anarchic environment .
 Structural realism as envisioned by Kenneth Waltz is often referred to as defensive realism . It is often called defensive realism to distinguish it from the more recent variant of realism .
 From the perspective of realism’s critics, seeking security by amassing power was self-defeating . Realism's critics say it is a mistake to seek security in order to gain power in order .
 Because much of realist theorizing was vague, it began to be questioned . Because of that, the realist theory began to become vague, he began to question it .
 Even the policy recommendations that purportedly flowed from its logic were often divergent . Even the policies that supposedly flowed from the logic were divergent.
 Realists were divided as to whether U.S. intervention in Vietnam served American national interests and whether nuclear weapons contributed to international security . Realists themselves, for example, were sharply divided on whether Vietnam war was a success in Vietnam .
 A growing number of critics have pointed out that realism did not account for significant new developments in world politics .
 The cooperative pursuit of mutual advantage led Europeans away from unbridled power politics that brought them incessant warfare since the birth of the nation-state some three centuries earlier .
 Critics worry about realism’s tendency to disregard ethical principles and about the material and social costs that some of its policy prescriptions seemed to impose . Other critics began to worry about how realistic realism's policies would affect society .
 Many people still think about world politics in the language constructed by realists, especially in times of global tension . Despite realism’s shortcomings, many people continue to think about the language of world politics .
 A recent example can be found in the comments by former Bush Chapter 2 37 administration adviser Michael Gerson about how the United States should deal with Iran’s nuclear ambitions .
 The U.S. should focus on preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, he said . Arguing from the realist assumption that “peace is not a natural state,” he called for a robust American response based on a robust response .
 Like realism, it has a distinguished pedigree, with philosophical roots extending back to the political thought of John Locke, Immanuel Kant, and Adam Smith . Realism is a form of realism, with a long history of realism .
 Liberalism warrants attention because it speaks to issues realism disregards, including the impact of domestic politics on state behavior, and the implications of economic interdependence . The role of global norms and institutions in promoting international cooperation should be considered .
 There are several distinct schools of thought within the liberal tradition . The Liberal Worldview is a view of the Liberal World View .
 Drawing broad conclusions from such a diverse body of theory runs the risk of misrepresenting the position of any given author, says author .
 There are sufficient commonalities to abstract some general themes . Nevertheless, there are enough commonities to abstract .
 At the core of liberalism is a belief in reason and the possibility of progress, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Liberalism is at the heart of reason, and the hope of progress .
 Liberals view the individual as the seat of moral value . Liberals assert that human beings should be treated as ends rather than means . Liberals view individual as moral value and assert that humans should be ends not means .
 Politics at the global level is more of a struggle for consensus and mutual gain than a struggle to power and prestige . Politics in the world is more about consensus, mutual gain, rather than power, than prestige .
 Realism liberalism is a paradigm predicated on the hope that the application of reason and universal ethics to international relations can lead to a more orderly, just, and cooperative world . liberalism assumes that anarchy and war can be policed by institutional reforms, thaf .
 Instead of blaming international conflict on an inherent lust for power, liberals fault the conditions under which people live, liberals blame the conditions of people living in the U.S.
 Reforming conditions, they argue, will enhance the prospects for peace . Reforming those conditions will enhance peace, they say .
 The first element common to various strands of liberal thought is an emphasis on undertaking political reforms to establish stable democracies . The idea is that political reforms must be undertaken to establish a stable democracy .
 democratic political cultures shun lethal force as a means of settling disagreements . Democracy is based on tolerance, compromise, and civil liberties, according to experts .
 In place of force, diplomacy provides a means for achieving mutually acceptable solutions to a common problem . Diplomacy enables leaders to negotiate and compromise with each other in a peaceful manner . Diplomatic diplomacy can be used to achieve mutuallyacceptable solutions to common problems .
 Politics is not seen as a zero-sum game, as the use of persuasion rather than coercion is the primary means of dealing with conflict . The use of judicial methods to settle rival claims is the main means of settling disputes .
 Liberal theory says conflict-resolution practices used at home can also be used when dealing with international disputes . Liberal theory: Conflict resolution practices can be used in dealing with disputes abroad .
 Viewing international politics as an extension of domestic politics, they generalize about the applicability of norms to regulate international competition, they say . Viewing the application of these norms to international competition is a generalization .
 Disputes between democratic governments rarely escalate to war because each side accepts the other’s legitimacy . Each side expects it to rely on peaceful means of conflict resolution . Disputes are rarely escalated to war in democracies .
 These expectations are reinforced by the transparent nature of democracies, says David Cameron . Cameron: "Democracies are transparent and transparent"
 The inner workings of open polities can be scrutinized by anyone, writes Andrew Hammond . It is difficult to demonize democratically ruled states as scheming adversaries, he says .
 The second thrust common to liberal theorizing is an emphasis on free trade . Free trade is a key part of the liberal theory of free capitalism .
 The idea that commerce can reduce conflict has roots in the work of Immanuel Kant, Charles de Secondat Montesquieu, Adam Smith, and Adam Smith .
 Norman Angell’s famous rebuttal of the assertion that military conquest produces economic prosperity . This view was later embraced by the Manchester School of political economy and formed the basis for Angell's view . Angell wrote that military conquests produce economic prosperity.
 The doctrine that unfettered trade helps prevent disputes from escalating to wars rests on several propositions . The doctrine is based on the fact that the U.S. has a right to free trade in the world .
 War reduces profits by interrupting the flow of vital economic exchanges . The Granger Collection is published in the Granger Collection .
 Cosmopolitan business elites who benefit most from these exchanges include transnational interest groups . Business elites have a stake in promoting amicable solutions to festering disagreements, the author says .
 The web of trade between countries increases communication, erodes national selfishness, and encourages both sides to avoid ruinous clashes . Finally, it also erodes the selfishness of national self-interest .
 The third commonality in liberal theorizing is the advocacy of global institutions . The idea is that global institutions should be protected from dictatorships .
 Liberals recommend replacing cutthroat, balance-of-power politics with organizations based on the principle that a threat to peace anywhere is a common threat to everyone . Liberals want to replace balance of power politics with an organization based on peace in peace .
 A product of the Enlightenment, David Hume tried to temper his realist concern that reason is a “slave of the passions” by embracing the liberal faith in wealth-generating free markets and free trade that could cohesively bind people together to create a peaceful civil society .
 Immanuel Kant helped redefine modern liberal theory by advocating global citizenship, free trade, and a federation of democracies as a means to peace . Influenced by David Hume and JeanJacques Rousseau, Kant in Perpetual Peace {M25] helped to redefine liberal theory .
 World War I involved more participants over a wider geographic area than any previous war . Modern science and technology made it a war of machinery . Old weapons were improved and produced in great quantities . New and far more deadly weapons were rapidly developed and deployed .
 By the time the carnage was over, nearly twenty million people were dead . By the end of the carnage, nearly 20 million people died .
 liberals set out to reform the global system of power politics . They believe it would lead to warring states practicing power politics again . The world's most powerful and most powerful nations should not engage in power politics, they say .
 The first group advocated creating global institutions to contain the raw struggle for power between self-serving, mutually suspicious states . The other group called for the creation of global institutions for the first time .
 The League of Nations was the embodiment of this strain of liberal thought . The League was an embodiment of the liberal thought. It is now the most powerful institution in the world .
 Its founders hoped to prevent future wars by organizing a system of collective security . The system would mobilize the entire international community against would-be aggressors .
 The League’s founders declared that peace was indivisible . An attack on one member of the League would be considered an attack on all . The League was founded by the League's founders .
 Because no state was more powerful than the combination of all other states, aggressors would be deterred and war averted . No state would have more power than that of all the other states . War averted with the help of the combined forces of all states .
 A second group called for the use of legal procedures to adjudicate disputes before they escalated to armed conflict . A third group said legal procedures should be used to settle disputes .
 Adjudication is a judicial procedure for resolving conflicts by referring them to a standing court for a binding decision . Adjudicating is a procedure for resolution of conflicts by refering them to standing court .
 The PCIJ held its inaugural public meeting in early 1922 and rendered its first judgment on a contentious case the following year . Loder, the court’s first president, was seen as the harbinger of a new era of civilization .
 Liberal champions of the court insisted that the PCIJ would replace military retaliation with a judicial body capable of bringing the facts of a dispute to light and issuing a just verdict .
 A third group of liberal thinkers followed the biblical injunction that states should beat their swords into plowshares and sought disarmament as a means of avoiding war . The Bible advised states to beat swords into swords to avoid war .
 Washington Naval Conference tried to curtail maritime competition among the U.S., Great Britain, Japan, France, France and Italy . Chapter 2 41 placed limits on battleships .
 The ultimate goal of this group was to reduce international tensions by promoting general disarmament . This led them to convene the 1932 Geneva Disarmament Conference, which was held in Geneva .
 A tone of idealism dominated policy rhetoric and academic discussions during the interwar period . Little of the liberal reform program was ever seriously attempted . Even less of it was achieved .
 The League of Nations failed to prevent the Japanese invasion of Manchuria or the Italian invasion of Ethiopia . The 1932 Geneva Disarmament Conference ended in failure . Major disputes were rarely submitted to the PCIJ .
 When the threat of war began gathering over Europe and Asia in the late 1930s, enthusiasm for liberal idealism receded . The threat to war in the 1930s receded.
 The 1973 oil crisis revealed that nonstate actors could affect the course of international events and occasionally compete with states . Although realists continued to focus on the state, the events surrounding the 1973 oil oil crisis showed that non state actors could influence international events .
 This insight led to the realization that complex interdependence sometimes offered a better description of world politics than realism, especially on international economic and environmental matters . This insight was later realized that the world's interdependency sometimes offered better description than realism .
 Rather than contacts between countries being limited to high-level governmental officials, multiple communication channels connect societies . The U.S. should use the internet to connect societies, the U.N. says .
 Issues on national agendas do not always have a fixed priority; and although military force often serves as the primary instrument of statecraft, other means frequently are more effective when bargaining occurs between economically interconnected countries .
 The realist preoccupation with governmentto-government relations ignored the complex network of public and private exchanges crisscrossing state boundaries . In short, the realist . preoccupations with government . relations ignored a complex network .
 States were becoming increasingly interdependent, that is, mutually dependent on, sensitive about, and vulnerable to one another in ways that were not captured by realist theory . States are becoming increasingly dependent on each other in ways not captured as realist theories .
 Many liberal theorists challenged the realist conception of anarchy . Interdependence was not new, but its growth during the last quarter of the twentieth century led many liberal theorists to challenge realist ideas .
 The global system was anarchic, but it was more properly conceptualized as an ‘ordered” anarchy . Most states followed commonly acknowledged normative standards, even in the absence of hierarchical enforcement, authors say .
 International regime embodies the norms, principles, rules, and institutions around which global expectations unite regarding a specific international problem . International regime is the norms and principles that unite around the world's expectations about a specific problem .
 Liberal Idealism as to manage access to common resources such as fisheries and river water . Liberal idealism as . managing access to . common resources . Such as fisheries, river water, water resources .
 neoliberalism emerged in the last decade of the twentieth century to challenge realism and neorealism . Neoliberalism emerged as a response to the recent history that suggested that international relations can change and that increased interdependence .
 Like realism and neorealism, neoliberalism does not represent a consistent intellectual movement or school of thought . Neoliberalism is not a consistent ideological movement, writes Julian Zelizer . Neudianism is an intellectual movement, but it is a movement of thought, he says .
 All neoliberals share an interest in probing the conditions under which the convergent and overlapping interests among transnational actors may result in cooperation . Whatever differences that divide them, however, they share a interest in exploring the possibilities of cooperation .
 Neoliberalism focuses on the ways in which influences such as democratic governance, public opinion, mass education, free trade, international law and organization, arms control and disarmament, collective security, multilateral diplomacy, and ethically inspired statecraft .
 Neoliberal theorists maintain that the ideas and ideals of the liberal legacy could describe, explain, predict, and prescribe international conduct in ways that they could not during the conflict-ridden Cold War . They perceive change in global conditions as progressing over time, haltingly but still in the same trajectory
 Liberal theorists share an interest in probing the conditions under which similar interests among actors may lead to cooperation . The Limitations of Liberalism is the subject of a new book, The Limits to Liberalism .
 Taking heart in the international prohibition, through community consensus, of such previously entrenched practices as slavery, piracy, dueling, and colonialism, they emphasize the prospects for progress through institutional reform . They emphasize the prospect of progress .
 Studies of European integration during the 1950s and 1960s paved the way for the liberal institutionalist theories that emerged in the 1990s . Theories emerged from studies of integration in Europe in the 1960s and 1950s .
 Neorealists argue that anarchy does not matter much and in fact may be preferable to the restraints of world government .
 Neoliberals see anarchy as a big problem that can be reformed through the creation of strong global institutions . Neeliberals believe anarchy is a problem that needs strong institutions to overcome .
 Neorealists and neoliberals agree that international cooperation is possible, but neorealists think cooperation is difficult to sustain . Neorealist believe cooperation can be expected because collaboration produces rewards that reduce the temptation to selfishly compete .
 Both neorealists and neoliberals are concerned with relative gain as well as absolute gain . Neorealists are concerned about relative gain rather than absolute gain, they say .
 Neorealists believe that the desire to get ahead of their competitors by obtaining relative gains is the primary motive . Neoliberals believe that states are motivated by the search for opportunities to cooperate that will produce absolute gains for all parties to the cooperative exchange .
 Both national seurity and national economic prosperity are seen as important state goals by neorealists and neoliberals . The goal is national security and economic prosperity .
 Neoliberals believe states place a greater priority on economic welfare . However, neorealists stress security as the most important goal, and neoliberalists stress that security is not a priority .
 Contemporary neorealists maintain that the distribution of states’ capabilities is the primary determinant of their behavior and international outcomes .
 Neoliberals maintain that states’ intentions, interests, information, and ideals, are more influential than is the distribution of capabilities . Neolibals maintain states' intentions and interests are more important than their own capabilities .
 Neoliberals believe that institutions such as the World Trade Organization create norms that are binding on their members and that change patterns of international politics . The World Trade Organisation is one of the most powerful institutions in the world .
 These developments were outside of realism’s worldview, creating conditions that made the call for a theory grounded in the liberal tradition convincing to many . Many who had previously questioned realism questioned realism .
 In the words of former U.S. President Bill Clinton, “In a world where freedom, not tyranny, is on the march, the cynical calculus of pure power politics simply does not compute.”
 As compelling as contemporary liberal institutionalism may seem at the onset of the twenty-first century, many realists complain that it has not transcended its idealist heritage . Yet, as compelling as liberal institutionalists may seem, liberal institutions may seem to have transcended idealism .
 They charge that just like the League of Nations and the PCIJ, institutions today exert minimal influence on state behavior . They say they charge that . just like like the . League of . Nations and . the . PCIJ are accused of exerting minimal influence over state behavior.
 International organizations cannot stop states from behaving according to balance-of-power logic . States calculate how each move they make affects their relative position in a world of relentless competition . International organizations can't stop countries from behaving in balance of power .
 Most studies supportive of international institutions appear in commercial, financial, and environmental affairs, not in the high politics arena of national defense . Critics of liberalism contend that most studies support international institutions are in the low politics arena .
 National survival hinges on the effective management of security issues, insist realists . National survival of the country hinges on effective management, insists realist .
 Because power-lusting states are unlikely to see their vital interests in this light, global institutions cannot provide timely, muscular responses to aggression . Chapter 2: Global institutions cannot respond to aggression with timely and muscular responses .
 On security issues, conclude realists, states will trust in their own power, not in the promises of supranational institutions, they say . States will not trust in the promise of national security institutions .
 A final complaint lodged against liberalism is an alleged tendency to turn foreign policy into a moral crusade . A final realist complaint is that foreign policy is turned into a morality crusade .
 Many liberals believe moral imperatives can guide and constrain leaders . Realists claim that heads of state are driven by strategic necessities . Liberal realists say they are more likely to be driven by moral needs than strategic .
 The 1999 war in Kosovo pitted the North Atlantic Treaty Organization against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . Kosovo was the site of a NATO war that pitted NATO against Yugoslavia .
 NATO Secretary General Javier Solana, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and U.S. President Bill Clinton all argued that humanitarian intervention was a moral necessity . Pointing to Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic’s repression of ethnic Albanians living in the province of Kosovo,
 Nonintervention into the internal affairs of other states had long been a cardinal principle of international law . They saw military action against Yugoslavia as a duty because human rights were an international entitlement and governments that violated them forfeited the protection of the law .
 The international community has an obligation to use armed force to stop flagrant violations of human rights, says Amnesty International . Amnesty International: International community has a right to stop human rights violations .
 Realists remain skeptical about liberal claims of moral necessity . To sum up, realists are skeptical of liberal claims that moral necessity exists .
 On the one hand, they deny the universal applicability of any single moral standard in a culturally pluralistic world . The one hand is the one of them denying the universal application of any one moral standard . On the other hand, the moral standards are not universal in the world .
 On the other hand, they worry that adopting such a standard will breed a self-righteous, messianic foreign policy . The U.S. should be careful not to adopt a selfrighteous foreign policy, they say .
 If there are no universal standards covering the many situations in which moral choice must occur, then policy decisions can be judged only in terms of their consequences in particular circumstances . Policy decisions can only be judged in the light of the consequences of their decisions in particular situations .
 Leaders must weigh the trade-offs between moral values and national security interests . Leaders must also weigh how pursuing these values might impinge on national security and other important interests .
 It’s important that we take a hard clear look not at some simple world, either of universal goodwill or of universal hostility, but the complex, changing, and sometimes dangerous world that really exists . —Jimmy Carter, U.S. President .
 Theories of International Relations: Realism v Liberalism . Constructivism a paradigm based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality . As consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve .
 Many students of international relations have turned to constructivism in order to understand world politics . Constructivism is a theory of constructivist theory .
 The Frankfurt School of Critical Social Theory is a theory of critical social theory . It was founded by the Frankfurt School in the early 1900s . The school was inspired by the work of Alexander Wendt, Friedrich Kratochwil, and Nicholas Onuf .
 Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed allows us to see world politics in a new and critical light .
 Like slavery and war, these practices are mere ideational constructs that depend on human agreement for their existence . The institutions of slavery and even war are just an ideational construct that depend upon human agreement .
 constructivism departs from realism and liberalism in important ways . Constructivism is “a loose paradigm of related interpretations share certain assumptions with realists and liberals” “constructivism” is a loose paradigm that shares certain assumptions .
 Constructivism emphasizes how ideas define identities, which in turn impart meaning to the material capabilities and behavior of actors . In contrast to realism and liberalism, constructivism focuses on how material factors such as military power and economic wealth affect relations among states . Constructivism is a form of constructivism that
 International reality is defined by our images of the world, according to the previous chapter of this article . International reality will be defined by the images of our world, the author says .
 Constructivists stress the intersubjective quality of these images . Constructivistists stress how perceptions are shaped by prevailing attitudes . Constructivistists stress that these images are not just images of individuals .
 Material conditions acquire meaning for human action only through the shared knowledge that circulating ideas ascribe to them . That is to say, material conditions acquire meaningful meaning only through shared knowledge . Material conditions acquired meaning for humans only through circulating ideas, he says .
 The meaning of a concept such as ‘anarchy’ depends on underlying shared knowledge . Hence, the meaning of anarchy depends on a shared knowledge, the author says .
 British nuclear weapons are less threatening to the U.S. than the same weapons in North Korean hands . Shared Anglo-American expectations about one another differ from those between Washington and Pyongyang .
 The nature of international life within an anarchy, in other words, is not a given . Life in an anarchy is not always a given, says the author of the book .
 The unraveling of the Warsaw Pact and subsequent disintegration of the Soviet Union stimulated scholarly interest during the 1990s in constructivist interpretations of world politics . Constructivist interpretations are a constructivist interpretation of the West .
 Constructivists attributed this to the material and individualist orientation of realism and liberalism . Constructivistists argued that an explanation that addressed the role of changing ideas and identities provided for superior explanation of this systemic change . Constructivism argued that this explanation was superior to that of a theory that addressed
 There are several strands of thought within the constructivist perspective . The constructivist view is that constructivist constructivist .
 Social constructivism is social constructivism, which emphasizes collective identity formation . The social constructivist is a form of social constructionism . Social constructivist has been described as a modern form of identity theory .
 Alexander Wendt is widely credited with the contemporary application of social constructivism to world politics . Wendt challenges the material and individualist foundations of realism and liberalism . He is widely regarded as a social constructivist and an individualist .
 Interests and identities stem from shared ideas and are not reducible to individuals . Likewise, identities and interests stem from common ideas and not individual individuals .
 Social constructivists see the structure of the international system in terms of the distribution of ideas, while neorealists view systemic structure within the context of distribution of material capabilities . neoliberals see it as the distribution . of capabilities within an institutional superstructure .
 According to social constructivism, all of us are influenced by collective conceptions of world politics . This is reinforced by social pressures from the reference groups to which we belong . Social constructivism is social constructivist .
 A second strand of constructivism takes a different approach by emphasizing individualist influences on identities . Agent-oriented constructivism focuses on individualism rather than individualism .
 An actor can hold both an internal and external identity, which can be shaped by respective dialogue at home and within the international community . The actor's identity is shaped by dialogue between home and international community, he says .
 Social constructivists attribute the shaping of ideas and identities to repetitive social practices . They view most identity as shared or collective . Social constructivism is a form of social constructivism .
 Agent-oriented constructivists allow for individual or autonomous identity . They credit the development of ideas in part to individuals with the capacity for independent and critical thinking .
 It is possible to construct new ideas and change existing social structures, says David Frum . It's possible to build new ideas, he says .
 Mikhail Gorbechev’s ‘new thinking’ posed to traditional ideas about national security . Agent-oriented constructivists pointed to the challenge that Mikhail GorBechev posed to the traditional ideas of national security.
 New thinking led to the rise of new norms governing relations between Moscow and Washington, experts say . New thinking, they suggested, led to rise of Russia-U.S. relations .
 For constructivists, the game of international power revolves around actors’ abilities, through debate about values, to persuade others to accept their ideas . Constructivists say that international power is based on the ability to persuade people to accept ideas .
 People and groups become powerful when their efforts to proselytize succeed in winning converts to those ideas and norms they advocate . A culture of shared understandings emerges emerges when a group wins converts to its ideas, norms .
 Human Rights Watch or Greenpeace are examples of how shared conceptions of moral and legal norms can change the world . The capacity of some activist transnational nongovernmental organizations to promote global change is to be seen as a model for change .
 The Limitations of Constructivism are the most common criticism of constructivism . Constructivism is an explanation of change . Constructivist is a theory of the origin of change, rather than an explanation .
 Many constructivists have been influenced by critical theory, especially as it was developed by Max Horkheimer and Jurgen Habermas . If changes in ideas through discussions and discourses lead to PIONEERING INFLUENCES ON CONSTRUCTIVIST THOU
 The roots of critical theory can be traced to the Frankfurt School in Germany during the 1920s . Critical theory is critical theory of critical thinking and critical theory . Critical theories are critical theories of the modern world .
 The aims of critical theory were to critique and change conditions, not merely understand them . Critical theory aims to critique, not just understand, change conditions . Critic theory is critical theory, but critical theory is not just theory, it's critical theory .
 Critics charge that constructivists remain unclear about what factors cause particular ideas to become dominant . Others argue that constructivistists are wrong to explain why particular ideas are dominant .
 Constructivists, he says, have excessive faith in the ability of ideas that seem self-evident today to replicate and sustain themselves . However, future generations who live under different circumstances and who may think differently could easily reject these ideas .
 Constructivists recognize that shared identities are not predetermined and can change over time, critics submit . Critics submit that constructivists cannot explain why and when they dissolve .
 Constructivist approach is increasingly viewed as a vital perspective for understanding world politics . But it is still criticized for its limited attention to methodological issues . The constructivist approach has been criticized for being too simplistic .
 Such a pluralistic methodology would help us consider both the material and ideational factors that shape the world politics, says David Cameron .
 Constructivism is a very popular theoretical approach to world politics . Despite these criticisms, constructivism is still a popular theory . Constructivism has been a very successful theoretical approach in world politics.
 Constructivism can remind you of the contingent nature of all knowledge and the inability of any theory of world politics to fully capture global complexities . Constructivism is the result of a social constructivist society .
 Realistic, liberalism, and constructivism dominate thinking about international relations in today’s academic and policy communities . These schools of thought have been challenged by realism, liberalism .
 Two of the most significant critiques of radicalism and feminism have come from radicalism, feminism and radicalism .
 For much of the twentieth century, socialism was the primary radical alternative to mainstream international relations theorizing . The very idea that there is another idea is something gained, says Richard Jeffries .
 Karl Marx argued that explaining events in world affairs requires understanding capitalism as a global phenomenon . Karl Marx’s argument was that explaining world affairs must be explained by understanding capitalism in global terms .
 Capitalism, they argued, has given rise to two antagonistic classes: a ruling class that owns the means of production and a subordinate class that sells its labor but receives little compensation . Capitalism, the authors said, has created an antagonistic class in capitalism .
 Lenin in the Soviet Union extended Marx’s analysis to the study of imperialism . Lenin interpreted imperialism as a stage in the development of capitalism when monopolies overtake free-market competition . He interpreted imperialism to be a stage of capitalism .
 Lenin maintained that advanced capitalist states eventually face the twin problems of overproduction and underconsumption . Lenin: "Capitalist states eventually have to accept the twin twin problems: overproduction"
 They respond by seeking foreign markets and investments for their surplus goods and capital, and by waging wars to divide the world into spheres of influence that they can exploit . The U.S. is seeking markets for its surplus goods, capital .
 imperialism is the policy of expanding state power through the conquest and/or military domination of foreign territory . Though his assertions have been heavily criticized on conceptual and empirical grounds (see Dougherty and Pfaltzgraff imperialism)
 His revolutionary theory of the economic determinants of world history inspired the spread of communism to overcome the class struggles so pronounced in most countries . The revolutionary theory was inspired by his revolutionary theory .
 The target of his critique was the compulsion of the wealthy great powers to subjugate foreign people by military force and to create colonies for purposes of financial exploitation, he said .
 Marx warned that humanity’s shift from a capitalist to a socialist economy and society could only be prevented, Marx warned . Marx: The attention given to social classes and uneven development stimulated several new waves of theorizing about capitalism as a global phenomenon .
 Dependent theorists claimed that much of the poverty in Asia, Africa, and Latin America stemmed from the exploitative capitalist world economy . As expressed in the writings of Andre Gunder Frank , Amir Samin , and others (Dos Santos 1970; see Chapter 4)
 Less developed countries had become dependent on exporting inexpensive raw materials and agricultural commodities to advanced industrial states, they say . Less developed nations were importing expensive manufactured goods from them, they said .
 A state may gain economic primacy by achieving productive, commercial, and financial superiority over its rivals . Within the core, a state may achieve productivity and commercial superiority over rivals . A state can gain economic dominance by achieving productivity, commercial success over its competitors .
 The diffusion of technological innovations and the flow of capital to competitors, plus the massive costs of maintaining global order, erode the dominant state’s economic advantage, all erode it .
 World-system theory calls attention to the cyclical rise and fall of hegemonic superpowers at the top of the core hierarchy . The core is exploited by the periphery by the core .
 Mainstream theorizing overemphasizes economic interpretations of international events, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Mainstream theorizes omit other potentially important explanatory factors" Zelizer says .
 Gender world-system theory is a body of theory that treats the capitalistic world economy as an interconnected unit of analysis encompassing the entire globe . According to feminist theorists, one such factor is gender . world-System theory .
 Beginning in the late 1980s, feminism began challenging conventional international relations theory . The Feminist Critique is published by Feminist International Relations Institute .
 Feminist theory sought to demonstrate how a gendered perspective is relevant to understanding and explaining world politics . In particular, feminist theory was concerned with the gender bias inherent in both mainstream theory and the practice of international affairs .
 According to the feminist critique, the mainstream literature on world politics dismisses the plight and contributions of women and treats differences in men's and women’s status, beliefs, and behaviors as unimportant .
 Spike Petersen, a prominent feminist theorist, notes that there was an explicit masculine bias in the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century . Science and reasoning attributed as a “male” trait and emotion and rationality as “female” one, Petersen says .
 The feminist critique argues that the study of international relations draws heavily on male experiences to explain international affairs, largely dismissing the feminine dimension . Social constructivism is similar to social constructivism .
 Feminism notes that the assumptions of the mainstream theoretical literature, as well as the practice of foreign policy, are heavily colored by a masculinist tradition of thought .
 Feminism challenges the heavy reliance on ‘feminine’ stereotypes . Feminism posits that characteristics dismissed due to their ‘female’ quality play an important role as well .
 For life to have persisted in the state of nature, cooperative activities such as child rearing must have occurred . Indeed, for life to persist in nature, cooperation must have been shared .
 Feminists call for a closer examination of key concepts in world politics . They ask whether a “masculine’s conceptualization of these ideas shapes the conduct of foreign policy .
 Realism attributes to the state masculine characteristics of sovereignty that emphasize a hierarchical leader, the capacity to wage war, and the conduct of international affairs as separate from the domestic concerns of its populace . Realism, for instance, attributes to a state's masculine characteristics, such as a leader,
 Feminist scholars argue that power relations are influenced by gender in ways that shape practices of war and diplomacy . They argue that alternative formulations of key concepts allow for the relevance of other issues and structures, including social and economic ones, in world politics .
 Historically, the role of women has been marginalized in most societies . Historically, women's roles have been marginalized . Women's roles in the United States have been traditionally marginalized .
 In order to understand how unequal gender relations have excluded women from foreign policy, perpetuated injustice and oppression, it is critical to purposively examine the female experience .
 Christine Sylvester's examination of women's cooperatives in Zimbabwe and women's peace activism at Greenham Common reflects a more flexible understanding of security that expands upon the traditional state-centric conceptualization as protection from external aggressors to include threats to family concerns .
 Feminist scholars demonstrate that many women have proven to be very capable leaders who have left deep footprints on international affairs . Regardless of the position taken on the issue of gender differences, feminist scholars have shown that women are capable leaders .
 Margaret Thatcher, Golda Meir, Benazir Bhutto, Angela Merkel, Michelle Bachelet, Christina Fernandez de Kirchner . They urge us to examine events from the personal perspectives of women who have been involved in international affairs as caregivers, grassroots activists, and participants
 The feminist critique continues to expand across a range of issues, from foreign policy to humanitarian intervention to terrorism, says author .
 They saw peace as a feminist issue, and asserted their power by hoiding hands and creating a 14-mile chain around the airbase with their bodies . The group created a chain of hoid hands and created a 14 mile chain .
 Not only did they see nuciear weapons as a direct threat to themseives and their children . They protested that trillions were being spent on weapons of mass destruction while so many around the world suffered from a lack of food and water .
 Two-decade demonstration attracted woridwide media attention and generated the support of miliions throughout the world . Their neariy two-decades demonstration attracted .
 Grand theories fade with the passage of time, but they often regain their attractiveness when global transformations make them useful once again . Theories fade with time but often reappear as useful when global transformation makes them useful .
 World politics is so complex that some advocates of so-called deconstructivism contend that international change and complexity defy description, explanation, and prediction . In fact, world politics is resistant to clear, comprehensive, and convincing analysis, they say .
 Deconstructionists share the philosophical view that all peoples’ conceptions of global realities are relative to their understandings . Deconstructists believe that all people’ perceptions of global reality are relative .
 The validity of all conceptions is dependent on one’s own personal point of view . There is no point in attempting to develop a shared conception of the world . Thus, biased interpretation is inevitable .
 The vast majority of scholars rejects this defeatist deconstructivist posture to understanding and continues to struggle in the pursuit of theory and knowledge .
 As you review various theoretical interpretations of global circumstances, it is important to evaluate the premises on which each contending account is based . epistemology is philosophical examination of the ways in which knowledge is acquired and the anaiytic principies governing the study of phenomena .
 As you seek to understand changing global conditions, it is important to be humble in recognizing the limitations of our understandings of world politics and at the same time inquisitive about its character .
 "The task of interpretation is complicated because the world is itself complex," he says . The task of interpreting is complicated, he says, because of the world's complex nature .
 Donald Puchala theoretically framed the challenge in 2008 . Conceptually speaking, world affairs today can be likened to a disassembled jigsaw puzzle scattered on a table before us .
 Each piece shows a fragment of a broad picture that as yet remains indiscernible . Each piece of art is meant to show a broad, but indiscreet picture of the world .
 Some pieces depict resurgent nationalism; others show spreading democracy; some picture genocide . Others depict prosperity through trade and investment; others picture nuclear disarmament . Some indicate a reinvigorated United Nations; others depict a re-invigorated UN . Others describe cultural globalization; others predict
 The answer to that question has never been satisfactorily resolved, and the long-standing debate about how best to construct theories ot international relations continues today .
 Some scholars, known as “postmodern deconstructivism,"" challenge the ability ot intellectuals to provide a satisfactory theoretical account of why states and people act as they do in international relations .
 Scholars devote their efforts to criticizing and “deconstructing’ the theories of world politics to expose their inherent limitations . These scholars devote their . efforts to criticize and ‘deconstruction’ of world . politics .
 Most scholars remain motivated by the theoretical quest to interpret and comprehend the complexities of international relations . They challenge the pessimistic view that world politics defies meaningful understanding, despite obstacles and limits .
 Behavioralism arose to challenge interpretations of international relations that were based more on speculative assessment than on systematic observable evidence . This evolving epistemological controversy took an important step in the 1960s when a movement known as behavioralism arose .
 Behavioralism advances principles and procedures tor formulating and stringently testing hypotheses interred from theories to reach generalizations or statements about international regularities that hold true across time and place .
 Science, the behavioralists claim, is primarily a generalizing activity . Science is a "generalizing activity," according to behavioralists . The behavioralists say science is primarily about generalizing ideas .
 A theory of international relations should state the relationship between two or more variables that specifies the conditions under which a relationship holds and explain why the relationship should hold . From this perspective, a theory should state a relationship between a relationship and a relationship that explains why it holds and why it should hold
 To uncover theories, behavioralists lean toward using cross-national analyses rather than case studies of particular countries at particular times .
 Behavioralists stress the need for data about the characteristics of transnational actors and how they behave toward one another . Behavioralists also stress the importance of data about transnational .
 Behavioralism predicated on the belief that the pursuit of knowledge about the world through systematic analytic methodologies is possible and productive . Behavioralism is predicated by the belief it is possible to pursue knowledge through analytic methods .
 Scientists seek to acquire knowledge cumulatively by suspending judgments about truths or values until they have sufficient evidence to support them . In place otthe self-proclaimed opinions of “experts” are often mistaken .
 Traditional inquiry attempts to overcome tendency of traditional inquiry to select facts and cases to tit preexisting hunches . They attempt to overcome the tendency to choose facts to pick up a preconceived notion .
 All available data, those that contradict as well as those that support existing theoretical hypotheses, are to be examined . Instead, all Chapter 2 available data will be examined to examine .
 Knowledge would advance best by theorists assuming a cautious, skeptical attitude toward any empirical statement, they argue .
 The slogans “Let the data, not the armchair theorist, speak,” and “Seek evidence, but distrust it"" represent the behavioral posture toward the acquisition ot knowledge .
 Theories can guide us in fitting the pieces together to form an accurate picture of the world's history . Theories help us to understand what happened in the past .
 In evaluating the usefulness of any theory to interpret global conditions, the overview in this chapter suggests that it would be wrong to oversimplify or to assume that a particular theory will remain useful in the future . However, in evaluating any theory, it is wrong to over-simulate or
 In our theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is permanently fixed . behavioralism is the methodological research movement to incorporate rigorous scientific analysis into the study of world .
 Realistic, liberalism, and constructivism are the dominant ways of thinking about world politics today . But none of these theories is completely satisfactory . Realistic and constructivist theories are not completely satisfactory, writes David Cameron .
 Recall that realism is frequently criticized for relying on ambiguous concepts, liberalism is derided for making naive policy recommendations based on idealistic assumptions . Constructivism is charged with an inability to explain change .
 Mainstream theories overlook seemingly important aspects of world politics, which limits their explanatory power . BO Theories of World Politics: Radicalism, feminism and feminism .
 Each has strengths for interpreting certain kinds of international events and foreign policy behaviors . Despite these drawbacks, each has strengths .
 We lack a single overarching theory able to account for all facets of world politics . We will draw on realist, liberal, and constructivist thought in subsequent chapters of this chapter .
 We will supplement them with insights from radicalism and feminism, where these theoretical traditions can best help to interpret the topic covered . Moreover, we will supplement these insights with insights .
 Millennium-journal of International Studies 37:97-105 . Contrast and Continuity in Feminist International Relations is critical .
 Maoz, Zeev, Alex Mintz, T Clifton Morgan, Glenn Palmer and Glenn Palmer, ed. Richard J Stoll, eds. Maoz .
 Change is like death and taxes: It should be postponed as long as possible and no change would be preferable . But that still implies that change should be delayed and that no change is preferable . No change is a good idea, but that's not true .
 But in a period of upheaval, such as the one we are living in, change is the norm . Change is not the norm in the world, but it's the norm, says David Cameron .
 People, like states and international organizations, are transnational actors . People like states, like nations, can be transnational agents, say experts . People can be statesmen and women, but statesmen can be men and women .
 About 100,000 Buddhist monks marched to protest Myanmar’s military government . The military government has crushed pro-democracy uprisings and neglected the welfare of its people .
 Despite widespread sentiment among Burmese that electoral exercises scheduled for 2010 will face severe obstacles and may be useless as an instrument of electoral freedom, there is nonetheless hope for the possibility of change .
 Not just people but also organizations, groups, and countries have a variety of roles to play on the global stage . When it comes to world politics, not just people are just people, but they are involved in the world's most important issues .
 Chapter 3 opens by giving you a view of the great powers -- the actors with the greatest military and economic capabilities . Chapter 3 gives you a look at the world's most powerful actors .
 Chapter 4 compares the great powers with the weaker, economically less developed countries now known as the Global South . The Global South is a region whose fates are powerfully shaped by others .
 The rise of the Global East to its new status as rival to the traditional great powers is also covered . The Global East is also discussed in this edition of this week's Daily Mail .
 Chapter 5 examines the role of intergovernmental organizations, such as the U.N. and the European Union . Greenpeace and Amnesty International are among those whose members actively work for global change .
 A window is opened for you to also explore the activities of other nonstate global actors, including multinational corporations, ethnic groups, and religious movements . A window also is opened to explore the activity of multinational corporations .
 Chapter 6 explains how states and all other transnational actors go about the task of making foreign policy decisions . Chapter 6 also explains how countries and transnational organizations go about their foreign policy .
 It also identifies intellectual and political barriers that often reduce the ability of transnational actors to make rational choices about their interests, policy goals, and workable paths .
 The “Big Three’s meet at Yaita as victorious great power aliies to establish rules for all states to follow in the postWorid War . But cooperation wouid soon be replaced by bitter competition .
 Rankings of the top teams are adjusted after the previous week’s competition . The rankings are adjusted following each week's results in the Premier League .
 Many people in the world make comparisons of countries, asking which states are the biggest, strongest, wealthiest, and most militarily powerful . And many people throughout the world habitually make comparisons, including which state is rising and which are falling relative to one another .
 When making such rankings, both groups are looking at world politics through the lens of realism . Both groups are keen to be realistic about the reality of world politics .
 They see a globe of competitors, with winners and losers in an ancient contest for supremacy . They see each other in a world of nations competing for dominance .
 Three global wars broke out in the 20th century, with three global wars breaking out . War and peace colored twentieth-century world politics, with war and peace periods in between .
 The Cold War was fought without the same magnitude of destruction but with equal intensity . World Wars I and II were fought with fire and blood . Cold War fought with the same intensity but not the same destruction .
 This chapter explores the causes and consequences of great power rivalries . This chapter focuses on the causes of great rivalries and consequences .
 By understanding the origins and impact of these three struggles over world leadership, you will be better positioned to anticipate whether the great powers will be able to avoid another global war in the twenty-first century .
 Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics . There is a strong probability that this historical pattern is cyclical and unfolds through a series of distinct phases . The question for world leaders is whether the U.S. can be found to be a leader .
 Long-cycle theory says periods of global war have been followed by periods of international rule-making and institution building . According to the theory, over the past five centuries, war was followed by international rule making and institutions building .
 With its unrivaled power, the hegemon has reshaped the rules and institutions of the global system to preserve its preeminent position . Hegemon reshapes the rules to preserve his pre-emineminate position in the world .
 A hegemon must bear the costs of maintaining political and economic order, while protecting its position and upholding its dominion . The cost of maintaining order must be borne by the nation's hegeman, the author says .
 Over time, as the weight of global engagement takes its toll, every previous hegemon has overextended itself . The weight of the global engagement has taken its toll on the world .
 Security agreements so carefully crafted after the last global war have come under attack . As challengers arise, the security agreements are under attack, experts say . Security agreements have been carefully crafted since the last war .
 Historically, this struggle for power has set the stage for another global war, the demise of one hegemon and the ascent of another . It has set up the possibility of another global conflict between the U.S. and China, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Long-cycle theorists disagree on whether economic, military, or domestic factors produce these cycles . Critics note that long-cycle theory is wrong .
 They also express frustration with the deterministic tone of the theory, which to them implies that global destiny is beyond policy makers’ control . They say they are frustrated with the 'deterministic' approach .
 Long-cycle theory suggests you should consider how shifts in the relative strength of great powers affect world politics . Still, long-cycle theories suggest you should be aware of shifts in world power .
 It rivets attention on hegemonic transitions, the rise and fall of leading states in the global system . In so doing provokes questions about whether this long cycle can be broken in your future .
 Longcycle theory also forces you to evaluate hegemonic stability theory and that theory’s predictions . The theory is also required to evaluate the predictions of longcycle theory .
 This chapter asks you to inspect the three great power wars of the twentieth century, as well as the lessons these clashes suggest for the twenty-first century . To underscore the importance of struggles over world leadership and their impact on trends and transformations in world politics, this chapter .
 Serbian nationalist assassinated Archduke Ferdinand, heir to the Hapsburg throne of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, at Sarajevo in June 1914 . Serbian nationalist was seeking to free his ethnic group from Austrian rule . Archduk Ferdinand was the son of a Serbian prince who
 This assassination sparked a series of great power actions and reactions in the five weeks that followed, shattering world peace . The assassination of President Kennedy shattered world peace in the wake of the assassination .
 In September 2008, protesters in Sadr City in Baghdad held “Go Out USA” signs . Shown here is one example of resistance to U.S. global preeminence .
 Sadr City had been one of the most dangerous areas of Iraq and was the site of intense fighting between the U.S. and insurgents earlier in the year .
 Following American construction of a wall across the district, a tenuous calm emerged that was regularly interrupted by protests and bombings . Seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun, and the world geopolitical map had been redrawn in ways that paved the way for the rise of Adolf Hitler in Nazi
 The Causes of World War I structuralism is the neorealist proposition that states’ behavior is shaped primarily by changes in the properties of the global system, such as shifts in the balance of power, instead of by individual heads of states . Structuralism is a belief that states
 World War I was inadvertent, not the result of anyone’s master plan, according to neorealist explanations . Most popular are structural neorealists, which hold that WWI was an accident .
 Neorealists believe that it was a war bred by circumstances beyond the control of those involved, one that people neither wanted nor expected . Neorealist believe that people were not expected to fight for their country .
 Structuralism postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor determining states’ behavior .
 Many historians hypothesize that the way in which the great powers were aligned against one another created an environment conducive to an armed conflict . Chapter 3 69 on the eve of World War I: The way the world's great powers aligned against each other created a conducive environment .
 This structural explanation concentrates attention on the nineteenth century, when Britain dominated world politics . This explains why Britain dominated the world in terms of power .
 Britain was isolated from continental affairs by temperament, tradition, tradition and geography . Britain was an island country isolated by temperament and tradition .
 Britain's sea power gave it command of the world’s shipping lanes and control over a vast empire stretching from the Mediterranean to Southeast Asia . It gave Britain control over the world's shipping lanes .
 After becoming a unified country in 1871, Germany prospered and used its growing wealth to create a formidable army and navy . Germany's growing wealth was used to build a formidable navy and army .
 With this strength came ambition and resentment of British preeminence, says George Osborne . Osborne: 'With this strength, there was resentment of UK preeminency'
 As the predominant military and industrial power on the European continent, Germany sought to compete for international position and status . Germany sought for international status and status as the dominant military power .
 Germany's rising power and global aspirations altered the European geopolitical landscape . With Germany ascendant, Germany’s rising power has altered the landscape of the continent . Germany's rise in power has changed the European political landscape .
 Germany was not the only newly emergent power at the turn of the century, however . Germany was the first country to emerge as a major European power .
 The decline in power of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire heightened Germany’s fear of Russia . The assassination of Archduke Eerdinand was reflected in Germany's strong reaction to the assassination . The decline of Austria-Hungary's only ally, the decline of the Empire,
 Germany sought a short localized war with a more favorable outcome . Eearing that a long war might result in an unfavorable shift in the balance of power, Germany wanted a short war . The war ended in a short, localized war .
 Germany thus supported Austria-Hungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia . Germany supported the Austrians' unrestrained attack on Serbia in the 1920s .
 A victorious war would bolster Austria-Hungary and hamper Russian influence, it turned out to be a serious miscalculation . The logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear, but it was a mistake .
 Erance and Russia joined forces to defend Serbia, and were soon joined by Britain in an effort to oppose Germany and defend Belgian neutrality . Erance joined forces with Russia in a bid to oppose the German invasion of Belgium .
 In April 1917, the United States entered the conflict in response to German submarine warfare . The war became truly global in scope when the U.S. joined the conflict .
 The dynamics of shifts in the balance of power as a causal factor is seen at the global level of analysis . The historic tendency for opposed 70 Great Power Rivalries and Relations conditions to form so that the distribution of military power is “balanced”
 Archduke Ferdinand’s assassination occurred in the decade prior to his assassination . And that is what did happen in the 10 years prior to the assassination .
 European military alignments had become polarized, pitting the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire against the Triple Entente of Britain, France, and Russia .
 Russia mobilized its armies in response to Austria’s attack on Serbia, cross-cutting alliance commitments pulled one European great power after another into the war . nationalism is a mind-set glorifying a particular state and the nationality group living in it, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Many historians view the growth of nationalism as having created a climate of opinion that made war likely . Nationalism is an alternative interpretation of the origins of World War I at the state level .
 Domestic unrest inflamed these passions, making it hard to see things from another point of view . Domestic unrest has inflamed the passions, and it's hard to think of another way .
 Austrians believed that they were upholding their national honor . The Austrians thought they were protecting their honor . But Russians labeled them the aggressors .
 With each side belittling the national character and ethnic attributes of the other, diplomatic alternatives to war evaporated . Diplomacy evaporated after each side's national character was belittled by the other's .
 The people gathered at the Imperial Palace in Berlin are seen as having pushed Europe over the brink . People gathered in Berlin have pushed Europe to the brink of war .
 World War I is best seen as a consequence of the purposive goal of rival great powers to compete against one another for global power . The rational choice model of decision making suggests that the rational choice .
 As these rival interpretations suggest, the causes of World War I remain in dispute . The causes of the conflict remain a mystery .
 Structural explanations emphasize the global distribution of power . Domestic interpretations look at causal factors within states, and rational choice explanations direct attention to the calculations and goals of particular leaders .
 All the sequences that produced the world’s first truly global war . All partially help us to understand the sequences . The sequences help us understand the origins of the conflict in Afghanistan .
 In its wake, three multi-ethnic empires—the AustrianHungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed . In their place, the independent states of Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged .
 Finland, Estonia, Eatvia, and Eithuania were born . The countries of Finland and Estonia were born in Finland .
 The war also contributed to the independence of the Republic of Ireland from Britain in 1920 and the overthrow of the Russian czar in 1917 .
 The emergence of communism under the leadership of Vladimir Eenin produced a change in government and ideology that would have geopolitical consequences for another seventy years . The emergence in Russia in the early 1930s was a major event for the country .
 The war set the stage for a determined effort to build a new global system that could prevent another war . Moreover, the war set . stage for an effort to . build a . new global . system that can prevent another . war .
 When it was all over, few remained to be convinced that such a war must never happen again . Few remained to remain convinced that .
 For the first time in history, broad publics and peacemakers shared a conviction that war was a central problem in international relations . For first time, publics have shared a belief that war is a major problem in relations .
 Previously, hegemony, the aggressive activities of a particular state, or revolution had been the problem . Now, the problem is no longer the problem. Instead, it is the threat of hegemony, or the aggressive activity of a certain state .
 In 1648,1713, and 1815, the peacemakers had tried to resolve issues of the past and to construct orders that would preclude their 72 Great Power Rivalries and Relations Relations . Text not available due to copyright restrictions reappearance .
 World War I evoked revulsion for war and theories of realism that justified great power competition, armaments, secret alliances, and balance-of-power politics . The war was the first to be fought in a world war that was fought in 1914-1919 .
 The staggering human and material costs of the previous four years led many delegates to the Versailles peace conference in 1919 to reevaluate their convictions about statecraft . Delegates to the 1919 peace conference were reevaluating their convictions .
 Many turned to liberalism for guidance on how to manage the global future . Disillusioned with realism, many turned to liberalism for guidance .
 The decade following World War I was the high point of liberal idealism . The decade after the war was the highest point of liberalism in the world .
 Wilson’s chief proposal was to construct a League of Nations that allegedly would guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all states . Wilson's chief proposal would be to construct an international league that would guarantee all states' sovereignty .
 His other recommendations included strengthening international law, settling territorial claims on the basis of self-determination .
 Once peace conference began, the knives of parochial national interest began whittling away at the liberal philosophy underpinning Wilson’s proposals .
 European leaders had been offended by the pontificating American president . Many European leaders were offended by his comments .
 As negotiations at the conference proceeded, hard-boiled power politics prevailed . The conference is scheduled to take place in Washington, D.C.
 The delegates were only willing to support those elements in the Fourteen Points that served their national interests . Ultimately, the delegates only supported those elements that served the national interest .
 The rest of the treaty was punitive, aimed at stripping the country of its great power status . The treaty was designed to strip the nation of its status as a great power .
 Similar treaties were later forced on Austria-Hungary and Germany’s other wartime allies . Similar treaties later forced to be forced on other allies .
 Germany’s military was drastically cut; it was forbidden to possess heavy artillery, military aircraft, or submarines . Its forces were banned from the Rhineland . Germany was also banned from possessing heavy artillery or military aircraft .
 Germany lost territory in the west to France and Belgium, in the south to Czechoslovakia, and in the east to the new states of Poland and Lithuania . Germany also lost territory to France, Belgium and Belgium .
 Germany was assigned responsibility for the war and charged with paying heavy financial reparations for the damages . The most humiliating clause of the treaty was that Germany would be charged with reparations . The treaty was signed in 1939, and the war ended in 1945 .
 Germany’s defeat in World War I and its humiliation under the Treaty of Versailles did not extinguish its hegemonic aspirations . The Second World War saw the rise of the German Empire in Europe and the Second World Wars .
 The Axis trio of Germany, Japan, and Italy pitted against an unlikely “grand alliance” of four great powers . The United States, Britain, France, and the U.S. united despite their ideologies .
 The world’s fate hinged on the outcome of this massive effort to defeat the Axis threat . Case Study; Liberal Idealism . 74 Great Power Rivalries and Relations .
 To understand the origins of this devastating conflict, we will again examine causal factors operating at different levels of analysis . We will once again examine the origins and consequences of this conflict .
 A democratic constitution was drafted by a constituent assembly meeting in the city of Weimar in 1918 . Germany’s capitulation in 1918 was followed by a democratic constitution . The Causes of World War II: Causes of WWII .
 The new government was linked in their minds to the humiliating Versailles Treaty . It also suffered from the 1923 occupation of the industrial Ruhr district, political rebellions, and the ruinous economic collapse of 1929 .
 By the parliamentary elections of 1932, over half of the electorate supported extremist parties that disdained democratic governance . By the 1932 elections, over 50 per cent of voters voted for extremist political parties .
 The largest of these was the Nazi, or National Socialist German Workers, party . The largest party in Nazi Germany was the NWS .
 On January 30, 1933, Adolf Hitler was appointed chancellor of Germany . Adolf Hitler became the Nazi leader of Germany in 1933 . Hitler was the first chancellor of the Nazi state .
 Less than a month later, the Reichstag building burned down under mysterious circumstances . It was the first building to be destroyed in Germany's capital .
 Hitler used the fire to justify an emergency edict allowing him to suspend civil liberties and move against communists and other political adversaries . Hitler's use of the fire was used as a pretext to justify suspending civil liberties .
 Once all meaningful parliamentary opposition had been eliminated, Nazi legislators passed an enabling act that suspended the constitution and granted Hitler dictatorial power . Hitler was granted dictatorial powers by the end of the war .
 Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe . In his 1924 book Mein Kampf, Hitler called for the invasion of Eastern Europe in order to reclaim territories .
 During his first year in power, he cultivated a pacifist image . He signed a nonaggression pact with Poland in 1934 . During that year he cultivated an image of himself as pacifist .
 In 1935, he repudiated the military clauses of the Versailles Treaty . In 1936, he ordered troops into the demilitarized Rhineland; in March 1938, he annexed Austria . In September 1938 he demanded control over the Sudetenland, a region of Czech
 Hitler, Neville Chamberlain and Neville Chamberlain attended a conference in Munich to address the Sudeten German question . The conference was attended by Hitler, the British prime minister, and leaders of France and Italy .
 Chamberlain and the others agreed to Hitler’s demands that appeasement would halt further German expansionism . Chamberlain and others believed appeasment would halt German expansionistism . Hitler's demands were rejected by the British government .
 Rather than satisfying Germany, appeasement whetted its appetite and that of the newly formed fascist coalition of Germany, Italy, and Japan, which aimed to overthrow the international status quo .
 Japan, disillusioned with Western liberalism and the Paris settlements, embraced militarism . Japan was suffering economically from the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s . The country was suffering from a deep recession .
 In the might-makes-right climate that Germany’s imperialistic quest for national aggrandizement helped to create, Japanese nationalists led their country on the path to imperialism and colonialism . In Japan, the might makes it seem to be the case for colonialism .
 Germany and Italy intervened appeasement a strategy of making concessions to another state in the hope that, satisfied, it wili not make additionai claims . Japan’s invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and China proper in 1937 were followed by Italy's absorption of Abyssinia
 The Soviet Union supported antifascist forces in the Spanish civil war . General Francisco Franco was on the side of the fascists, headed by General Franco . General Franco supported the Soviet Union in Spain .
 Britain and France formed an alliance to protect the next likely victim, Poland . After Germany occupied the rest of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, the alliance was formed to protect Poland .
 They also opened negotiations with Moscow in hopes of enticing the Soviet Union to join the alliance . The negotiations failed to reach an agreement .
 Hitler, Stalin and Hitler signed nonaggression pact on August 23, 1939 . Hitler, a fascist, and the Soviet dictator, Joseph Stalin, a communist, promised not to attack each other .
 Britain and France honored their pledge to defend Poland, but two days later declared war on Germany . France and Britain honored the pledge, and declared war .
 Hitler next turned his forces to the Balkans, North Africa, and westward . The mechanized German troops invaded Norway and marched through Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands .
 Germany swept around the Maginot line, a defensive barrier on the eastern frontier that France boasted could not be breached . The Maginat line was a symbol of France's strength in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Within six weeks France surrendered, even though Germany’s forces were measurably inferior to those of France and its allies . France surrendered within six weeks .
 The alarming and nearly bloodless German victory forced the British to evacuate a nearly 340,000-strong expeditionary force from the French beaches at Dunkirk . The British were forced to evacuate nearly 300,000 of their troops .
 In 1940 Japan forged the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy that pledged the three Axis powers to come to one another’s aid if attacked by another nonbelligerent great power . Meanwhile, to deter the United States from participating in the looming war, in September 1940 Japan
 In the months that followed, the German air force, the Luftwaffe, pounded Britain in an attempt to force it into submission as well . In the years following the war, the British air force was also pounding Britain .
 Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Hitler’s former ally, in June 1941 . Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops attacked Britain in 1941 .
 On December 7th of that same year, Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Harbor . The U.S. launched an attack on Japan in 1941 .
 The unprovoked Japanese assault and the German challenge ended U.S. aloofness and isolationism . President Franklin Roosevelt forged a coalition with Britain and the Soviet Union to oppose the fascists . multipolarity the distribution of global power into three or more great power centers .
 Many historians regard the reemergence of multipolarity in the global power distribution as a key factor in the onset and expansion of World War 11 . Underlying Causes at Three Analytic Levels at three analysis levels .
 The number of sovereign states increased at the same time the number of great powers declined . The post-World War I global system was precarious because of the rise in sovereign states . The world's greatest powers declined in the post-WWI global system, says David Cameron .
 In 1914, Europe had only twenty-two key states, but by 1921 the number had nearly doubled . Chapter 3 77 has nearly doubled the number of key states in Europe .
 The 1930s collapse of the global economic system also contributed to the war . World War II was a major source of conflict in the 1930s .
 Great Britain found itself unequal to the leadership and regulatory roles it had performed in the world political economy before World War I . The U.S. was the logical successor, but its refusal to exercise leadership hastened the war .
 In this depressed global environment, Germany and Japan sought solutions through imperialism abroad . Germany sought solutions to its economic problems through imperialism, the author says .
 German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders . Germany expanded borders to regain provinces previously lost in wars and to absorb Germans living in Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland .
 The rise of fascism —the Nazi regime’s ideology championing anti-Semitic racism against the Jews, flag, fatherland, nationalism, and imperialism —animated this renewed imperialistic push and preached the most extreme version of realism .
 The importance of leaders at the individual level of analysis stands out, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the importance of leadership at individual level stands out .
 The war would not have been possible without Adolf Hitler and his plans to conquer the world by force . Adolf Hitler's plans for the war by force would have been impossible without Hitler's help .
 Hitler chose to wage war to create an empire that he believed could resolve once and for all the historic competition and precarious coexistence of the great powers in Europe by eliminating Germany’s rivals . Hitler believed he could resolve historic competition by eliminating all of Europe's great powers .
 The vision of the Thousand-Year Reich was ... of a vastly expanded— and continually expanding—German core, extending deep into Russia, with a number of vassal states and regions . France, the Low Countries, Scandinavia, central Europe, and the Balkans would provide resources and
 The lesser peoples were to be taught only to do menial labor or, as Hitler once joked, educated sufficiently to read the road signs so they wouldn’t get run over by German automobile traffic . On the contrary, the lesser peoples had to be educated enough to read road signs
 Hitler's purpose of policy was to destroy the system and to reconstitute it on racial lines, historian says . Hitler wanted to create a vastly expanded Germany running a distinctly hierarchical and exploitative order .
 Vestigiges of sovereignty might remain, but they would be fig leaves covering a monolithic order . Vestiges may remain but they are fig leaves covered by monolithic orders .
 German occupation policies during the war were the practical application of Hitler’s conception of the new world order . German occupied nations were reduced to satellites, satrapies, and reservoirs of slave labor .
 Adolf Hitler’s propaganda experts staged dramatic political rallies to glorify the German Fuhrer . They persuaded the German people of the need to persecute the Jews and expand German borders by armament and aggression .
 The Consequences of World War II: Germany’s Thousand-Year Reich lay in ruins by May 1945 . Germany faced ruinous losses in Russia and a massive Allied bombing campaign at home .
 The United States atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced Japan to end its war of conquest and brace itself . Chapter 3 79 is about Japan's shattering defeat followed by six years of U.S. military occupation .
 Allied victory over the Axis redistributed power and reordered borders, resulting in a new geopolitical terrain . Allied victory in World War II redistributed power, re-ordered borders .
 The Soviet Union absorbed nearly 600,000 square kilometers of territory from the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania . Poland, a victim of Soviet expansionism, was compensated with land taken from Germany .
 Germany itself was divided into occupation zones that provided the basis for its partition into East and West Germany . The occupation zones were occupied by the West and East of Germany .
 In the Ear East, the Soviet Union took from Japan the four Kurile Islands, or the “Northern Territories” as Japan calls them . Korea was divided into Soviet and United States occupation zones at the Thirty-Eighth Parallel .
 With the defeat of the Axis, one global system ended, but the defining characteristics of the new system had not yet become clear . With the collapse of the World War II, the new global system was not yet clear .
 The U.N. was created to replace the old, discredited League of Nations . The management of world affairs still rested in the hands of the victors .
 Winston Churchill, Eranklin Roosevelt, Joseph Stalin and Joseph Stalin met at the Yalta Conference in Eebruary 1945 to design a new world order . The “Big Three” leaders met to design the world order at the conference .
 Germany and the U.S. met again in 1945 at Potsdam, Germany's first meeting of the warring nations . But the differences were not clear enough to reveal the differences between the two sides .
 The meeting ended without agreement, and the facade of Allied unity began to disintegrate . It was the first time Allied unity had been reached .
 In the aftermath of the war, the United States and the Soviet Union were the only two great powers that were still strong and had the capacity to impose their will . In the 1950s, the U.S. and the USSR were the two most powerful nations in the world .
 The other major-power victors, especially Great Britain, had exhausted themselves and slipped from the apex of the world-power hierarchy . Great Britain had exhausted itself and slipped out of the top world power hierarchy .
 The vanquished, Germany and Japan, also fell from the ranks of the great powers . The vanquished were Germany, Japan, and Japan .
 Yalta Conference was the 1945 summit meeting of the Allied victors to resolve postwar territorial issues and voting procedures in the United Nations to collectively manage world order . The Americans and Russians now held in their hands the destinies of half of the . . the 1945 meeting .
 Cold War was the forty-two-year rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as their competing coalitions, which sought to contain each other’s expansion and win worldwide predominance . it caused, after a short interlude, in the distribution of global
 Washington and Moscow used the fledgling United Nations not to keep the peace but to pursue their competition with each other . The Cold War began in 1949 in what in 1949 became known as the U.N.
 The Cold War and its lessons still cast shadows over today’s geostrategic landscape . As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Cold War still casts shadows over the world .
 The Cold War was the second great war of the 20th century, without parallel in the number of participants and destruction . The United States should take the lead in running the world in the way that the world ought to be run, Truman said .
 Out of these circumstances grew the competition between the U.S. and the Soviet Union for hegemonic leadership . The United States and Soviet Union were at odds with each other for dominance .
 The Cold War resulted from the power transition that propelled the U.S. and the Soviet Union to the top of the international hierarchy . At the global level, the first is advanced by realism .
 Circumstances gave each superpower reasons to fear and to struggle against the other’s potential global leadership . Each superpower competitor was encouraged to carve out and establish dominant influence in its own sphere of influence .
 A second interpretation, at the state level of analysis, holds that the Cold War was simply an extension of the superpowers’ mutual disdain for each other’s professed beliefs about politics and economics . The Cold War may have been the result of a mutual distrust of each other
 American fears of Marxism stimulated the emergence of anticommunism as an opposing ideology . The anti-communist movement was born out of fear of Marxism .
 The U.S. embarked on a missionary crusade of its own to contain and ultimately remove the atheistic communist menace from the face of the Earth. Accordingly, the United States embarked on an own missionary crusade .
 Soviet policy was fueled by the belief that capitalism could not coexist with communism . Similarly, Soviet policy believed that capitalism and communism could not be compatible .
 The purpose of Soviet policy, therefore, was to push the pace of the historical process in which communism eventually would prevail, he says . The purpose was to 'push the pace' of the progress in the process, he writes .
 Soviet planners did not believe that this historical outcome was guaranteed . However, Soviet planners believed that this would be guaranteed .
 They felt that the capitalist states, led by the United States, sought to encircle the Soviet Union and smother communism in its cradle . The Soviets felt that resistance by the Soviets was obligatory .
 Additional factors, beyond those rooted in divergent interests, ideologies, and images, § c undoubtedly combined to produce this . explosive Soviet-American hegemonic “ rivalry”
 A third explanation, rooted in decision making at the individual level of analysis, sees the Cold War as being fueled by the superpowers’ misperceptions of each other’s motives . The Cold War was fueled by a lack of trust between the two superpowers .
 Erom this constructivist perspective, conflicting interests were secondary to misunderstandings and ideologies, he says . Erom says conflicting interests are secondary to misunderstanding and ideologies .
 Mistrustful actors are prone to see only virtue in their own actions and only malice in those of their adversaries . Mistrusty actors see virtue in themselves and malice in their adversaries. Mistrustiness is a sign of weakness in the eyes of the public, not the eyes .
 This tendency to see one’s opponent as the complete opposite, or mirror image, of oneself makes hostility virtually inevitable . It also makes people see their opponents as the opposite of one of them .
 When perceptions of an adversary’s evil intentions are socially constructed and become accepted as truth, a self-fulfilling prophecy can develop and the future can be affected by the way it is anticipated . Moreover, when perceptions of evil intentions become socially constructed, they can be socially constructed
 Each rival giant acted in hostile ways that encouraged the very behavior that was suspected . Thus, viewing each other suspiciously, each other acted suspiciously .
 Senator Joseph IVIcCarthy led the most infamous hunt for communist sympathizers in government . Hollywood production companies blacklisted supposed communists . Average American citizens were often required to take loyalty oaths at their offices .
 Everywhere, communism became synonymous with treasonous, un-American activity . The U.S. has never been able to find a way to defeat communism in America .
 As the nuclear arms race escalated, the U.S. government took military action to contain the Soviet Union . Its justification was almost always expressed in terms of ideology .
 The threat, as the population learned to perceive it, was that of an atheistic, communistic system that challenged the fundamental American principles of democratic capitalism . The threat of a communistic, atheistic system challenged American principles .
 The domino theory states that communism was driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was inherently expansionistic . Also, according to the Domino theory, the domino Theory, is driven by the desire to knock down one country .
 The other side also couched its Cold War rhetoric in terms of ideology . The Soviets objected to the imperialistic, capitalist system that the Soviets said America planned to impose .
 Some would argue that fear of the other side’s world dominance may have been more important in the Cold War than pure ideology . The Cold War may have come to an end due to fear of world dominance .
 Both the American and the Soviet governments may have entered the Cold War to secure their relative power in the world order as much as to protect pure principles . Both the U.S. and Soviet governments entered the cold war in order to secure the relative power .
 After World War II, a power vacuum created by the demise of Europe’s traditional great powers drew them into conflict with each other . As they competed, ideological justifications surfaced .
 Liberalism, communism, socialism, and capitalism are examples of ideologies of international politics . Liberalism is an example of the ideologies of the modern world . Communism, communism and capitalism were examples of the ideology .
 Ideologies help us to interpret life and its meaning and are indispensable for organizing thought and values . Ideologies are indispensable to organizing thought, values, according to the author of the book . Ideology is essential to understanding and understanding of life's meaning .
 Ideology provides meaning within a social context and enables a society to use its domestic values and norms to frame its interests and convictions . As social constructivism suggests, ideology provides meaning in the social context of a society .
 Institutional proponents of particular ideologies are prone to perceive other ideologies competitively . They see other ideologies as challenges to the truth of their own ideology’s core beliefs .
 Scholars are still debating the causes of the Cold War . We need to ask whether it was, in fact, an ideological contest over ideas, or a more general contest for power .
 The character of the Cold War shifted in three phases over its long history . Several distinct patterns emerged that not only provide insights into the history of Cold War but also illustrate the properties of great power rivalries .
 The two giants’ interests collided in the wake of the Second World War II . The Soviets and the U.S. faced each other for decades .
 At this critical juncture, George F Kennan, then a diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent to Washington his famous ‘long telegram’ assessing the sources of Soviet conduct . Kennan was then a Diplomat in Moscow .
 Kennan argued that Soviet leaders would forever feel insecure about their political ability to maintain power against forces both within Soviet society and the outside world .
 Their insecurity would lead to an activist—and perhaps aggressive— Soviet foreign policy . The insecurity would mean an activist and perhaps aggressive foreign policy, says Julian Zelizer .
 The U.S. had the power to increase strains under which the Soviet leadership would have to operate . That could lead to a gradual mellowing or final end of Soviet power . However, the United States could increase the strains under the leadership .
 The evolution of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Cold War displays a series of shifts between periods of conflict and cooperation . Key events in the evolution of the relationship between the two countries are key events in their relationship .
 As this figure shows, each superpower’s behavior toward the other tended to be reciprocal, and, for most periods before 1983, confrontation prevailed over cooperation .
 Truman Doctrine is a strategy to prevent a great power rival from using force to alter the balance of power and increase its sphere of influence . Truman Doctrine was a declaration by President Harry S Truman that U.S. foreign policy would use intervention to support peopies who ailied with the
 President Truman made Kerman’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy . Soon thereafter, President Harry S Truman made it a cornerstone of his policy .
 Truman Doctrine defined the strategy that the U.S. would pursue for the next forty years, over Kennan’s objections . Eventually known as the Truman Doctrine, this statement is known as ‘The Truman Doctrine’
 This strategy sought to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence by encircling the Soviet Union and intimidating it with the threat of a military attack . This strategy, called containment, sought to stop the Soviet influence .
 Czechoslovakia in 1948, Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950, Korean War in 1950 . Taiwan Straits crises in 1950 and 1950 included on-again, off-again crises in China and Taiwan .
 The risks of massive destruction necessitated restraint and changed the terms of the great powers’ rivalry . Thereafter, the risks of . massive destruction .necessitated restraint . The risk of massive . destruction .
 Nikita Khrushchev pursued a policy of peaceful coexistence with capitalism . The Soviet Union remained strategically inferior to the U.S.
 Soviet Union cautiously sought to increase its power in places where opportunities appeared to exist . Even so, the Soviet Union at times cautiously sought a larger role in the world .
 The period following Stalin’s death saw many Cold War confrontations . Hungary, Cuba, Egypt, and Berlin were flash points in the Cold War .
 This painful learning experience reduced enthusiasm for waging the Cold War by military means . It also expanded awareness of the suicidal consequences of a nuclear war .
 From Coexistence to Detente, 19G3-1978: The growing threat of mutual destruction, in conjunction with the approaching parity of American and Soviet military capabilities, made coexistence or nonexistence appear to be the only alternatives . In 1978, the U.S. and Soviet Union
 Suspicions on one side breeds suspicion on the other and new weapons beget counterweapons . We are both caught up in a vicious and dangerous cycle in which suspicion breeds suspicion and counter-suspicions .
 "Let us not be blind to our differences, but let us also direct attention to our common interests," he says . "So let's not be blinded to differences but to the means by which those differences can be resolved"
 If we cannot end now our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity . And if we can't end now, we can make it safer for diversity, it's a good thing to say .
 Kennedy signaled a shift in how the U.S. hoped thereafter to bargain with its adversary . The Soviet Union reciprocally expressed its interest in more cooperative relations with the United States . Kennedy: "The Soviet [Russia] reciprocally [expressed] interest in cooperation"
 The movement took another step forward following Richard Nixon’s election in 1968 . Richard Nixon was elected president of the United States in 1972 . The movement became more prominent in the 1960s .
 Nikita Krushchev’s 1956 doctrine that war between capitalist and communist states is not inevitable and that inter-bloc competition could be peaceful . The Cold War peaceful coexistence was peaceful .
 President Nixon initiated a new approach to Soviet relations that in 1969 he officially labeled detente . In the 1970s, the U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to limits on strategic nuclear delivery systems .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, initiated in 1969, sought to restrain the threatening, expensive, and spiraling arms race by limiting the deployment of antiballistic missiles . The talks were intended to restrain an expensive and dangerous arms race .
 Visits, cultural exchanges, trade agreements, and joint technological ventures replaced threats, warnings, and confrontations . Visits and cultural exchanges replaced threats and warnings, instead of confrontations, replaced .
 From Renewed Confrontation to Rapprochement, 1979-1991, the spirit did not endure . Despite the careful nurturing of detente, its spirit didn't endure .
 When the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 led to detente’s demise, detente was deadlier . The Soviet-Afghanistan war ended in 1979, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan .
 In retaliation, he declared America’s willingness to use military force to protect its access to oil supplies from the Persian Gulf . The U.S. suspended United States grain exports to the Soviet Union, and attempted to organize a worldwide boycott .
 President Ronald Reagan and his Soviet counterparts exchanged a barrage of confrontational rhetoric . Reagan and Soviet counterparts met in Washington, D.C. for the first time in the 1980s .
 The arms race resumed feverishly, at the expense of addressing domestic economic problems . It's the arms race for arms race again, but it's not a solution to domestic problems .
 The superpowers also extended the confrontation to new territory, such as Central America . They renewed their public diplomacy efforts to extol the virtues of their respective systems throughout the world .
 Reagan pledged support for anticommunist insurgents who sought to overthrow Soviet-supported governments in Afghanistan, Angola, and Nicaragua . Reagan pledged U.S. support for anti-communist insurgents .
 U.S. leaders spoke loosely about the “winability” of a nuclear war through a “prevailing” military strategy that included the threat of a ‘first use’ of nuclear weapons in the event of conventional war .
 Relations deteriorated as these moves and counter-moves took their toll . Relations between the two countries deteriorated as relations deteriorated .
 Richard Nixon was one of the architects of the U.S. ‘linkage’ strategy a\ong with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger . Kissinger toasts Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev and fellow dignitaries .
 Gorbachev’s advocacy of ‘new thinking’ in order to achieve a rapprochement, or reconciliation, of the rival states’ interests . Instead, prospects for a more constructive phase improved greatly . Instead of a more destructive phase, prospects improved greatly following
 He sought to settle differences with the capitalist West in order to halt the deterioration of his country’s economy and international position . The Soviet Union sought to end its differences with capitalist West .
 Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to the market economy . Shortly thereafter, Gorbaugh embarked on reforms to end the Cold War .
 The Soviets began to act like an ally instead of an enemy . The Soviets did what they promised, to many adherents of realism who see great power contests for supremacy .
 The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support “linkage"" strategy . A policy seeking to reestablish normal cordial relations between enemies . The policy was seeking to link cooperation to rewards .
 Cuba withdraws from Afghanistan and announces unilateral reductions in military spending . Cuba withdrew from Afghanistan, announced unilateral reductions of military spending. The U.S. pulled out of Afghanistan .
 Gorbachev also agreed to two new disarmament agreements . START treaty for deep cuts in strategic arsenals . Conventional Forces in Europe treaty to reduce the Soviet presence in Europe . The START treaty was signed in 1987 .
 In 1989, the Berlin Wall came down, and by 1991 the Cold War had truly ended . In 1991 the Soviet Union dissolved, accepted capitalist free-market principles, and initiated democratic reforms .
 The conclusion of the enduring rivalry between East and West, and with it the end of the seventy-year ideological dispute as well, was a history-transforming event . The conclusion was the end to the ideological dispute between the two sides .
 The collapse of the Cold War suggested something quite different from the lesson of the two world wars, which had implied that great power rivalries are necessarily doomed to end in armed conflict . The collapse suggests something different, especially from the lessons of the last century’s world wars .
 The Cold War was different; it came to an end peacefully . A combination of factors contributed at various stages in the Cold War’s evolution to transform a global rivalry into a stable, even cooperative relationship .
 This suggests that it is sometimes possible for great power rivals to reconcile their competitive differences without warfare . It also suggests it is possible to reconcile this without war .
 The Consequences of the Cold War: The U.S. and the Soviet Union avoided a fatal showdown . The Cold War was a geostrategic rivalry made worse by antagonistic ideologies and mutual misperceptions . The Soviets and the United States were locked in each other's
 Russian leaders made the most dramatic peaceful retreat from power in history . In accepting the devolution of their empire, Russian leaders accepted the most peaceful retreat in history.
 The end of the Cold War altered the face of world affairs in profound and diverse ways . CNN's John Sutter says the end of Cold War changed the world in profound ways .
 With the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, no immediate great power challenger confronted American hegemonic leadership . The U.S. has been dominant in the world for more than 20 years .
 A host of new security threats emerged, ranging from aspiring nuclear powers such as North Korea and Iran to terrorist networks such as A1 Qaeda . However, the U.S. has not been able to rely on Russia for the future .
 As the turbulent twentieth century wound down, the simple Cold War world of clearly defined adversaries gave way to a shadowy world of elusive foes . As the Cold War ended, the world of adversaries became shadowy .
 How history is remembered is important because those memories shape tuture decisions about the management of great power rivairies . How history will be remembered will shape the future of the United States .
 The Coid War’s abrupt end came as such a surprise to most observers . That question remains a puzzie that provokes much controversy, in part because of the end .
 ‘tough’ policy and intensified arms race [did not persuade] communists to ‘give up’ sheer nonsense. ‘The transformations ... would not have begun were it not for him”—James A Baker III, U.S. Secretary of State .
 “The Soviet Union collapsed at the hands of its own people.”—Fred Charles Ikle, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense . “Militarism, in harness with communism, destroyed the Soviet economy and thus hastened the self-destruction of
 By 1987, Gorbachev made it clear that he would not interfere with internal experiments in Soviet bloc countries . Once communism fell in Eastern Europe, the alternative in the Soviet Union became civil war or dissolution . Evaluate the validity of these contending hypotheses .
 Rapid, unanticipated changes in world politics create uncertainty about the global future . The post-cold war era is a new chapter in the world's history .
 To pessimists, these sea changes suggested not history’s end but the resumption of contests for hegemonic domination and opposition over contested ideas and ideologies, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: These sea changes suggest not history's end but resumption .
 Both groups recognized that in the years immediately following the end of the Cold War, bipolarity was superseded by unipolarity . Unipolarity is a hegemonic configuration of power with only one predominant superstate .
 There is ongoing debate as to whether multipolarity better describes the emerging distribution of power today . As time passed, other great powers began to vie for increased influence in world politics .
 Of interest is what this might mean for relations among the great powers in meeting the new and difficult challenges in world politics in the post-Cold War era . Of interest also is what it might mean to meet the new challenges of the Cold War .
 Unipolarity refers to the concentration of power in a single preponderant state . America’s Unipolar Moment is America's unipolar Moment . Unipolar state is a state of power that has a dominant state .
 With the end of the Cold War, in a historical “moment” in world history, the United States stood alone . The U.S. stood alone at the summit of the international hierarchy .
 Defense expenditures in 2010 were larger than nearly all other countries combined . The U.S. military is not just stronger than anybody else’s .
 Complementing America’s military might is its awesome economic strength, says President Obama . Obama's economic strength is the strength of the U.S. economy, he says .
 The United States accounts for a fifth of global income and two-fifths of the entire world’s combined spending on research and development . With less than 5 percent of the global population, the U.S. accounts for more than 5% of the world's income .
 This rare confluence of military, economic, and cultural power gives the U.S. what might appear to be an extraordinary ability to shape the global future to its will . The United States may appear to have an extraordinary power in shaping the world .
 America's unique superpower position atop the global pyramid of power seemingly allows it to act independently without worries about resistance from weaker powers . This is why America’s unique superpower . position atop a global pyramid . of power . seems to allow America to act alone without worries .
 A strong and dominant hegemon can address international problems without reliance on global organizations and can “go it alone,” even in the face of strident foreign criticism . Rather than working in concert with others, a strong hegeman can address problems without relying on international organizations
 Such unilateralism derives from the desire for control over the conduct of a great power’s foreign relations, independent of control by or pressure from other great powers, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: “Unilateralism is an attempt to gain control of the world's flexible conduct of
 Acting alone may appear expedient, but it erodes international support on issues such as combating terrorism . The United States is in strong need of cooperation from others . Acting alone erodes U.S. support on matters such as terrorism, on which the United States needs cooperation .
 At the extreme, unilateralism can lead the global leader to play the role of international bully, seeking to run the world, says Simon Tisdall . At the end of unilateralism, it can lead to an international bully .
 The status of being a superpower, the single “pole” or center of power, has fated the U.S. with heavy and grave responsibilities . Without a real challenger, the United States has heavy responsibilities, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Although the United States may hold an unrivaled position in the world today, in the long run, unipolarity is very unlikely to endure . The U.S. is in a position that is very much more secure today than any other major superpower .
 Throughout history, hegemons repeatedly have defined their security interests more broadly than other states, only to slip from the pinnacle of power by reaching beyond their grasp .
 For fiscal year 2009, Defense Secretary Robert Gates conservatively estimated that those operations would cost $136 billion more . For fiscal 2009, defense secretary Robert Gates estimated that that would cost more . Defense secretary Gates said that the cost of such operations would be more than double .
 The trade-offs posed by allocating enormous national resources to military preparedness are reflected in Dwight Eisenhower’s warning that “the problem in defense spending is to figure out how far you should go without destroying from within what you are trying to defend from without” imperial over
 Some worried about America’s ability to sustain its predominant position in the international system . There are political costs to U.S. assertiveness as well as the financial cost of military commitments .
 The United States’ predominance in the world has been further eroded by the financial crisis of 2008, which originated in the United States and spread throughout the global financial system . The U.S. has been in decline since 2008 .
 The rise of the rest is at heart an economic phenomenon, but the transition we are witnessing is not just a matter of dollars and cents . It's not just about dollars or cents, but it's about the rise of rest of the world's largest companies .
 There is growing recognition that the distribution of power in the international system is shifting to what political scientist Samuel Huntington has described as uni-multipolar . Huntington has called it a "multipolar" system of power .
 According to this perspective, while the United States continues to be the only superpower, other states are not easily dominated by the U.S. The United States will not be able to dominate other states, it has been said .
 U.S. involvement remains critical in addressing key international issues . Resolution of transnational problems also requires action by some combination of other major states . United States involvement is critical, but it also requires cooperation from other states .
 Map shows the proportionate economic clout of the leading great powers . It shows the United States, Europe, and China as today's leading economic powerhouses .
 Many scholars and policy makers predict that a multipolar global system with more than two dominant centers of power will emerge . If some combination of U.S. imperial overstretch and rising economic and political influence by America’s chief challengers transforms the current distribution of global power, many
 multipolar systems include several comparatively equal great powers, they are complex . Multipolar systems are complex. They include countries with comparatively equal powers .
 The interplay of military and economic factors, with great powers competing as equals, is fraught with uncertainty . Great powers compete as equals in the Middle East .
 Differentiating friend from foe becomes especially difficult when allies in military security may be rivals in trade relationships .
 There is a deepening sense that shifts in the global distribution of power are underfoot . The Future of Great Power Relations is underfoot, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Of current debate is the extent of the U.S. will continue to hold its position as the principal global leader . The debate is whether the United States will be able to continue to lead the world .
 Eeslie Gelb, a renowned foreign policy expert, rejects the idea that the U.S. will be no more significant than the other great powers . Gelb: We are moving into a period where the United States will not be as significant as the other major powers .
 The shape of global power is decidedly pyramidal—with the United States alone at the top, a second tier of major countries (China, Japan, India, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Brazil) and several tiers descending below . He shares the view that
 Even the smallest countries now occupy a piece of the international pyramid and have, particularly, enough power to resist the strong . Smaller nations now occupy part of the global pyramid .
 Russian President Mikhail Klimentyev is a former leader of the Soviet Union . He is the leader of Russia's most powerful state in the world . Russia's relations with the West has been strained in recent years . Russia and the West have been at odds for decades .
 The Economist forecasts the probable size of the largest economies in 2020 . Using purchasing power parities to remove differences in countries’ price levels, the Economist estimates the likely size of each country’s economy .
 Others see a great transformation marked by the ascendance of other great powers in what has been coined a ‘post-American’ world . Others see the world from a somewhat different perspective, perceiving a great change .
 Predicting what cleavages and partnerships will develop among the great powers in the future twenty-first-century system will be difficult . It will be hard to foresee what will become the next major axis of conflict .
 Competition could emerge from any pair of great powers, but it may be restricted to one sphere of interaction . Competition may be limited to a sphere of interactions .
 Such cross-cutting axes of conflict and cooperation will affect the stability of relations among the great powers, says the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Different types of power structures have existed in the international system, some of which have experienced more stability than others . Throughout history, different power structures in the world have existed .
 When great powers compete in one sphere of activity but cooperate elsewhere, the potential increases that any given issue will divide them in opposing coalitions . Great powers can be divided on issues they disagree on .
 Great power conflict would be frequent, but as long as security and economic disputes did not overlap, they would not necessarily divide the system into two antagonistic camps . Great power conflicts would not divide the world into one antagonistic camp, writes Peter Bergen .
 The danger of polarization could be managed if the great powers develop international rules to manage their fluid, mixed-motive relationships .
 China’s status as an economic powerhouse has generated fears elsewhere that as China becomes a modern military power, it will seek hegemony and eventually use force to cause trouble abroad . China has been accused of using force to destabilize its neighbors .
 In Beijing, China’s rise to great power status is seen as helpful to maintaining peace . China's rise to power status seen as helping to maintain peace in the region .
 Chinese People’s Liberation Army soldiers marching with bayoneted rifles at a welcoming ceremony in Beijing . The move is a show of strength at Tiananmen Square by the Chinese army, and a symbol of China's potential to project power .
 This kind of armed rivalry need not develop; cooperation could increase instead . However, this kind of an armed rivalry must not develop, says CNN.com editor .
 Different and inconsistent political types of great power relations could emerge in the economic and military spheres . Quite different and inconsistent types of political types could emerge from the political sphere .
 Global trade expands the integration of states’ economies in an ever-tightening web of interdependence . There is the probability of economic rivalry growing as global trade expands .
 The likelihood of security cooperation for many of these relationships is also high . However, security cooperation is also likely to be high in the U.S.
 It estimates the probability of military cooperation and economic conflict between any pair of the five major powers . It also estimates the likelihood of economic and military cooperation .
 The paradox prevails that many pairs of great powers that are the most active trade partners are also the greatest military rivals . The key question is whether economic cooperation will help to reduce the potential for military competition .
 Chapter 3 99 we face in the world today call for a multilateral approach, with all of the great powers working cooperatively to achieve global solutions . Chapter 3 of the world's 99-page book, "The World of the World" is published by John Defterios .
 One possibility is the development of a concert, or a cooperative agreement, among the great powers to manage the global system jointly . This could prevent international disputes from escalating to war .
 The Concert of Europe, at its apex between 1815 and 1822, is the epitome of previous great power efforts to pursue this path to peace . The Concert was at its height between the 1815-1822 period and was the most successful attempt to achieve peace .
 The effort to build a great power coalition to wage a war against global terrorism following 9/11 is a more recent example of multilateralism to construct a concert through collective approaches .
 Policy makers also recommend that today’s great powers unite with the lesser powers in constructing a true system of collective security .
 Some believe Russia’s pledge to cooperate with NATO is representative of a collective security quest to maintain peace through an alliance of powerful countries . The League of Nations in 1919 is the best example of this multilateral approach to peace under conditions of multipolarity, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Hu Jintao: Challenge and opportunity always come together . Under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other . Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds .
 Patterns and practices can change, and it's possible for policy makers to learn from previous mistakes . Policy makers can learn from mistakes and avoid repeating them, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 What is crucial is how the great powers react to the eventual emergence of a new global system where power and responsibility is more widely distributed, says David Cameron .
 It is clear that the choices the great powers make about war and peace will determine the fate of the world . The choices the world makes will determine its fate, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In Chapter 4, we turn your attention from the rich, powerful, and commercially active great powers at the center of the world system to the poorer, weaker, and economically dependent states in the Global South and the rising powers in the global east . In Chapter 5, we focus on the
 Hiiiary Ciinton made her first trip to Asia as Secretary of State . Dean Rusk's 1961 visit to Asia was the first since his 1961 visit .
 Southeast Asia wants American engagement as a counterbalance to Cbina’s expanding military might . The U.S. sees its future shaped by Asia as weil.
 E arth is divided into two hemispheres, north and south, at the equator . The Earth is divided between the north and the south of the globe .
 This artificial line of demarcation is, of course, meaningless except for use by cartographers to chart distance and location on maps . Cartographers use it to chart distances and locations on maps, but it is meaningless to use .
 This divide represents a popular way of describing the inequalities that separate rich and poor states . However, this divide also represents the inequality that separates rich states . It is also a popular term to describe the differences between rich and poorer states .
 Global South a term now often used instead of ‘Third World" to designate the less developed countries located primarily in the Southern Hemisphere . Global South is a term used to refer to less developed nations in the South .
 Life for most people in the Northern Hemisphere is very different from that in the Southern Hemisphere . The Northern Hemisphere has a very different climate than the Southern hemisphere .
 The division in power and wealth characterizing the Global North and the Global South poses both moral and security problems . The division of power in power is characterizing both sides of the divide in power .
 While poverty and inequality have existed throughout recorded history, today it has reached extremes . The levels of inequality in the United States are now at an extreme level .
 The poor countries find themselves marginalized, in a subordinate position in the global hierarchy . Poor countries are marginalized in the world's hierarchy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Global North countries are wealthy and democratic . Global North is rich and democratic, but not rich . North and South are more populous and more democratic .
 Countries that have arisen from the former Global South are now positioned to rival the levels of prosperity that the Global North has enjoyed in the last two decades . As shall be seen, into this picture should now be placed ‘the Global East’ countries that have emerged from the Global South
 Many analysts trace the roots of today’s inequalities among states at the global level of analysis . They believe that the global system has properties built into it that account for the inability of most poor countries to close the gap with the wealthy countries .
 The rules governing international politics today were constructed in the 1648 Peace of Westphalia following Europe’s Thirty Years’ War .
 The origins and persistence of the inequalities of states stem in part from the fact that today’s modern global system was initially, and remains, a socially constructed reality by, of, and for, the most powerful states .
 The powerful did not design a global system for equals . The great powers followed the prescription of realist thought to always seek self-advantage . The world's most powerful power did not want equal rights for equal rights, it wanted self-interest .
 The global system did not build the global system with an eye to preventing the victimization of the weak and the disadvantaged, the authors say . The system was built to protect the weak, the victims, they say, but not the victims .
 A good starting place is to begin your inquiry by taking into consideration the legacy of this seedbed for today’s global system . So, a good starting point is to take into consideration .
 Many analysts see the history of colonialism as the root source of the problem . The European conquest of indigenous peoples and the seizure of their territory for exclusively European gain is the root cause of the issue .
 Almost all of the independent sovereign states in the Southern Hemisphere were at one time colonies . They note that almost all of them were at once colonies .
 Analysts argue that today’s inequalities are a product of this past colonization . These analysts argue that the problems are a result of this colonization . Today's inequalities are the result of colonialism, they say .
 During the Cold War, the term Third World was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but economically less developed states that shared a colonial past with those states aligned with either the communist East or capitalistic West .
 indigenous peoples the native ethnic and cultural inhabitant populations within countries, referred to as the “Fourth World” indigenous peoples . However, indigenous peoples are not native ethnic or cultural inhabitants of countries .
 Third World a Cold War term to describe the less developed countries of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America . Third World is used to refer to less developed nations in the Middle East .
 The so-called Second World, consisting of the Soviet Union and its allies in other communist countries, was distinguished by a communist ideological commitment to planned economic policies rather than reliance on free market forces .
 The terms Second World and Third World carry obsolete Cold War baggage . The terms 'Second World' and 'Third World' are outdated, but are still relevant .
 Global North refers to what was previously known as the First World . Global South refers to less developed countries in the Southern Hemisphere . Global North is now commonplace .
 The placement of particular states within these categories is not easy . It's not easy to put states in these categories, and it's not always easy .
 Although journalists, policy makers, and scholars frequently generalize about the Global South, considerable diversity exists within this grouping of states .
 It includes low-income countries such as Ghana and Haiti, where a majority of the population tries to survive through subsistence agriculture . Middle-income nations such as Brazil and Malaysia produce manufactured goods . Countries such as Kuwait and Qatar, whose petroleum exports have generated incomes rivaling those of Global North
 Indonesia and Burundi are among the most populous countries in the world . Indonesia is an archipelago of more than seventeen thousand islands . Burundin is a landlocked state slightly smaller than Maryland .
 Global South countries also vary politically and culturally, ranging from democratic Costa Rica to autocratic Myanmar . Costa Rica is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 The emergence of the Global South as an identifiable group of states is a distinctly contemporary phenomenon . It is a distinctively contemporary phenomenon, writes David Frum .
 Although most Fatin American countries were independent before World War II, not until then did other countries of the Global South gain that status .
 In 1947, Great Britain granted independence to India and Pakistan, after which decolonization began . Decolonization — freeing of colonial peoples from their dependent status—gathered speed . India's independence was granted in 1947 .
 A profusion of new sovereign states has joined the global community . Nearly all carved from the British, Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, and French empires built under colonialism four hundred years ago .
 Most of the ethnic national conflicts that are now so prevalent have colonial roots . Imperial powers drew borders within and between their domains with little regard for the national identities of the indigenous peoples .
 The first wave of European empire building began in the late fifteenth century . The Dutch, English, Erench, Portuguese, and Spanish used their naval power to militarily conquer territories for commercial gain .
 Scientific innovations made the European explorers’ adventures possible, and merchants followed in their wake, “quickly seizing upon opportunities to increase their profits,” according to the MAP 4 .
 The transatlantic slave trade took place from the mid-1500s through the late 1700s . The expanding colonial powers eagerly participated in a transatlantic trade . Africans proved much more resistant than the indigenous peoples to diseases brought over by Europeans .
 In turn, Europe’s governments perceived the possibilities for increasing their own power and wealth . Europe's governments perceived possibilities for increased their own wealth and power .
 The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of ‘classical imperialism’ is known as mercantilism . The economic philosophy advocating government regulation of economic life to increase state power is called mercantilation .
 European rulers believed that power flowed from the possession of national wealth measured in terms of gold and silver . cultivating mining and industry to attain a favorable balance of trade was the best way to become rich .
 States wedded to realist justifications of the competitive drive for global power saw the imperial conquest of foreign territory by war as a natural by product of active government management of the economy . The British Empire of the Cold War was founded in the early 1900s .
 By the end of the eighteenth century, European powers had spread themselves, although thinly, throughout virtually the entire world . The European powers were spreading themselves throughout the world .
 Britain’s thirteen North American colonies declared their independence in 1776 . Most of Spain's possessions in South America won their freedom in the early nineteenth century . Britain's 13 North American . colonies declared independence in the 1776, and most of Spain’ .
 As Europe’s colonial empires dissolved, belief in the mercantilist philosophy also waned . The mercantillist philosophy was also waning in popularity .
 The Wealth of Nations, national wealth grew not through the accumulation of precious metals, but rather from the capital and goods they could buy . The wealth of nations grew not as much as precious metals but as capital, goods and capital .
 Smith's ideas about the benefits of the ‘invisible hand’ of the unregulated marketplace laid much of the intellectual foundation for classical liberal economic theory . Smith’s ideas were the intellectual basis of classical liberal economics . Smith was an advocate for the free market .
 European powers continued to seek colonies, but the rationale for their imperial policies began to change . Henceforth, European powers would seek colonies .
 From the 1870s until the outbreak of World War I, a second wave of imperialism washed over the world . Europe, joined later by the U.S. and Japan, aggressively colonized new territories .
 In the last twenty years of the nineteenth century Africa fell under the control of seven European powers . In all of the Far East and the Pacific, only China, Japan, and Siam were not conquered .
 Foreign great powers carved China into separate zones of commerce, which they each individually controlled and exploited for profit . However, the foreign great powers carve China into a separate zone of commerce .
 The United States acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines in 1898 Spanish-American War . The U.S. extended its colonial reach westward to Hawaii . The Panama Canal Zone was leased in perpetuity from Panama .
 As British imperialists were proud to proclaim, it was a British empire on which the sun never set . The sun never sets in Britain, the British Empire was proud to say .
 With the Industrial Revolution, capitalism grew—emphasizing the free market, private ownership of the means of production, and the accumulation of wealth . With the industrial revolution, capitalism became more mainstream .
 Radical theorists following Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin saw imperialism’s aggressive competition as caused by capitalists’ need for profitable overseas outlets for their surplus capital . Marx and Lenin called themselves adherents of communism, they said .
 Communism is the radical ideology maintaining that if society is organized so that every person produces according to his or her ability and consumes according to their needs, a community without class distinctions will emerge, sovereign states will no longer be needed, and imperial wars of colonial conquest will vanish from history . Communism
 British possessions 1 1 1 Japanese possessions . 1 1 Portuguese possessions . U.S. possessions .
 Union of ^th AMca Japan Pacific Ocean ich I COlndo(Phiiippine Atiantic indian) Mocambique Australia New Zeaiand ; Antarctica MAP 4.0 .
 The ten major imperial powers competed for colonies throughout the globe in the presentday Global South . World-system theory saw a world division of labor where the ‘core” areas exploit the “periphery,” and colonization provided a means for imperial control over foreign lands
 Liberal economists, by contrast, regarded the new imperialism not as a product of capitalism but as a response to certain maladjustments that, given the proper will, could be corrected . The new imperialism is not a result of capitalism, but it is a reaction to maladjustment that,
 Another explanation emphasizes purely political factors as the source of the second wave of imperialism . Another explanation is that political factors are to blame for the change .
 Imperialism, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system . Imperialism was always characterized by great powers' behavior in Europe .
 Britain emerged from Europe's perpetual conflict as the world’s leading power . By the 1800s, Britain emerged as the leading power in Europe .
 Germany emerged as a powerful industrial state, as did the U.S. as did Germany and the United States .
 Britain tried to protect its privileged global position in the face of growing competition from the newly emerging core states . Understandably, Britain tried . to protect . its privileged . position .
 partition served the imperial powers at the expense of local populations . Its efforts to maintain the status quo help to explain the second wave of imperial expansion, especially in Africa .
 The climate of opinion turned decidedly against imperialism when the 1919 Versailles peace settlement that ended World War I embraced liberalism . The body of theoretical thought stresses the importance of ideas, ideals, and institutions .
 Self-determination advocated that indigenous nationalities should have the moral right to decide which authority would rule them . Self-determined is a form of self-determination in the U.S.
 Despite a purge of eleven government ministers, it is expected that under Raul's leadership the radical perspective of Marxist-Leninism will persist . However, disappointingly little has been done thus far to alleviate poverty and repression, says Wilson .
 The proposition that self-determination should be extended to Europe’s overseas empires did not receive serious support . Realpolitik the theoretical outlook prescribing that countries shouid increase their power and weaith in order to compete with and dominate other countries .
 The colonial territories of the powers defeated in World War I were not simply parceled out among the victorious allies, as had typically happened in the past . Still, the colonial territories were not parcelled out among victorious allies . The British colonial territories did not have to be parce
 The territories controlled by Germany and the Ottoman Empire were transferred under Eeague of Nations auspices to countries that would govern them as “mandates” until their eventual self-determination . The iiberai doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them
 Many territorial decisions gave rise to subsequent conflicts such as in the Middle East and Africa . Many of these territorial decisions have given rise to later conflicts .
 League of Nations called for the eventual creation of a Jewish national homeland in Palestine . It arranged for the transfer of control over Southwest Africa to what would become the white minority regime of South Africa .
 The defeated powers’ territories placed under the United Nations trusteeship system were not absorbed by others but were promised eventual selfrule . This set an important precedent after World War II, when the defeated powers' territories did not absorb others .
 The decolonization process accelerated in 1947, when the British consented to the independence of India and Pakistan .
 War erupted between newly independent states as each sought to gain control over disputed territory in Kashmir in 1965, in 1971, and again as the nuclear-armed states clashed .
 Violence also broke out in Vietnam and Algeria in the 1950s and early 1960s when the French sought to regain control over their pre-World War II colonial territories . Violence also erupted in Vietnam, Algeria and Vietnam in the 1960s .
 bloodshed followed closely on the heels of independence in the Congo when the Belgians granted their African colony independence in 1960 . It dogged the unsuccessful efforts of Portugal to battle the winds of decolonization .
 Despite these political convulsions, decolonization for the most part was remarkably peaceful . Decolonization was extraordinarily rapid but also remarkably peaceful. Despite these, it was remarkably rapid and peaceful.
 World War II sapped the economic and military vitality of many of the colonial powers . This may be explained by the fact that World War I sapped many colonial powers' economic, military vitality .
 More new countries can be expected because many existing states are fragmenting . In a world increasingly NEW STATES after the decolonization process runs its compiete course .
 When World War I broke out, only sixty-two independent countries existed; now there are more than two hundred . World War II was the start of the war in 1918, when it began .
 The 'micro-state' of Nauru has a president, a supreme court, and the fuii apparatus of government to ruie its tiny government .
 Haif the giobe’s countries have populations less than that of the U.S. state of Massachusetts . Haif's countries have population less than the United States state .
 Many Global South countries feared that they would become entrapped in the Cold War and that their right to self-determination would be compromised . They adopted foreign policies based on nonalignment .
 The strategy energized both the U.S. and the Soviet Union to renew their efforts to attract the uncommitted Global South countries to their own network of allies, often offering economic and military aid as an inducement .
 Some states aligned themselves with either the U.S. or the Soviet Union during the Cold War . Others avoided taking sides in the war .
 Twenty-nine nonaligned states from Asia and Africa met in Bandung, Indonesia, to construct a strategy to combat colonialism . The latter approach gathered momentum in 1955 .
 The membership of this coalition would later grow to more than one hundred countries . The membership was later growing to over one hundred nations .
 The Cold War’s end eroded the bargaining leverage nonalignment had provided the Global South . The end of the Cold War's end has eroded some of the leverage it had provided .
 The 2003 Non-Aligned Kuala Lumpur Summit Declaration raised questions about the inability of many Global South countries to advance . But the passion of Global South leaders to eradicate global inequities lives on, as can be seen .
 The Global South worries that in the future, even newer forms of great power imperialism might continue to destroy any Global South hopes for progress .
 Nonaligned Movement is a group of more than one hundred newly independent, mostly less developed, states that joined together in the Cold War . It was formed to avoid entanglement with the superpowers’ competing alliances . Nonaligned movement aims to advance the Global South’s primary
 Most of the people in the Global South face chronic poverty amidst war, tyranny, and anarchy . The Global South is sometimes described today as a “zone of turmoil” or an “axis of upheaval” in large measure because of its poverty .
 Democracy has spread rapidly and widely since the 1980s, becoming the preferred mode of governance throughout much of the Global South as a means of promoting both economic development and peace . Democracy is the preferred form of governance in many of the world's most developed countries .
 Global North’s history suggests that “economic and technological development bring a coherent set of social, cultural, and political changes .” The continuing expansion of Global South market economies under capitalism appears likely to hasten democratization . In the Global South, the expansion of market economies
 Some see democracy as failing even while elections become more commonplace . Even so, the continued enlargement of the liberal democratic community is not guaranteed .
 In the average election held among the bottom billion poorest of the world’s population, the incumbent “wins” a healthy 74 percent of the vote . Oxford economist Paul Collier points out .
 In elections with particularly weak restraints, it is an even healthier 88 percent of the vote, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Incumbent incumbents in these societies are very good at winning elections, says CNN's John Sutter . He says incumbents are good at keeping control of their societies .
 Many Global South countries lack well-developed domestic market economies based on entrepreneurship and private enterprise . Furthermore, many Global S.S. countries have not developed well- developed domestic markets economies .
 The fact that 84 percent of the world’s population is poor is both a reflection and cause of these unequally distributed resources . The world's economic inequality is a reflection of the fact that the world is poor, the author says .
 The data on the division between the Global North and the Global South point to brutal disparities and inequalities . Numbers paint pictures and construct images, and the data points to brutal inequalities .
 A category used by the World Bank (WDI 2009) to identify Giobal North countries, with a GNI per capita of $11,456 or more annuaily . The category is used by World Bank to identify . Giobal . North countries .
 The situation is much more favorable—and the quality of life is relatively advantageous—in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Hemisphere, where nearly all the Global South countries are located .
 The least developed of the less developed countries are the most impoverished countries in the Global South . They are the least developed countries of the world's most impoverished regions .
 This picture darkens even more when the focus shifts to the plight of the poorest in low-income developing countries .
 Sometimes described as the “Third World’s Third World,” these countries are the very poorest, with little economic growth and rapid population growth that is straining their overtaxed society .
 These countries are not emerging or reemerging to break the chains of their destitution . They are falling behind the other Global South countries, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 A daunting scale of misery and marginalization is evident across the Global South, from which only a fraction of its countries have begun to escape . Only a handful of countries have escaped from the misery they face .
 For most Global South countries, the future is bleak, and the opportunities and choices most basic to freedom from fear and poverty are unavailable . For most of the world's Global South, the opportunities are unavailable. For most, they are not available. For the future, they say .
 The aggregate pattern underlying global trends in the last twenty years shows that more than sixty countries today are worse off than they were in the 1990s . The Global North is falling further behind the levels achieved by the countries in the Global North .
 Nearly all the population growth in the twenty-first century will occur in the Global South, the poorest countries cut off from circulation in the globalized marketplace . It is hard to imagine how the gap can close and how the soil of poverty can prevent terrorism and civil war .
 The diversity evident in the Global South invites the conclusion that underdevelopment is explained by a combination of factors . Underdevelopment can be explained by the fact that it is due to a number of factors, such as climate change and environmental factors .
 Some theorists explain the underdevelopment of most developing economies by looking primarily at internal causes within states . Some theorists say internal causes may be internal causes .
 Some theorists focus on international causes such as the position of developing countries in the global political economy . Others focus on developing countries' position in global politics .
 Classical Economic Development Theory’s Interpretation . Liberal economic development theories of modernization first emerged in the early post-World War II era .
 Global South countries’ own internal characteristics could be barriers to development, they said . They argued that major barriers to developing were posed by the Global South’s internal characteristics .
 Classical theorists recommended that wealthy countries supply various “missing components” of development, such as investment capital through foreign aid or private foreign direct investment . To overcome these barriers, wealthy countries should supply these ‘missing components of development’
 liberal theorists predicted that its benefits would eventually “trickle down’ to broad segments of society . Once sufficient capital was accumulated to promote economic growth, it would ‘trickle’ down, they said .
 Everyone, not just a privileged few, would begin to enjoy rising affluence . Everyone would benefit from the rise in affluence, says the president of the UK .
 He predicted that traditional societies would inevitably pass through various stages by means of the free market and would eventually “take off” to become similar to the mass-consumption societies of the Global North .
 As incomes in the world as a whole grow, the odds increase that a preindustrialized economy will grow faster and eventually reduce the gap between it and richer countries . Even though the rich are likely to get richer, it was argued that the odds increased that the rich will get richer .
 The Global South was instead persuaded by the rival theory that attributed their lack of development to the international links between developing countries and the Global North’s leadership in the global political economy .
 Classical theory attributes the causes of most developing countries’ underdevelopment to internal conditions within states . Dependency theory emphasizes international factors in general and the Global South’s dependence on the dominant great powers in particular . The Global South is dependent on the Dominant Great Powers .
 dependency theory builds on Lenin’s radical critique of imperialism, but it goes beyond it to account for changes that have occurred in recent decades . As noted in Chapter 2, dependency theory is based on Lenin's critique of capitalism .
 The structure of the capitalist world economy is based on a division of labor between a dominant core and a subordinate periphery . Its central proposition is that the structure of . the capitalist . world economy . based on division of . labor .
 As a result of colonialism, the Global South countries that make up the periphery have been forced into an economic role whereby they export raw materials and import finished goods . The Global South is forced into a role where it exports raw material and imports finished goods.
 Classical liberal theorists submit that specialization in production according to comparative advantage will increase income in an unfettered market . Dependent theorists maintain that global inequalities cannot be reduced so long as developing countries continue to specialize in producing primary products for which there are often numerous competing suppliers and limited demand .
 Breaking out of their dependent status and pursuing their own industrial development remains the greatest foreign policy priority for countries in the Global South . The Global South is the most dependent country in the world .
 Some countries (particularly those in Latin America) have pursued development through an import-substitution industrialization strategy . The strategy is designed to encourage domestic entrepreneurs to manufacture products traditionally imported from abroad .
 Governments became heavily involved in managing their economies and, in some cases, became the owners and operators of industry . Governments are now heavily involved with managing the economies .
 Import-substitution industrialization eventually fell from favor . Manufacturers often found they still had to rely on Global North technology to produce goods for domestic markets .
 "What had enriched the rich was not their insulation from imports (rich countries do), it says . The preference now is for export-led industrialization, the author says .
 Dependency theorists argue that countries in the Global South are vulnerable to cultural penetration by multinational corporations and other outside forces, which saturate them with values .
 Once such penetration has occurred, the inherently unequal exchanges that bind the exploiters and the exploited are sustained by elites within the penetrated societies, who sacrifice their country’s welfare for personal gain .
 The argument that a privileged few benefit from dependency at the expense of their societies underscores the dual nature of many developing countries . The argument is that the rich and powerful benefit from the privilege of dependency .
 Dualism refers to the existence of two separate economic and social sectors operating side-by-side . Dualism is a form of dualism in the United States .
 Dual societies typically have a rural, impoverished, and neglected sector operating alongside an urban, developing, or advanced sector . Dual societies have little interaction between the two, but with little interaction .
 MNCs contribute to dualism by favoring a minority of well-compensated employees over the rest that increases gaps in pay and by widening differences between rural and urban economic opportunities . The world's largest companies are the largest in the world, according to a recent study .
 Although dependency theory has great appeal within the Global South, it cannot easily explain rapid economic development of what many people refer to as the newly industrialized countries in the Global East .
 Cuba, Myanmar, and North Korea have focused their economic growth efforts inwardly and have had little involvement in global trade . Neither does it do a good job of explaining the lack of sustained development of countries such as Cuba and Myanmar .
 The vast political, economic, and social differences separating the Global North and the Global South suggest that the remaining countries in the Global . South are increasingly vulnerable, insecure, and defenseless . These conditions are products of both internal and international factors, authors say .
 The rapidly growing economies of the Global East and South Asia that have made those countries competitors with the traditionally dominant countries of the global North . Global East is a rapidly growing region of the world .
 classical theory prescribed countries to emulate the path of industrial democracies in order to develop . During its heyday in the 1960s, classical theory said countries should emulate path to industrial democracies to develop.
 By 1970s, efforts had not resulted in widespread prosperity or democracy . However, it was apparent by the 1970s that such efforts did not lead to widespread prosperity and democracy .
 Many Latin American countries suffered from authoritarian rule and abject poverty . For example, many countries in Latin America, such as Chile, Argentina, and Brazil, suffered from . authoritarian rule .
 Dependency theory grew in popularity at this time, with its focus on the global capitalist system as the reason for persistent underdevelopment of the Global South countries .
 The relevance of this theoretical explanation came to be questioned as well, particularly in light of the success of the Global East countries that experienced meaningful growth by participating in the global market .
 As both perspectives fell out of vogue, critics suggested that modernization theory was dead . Modernization theory is dead, but some have suggested that it is still relevant .
 Since the end of the Cold War, a nuanced version of modernization theory has emerged . Modernization theory is gaining credibility since end of Cold War .
 Like earlier incarnations of modernization theory, this more recent version sees economic development as eliciting important and predictable changes in politics, culture, and society . The theory is similar to that of earlier versions .
 A society’s beliefs, values, and traditions shape its larger worldview and its engagement with the forces ot modernization . As constructivists would argue, a society's beliefs and values shape its worldview and engagement with modernization .
 Success of industrialization in the Global East challenges ethnocentric assumptions of modernization theory . Success of countries other than the U.S. as models for development challenges earlier assumptions, says Peter Bergen .
 Economic development tends to produce certain societal changes linked to modernization . However, increases in per capita GDP do not automatically result in democracy, as seen in Kuwait and the UAE .
 There are multiple inflection points, as individual phases of modernization tend to be associated with particular changes in society . Industrialization tends to be linked to bureaucratization, hierarchy, and secularization . Post-industrialization tend to emphasize individual autonomy and selfexpression values .
 This debate over the sources ot modernization provides us ideas about why some countries develop to a greater extent than others . This debate provides us with ideas about how some countries have developed more rapidly than others.
 It also illustrates a feedback loop between real-world events and trends and the construction and testing of theory .
 Your choices would undoubtedly benefit by considering the different approaches Global South countries have taken to pursue their objectives, particularly in their relationships with the Global North .
 Global South states whose relative wealth contrasts sharply with LLDCs’ poverty . Those Global S states that have fossil fuels to consume and export are rich enough to fuel growth .
 The sixteen developing-country exporters of oil and other fuels have escaped the EEDCs’ grim fate . The twelve members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries have escaped their grim fate.
 OPEC members Kuwait, Qatar, and the Elnited Arab Emirates have risen to the high-income group’s standards of living, rivaling or exceeding some Global North countries .
 Differences in technological capabilities separate the Global North and Global South . Differences in technology also separate North and South .
 Global South countries have been unable to evolve an indigenous technology appropriate to their own resources . Global South have been dependent on powerful Global North multinational corporations to transfer technical know-how .
 Research and development expenditures are directed toward solutions of the Global North’s problems, with technological advances seldom meeting the needs of the global South . This means that research and development expenditure is directed toward solving the problems of the North, not the South .
 In the information age, technology has not been multinational corporations headquartered in one state that invest and operate extensively in many other states, it has been said . Technology is not a business venture venture venture, it's a company that invests extensively in other states .
 Tata Nano is the worid’s cheapest car and is the innovation of an emerging muitinationai in Mumbai, india . Launched in March 2009, the Tata Nano was the first car to be built in India .
 Companies in the Globai South are competing with the richcountry muitinationais in the Glohai North . With iow-cost production modeis based on inexpensive iocal iahor and growing domestic markets .
 Middle-income countries in East and Southern Asia inspire hope and awe . New industrialized countries in the region inspire hope, awe in the world .
 This new contingent of countries, called “the Global East,” has semiperiphery to world-system theorists . Countries midway between the rich “core,’ or center, and the poor “periphery"" In the global hlerarcy,
 They are experiencing even greater success than the oil-exporting countries, says CNN's John Defterios . "They are experiencing greater success," he says .
 Their achievement lies in moving beyond the export of simple unfinished goods such as crude oil . The export of manufactured goods is to provide expertise in the digital revolution of the information age .
 NICs are among the largest exporters of manufactured goods and are leaders in the information processing industry . Today, the NICs have become the world's largest exporter of manufactured products and information processing processors .
 They have climbed from the periphery into the semiperiperiphery and beyond to rival the Global North . They've climbed from periphery to the semiiperiperiperiiphery .
 South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and Hong Kong engineered export-led growth through aggressively so-called neomercantilist policies . The policies are aimed at protecting infant industries from foreign competition and subsidizing manufacturers .
 China, India, Malaysia, and Thailand next followed this route toward joining the ranks of the wealthiest states . Following the lead paved by Japan in developing new products for export .
 MNCs are energizing by outsourcing of jobs from the labor-costly Global North to the skilled Asian workers capable of performing the same labor at less expense to the multinational corporation .
 Rising oil prices have created a boom that is transforming this Arab kingdom into a zone of prosperity . The construction of the world’s largest shopping mall with the largest aquarium and a five-story underwater hotel is exemplified by the construction of a shopping mall .
 Saudi and Kuwaiti investors have developed a huge financial center in war-torn but oil-rich Sudan . Sudan is Africa’s largest country, and is the most populous country in the world .
 Sudanese crossing the bridge to witness the inauguration ceremony for the financial center on March 21,2009 . also China, India, Malaysia, and Thailand also attended .
 purchasing power parity is an index that calculates the true rate of exchange among currencies . The index determines what can be bought with a unit of each currency . China and India are already commercial giants and have set their sights on being the globe's next great powers .
 The success of the NICs in elevating themselves above the rest of the Global South has inspired faith in the neoclassical theorists’ export-led strategies . It now encourages other Global South countries to copy them by removing still other obstacles standing in the way of economic growth .
 Global South countries must face the fateful question of whether they dare to call for help from the great powers and dominating international organizations when violence, terrorism, and anarchy prevail . Global South must decide whether to ask for help when violence and terrorism prevail .
 On top of this concern is another; the threat of great power indifference or inability to agree about when, where, why, and how they should collectively become involved within Global South borders .
 Faced with seemingly endless conflict at home or abroad, it is not surprising that the Global South countries have joined the rest of the world’s quest to acquire modern weapons of war . China, India, North Korea, and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, as in the cases of China
 In the Global South, military spending typically exceeds expenditures on health and education . impoverished states facing ethnic, religious, or tribal strife at home are quite prepared to sacrifice expenditures for economic development in order to acquire weapons .
 Weak Global South governments have invested increased proportions of their modest national budgets in arms rather than reducing poverty by reallocating scarce revenues from the military to social and economic development . Weak governments are paralyzed by fears of separatist revolts .
 The Global South appears to be increasing its dependence for arms purchases on the very same rich states whose military and economic domination they historically have most resented . Thus, in responding to a world of powers, the Global South .
 Although some Global South countries benefit from global economic integration and prosper, others remain immune to the alleged benefits of globalization and are especially vulnerable to recessions in the global economy . Global South is particularly vulnerable to global recessions .
 How to cope with dominance and dependence thus remains a key Global South concern . How to deal with dominance is a key concern for the South .
 The emerging Global South countries were born into a politicaleconomic order with rules they had no voice in creating . They had no choice in creating the rules they were born in, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 In order to gain control over their economic futures, they began coordinating their efforts within the United Nations . Their growing numbers and voting power gave them greater influence than they could otherwise command .
 UNCTAD later became a permanent UN organization through which the Global South would express its interests concerning development issues . UNCTad later became an international organization through its membership .
 Global South seeks to compel the Global North to abandon practices perceived as perpetuating their dependence . Motivated by the oil-exporting countries’ rising bargaining power, the Global South sought to . .
 Not surprisingly, the Global North rebuffed many of the South’s proposals, although some of the issues that were raised remain on the global agenda . The Global North also rebuffed the South's proposals .
 At the 2003 World Trade Organization meeting in Cancun, Mexico, poor countries united to demand major concessions from the wealthy countries, especially with regard to foreign subsidies . Poor countries united in 2003 to demand concessions from wealthy countries .
 ‘Banco del Sur’ was launched by founding members Brazil and Argentina to compete directly with the World Bank and thereby fund big infrastructure projects through the region’s new oil wealth to go around Global North interference . In 2008 another step was taken when ‘ Banco del
 Group of 77 was the coalition of Third Worid countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Developing Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade . The coalition of 77 countries was formed in 1963 .
 1974 UN policy resolution called for a North-South dialogue opened the way for the less developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy . New International Economic Order the 1974 UN resolution .
 With the failure of reform envisioned by the NIEO, the integration of Global South countries will occur according to the rules dictated by the Global North . Global South will have to comply with the rules of the global North, writes Peter Bergen .
 To promote growth through regional economic agreements, the global economy began to subdivide into three “trade blocs” One in Europe, with the European Union as its hub, a second in the Americas, and a third in the Global East, with Japan and China dominant .
 Central America-Dominican Republic Eree Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAETA and create a free-trade zone . The agreement includes the United States, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica .
 Mercosur, commonly referred to as the “Common Market of the South,’ is the largest trading bloc in South America and aims for full economic integration of the region .
 Full members include Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Uruguay and Venezuela . Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile hold associate membership status .
 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations agreed to set up a free-trade area . The free trade area was first established in 1967 by Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and the Philippines .
 The Southern African Development Community is the largest of twelve regional free-trade areas in the region . The community is based in Southern Africa's largest free trade zone .
 In the past, political will and shared visions have proven to be indispensable elements in successful regional trade regimes that set rules for members’ collaboration . Political will and common vision are essential elements to successful trade regimes, say experts .
 The goal is to stimulate greater trade among the members of the free-trade area, not simply between it and other regions . Economic complementarity is another essential component, as well as economic complementarity . The aim is to encourage greater trade in the free trade area .
 One approach for closing the gap between the Global South and the Global North is through the distribution of foreign assistance . Foreign aid and remittances can be used to close the gap .
 Some foreign aid consists of outright grants of money, some of loans at concessional rates, and some of shared technical expertise . Some of the money is in the form of grants, loans and grants .
 Security objectives traditionally have figured prominently as motives of donors’ allocations of both economic aid and military assistance, and still do . However, security objectives traditionally figure prominently in donors' allocations of military assistance .
 The U.S. continues to target Israel and Egypt as major recipients to symbolize friendship, maintain a balance of power, and tilt the scales toward peace .
 Security was the primary motive behind the doubling of the U.S. foreign assistance budget following 9/11 to provide funds for allies’ use in the global war on terrorism . Also, security was the main motive behind doubling the .
 The assumption that development will support other goals, such as fostering solidarity among allies and promoting commercial advantage, free markets, or democratization, still underpins most donors’ assistance programs .
 The general trend for the past fifteen years in foreign aid allocations has been toward slowly rising increases . Foreign aid allocations have been rising steadily in the past 15 years .
 This represented the largest increase in U.S. development assistance since the Marshall Plan in 1948 . The U.N. increased the amount of development assistance to $1.5 billion .
 Critics resent what they perceive is an entrenched state of mind in many Global South cultures that stands in the way of development . Critics resent the profit motive, competition, and consumerism at the heart of capitalism’s spirit .
 Donors resentful that countries seeking aid do not value core Western values of hard work, competition, and entrepreneurial creativity . Donors are especially resentful of the Western values that are crucial for progress .
 The World Bank estimates this practice reduces the value of aid by 15 to 30 percent . Donors also persist in their habit of making development assistance ‘tied’ to the donors for their benefit .
 Global South leaders have joined Global North critics of foreign aid, interpreting it as an instrument of neocolonialism and neoimperialism . Many Global S. leaders resent the conditionality criteria for receiving aid imposed by the IMF and other multilateral institutions .
 With UN Resolution 2626, the weaithy countries of the Global North agreed in 1970 to allocate 7 percent of their GNP as aid for the long-term development of the poorer countries . UN resolution 2626 was passed by the UN in 1970 .
 Migrant laborers working in the Global North earn each paycheck and send home to their families . More than double the global total in foreign aid is funneled into the Global South economies .
 Global remittances reached $305 billion in 2008 from only $170 billion in 2002 . Remittances rose steadily each year since the 1970s, reaching $305billion in 2008 .
 The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year is vital to developing countries . Migrant workers send millions of dollars back to developing nations .
 In Tajikistan, remittances amount to almost 36 percent of the gross domestic product . Remittances are almost a quarter of the country's GDP . In some countries, it is estimated as much as $1 billion a year .
 As the global economy continues to struggle at the start of 2010, revenue revenue may slow .
 Fewer Latin American immigrants in the United States are sending money back home . This concerns governments such as Mexico’s, where fewer Latin Americans in the U.S. send money .
 Developed countries have long pleaded for ‘trade, not aid’ to improve their global position . Access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth, says NIC .
 Many countries of the Global South have benefited from a “virtuous cycle” (Blanton and Blanton 2008), wherein trade leads to improved domestic conditions that in turn facilitate trade . Trade leads to better domestic conditions, which in turn facilitates trade .
 Trade may be preferred to aid, but political barriers often interfere with free trade . Political barriers may interfere with trade, especially in the Middle East . Trade may aid but it may not be the only way to help the economy .
 Global South’s strategies for escaping destitution and stagnant economic growth have been to encourage MNCs to funnel an increasing share of their foreign direct investment into its countries . This would increase its export earnings to gain a greater share of global trade .
 Critics question whether the investment of capital by MNCs into local or domestic business ventures is really a financial remedy . This strategy has always been the target of critics .
 The strategy has always been controversial, because there are many hidden costs, or externalities, associated with permitting corporations controlled from abroad to set up business within the host state for the purpose of making a profit .
 The primary danger with this strategy is the potential for foreign investments to lead to foreign control and the erosion of sovereign governments’ capacity to regulate the economy within their borders .
 An additional danger is that multinational foreign investors will not invest their profits locally but channel them abroad for new investments or disburse them as dividends for their wealthy Global North shareholders . The risk is that the profits will not be invested locally, but channeled to new investments .
 Despite the risks, many developing countries have relaxed restrictions in order to attract foreign investors . Many countries have less emphasis placed on liberalizing investment restrictions than on offering tax and cash enticements .
 Net private-capitai fiows have poured into the Giobai South, reaching a record $1.03 trillion in 2007 . Developing countries in East and Centrai Asia, as weil as Europe, have seen an investment contribution to overail growth of roughly 4
 It has paved the way for emerging markets to expand their rates of economic development . The investments have been made despite the resistance of local industries that are threatened by the competition .
 The prospects for foreign aid, trade, or foreign direct investments to contribute to the future development of, and relief of poverty in, the Global South will depend on a number of other factors, such as debt .
 Foremost is the extent to which the staggering level of debt facing many Global South countries can be managed . Foremost of the debt facing the Global South is managed, says the IMF .
 This is unsustainable and threatens their economic health and future growth . This is unacceptable and threatens the economic health of the U.S. economy .
 The joint IMF-World Bank “Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries” coordinated efforts to reduce the severe external debt of HIPCs to a level that they could sustain . HIPCs are in need of relief from severe external debts .
 A group of Global North great powers proposed the “Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative” in 2005 . To provide even further debt relief, a group of global North great power proposed the "Multilateral debt Relief Initiative"
 Under this program, four multilateral lending institutions will provide 100% debt relief on eligible debts owed to them by HIPCs . HIPCs have completed key structural reforms as required by the “HIPC Initiative” process .
 MNCs can either promote or inhibit development, depending on how they channel investments and, when they do, how they operate in the host country . MNC's investment can be either positive or negative depending on the type of investment it takes .
 Global South countries have overcome fears about MNCs as powerful, potentially neocolonial, nonstate actors that may compromise national sovereignty and undermine local prosperity . MNC penetrations often incur many potential risks and costs . Despite these concerns, Global South nations have overcome their fears and now welcome
 MNCs continue to be alternately praised and condemned, depending on how their performance is viewed . MNC’s performance has been viewed with varying degrees of criticism .
 The following “balance sheet’s” summarizes the major arguments for and against MNCs . The balance sheet is a look at both sides of the debate .
 Using this summary of contending interpretations, you can easily see why the role and impact of MNCs is so controversial . The role of the MNC's role in the Middle East is also controversial .
 China and Singapore have enjoyed rapid economic growth without significant political liberalization . On the one hand, China has enjoyed rapid growth without undertaking significant political reforms . Singapore has seen rapid growth in recent years without significant reforms .
 Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel Laureate in economics and former chief economist of the World Bank, complains that the policies produce disappointing results because they are anchored in a freemarket dogma that ignores the sociocultural contexts of the countries where they are applied .
 Development strategies for the future should avoid grandiose claims of universality and one-size-flts-all policies . Given the diversity of the Global South, development strategies should avoid such claims of universalality, say experts .
 What works in one country may be impractical or undesirable in another, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The twenty-first century is going to be about more than great power politics, says Bill Clinton . It is useful to remember historical trends underlying the emergence of the Global South as an actor on the global stage .
 Those states that came to regard themselves as its members share important characteristics . Those states have important characteristics, such as a state of mind, they say .
 Most were colonized by people of another race, experienced varying degrees of poverty and hunger . They felt powerless in a world dominated by the affluent countries that once controlled them and perhaps still do .
 Post-World War II decolonization took place, but much remained the same . Considerable change occurred among the newly emergent states as post-WWII decolonized .
 The relationships between the world’s great and small powers will no doubt continue to change . But how exactly how remains uncertain .
 The future of Global South development is certain to depend in the near term on the activities of the Global North . However, the future of global South development will depend on the activity of the North .
 A turn inward toward isolationist foreign policies in the Global North could lead to a posture of “benign neglect” of the Global South, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Relations between the Global South and the Global North remain dominated by the great powers . International Organizations and Transnational Actors Actors Relations between South and North dominate the world .
 The U.N. and the World Bank are the world's most powerful institutions . That domination is funneled in part through the United Nations and World Bank, such as the UN .
 Intergovernmental organizations provide an opportunity for the small powers of the Global South to exert influence on world politics . At the same time, intergovernmental organizations give an opportunity to influence world politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To understand world politics and the roots of changes in international affairs, it is important to inspect the impact of these influential IGOs as actors in the global arena .
 Nonstate actors are also transforming international politics, for both the Global North and the Global South . To complete the picture, you also need to inspect the thousands of nongovernmental organizations , whose presence and pressure is also transforming .
 The answer for centuries has been reliance primarily on sovereign territorial states . The answer is to the question of sovereignty, not sovereignty, but sovereignty .
 As realism posits, countries remain the most influential actors on the world stage . Countries are the most powerful actors in the world, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is states’ foreign policy decisions and interactions that, more than any other factor, give rise to trends and transformations in world politics, says David Frum .
 The extraordinary power of states over global destiny is eroding as our world becomes increasingly complex and interdependent . Nonstate actors continue to multiply and seek greater influence in the global community .
 A critical question to consider is if the predicted decline of states’ sovereign authority will ultimately prove to be a cure for global problems or a curse . responsible sovereignty a principle that requires states to cooperate across borders to protect global resources and address transnational threats .
 This chapter provides information and insight that can help you evaluate this question . It also provides information about how to evaluate your relationship with the world .
 Nonstate actors on the world stage are flexing their political muscle in efforts to engineer adaptive global changes . There have arisen impressive numbers of nonstate actors in the world world .
 This chapter will explore two broad types of nonstate actors: international organizations that carry out independent foreign policies as transnational actors and NGOs made up of individual people who band together in coalitions of private citizens to exercise international influence .
 We begin with a look at the general characteristics of both types of nonstate actors . To introduce this, we begin with an analysis of the characteristics of the nonstate agents .
 Intergovernmental organizations are intergovernmental organizations whose members are states . Nongovernmental organizations are associations comprised of members who are private individuals and groups . Nonstate actors are nonstate actors .
 Intergovernmental Organizations IGOs are purposely created by states to solve shared problems . Intergovernmental organizations IGOIs are created by state governments to solve problems together .
 IGOs are generally regarded as more important than NGOs . This gives them whatever authority they possess for the purposes states assign them .
 IGOs are defined by the fact that their members are the governments of states and also by the permanence of their institutions . In part, this is because they are defined as permanent institutions, and their membership is permanence .
 IGOs meet at regular intervals, and they have established rules for making decisions and a permanent secretariat or headquarters staff . They meet regularly, with regular meetings and rules established .
 Only thirty-three IGOs qualify as “intercontinental organizations” and only thirty-four are, like the UN, “universal membership” IGO’s . The UN is the largest organization in the world, with more than 30,000 members .
 The rest, accounting for more than 72 percent of the total, are limited in their scope and confined to particular regions . The rest of the world's most limited in scope are confined to specific regions .
 The variation among the organizations in each subcategory is great, particularly with single-purpose, limited-membership IGOs . The variations are great, especially with limited-member-member organizations .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is primarily a military alliance . Others, such as the Organization of American States, promote economic development and democratic reforms .
 Most IGOs concentrate their activities on specific economic or social issues of special concern to them . Still, most IGO's focus is on the management of trade or transportation, such as transportation .
 Since 1900 the number of independent states has increased dramaticaiiy . That growth acceierated especialiy after Worid War II when the decolonization movement began .
 The number of NGOs has grown even more rapidly in this period, declining only since the late 1980s when a number of formerly independent IGOs began to merge with one another . But note that the number has grown more rapidly since the mid 1980s .
 The number of NGOs has grown even more rapidly, with almost 8,000 NGOs in existence worldwide . There are now almost 9,000 organizations worldwide .
 They support one another to work on issues such as trade, defense, disarmament, economic development, agriculture, health, culture, human rights, the arts, illegal drugs, tourism, labor, gender inequality, education, debt, and the environment .
 The term NGO can be applied to all nonstate and nonprofit organizations that operate as intermediaries to build transnational bridges between those with resources and a targeted group in order to address global problems . Nongovernmental Organizations can be used to build bridges between resources and groups .
 It is customary to think of NGOs as intersocietal organizations that contribute to negotiations between and among states in the hope of reaching agreements for global governance on nearly every issue of international public policy .
 Amnesty International in 2009 included 2. million members spread across one hundred fifty countries and regions . Amnesty International is one of the largest rights groups in the world, with 2 million members .
 NGOs span virtually every facet of political, social, and economic activity in an increasingly borderless globalized world . They range from earth sciences to ethnic unity, health care, language, history, culture, education, theology, law, ethics, security, and defense .
 The long list of acronyms that have accumulated around NGOs can be used to illustrate this . It is a long list that has accumulated around the world .
 People speak of NGOs, INGOs, BINGOs, RINGOs and ENGOs, QUANGOS (Quasi-Non-Government) Organizations—i.e., those that are at least partially created or supported by states .
 In general, the image of NGOs widely accepted throughout the world is very positive . Most pursue objectives that are highly respected and therefore do not provoke much opposition . Most of these NGOs pursue objectives highly respected, therefore don't provoke opposition .
 Amnesty International, the International Chamber of Commerce, the Red Cross, Save the Children, and the World Wildlife Federation enjoy widespread popular support . For example, Amnesty International . Amnesty International is one of the largest NGOs in the world .
 More than three thousand NGOs consult with various agencies of the UN system . NGOs maintain offices in hundreds of cities and hold parallel conferences with IGO meetings to which states send representatives .
 Such partnerships between NGOs and IGOs enable both types to work together in pursuit of common policies and programs . Such partnerships are important for NGOs to be able to reach common goals and objectives .
 As IGOs and NGOs rise in numbers and influence, a key question to contemplate is whether a ‘global society’ will materialize to override the traditional global system centered on sovereign states . If so, if so, whether this structural transformation will democratize or disrupt global governance
 Ask yourself whether IGOs’ activities are adequate for dealing with pressing threats to human welfare, or whether they are undermining states’ continuing autonomy . If so, if so, whether an erosion of state power will prove helpful or harmful .
 The United Nations is the best-known global organization in the world . It is based in New York City .
 U.S. Navy seized suspected pirates in the Gulf of Aden in February 2009 as they were being seized .
 More than 23,000 merchant vessels that sail near the Horn of Africa each year each year are targeted by pirates . The pirates appear to be motivated by monetary gain rather than ideology . Protecting the more than 25,000 ships from this “new kind of bad actor” is
 UN's nearly fourfold growth from fifty-one states that joined it at the UN's birth in 1945 has been spectacular . The admission process has from the start been governed by political conflicts that show the extent to which the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and
 In principle, any sovereign state that accepts the UN’s goals and regulations can join . Great powers have often let realpolitik guide their decision making about which new countries should be admitted to the UN .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union prevented countries aligned with their adversaries from joining . This was especially true during the Cold War, when both the U.S. and the USSR prevented countries aligning with their adversary from joining.
 Peace and security figured prominently in the thinking of the great powers responsible for creating the UN and its predecessor, the League of Nations . The UN’s Agenda is based on peace and security in the United States .
 These institutional reforms were inspired by the liberal conviction that both war and the management of other global problems can best be controlled by removing global anarchy . The absence of supranational authority to regulate relations between states—from the international scene .
 League of Nations sought to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophic World War I by replacing the balance-of-power system with a collective security regime . An act of aggression by any state would be met by a collective retaliatory response from the rest .
 The League failed to restrain expansionistic aggression by Germany, Japan, and Italy during the 1930s . It collapsed after failing to restrain aggression by Japan, Italy, and Germany .
 At the start of World War II, the U.S., British, and Russian allies began planning for a new international organization, the United Nations . It was believed that peace could not be maintained unilaterally by any one great power acting alone .
 The UN was paralyzed by the Cold War conflict between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the post-Gold War era . It was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission in post-Cold War era after Cold War .
 To assess the capacity of the U.N. to fulfill its growing responsibilities, let us consider how it is organized . Let us assess how the United Nations is organized, we ask .
 Since its creation the UN has sought to address the continuously expanding problems on the global agenda . UN's head headquarters and global network are located in New York City .
 UN has spread its administrative arm to every corner of the globe in order to fulfill its primary purpose of spearheading international cooperation . To reduce the gap between aspiration and accomplishment, the UN's administrative arm has spread across the globe .
 In 2009 the UN continued its search for addifional cheap office space, including islands, cruise ships, and large tents . The UN continues to search for new office space .
 The UN’s limitations are perhaps rooted in the ways it is organized for its wide-ranging purposes . Organizational Structure of the UN is perhaps more important to the organization . UN's limitations may be rooted in its organizational structure .
 All members of the U.N. are equally represented according to a one-state/one-vote formula . Established as the main deliberative body of the United Nations, all members are equal .
 Decisions are reached by a simple majority vote, except on so-called important questions, which require a two-thirds majority . Decisions must be reached by the majority of a majority vote .
 The Security Council is responsible for dealing with threats to international peace and security . It consists of five permanent members with the power to veto substantive decisions . Ten nonpermanent members are elected by the General Assembly for staggered two-year terms .
 This body has been particularly active in addressing economic development and human rights issues . This body is particularly active on economic development, human rights .
 The Trusteeship Council suspended operation in 1994 when the last remaining trust territory gained independence .
 The competence of the Court is restricted to disputes between states, and its jurisdiction is based on the consent of the disputants . The competence is restricted .
 The Court may also give nonbinding advisory opinions on legal questions raised by the General Assembly, Security Council, or other UN agencies .
 It is exclusively permitted by the UN Charter to initiate actions, especially the use of force . The UN Charter allows it to take action against the Syrian government in Syria .
 Despite the intentions of the founders of the UN, the General Assembly has assumed wider responsibilities . Countries in the Global South have guided UN involvement in directions of particular concern to them . The one-state/one-vote rules of the United Nations have led UN involvement to particular concern .
 A coalition of Global South countries constituting three-fourths of the UN membership seeks to resist domination by the Global North . The Global South is a coalition of three-fifths of UN membership .
 This coalition directs the UN to address economic and social needs and protests when it fails to respect the Global South’s special interests . The UN must respect the needs of the global south, it says .
 The growth of the General Assembly's power may not be sufficient to ensure the Global South’s control of the agenda . The original five great powers in the Security Council continue to run the show, with the United States hegemon in a pivotal position of preeminent influence .
 The United States resisted the 2005 proposal to expand the Security Council to twenty-four members because it would dilute American power . The U.S. also said it would not support extension of the veto power held by the big five permanent members to other members .
 China surprised many with its refusal to support an Indian bid for a permanent seat in the UN . In 2008 China refused to support India's bid to become a permanent UN seat .
 States contribute to voluntary programs and some of the peacekeeping activities as they see fit . Nations contribute to the voluntary programs .
 The core budget and other peacekeeping activities are subject to assessments . Peacekeeping activities in the U.N. have been subject to an assessment .
 The precise mechanism by which assessments have been determined is complicated, but, historically, it has been allocated according to states’ capacity to pay .
 The poorest 28 percent of the UN’s members, or a total of fifty-four member states, contribute only $24,363 annually . Ban Ki-Moon, 2007-present, is one of the most popular leaders of the world .
 Kofi Annan had a quiet charisma, but the Iraq war and the oil-for-food scandal marred his second term . Annan was the leader of the United Nations in the 1990s and 1996 .
 Boutros Boutros-Ghali, 1992-1996, was the Egyptian president of the United States . Boutros was ousted by the U.S. after one turbulent term .
 Javier Perez de Cuellar, 1982-1991, guided the organization out of Cold War paralysis and back into business . He led the organization into business in the 1980s and '90s .
 Kurt Waldheim, 1972-1981, was an effective bureaucrat in Germany . Waldheim is now remembered mainly for his Nazi past .
 The placid Thant had a low profile but got flak for pulling U.N. peacekeepers from Sinai . U. Thant got a lot of criticism for pulling peacekeepers out .
 Trygve Lie, 1946-52, helped create the organization but accomplished little in office . Lie was a hard-fought politician who helped create but failed to achieve anything . Lie died in 1952 at the age of 65 .
 Secretary-Generals of the UN have had a big influence in shaping the UN’s response to an array of global problems . The Secretary-General has been a key figure in shaping UN's response to global issues .
 The richest 28 percent of states were assessed to pay more than 97 percent of the UN’s 2008-2009 budget . In comparison, the richest 28 per cent of states paid more than 98 per cent .
 Although this formula is under attack in many wealthy states, it still governs . The formula is still under attack from some wealthy states . But it is still governs the country .
 Resistance to this budgetary formula for funding UN activities has always existed . Resistance to the budget formula for UN activities is always existed.
 It has grown progressively worse in large part because when the General Assembly apportions expenses, it does so according to majority rule . The General Assembly does so based on majority rule, and expenses have grown worse .
 The problem is that those with the most votes do not have the money, and the most prosperous countries don't have the votes, says David Cameron . The most prosperous nations don't need to vote, he says .
 This deep imbalance contributes to the great powers' concern about the UN’s priorities, administrative efficiency, and expenses . It has led to many fierce disputes with the small powers over which issues should be the focus of the UN's attention and resources, says the UN .
 The wealthy members charge that the existing budget procedures institutionalize a system of taxation without fair representation . Wealthy members say the system is institutionalized .
 Critics say great power members should bear financial responsibilities commensurate with their wealth and influence . Critics counter that, for fairness and justice, members of Congress should bear responsibility .
 Differences about what is important and which states should have political influence are the real issues, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Differences about what's important is the real issue."
 Poor states argue that need should determine expenditure levels rather than rich countries’ interests . Major contributors do not want to pay for programs they oppose . Poor states say need should dictate expenditure levels .
 Since 2000, the U.S. has been in arrears or behind in its payments, an average of $1.35 billion each year . The United $tates has been the most vocal about its dissatisfaction .
 Of course, this must be viewed in light of the heavy portion of payments that the United $tates is assessed . The United States is assessed heavily by the government .
 Japan paid 16.8 percent of the UN budget in 2009 . The UN is a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council . But Japan is excluded from participation as a member of permanent members .
 The UN’s future remains uncertain, and its persistent financial troubles leave it without the resources to combat global problems and carry out the responsibilities assigned to it . A Ticking Bomb Future Challenges .
 Doubts about its viability have been exacerbated by a string of scandals including mismanagement in the 1990s Iraqi ‘Oil-for-Food’ program, sexual abuse of women in the Congo by UN peacekeepers .
 The UN has a history of successful adaptation to challenges, but supporters have reasons to be optimistic about the organization's long-term prospects .
 Since 2006 the UN has undertaken a series of reforms to change its management procedures and bring its recruitment, contracting, and training responsibilities into line with its vast new responsibilities . Despite some resistance by members of the Global South that feared that new Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon might bend to big-
 Reforms include protection for “whistleblowers” who report scandals, an antifraud and anticorruption policy, and a unified standard of conduct for peacekeepers to prevent sexual abuse .
 These massive reforms also cut the Secretariat’s administrative costs by one-third, from 38 percent of the core budget to 25 percent, and put the savings into a development fund for poor countries .
 The UN will likely remain an arena for heated jockeying among member states and hemispheric blocs, a fact bound to undermine its capacity to solve new global problems . The UN is likely to continue to be a source of heated jockey among members of the world's largest
 In the final analysis, the UN can be no more than the mandates and power that member states give to it . The UN cannot be more than what it is given to it by member states, says David Cameron .
 Beyond the UN, literally hundreds of other IGOs are active internationally . Hundreds of other organizations are active in the world .
 Each of these IGOs was created by the great powers for the purposes of their sponsors in response to the need for a stable international economic order, even at the voluntary sacrifice of sovereignty . Note that each of these great powers created by their sponsors was created for the purpose of their sponsorship
 The primary reason is that multilateral cooperation enables those cooperating states to receive benefits that they would not otherwise receive . Multilateral cooperation is a form of cooperation that allows cooperation to take advantage of each other, the author says .
 The creation of international regimes (rules agreed to by a set of states to regulate cooperative ventures) as well as authoritative IGO institutions for global governance can pay dividends . IGOs should be established to govern cooperative ventures in the future .
 Shared problems often cannot be managed without multilateral cooperation, experts say . Shared problems can't be managed by governments alone, they say . Multilateral cooperation is key to solving shared problems, experts argue .
 Unilateral measures on many issues by even the most powerful great power acting independently simply will not work, says the U.S. State Department .
 After World War II the United States sought to create international economic institutions that would prevent another depression by facilitating the expansion of world trade . Remembering the hardships caused by the Great Depression of 1929, the U.S. created the World Trade Organization .
 Negotiations for the anticipated ITO were dragging on, many people urged immediate action . Many people urged the government to take action immediately .
 These treaties were written into a final act called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . It originally was thought of as a temporary arrangement until the ITO came into operation .
 GATT provided a mechanism for continued multilateral negotiations on reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade . GATT provides a mechanism to continue multilateral talks on reducing tariff and other trade barriers .
 Eight rounds of negotiations were held to liberalize trade between the U.S. and China . Over the next several decades, eight rounds were held .
 GATT members were to give the same treatment to each other as they gave to their “most favored” trading partner . Under the principle of nondiscrimination, GATT was to give same treatment as they did to their most favored trade partner . The GATT countries were to
 It is not exactly what the ITO envisaged immediately following World War II . But it represents the most ambitious tariff-reduction undertaking yet .
 The WTO was and still is a full-fledged IGO with formal decision-making procedures . Unlike GATT, the WTO has formal decision making procedures and formal IGO procedures .
 WTO was given authority to enforce trading rules and adjudicate trade disputes . Mandated to manage disputes arising from its trading partners, the WTO was created in 2003 .
 The WTO now seeks to transcend the existing matrix of free-trade agreements between pairs of countries and within particular regions . The WTO seeks to replace them with an integrated and comprehensive worldwide system of liberal or free trade .
 At the heart of their complaint is the charge that the WTO undermines the traditional rule of law prohibiting interference in sovereign states’ domestic affairs, including management of economic practices within the states .
 The WTO developed as a result of voluntary agreements states reached to surrender some of their sovereign decision-making freedom . This pooling of sovereignty would produce greater gains than losses, the WTO says .
 Many of the WTO's policies are orchestrated by its most powerful members during informal meetings that do not include the full WTO membership . Many of its policies are often orchestrated by members of the organization .
 With increasing criticism of the globalization of national economies, these meetings are convenient targets for protesters . Now, with increasing . criticism of . globalization, these . meetings were convenient targets . for protesters.
 Over the next decade, the Bank shifted its attention from reconstruction to developmental assistance . The Bank shifted attention to development assistance in the region .
 Global South countries often have difficulty borrowing money to finance projects aimed at promoting economic growth . The Bank offers them loans with lower interest rates and longer repayment plans than they could typically obtain .
 Governor customarily is a member country’s minister of finance or an equivalent official . A governor customarily has to be a governor of a state or a member of the legislature .
 The board meets annually in the Bank’s Washington, DC, headquarters to set policy directions and delegate responsibility for the routine operations of the Bank .
 The five countries with the largest number of shares in the World Bank’s capital stock (the United States, Germany, Japan, France, and the United Kingdom) appoint pOV-VCt. The U.S. has the largest share of the world bank's capital stock
 The weighted voting system recognizes differences among members’ holdings system . It protects the interests of the great powers that make more substantial contributions to the World Bank’s resources . The World Bank's voting system is based on the differences among its holdings system and members' holdings .
 If a country’s economic situation changes over time, its quota is adjusted and its allocation of shares and votes changes accordingly . The quotas are adjusted according to the country's economic situation .
 Over the years, both the self-image and operations of the World Bank have changed . The World Bank is now assisting states’ development planning and training . It is now a strictly financial IGO .
 The World Bank also has participated increasingly in consortium arrangements for financing private lending institutions . It has insisted that democratic reforms are made a condition for economic assistance .
 Charges of bribery, kickbacks, and embezzlement being levelled against World Bank projects from road building in Kenya to dam construction in Lesotho . The last three bank presidents have insisted on anticorruption reforms as well .
 The World Bank is poorly prepared to meet all the needs for financial assistance of developing states . Despite its increased pace of activity and its goal for members to pledge nearly $20 billion for three years starting in mid-2008, World Bank says .
 The repayment of loans in hard currencies has imposed serious burdens on impoverished and indebted Global South states . Repaying hard currencies in hard currency is a burden on impoverished states .
 The deficiencies of the World Bank have been offset by the establishment of another lending IGO, the International Monetary Fund . The World Bank has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 Before World War II, the international community lacked institutional mechanisms to manage the exchange of money across borders . The International Monetary Fund was set up in 1945 .
 At the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference, the United States was a prime mover in creating the International Monetary Fund . The IMF is designed to maintain currency-exchange stability by promoting international monetary cooperation .
 IMF is one of the sixteen specialized agencies within the UN system . IMF is now one of 16 specialized agencies in the world's most specialized agencies .
 Each IMF member is represented on its governing board, which meets annually to fix general policy . The IMF is one of the world's largest and most powerful economies .
 Contributions are based on a quota system set according to a state’s national income, monetary reserves, and other factors affecting each member of the state . State's national income and monetary reserves are among factors affecting how much each member can contribute .
 IMF operates like a credit union that requires each participant to contribute to a common pool of funds from which it can borrow when the need arises . In this way, each participant contributes to a pool of money from which the IMF can borrow .
 IMF voting is weighted according to a state’s monetary contribution, giving a larger voice to the wealthier states . The IMF's voting is based on the amount of contributions made by a state .
 Push for IMF reform has become prevalent following the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s . Many argued that IMF intervention was counterproductive, as many argued that it was counterproductive .
 The tug of war between individual states and groups of states within the UN, the WTO, the World Bank, and the IMF are reminders of the underlying principle that IGOs are run by the states that join them .
 This severely inhibits the IGOs’ ability to rise above interstate competition and independently pursue their organizational purposes . This is the result of a lack of federal cooperation in the United States . The IGO’s can no longer compete in interstate competition .
 Universal IGOs are often viewed more as instruments of their state members’ foreign policies and arenas for debate than as independent nonstate actors . Because they cannot act autonomously, they lack the legitimacy and capability for independent global governance, they are often seen as instruments for state members'
 When states dominate universal international organizations like the UN, the prospects for international cooperation can decline . As realism emphasizes, states are fearful of multilateral organizations that compromise their vital national interests . States should not dominate universal organizations like UN .
 This limits IGOs’ capabilities for multilateral decision making to engineer global change . This limits the IGO’s capabilities for multi-tensionary decision making, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 A rival hypothesis is that cooperation among powerful states is possible and that international organizations help produce it . A rival theory emerges from liberal theory of international cooperation and international organizations .
 The EU serves as a model for other regional IGOs to emulate as the globe’s greatest example of peaceful cross-border cooperation . The EU is an integrated security community with a single economy with a one-nation economy .
 The EU’s dedication to liberal democratic governance and capitalist free markets, as well as its emphasis on the search for a Third Way to alleviate human suffering, is paving an approach that other regional IGOs are pursuing .
 The European Union is not, strictly speaking, a frepranational organization for the collective management of European domestic and foreign affairs . The EU is not ... strictly speaking . It is not . strictly . speaking, it is not a free-standing supranormal organization .
 The EU coexists with a large number of other European IGOs, in which it is nested and with which it jointly makes decisions . The EU is one of the largest economies in the world and has the largest stake in international business .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe stand as regional institutions of equal European partners . They are designed to manage regional security and promote the human rights of minorities through democratization .
 In this overlapping network of European IGOs, the EU is prominent as the primary example of a powerful organization that has transformed itself from a singleto a multiple-purpose nonstate actor .
 As constructivism argues, ideas have consequences. EU Expansion and Political Integration is a key part of constructivism . The EU is the most powerful institution in the world .
 Big ideas often come from painful experiences and crises, such as devastating wars . Big ideas come from pain and crises such as a devastating war, says CNN's John Sutter .
 European leaders conceived of a bold plan to remove the curse of war by attacking the incentives for war . European leaders say they want to attack the incentives of war .
 Their reform program aimed at the political integration of Europe to build a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states . They seek nothing less than the transformation of international relations to institutions over them .
 The process of European integration began with the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 . The European Atomic Energy Community in 1957, and the European Economic Community was created in 1957 .
 This bold enlargement added seventy-five million people to create the globe’s biggest free-trade bloc . It transformed the face of Europe by ending the continent's division . The EU is now the world's biggest free trade bloc .
 Croatia and Turkey are considering membership of the European Union . Croatia and other western Balkans countries are lobbying for future membership .
 Iceland applied for membership on July 16, 2009, with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the bloc . Iceland is the only member of the European Economic Community of Nations .
 The prospect of a populous Muslim Turkey joining the EU raises fundamental questions about Europe’s identity . In particular, the prospect of joining the European Union raises questions about the continent's identity . Turkey's membership of the EU is a key part of Europe's identity, writes Andrew Keen .
 Identity identities shape how agents envision their interests and, in turn, how they act . As constructivist theorists point out, identity shapes how agents imagine their interests .
 The possible entry of Turkey and, perhaps, more remote and different countries, would have major implications for the way many people, especially within the six Western founders of the EU, conceive of Europe . The possibility of Turkey's entry into Europe has major implications .
 The idea of a single, integrated Europe is compelling for those who are haunted by the specter of European nationalities and states that have been fighting each other ever since the Pax Romana collapsed eighteen hundred years ago . Nevertheless, the idea is compelling .
 EU enlargement through eastward expansion has presented the organization with a host of troublesome questions . The twelve newest members, whose combined economies are less than 10 percent of that of the entire EU, have poorer economies .
 These new members, therefore, have different needs and interests that can make reaching agreement on policy decisions increasingly difficult . The new members of the House of Representatives will need to be able to reach agreement .
 Former U.S. Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld made the distinction between the "old" Europe and the "new" Europe . The new members originally supported the American war in Iraq and the Western members, with the exception of Great Britain, opposing the military invasion .
 If Germany, France, and the other Benelux countries join together to oppose the smaller, less developed new members of the EU . A “club within a club” could split the EU into two opposed coalitions .
 If East-West frictions coincide with new tensions between the big and small EU members, collective decision making will be immeasurably more complicated .
 It has grown in seven expansions from six members in 1951 to twenty-seven in 2009, as shown here . Ukraine, Turkey, and others are waiting in the wings to join .
 Council of Ministers represents the governments of the EU’s member states and retains final authority over the policy making decisions . EU's central administrative unit, the council of ministers, is the most powerful body in the EU .
 Commissioners are nominated by EU member governments and must be approved by the European Parliament . Commissioners must be nominated by member countries and approved by EU members .
 The European Commission is the EU's executive body responsible for the European Union . It is the body of the European Commission, which is based in Brussels, Belgium .
 The European Parliament represents the political parties and public opinion within Europe . The European parliament represents the public opinion in Europe .
 At its creation this legislative body was appointed rather than elected and had little power . It has existed from the beginning of Europe’s journey toward political unification .
 The European Parliament is now chosen in a direct election by the citizens of the EU’s member states . The EU is now a member state and a member of the European Parliament .
 More than six hundred deputies debate issues at Brussels' Brussels headquarters and Strasbourg palace . The European Parliament debates issues in the same way that democratic national legislative bodies do .
 The European Parliament shares authority with the Council of Ministers . The Parliament’s influence has increased over time .
 The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Commission, whose decisions they can overturn . pooled sovereignty legal authority granted to an IGO by its members to make collective decisions regarding specified aspects of public policy .
 The European Court of Justice in Euxembourg has grown in prominence and power as European integration has gathered depth and breadth . The court of justice has also grown to prominence in recent years .
 The court was given responsibility for adjudicating claims and conflicts among EU governments . It also adjudicates disputes between governments and the new institutions the EU created .
 The court interprets EU law for national courts, rules on legal questions that arise within the EU’s institutions . It also hears and rules on cases concerning individual citizens .
 The fact that its decisions are binding distinguishes the European Court of Justice from most other international tribunals . The fact of its decisions is binding distinguishes itself from most others .
 EU law does not compel Internet service providers to disclose customers’ names if subpoenaed in copyright infringement file-sharing cases . In 2008, the Court rendered a landmark decision widely seen as a victory for the Internet surfer in ruling .
 Debate continues over how far and how fast such a process of pooled sovereignty should proceed . Debate continues also over how fast it should proceed, with debate over how long it should take .
 It would also discard national vetoes in a number of areas, change members’ voting weights, and give the European Parliament additional powers .
 Ireland’s rejection of the treaty in a national referendum in June 2008 indicated that many are satisfied with the status quo, reluctant to pursue deeper political integration .
 The Erench and Dutch rejected the EU Constitution in 2005, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001, and the Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 . The rejection of the Eisbon Treaty by the Irish calls into question whether there is sufficient popular support for a
 Some European leaders have called for a ‘two-speed Europe’ that would leave those who did not agree behind behind . Others such as German chancellor Angela Merkel and French president Nicolas Sarkozy do not support the idea .
 These issues will be debated in the future, and only time will tell how they will be resolved . Only time is telling how the future of the country will be solved .
 EU represents a remarkable success story in international history, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The EU is the largest economic bloc in the world, and the EU is one of the world's largest economies .
 Since Europe’s 1950s initiatives toward integration, more than a dozen regional IGOs have been created in various other parts of the world . The Global East and Global South are among states in the Global East .
 Most seek to stimulate regional economic growth, but many have expanded from that original single purpose to pursue multiple political and military purposes as well . Most of the nations' military operations are in response to economic growth .
 APEC plans to establish free and open trade and investments in the region for developed countries by 2010 and for developing member countries by 2020 . APEC members will establish free trade and investment for developed nations by 2010, 2020 .
 In 1999, ASEAN created a free-trade zone among its ten Southeast Asian members as a counterweight outside the orbit of Japan, China, the U.S. and other great powers . The zone was created to compete as a bloc in international trade . In 1999 it created
 ICO has broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe . ICO has expanded its membership to twenty-six countries and broadened .
 Most IGOs are organized on a regional rather than global basis . As these examples illustrate, most IGO organizations are organized in a regional or global way .
 The governments creating them usually concentrate on one or two major goals . Instead of attempting to address at once the complete range of issues that they face in common, such as environmental protection, democratization, and economic and security cooperation, they should address them .
 Many smaller organizations such as the Economic Community of the Great Eakes Countries and the Mano River Union also exist . Alongside these are many smaller organizations .
 Regional IGOs sometimes fail and often ineffective . The particular reasons why they fail vary vary from what causes them to fail or why they do .
 Evidence suggests that the factors promoting successful integration efforts are many and their mixture complex . Evidence suggests success in integration efforts is many and complex, such as many factors .
 It is not enough that two or more countries choose to interact cooperatively. It's not enough for two countries to choose cooperatively, it's a matter of cooperation, it says .
 The difficulty that most regions have experienced in achieving a level of institution building similar to that of the EU suggests the enormity of the obstacles to creating new political communities out of previously divided ones .
 All IGOs are limited by national leaders' reluctance to make politically costly choices that would undermine their personal popularity at home and their governments’ sovereignty .
 Regional ventures in cooperation demonstrate that many states accept the fact that they cannot individually manage many of the problems that confront them collectively . Nonetheless, regional ventures in . cooperation demonstrate .
 The state is clearly failing to manage many transnational policy problems . Collective problem solving through IGOs is likely to continue .
 In turn, IGOs’ expanding webs of interdependence are infringing on the power of states, says the author . IGO’s expanding webs are changing the ways in which they network on the global stage, he says .
 IGOs are not the only nonstate actors leading the potential transformation of world politics, says John Defterios . He says they are not only not only nonstates actors in the world's future .
 Global terrorist networks include multinational corporations, transnational religions and ethnic groups, and global terrorist networks . They include transnational humanitarian organizations such as Amnesty International and multinational corporations .
 NGOs are growing in number and roaring in voices too loud to ignore, making them increasingly influential in world politics . Such NGOs are now influential in the world politics, writes Andrew Hammond .
 In the emerging global politics, state sovereignty and authority are withering . No alternative, such as some system of world government, is about to fill the vacuum .
 Tens of thousands of ‘transitional activists’ are influencing the policies of state governments and intergovernmental organizations . They have chosen to become international decision makers themselves by joining one or more NGOs .
 NGO activism transcends the traditional distinctions between what is local and what is global . Nonstate nations are national or ethnic groups struggling to obtain power and/or statehood .
 Today, a small subset of increasingly active and self-assertive NGOs receives the most attention and provokes the most controversy . Today, today, a few small groups of NGOs receive most attention .
 Auguste Comte argued that all institutions form in order to address problems and meet human needs . Comte argues that when those IGOs are no longer able to perform these functions, they disappear .
 Today, the managerial capabilities of states are failing to inspire confidence . The country's managerial capabilities are not inspiring confidence, experts say .
 Debate over whether President Obama should be allowed to speak to the public again is now a hot topic . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 In formulating your assessment, consider not only what you have learned about IGOs and their power and limits in this chapter . Consider the range of theoretical opinion percolating about this question .
 Theoretical Perspective Realism Liberalism . “Institutions are basically a reflection of the distribution of power in the world’s world,” says author .
 Jon Mearsheimer: "We are at present embarked on an exceedingly dangerous course" One symptom is the erosion of the authority and status of world and regional intergovernmental institutions, he says .
 “Such a trend must be reversed before once again we bring upon ourselves a global catastrophe and find ourselves without institutions effective enough to prevent it.”—Javier Perez De Cuellar, UN Secretary General “States retain many of their present functions effective governance of a partially
 A wide variety of forces has made it increasingly difficult for any state to wield power over its peoples, says international relations scholar Keohane . The task of inquiry for you is to weigh the evidence behind rival theoretical interpretations .
 Ethnic Groups and Indigenous Peoples Realists often ask us to picture the all-powerful state as an autonomous ruler of a unified nation, that is a unitary actor . Realists believe that the state is an autonomous leader of a united nation .
 Few states are tightly unified and capable of acting as a single body with a common purpose . Most states are divided internally and are highly penetrated from abroad . Few states can act as a unified body with the common purpose.
 The state remains the most visible global actor, as constructivism emphasizes . Ethnic nationalism (people’s loyalty to and identification with a particular ethnic nationality group) reduces the relevance of the state .
 Many states are divided, multiethnic and multicultural societies made up of a variety of politically active groups that seek a greater level of regional autonomy and a greater voice in the domestic and foreign policies .
 Individuals who think nationalistically are very likely to pledge allegiance not to the state and government that rules them . Instead, they pledge allegiance to a politically active ethnic group whose members identify with one another because they perceive themselves as bound together by kinship, language, and culture .
 Ethnicity is socially constructed, in that members of an ethnic or racial group learn to see themselves as members of that group . They accordingly perceive their identity as determined by their inherited membership at birth .
 Ethnic groups are likely to be strongly reinforced when recognized by other ethnic groups . That perception will be reinforced by recognition by other groups, experts say .
 China came under international criticism for its crackdown on ethnic Tibetan groups following rioting in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital .
 Ethnic divisions challenge the realist ‘billiard ball’ conception of international relations as homogeneous interactions between unified states . Ethnic divisions such as these challenges the 'realist’s conception of global relations as ‘homogeneous interactions’
 The Brazilian Indian Protection Agency, Funai, and Survival International released the picture in 2008 to generate international concern for the threat posed by the logging industry to “uncontacted” indigenous tribes in the area .
 NGOs claimed success in pressuring Peru to reexamine its logging policy . Peru's logging policy has been criticized by NGOs .
 Indigenous peoples are ethnic and cultural groups that are native populations to a particular area . Indigenous peoples include people who are native to a certain area .
 Indigenous people were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient, but now controlled by a state govenment . In most cases, indigenous people were once politically sovereign but now control by the state .
 As Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf hypothesized in the 1930s, different languages reflect different views of the world that predispose their speakers toward different ways of thought . Different languages are more likely to be spoken in different languages .
 Indigenous peoples are at risk, with high percentages nearing extinction . What this means is that indigenous peoples at risk is that they're at risk of extinction .
 Indigenous peoples are located within many of the globe’s pluralistic states . They also display a transnational face because they are geographically spread across existing state boundaries .
 Indigenous peoples have migrated across borders from their ancestral homelands . This dispersion has increased as indigenous peoples have moved across borders . The dispersion of indigenous peoples has increased .
 indigenous peoples such as the sizable Kurdish minorities of Turkey, Iraq, Iran, and Syria have members living in more than one of the globe’s existing independent states . There is no single sovereign country the Kurds can call their home .
 Differences in language often reflect differences in interests and attitudes . Language differences reflect differences of interests, attitudes, attitudes .
 As shown here, the diversity of ethnic language groups in Africa is very high . The diversity of African language groups is shown here .
 The consequences for world politics are not certain, but some possibilities are alarming . The consequences of the consequences for the U.S. are unknown, but it's alarming .
 Samuel P Huntington pessimistically predicts that a clash of civilizations is probable between some of these universalistic civilizational identities . Armed conflict is especially likely between the West and Islam, Huntington says .
 A1 Qaeda terrorist network attacked the U.S. on September 11, 2001, to vent the anger of its extremist Islamic members against the West . That prediction proved rather prophetic on 9/11, 2001 .
 Religious movements may operate as transnationally active NGOs as well . For that reason, we now turn from ethnic group NGOs to . examine the ways religious movements operate as . transnational .
 I I African . I I I Latin American I I Orthodox I I Sinic . A/Vestern I I Western MAP 5. I I Japanese I I
 The Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants killed nearly one-fourth of all Europeans . Similarly, the religious conflicts during the Thirty Years' War .
 Many of the world’s more than 6. billion people are affiliated at some level with transnational religious movements . Transnational religious groups are politically active organizations based on strong religious convictions .
 A religion is a system of thought shared by a group that provides its members an object of devotion and a code of behavior by which they can ethically judge their actions . At the most abstract level, a religion is an idea shared by members of a group .
 This definition points to commonalities across the great diversity of organized religions in the world, but it fails to capture that diversity . This definition of religion is based on the fact that Islam is a religion .
 The world's principal religions vary greatly in the theological doctrines or beliefs they embrace . The world’s principal religions include Christianity, Islam and Christianity .
 They differ widely in the size of their followings, in the geographical locations where they are most prevalent, and in the extent to which they engage in political efforts to direct international affairs . They are also differ widely .
 Those who study religious movements comparatively note that a system of belief provides religious followers with their main source of identity . This identification with and devotion to their religion springs from the natural human need to find a set of values with which to evaluate the meaning of life and the consequences of choices .
 This need sometimes leads believers of a religious creed to perceive the values of their own religion as superior to those of others, which sadly often results in intolerance . This need often leads to intolerance .
 The proponents of most organized religious movements believe that their religion should be universal . That is, of course, accepted by everyone throughout the world . But that is not true .
 Organized religions actively proselytize to convert nonbelievers to their faith . Many organized religions engage in evangelical crusades to win over followers of other religions and followers .
 Conversion usually achieved by persuasion through missionary activities . Conversion is usually achieved through persuasion through missionaries . Conversion usually occurs through the use of missionaries .
 This map shows where the world’s major religious affiliations have attracted a dominant following . It also shows how the world's major religions have attracted their dominant followers .
 The chart predicts the number of people who will adhere to the four largest religious groups by the year 2050 . The chart is based on the population's number of religious groups .
 In evaluating the impact of religious movements on international affairs, it is important to distinguish carefully the high ideals of doctrines from the activities of the people who head these religious bodies . In evaluating religious movements, it's important to . distinguish carefully .
 The two realms are not the same, and each can be judged fairly only against the standards they set for themselves . The two worlds are not different, and can't be compared to each other's .
 To condemn what large-scale religious movements sometimes do administratively when they abuse their own religion’s principles doesn’t mean that the principles themselves deserve condemnation .
 Consider the Hindu ideology of tolerance of different religions, which teaches that there are many paths to truth and accepts pluralism among diverse populations .
 Relationship between transnational religions and states’ governments is a major issue in the global community . The relationship between religions and governments is an issue for the world community .
 Religion and state are tightly linked and almost indistinguishable in many countries . But in many other countries, religion and state have become almost indistinguishable .
 Religious institutions submissively subordinate their religion to state control in order to survive, grow, receive state subsidies, and cement political influence . In such a country, that is, in such a theocracy, religious institutions subordinate their religious institutions to the state .
 In these countries, crown and church protect and preserve each other through an alliance . Crown and church are protected by their alliance .
 The leaders of extreme militant religious movements are convinced that those who do not share their convictions must be punished and that compromise is unacceptable . Extremist religious movements believe that compromise must be unacceptable .
 In many cases the religious movement substitutes itself for the government at the local level . The religious movement is involved in education, health, and other social welfare programs . It is also involved in the local government .
 This generally means that government and all of its domestic and foreign activities must be in the hands of believers or subject to their close oversight . This means government must be closely monitored by believers or it's subject to oversight .
 This tends to give them a trans-state motivation, a factor that translates their views on legitimacy of political authority into a larger context for action . This is a factor then translates their view of legitimacy of authority into larger context, says author .
 International boundaries are not recognized as barriers to the propagation of the faith, even if this means they resort to violence . In some cases, this means that international boundaries do not recognize them as barriers .
 Militant religious movements tend to stimulate five specific types of international activities, such as terrorism and terrorism . Militant religions stimulate five types of activities .
 Debate about the impact ot religion on international conflict intensified after 9/11 . Many believed that the terrorist attacks were motivated by religious fanatics in the Islamic Al Qaeda global terrorist organization . Are RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTs CAUSING OF WAR or SOURCES OF TRANSNATIONAL
 Most people equate religion with peace, compassion, and forgiveness, not hatred or intolerance . Yet it is difficult to understand the religious origins of violence, writes Andrew Hammond .
 High ideals inspire the believers ot nearly all the world’s major religious movements . Many of the principles religions espouse are very similar and conducive to peaceful relations between people .
 They all voice respect and reverence for the sanctity of life and acceptance of all people as equal creations ot a deity . Regardless of race or color, they voice respect .
 Religions speak to universal principles, across time and place . They speak to enduring values in changing times . Religion is an important part of the American Dream .
 The role of religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial . However, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, it is controversial to use religious NGOs .
 The virtues that religions uphold ironically can become weapons against those who do not hold such views . The virtues of religions are often used as weapons against people who disagree with them .
 Followers of a religion may conceive the world and history through an ideological lens that views one deity protecting a chosen people against inferior others . Followers may conceive of the world through a lens of ideological lens .
 In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, they reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from what they or other religions think to be false . They reject the attempts to separate the teachings from that of other religions .
 "This constructed reality inspires an ethic that justifies violence, plunder, and conquest," says the author . This constructed reality justifies violence and plunder, he says, and justifies violence .
 In part, they tend to see outsiders as threatening rivals . Their loyalty and allegiance to other deities represents a challenge to their own religion’s claim of universal worldwide applicability .
 Religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and the right to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs . In a word, religious movements practice intolerance, intolerance .
 Fanatics paint imagined enemies as evil, unworthy of mercy, and to justify brutal violence against them . The next logical step is to paint these imagined enemies evil and justify violence, he says .
 It's dangerous to accept stereotypes of religious groups as responsible for relentless barrages of terrorism . Yet it is dangerous to believe that religious groups are responsible for terrorism, writes David Cameron .
 Paganistic and atheistic societies recognizing no higher deity have equally long histories of waging violent wars against external enemies and their own people . Paganism and atheism has equally long history of waging wars against each other and their people .
 Most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for centuries . Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peace making, and peace making .
 The second is secession, or separative revolts —the attempt by a religious minority to revolt and break away from an internationally recognized state . The second, or separation, is a separation of religious minorities .
 Militant religions tend to incite migration, the departure of religious minorities from their countries of origin to escape persecution . Third, militant religions incite migration .
 In sum, transnational religious movements not only bring people together but also divide them . In this case, they bring together and divide people .
 Transnational religions compete with one another, and this tends to divide humanity . This tends to breed separatist efforts that can tear countries apart . This consequence notwithstanding, transnational religions .
 These groups can hardly be considered conventional NGOs, given their use of violence . Many people now think so, even if these groups are not conventional NGOs .
 It is very difficult to identify these terrorist groups as a virulent type of NGO conducting its lethal trade across borders . "You would make a big mistake if you lumped all terrorist movements together," he says .
 Today, terrorism is a strategy practiced by a very diverse group of nonstate actors . Terrorists are practicing terrorism in the U.S. Today's terrorism strategy is practiced by very diverse groups of non-state actors, says CNN.com .
 Some historians place the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BCE with the Sicarii Zealots, who violently targeted Jewish high priests, whom they saw as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law . Today's terrorism today is arguably much different than in the past .
 Historian and terrorism expert Walter Laqueur sees a future of postmodern terrorism that poses great threat to technologically advanced societies . Terrorists tend to be less ideological, more likely to hold ethnic grievances, and increasingly difficult to distinguish from other criminals .
 So-called postmodern terrorism is likely to expand because of the globalized international environment . Without meaningful barriers separating countries, terrorists practice their ancient trade by new rules and methods .
 Information age facilitates transnational networking among terrorists . New methods such as electronic “cyberterrorism” and “netwar” strategies are available .
 Global environment encourages rapid spread of new weapons and technology across borders . Terrorists can commit atrocities and change their tactics in response to successes in countering them, experts say .
 The growing difficulty of detecting and deterring attacks of disciplined globalized terrorist networks is further exacerbated by their ties to international organized crime syndicates and international linked networks of thousands of gangs . Thousands of gangs facilitate their profit in the narcotics trade .
 The activities of nonstate terrorist organizations are likely to remain a troubling feature of world politics . Every spectacular terrorist act generates a powerful shock effect and gains worldwide publicity through the global news media .
 As you can see, there is diversity in the primary goals of various groups . The goal is to help people in the United States and the world .
 Some of FARC and ETA focus on secular nonreligious objectives such as ethnic selfdetermination or overthrow of a government . Some of the FARC, ETA and FARC have been involved in the Colombian conflict .
 Others, most notably A1 Qaeda, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals . Others, including A1 al Qaeda, have more ambitious goals .
 There is also variation in the manner in which their organizations are structured, with some having a hierarchical structure . Some groups tend to favor a networked form with insulated cells dispersed across the globe .
 Terrorist expert Bruce Hoffman: "Terrorism has a purpose" Terrorists are often portrayed as “madmen’s bent on death and destruction,” says Hoffman .
 Al Qaeda is a global network with cells in a number of countries and tied to Sunni extremist networks . Al Qaeda has cells in several countries and ties to Sunni extremists networks . The network has cells across the world .
 Bin Laden and his top associates are suspected to reside in Afghanistan or the border region in Pakistan . The group maintains terrorist training camps there, according to reports .
 To establish pan-lslamic rule throughout the world by working with allied Islamic extremist groups to overthrow regimes it deems ‘nonIslamic’ and expel V.esterners and nonMuslims from Muslim countries .
 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Colombia with some activities (extortion, kidnapping, logistics) in Venezuela, Panama, and Ecuador . Some activities include kidnapping and kidnapping .
 Islamic Jihad, Revolutionary Justice Organization, Organization of the Oppressed on Earth, and Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine in southern Lebanon . In the Bekaa Valley, the southern suburbs of Beirut, and southern Lebanon.
 Cells have established cells in Europe, Africa, South America, North America, and Asia . Cells have been established in Europe and Africa .
 To increase its political power in Lebanon, and opposing Israel and the Middle East peace negotiations. To increase their political power, the Lebanese government wants to increase its .
 To establish an Islamic Palestinian state in place of Israel, and gain international aoceptanoe of its rule in Gaza, the Palestinians want to establish a state of Islamic Palestine .
 Interahamwe, Former Armed Forces, operates mainly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda . A few may operate in Burundi, but a few may also operate in the country .
 To topple Rwanda’s Tutsi-dominated government, reinstitute Hutu control, and, possibly, complete the genocide begun in 1994 . Rwanda's Hutu government was overthrown in 1994, but Hutu still controls the country .
 To topple the current government of Sierra Leone and retain control of the lucrative diamond-producing regions of the country, the government will try to retain control .
 Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna is located in the Basque regions of northern Spain and southwestern Franoe . Primarily in Basque autonomous regions, it is also located in Franoe and northern Spain .
 To establish an independent homeland based on Marxist principles in the Basque autonomous regions, Basque Autonomous Basques will seek to establish a Marxist homeland .
 Egyptian Islamic Jihad, Jihad Group, Islamic Jihad . Primarily Cairo, but has network outside Egypt, including Yemen, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, Lebanon, and the United Kingdom .
 To overthrow the Egyptian government and replace it with an Islamic state; attack U.S. and Israeli interests in Egypt and abroad . To overthrow Egypt's government, overthrow it and replace the Islamic state, attack the United States and Israel . To oust the Egyptian . government and . replace it
 Sri Lankan government declared an end to the 25-year civil war on May 19, 2009 . Sri Lanka had been characterized as the fiercest terrorist force in the world .
 Aum Shinrikyo, Aleph Principal membership is located only in Japan . An unknown number of followers have surfaced in Russia . Members of the group are believed to be Russian .
 To destroy existing Peruvian institutions and replace them with a communist peasant revolutionary regime, the government will destroy existing institutions . The government wants to replace existing institutions with a revolutionary regime .
 Abu Sayyaf Group Primarily the southern Philippines, with members occasionally traveling to Manila . Abu Sayaaf Group is based in southern Philippines .
 To promote an independent Islamic state in western Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago, areas in the southern Philippines heavily populated by Muslims . To promote Islamic state, the Philippines has been under attack from Muslims .
 Take care to consider how your value judgments can affect your image and interpretation of the identity and purpose of any group you may believe belongs in this menacing category of NGO actors . Take care of how your . value judgments may affect your . image .
 Constructing a valid account will be a challenge especially in regard to such a controversial topic . Constructing an account for such an account is a challenge .
 The cliche “one person’s terrorist is another person's freedom fighter” springs from the hold of prior and subjective perceptions on many people's definitions of objective realities . “The cliche is ‘one person's terrorist’ is “another person�
 Like transnational terrorist groups, MNCs are both praised and condemned because different people ascribe to them different attributes . MNCS are like transnational terrorists groups, both praised by different people .
 This makes MNCs increasingly influential as nonstate actors . It may be eroding the sovereignty that states have previously taken as an unchanging fact .
 As a result of their immense resources and power, MNCs have provoked both acceptance and animosity . The world's most powerful corporations are often seen as a threat to the environment .
 MNCs generate both credit for the positive aspects of free trade and globalization as well as blame for their costs . As advocates of liberal free trade, they are active contributors to the globalization of world politics, they contribute to world politics .
 MNCs were headquartered almost exclusively in the United States, Europe, and Japan . Their common practice was to make shortterm investments in the Global South’s plants, sales corporations, and mining operations .
 At the start of the twenty-first century, about 80 percent of all MNCs’ employees worked in the developing countries, where wages were lower, to bolster corporate profits at the parent headquarters in the Global North .
 This outsourcing is now eagerly welcomed by the Global South’s developing countries as a means to economic growth, where once MNC domination was resisted . Developed countries now eagerly welcome outsourcing as a way to grow their economies .
 Wealth and power remain highly concentrated, but the big seem to get bigger and bigger . Nonetheless, wealth and power remains highly concentrated in America .
 MNCs are increasingly influential NGOs because the world’s giant producing, trading, and servicing corporations have become the primary agents of the globalization of production . The MNC is increasingly influential NGO because of its influence in the global economy .
 The profile shows that of the world’s top thirty-five economic entities, multinationals account for only four . But in the next thirty, they account for 19 of the top 30 economic entities in the world .
 MNCs comprise over a third of the top sixty-five economic entities . The financial clout of most countries rivals or exceeds that of most of the countries .
 MNCs’ involvement in the domestic political affairs of local or host countries is controversial . In part due to their global reach and economic power, it is controversial to MNCS' involvement in political affairs .
 MNCs actively lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their business . In some instances this concern has extended to the domestic politics of their home countries .
 Hosts and home governments have sometimes used MNCs as instruments in their foreign policy strategies . Hosts have often used them as an instrument in foreign policy .
 The most notorious instance of an MNC’s intervention in the politics of a host state occurred in Chile in the early 1970s . International Telephone and Telegraph tried to protect its interests in the profitable Chiltelco telephone company by seeking to prevent the election of Marxist-oriented Salvador
 The huge profits and activities of corporate giant Halliburton to rebuild the infrastructure of Iraq after the 2003 U.S. occupation provoked widespread complaints that this MNC was exploiting the circumstances to line its pockets .
 Halliburton moved its headquarters from Texas to Dubai in 2007 . In 2007 the corporate giant moved its HQ from Texas into Dubai .
 This global penetration positions the biggest MNCs to propel changes in relations between countries and within them, as well as in the global marketplace . The global penetration of the biggest companies positions them to propel global change .
 A Ranking by Size of Economy and Revenues Rank Country/Corporation GNI/Revenues . United States 13,886.2 lapan 4,828.828 . The U.S. ranks second in the world .
 MNCs have recently taken steps toward engineering a “social responsibility revolution” by “making products and delivering services that generate profits and also help the world address challenges such as climate change, energy security, healthcare, and poverty . For example, the MNC’s
 In the interest of corporate social responsibility, MNCs in many sectors are also increasingly sensitive to human rights conditions in potential host countries, as well as the impact of the human rights they may have upon human rights .
 MNCs assist in promoting free trade and are active participants in the process by which governments have reached agreements on rules liberalizing economic transactions in the global marketplace . The world's largest companies are involved in promoting international trade .
 It is tempting to conclude that MNCs are a threat to state power, it is tempting . Thus, as another consequence of their growing wealth and power, they are also a threat .
 As MNCs have grown in size, the regulatory power of states has also grown . However, this interpretation overlooks the fact that this is not the case, states have also grown in power .
 Only the state can defend corporate interests in international negotiations over trade, investment, and market access . Only state can protect corporate interests over trade and investment negotiations . The state can also defend its position in international trade negotiations .
 Agreements over airline routes, the opening of banking establishments, and the right to sell insurance are not decided by corporate actors who gather around a table . Diplomats and bureaucrats determine such things as airline routes and banking establishments .
 The blurring of the boundaries between internal and external affairs adds potency to the political role that MNCs unavoidably play as nonstate actors at the intersection of foreign and domestic policy . Still, the blurring . of the . boundaries between the . external and internal affairs add potency to
 The symbolic invasion of national borders by MNCs can be expected to arouse the anger of many local nationalists . Many local nationalists fear the loss of income, jobs, and control to foreign corporate interests .
 MNCs’ growing influence appears to contribute to the erosion of the global system’s major organizing principle—that the state alone should be sovereign . Because multinationals often make decisions over which leaders of states have little control, MNC's influence may erode .
 MNCs’ awesome financial resources are much greater than the official statistics suggest . MNC’s awesome financial . resources are greater than official . statistics suggest, according to the MNC .
 MNCs merge with one another and cease to remain tied to any one parent state or region . States are losing control of their national economies in some respects, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Many MNCs are now globally integrated enterprises that produce the same goods in different countries . This is because their horizontal organization no longer ties them to any single country. This is due to the fact that they are no longer tied to one country .
 More than 50 percent of IBM’s revenues originate overseas . Citigroup, ExxonMobil, DuPont, Procter & Gamble, and many other corporate giants also do so .
 Controlling webs of corporate interrelationships, joint ventures, and shared ownership for any particular state purpose is nearly impossible . Controlling the webs of . corporate inter .relationships and joint ventures for any . particular state . purpose is impossible .
 In the past twenty years the number of MNCs has increased ninefold . MNCS are playing a correspondingly larger and larger role in world politics .
 Assessing the future requires a theoretical examination of contemporary thinking regarding MNCs and other types of NGOs . Assessing future requires examination of the contemporary thinking about MNCS and NGOs, says John Defterios .
 Greenpeace, Amnesty International, and Doctors Without Borders are just a few examples of nongovernmental issue-advocacy groups that actively seek to influence and change global conditions . Greenpeace and Amnesty International are just one example of groups that seek to change the world .
 Many people now see NGOs as a vehicle empowering individuals to engineer transformations in international affairs . Many people see NGOs empowering individuals as vehicles for change .
 Networks of transnational activists have formed NGOs at an accelerating rate, says activist group . NGOs have performed an educational service that has contributed to the emergence of a global civil society, he says .
 The growth of transnational activism by NGOs “is leading to a diffusion of power away from central governments” says Earthjustice . When the Supreme Court delivered the landmark ruling that gave the EPA the power to fight global warming, it was just one in a long line of court victories
 From Alaska to California to West Virginia, good lawyers are making the difference . Good lawyers make the difference in Alaska, West Virginia .
 Earthjustice is putting more lawyers on the ground where they are needed most . Earthjustice will be putting lawyers in the field where they're needed most in the fight for the right .
 The Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund promotes the fight against global warming . The group is a legal group fighting global warming and climate change .
 Single-issue NGO interest groups have more influence than large general-purpose organizations . Single issue NGOs influence more heavily than general purpose organizations .
 NGOs are generally seen as agents of policy continuities . For this reason NGOs are often seen as agent of policy continuity .
 NGO efforts to redirect global policy suggest that the mere presence of such groups, and the mere fact they are organized with the intent of persuasion, does not guarantee their penetration of global policy-making process .
 NGOs have participation without real power and involvement without real influence . The ability of any one to exert influence is offset by the tendency for countervailing powers to materialize over any major issue .
 A coalition of interest groups seeks to push policy in one direction, other nonstate actors are stimulated to push the opposite direction . That is when interest groups seek to push policies vigorously, they will be stimulated to do so, says the author .
 The result is usually a continuous battleground over the primary global issues from which no permanent resolution of the struggle materializes . The result of this is a continuous battle of the world's primary issues, the U.N. says .
 The debate and contests between those wishing to make environmental protection a global priority and those placing economic growth ahead of environmental preservation provide one example among many .
 "We are not asking you to put your hand in your pockets, but we are asking people to put their fist in the air. Were not asking us to put our hand in our pockets, they are asking us if we put our fist in our fists,” says CNN.
 As the world grows more interdependent, transactions across state borders increase through the movement of people, information, and traded products . It is likely that world politics nonetheless will be increasingly affected by the activities of both IGO and NGO nonstate actors .
 The idea of sovereign equality reflected a conscious decision governments made 60 years ago that they would be better off if they repudiated the right to meddle in the internal affairs of others .
 In an era of rapid globalization, internal developments in distant states affect our own well-being, even our security . In the past, Russia's relations with the West have been a problem, especially in Syria .
 Respect for state sovereignty should be conditional on how states behave at home, not just abroad, says David Cameron . State sovereignty must be respected at home and abroad, he says .
 sovereignty carries with it a responsibility to protect citizens against mass violence and prevent internal developments that threaten others . sovereignty is a duty to protect people from mass violence, says the president .
 It is misleading to think that politics is only about territorial states in interaction with each other, exercising supreme authority within their own borders . As you contemplate these questions, keep in mind one clear lesson, keep a clear lesson .
 The outlines of a future type of dual global system may be coming into view, driven by the importance of relations between states and by the growing impact of cross-border transactions and channels of communication among nonstate actors .
 Transnational NGOs are putting increasing pressure on states and, in the process, may truly be paving the path for a possible transformation of world politics . To be sure, transnational NGOs must be careful to be careful of their influence .
 This change would lead to a hybrid or two-tiered world in which the clout and authority of the governments that rule countries decline while the relative power of nonstate actors rises . This change could lead to the rise of non-state actors in a two-tier world .
 Realist theory says the choices that direct global destiny are ultimately made by the most powerful states . This is seen through realist theory, the theory says . The most powerful state is ultimately responsible for the decisions that affect global destiny .
 Relations between global actors, as well as broader developments in world politics, are the consequence of innumerable decisions made by states, transnational organizations, and individuals . Relations between world actors are the result of countless decisions made, such as those made by governments, individuals .
 In the next chapter, we will look at the processes by which both state and nonstate actors make international decisions in an effort to further enhance your understanding of the challenges of world politics . The next chapter will focus on the processes of which nonstate and state actors make decisions .
 Henry Kissinger was interviewed by Charles Kegley in an interview with one of your text’s authors . Kissinger was the former U.S. Secretary of State during his time in Washington .
 Your employment steps allowed you to apply your acquired knowledge to help make the world a better place . You can also apply your knowledge to make a difference in the world .
 Your challenge is to make decisions, based on your organization’s values, about the foreign policy goals your NGO should pursue as well as the means by which those international goals might best be realized .
 Now your task is to make critical choices that are destined to determine whether or not your foreign policies will succeed . Now you must choose your foreign policy choices .
 As an international decision maker, your approach will partly depend on your preferences and priorities . Your approach to international affairs will depend on what you want to do and what you think .
 There is no sure path as to how to make foreign policy decisions that are workable, moral, and successful . But there are no sure ways to make workable and moral decisions that can be successful .
 You will face many obstacles and constraints on your ability to make informed choices . You will be faced with many obstacles, constraints and constraints .
 Any choice you might make is certain to carry with it costs that compromise some values you hold dear and undermine some of the other goals you would like to pursue . What is more important is that you don't compromise some of your values and other goals .
 Foreign policy "befuddled every decision maker who has had the power to make foreign policy decisions on behalf of the transnational actor he or she led"
 The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to the lessons that history provides about the patterns, pitfalls, and payoffs that surround alternative approaches for making international decisions . FOREIGN POLICY MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS is chapter 1 .
 This introduction opens a window to rival ways of describing the processes by which transnational actors make foreign policy decisions . It opens up a window for rival ways to describe the processes of . making foreign policy . decisions .
 It will take into view the decision-making practices of international organizations such as the Nordic Council, nongovernmental organizations, multinational corporations such as Wal-Mart, and terrorist networks such as A1 Qaeda .
 Each and every one of us are transnational actors capable of making free choices that contribute in countless ways to the direction of trends in world politics . In addition, it is important to reflect on how individual people are part of the equation .
 When mobilized and inspired by a sense of agency, individuals can make a difference in the course of world history . The decisions that we make every day and groups that we join are reflections of our own personal ‘foreign policy .
 As American anthropologist Margaret Mead advised, “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world”
 To stimulate your thinking about international decision making by all types of transnational actors, visit www.global.com/worlds .
 World Politics is a framework for analyzing and explaining the processes by which foreign policies are made . World Politics provides a framework to analyze and explain the processes of foreign policies .
 To structure theoretical thinking about international decision making, it is useful to think in terms of factors or causes that influence the ways in which foreign policy decisions are made by all transnational actors .
 It would be an error to assume that international decisions and behaviors are influenced solely by the choices of global leaders, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This kind of single-factor explanation will not work because no decision maker (not even the most authoritarian in a dictatorship) can act alone in terms of his or her whims and fancies . No decision maker in an authoritarian state cannot act alone, even if it is authoritarian .
 The leaders of all groups are constrained by various pressures and circumstances that restrict free choices, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Leaders of all parties are constrained"
 To cut into the question of how international decision making unfolds, we must go beyond a single-factor explanation and think in terms of multiple causes . We need to go beyond the single factor explanation, says David Frum .
 It is useful to identify the various clusters of variables that exert an influence on the choices that all types of transnational actors make when they formulate a foreign policy . For that, it is useful, to identify clusters of factors that exert influence .
 The level-of-analysis distinction was introduced in Chapter 1 . We construct an image of the determinants of decision making in the foreign-policy-making process by reference to three major sets of causal variables .
 These are the global conditions that prevail at the time of decision, the internal characteristics of the transnational actor making foreign policy choices, and the leaders who head the decision . The global conditions and leaders are the key factors in foreign policy decisions .
 This three-part framework encourages you to think in causal terms about classes of phenomena that explain why particular decisions are made . The framework is designed to help you think about how to make decisions .
 Global conditions at the time of the decision color the degree to which an actor’s internal attributes and individual leader preferences can account for the choices made . Global conditions in the decision make a difference in the decisions made .
 The internal characteristics of the transnational actor heavily constrain the range of choice open to the individual decision maker, says the author of the book .
 The characteristics of the leaders are important as well as their individual values, personalities, beliefs, intelligence, and prior experiences . Individual values and personalities define the kind of people they are and predispose them to take certain positions on global issues .
 The three categories of influences serve as “inputs” that shape the policy-making process . The three “insights” are “informative’s’ shapes the policy process .
 Foreign policy decisions ultimately lead to foreign policy decisions and outcomes, or foreign policy “outputs,” that in turn provide “feedback’s” That may subsequently affect the inputs themselves, the author says .
 Global conditions are the most comprehensive, global conditions, and working to the most specific, individual leaders . Let’s take a closer look at these three categories of causation .
 What is happening in world politics provides the setting for international decision making . Global conditions provide the setting of international decision-making .
 The changing state of the world—everything that occurs beyond the actor—affects the decisions of transnational actors . Everything that occurs outside of the actor, the world, is affected by the changing world's changing state .
 The prevailing global circumstances define the decisional situation, provoking the need to make decisions and restricting policy options available to the actor .
 Take any global trend highlighted in World Politics and we can easily visualize how changes in the state of the world condition the issues on the global agenda . Global warming, nuclear proliferation, international trade, the AIDS/HIV crisis, international terrorism, and civil wars—you name it .
 All shifts in global circumstances give rise to crucial decisions by transnational actors . Transnational actors must take responsibility for transnational decisions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 As important as the global environment is, it would be mistaken to think it alone is the sole source driving international decision making . Internal Characteristics are key to international decision-making, say experts .
 Every actor on the global stage is defined by their own attributes, which also act to determine the actor’s foreign policy choices . Every actor's attributes are defined by his own attributes .
 All transnational actors organized to take action abroad are composed of a collection of individuals, says CNN.com.com . "All transnational organizations organized to act abroad are made up of individuals"
 How these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the kinds of decisions that are reached . How these groups are governed is also a force in foreign policy .
 The size of the organization, its power relative to the other actors with which it interacts, the financial resources, and the distribution of opinion within the actor all affect the capacity of the actor to make foreign policy choices .
 The rise of “bureaucratic politics” among competing agencies influencing foreign policy now heavily influences the course of a country’s foreign policy .
 Choices about ends and means in foreign policies are molded by transformations in international relations . Choices of foreign policy are shaped by the impact of these global changes on the characteristics of transnational actors .
 The personal characteristics of the leaders heading transnational actors assume great importance in the making of international decisions . Personal characteristics of leaders head transnational organizations are important .
 Leaders are influential because “factors external to the actor can become determinants only as they affect the mind, the heart, and the will of the decision maker’s decision maker. Leaders can be influential because they can affect their will, the will and the mind of the
 A human decision to act in a specific way necessarily represents the last link in the chain of antecedents of any act of policy . "A human decision" is the "last link" in any policy, says the author of the book .
 Changes in global conditions and actors’ collective internal characteristics may influence the costs and benefits of particular foreign policy options and stimulate the need for choice .
 Constructivist theory argues that ideas and expectations within the heads of leaders are the intellectual filters through which objective realities are interpreted . As constructivist theory .
 The framework provides clues as to where to look when asking why a foreign policy decision has been reached . It also provides a framework to look at where to ask why foreign policy has been decided .
 Each policy decision can be viewed as the result of the multiple prior causal events taking place in the funnel . Policy decisions can be seen as a result of multiple causal events, such as policy decisions .
 The framework implies a temporal or time sequence in the transition from inputs to outputs in the foreign-policy-making process . Observe as well that our framework implies that .
 Foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent policy making . These policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time .
 The Bush Administration’s March 2003 decision to invade Iraq generated a hostile public reaction on the four-year anniversary of that decision . For example, a cluster of factors at some point in time led the United States to make the decision in March 2003 .
 Thousands of protestors voiced their rage against the war near the Pentagon, the headquarters and symbol of U.S. military power . Shown here are thousands of protestors voicing their rage .
 It can be used to account for past policy decisions and behaviors as well as for the effects of those outcomes on later policy decisions . It can also be used in accounting of past policies and behaviors .
 The model is not tied analytically to any one time period or actor . This way of tracing the determinants and consequences of international decisions provides you, the analyst, with a lens with which to view and explain theoretically .
 With this analytic framework in mind, you are armed intellectually to probe international decision making in greater depth . With this analytical framework, you can be armed intellectually .
 In the episodic and visual comprehension of our foreign policy, there is serious danger that the larger significance of developments will be lost in a kaleidoscope of unrelated events . In the past, the American public has been unable to understand foreign policy .
 Realism assumes that foreign policy making consists of adjusting a transnational actor to the pressures of an anarchical global system . The essential properties of the global system will not vary, Realism says .
 Transnational actors can and do make decisions by rational calculations of the costs and benefits of different choices . From this assumption can be derived the expectation that transnational actors make rational calculations .
 Decision Making as Rational Choice is typically described as rational . The decision-making processes of unitary actors that determine national interests are described as 'rational' Decision-making is often described as a rational process .
 The need to decide begins when policy makers perceive an external problem and attempt to define objectively its distinguishing characteristics . Policy makers must decide when they perceive a problem and try to define it's distinguishing characteristics, experts say . The U.S. Senate will hold a hearing on the issue in a
 Objectivity requires full information about the actions, motivations, and capabilities of other actors, as well as the character of the global environment and trends within it . Objectivity must also be considered in the context of the events surrounding them .
 The search for information must be exhaustive, and all the facts relevant to the problem must be gathered, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Next, those responsible for making foreign policy choices must determine what they want to accomplish .
 It requires the identification and ranking of all values in a hierarchy from most to least preferred . A hierarchy of values must be placed in order to determine which is preferred .
 Rationality also requires an exhaustive list of all available policy options and an estimate of the costs associated with each alternative . It also requires a detailed list of the options and a cost estimate .
 rationality requires selecting the single alternative with the best chance of achieving the desired goal . Finally, rationality requires choosing a single alternative to achieve the desired goals .
 Policy makers must conduct rigorous means-ends, cost-benefit analysis guided by an accurate prediction of the probable success of each option, they say . For this purpose, policy makers must also consider the benefits of each decision .
 Policy makers often describe their own behavior as resulting from a rational decision-making process designed to reach the “best” decision possible . Policy makers use the logic of consequentialism to estimate the results that can be expected from the decision taken .
 They claimed that they were following the rules for rational choice in their declared war against “global terrorism” following 9/11 and in their decision to attack the dictator Saddam Hussein’s Iraq . The U.S. government claimed that it was following a rational choice .
 The message was clothed in the language of deliberate rational choice to convince skeptics that the costs and benefits of all options had been carefully weighed . The message of the U.S. President Barack Obama's election victory was met with skepticism .
 Like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, but rationality lies in eye of eye, mind . reasonable, clear-thinking people can disagree about the facts and about the wisdom of foreign policy goals .
 The debate demonstrated that while rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met . This debate demonstrated .
 Decision-making theorists Daniel Kahneman and Jonathan Renshon write Impediments to Rational Choice . They say rational choice is often more an idealized standard than an accurate description of real-world behavior .
 He described an eight-step process for policy making that is consistent with the rational model we have described . The process includes agreeing on facts, agreeing on the facts, defining the problems, canvassing all possible solutions . Listing the consequences that flow from each solution; recommending one option;
 There may be many interpretations of what is right, what is possible, and what is in the national interest . The concept that decision makers’ capacity to choose the best option is often constrained by many human and organization obstacies .
 Despite the virtues rational choice promises, the impediments to its realization in foreign policy making are substantial . The United States needs to be able to make rational choice decisions, experts say .
 Some of the barriers that make errors in foreign policy so common are human, deriving from deficiencies in the intelligence, capability, and psychological needs and aspirations of foreign policy decision makers . The barriers are human .
 Most decisions require group agreement about the actor’s best interests and the wisest course of action . Others are organizational, such as organizational, because of group agreement .
 Reaching agreement is not easy, as reasonable people with different values often disagree about goals, preferences, and the probable results of alternative options .
 The impediments to rational policy making are not to be underestimated . Thus, the impediments should not be underestimated, he says .
 Scrutiny of the actual process of decision making reveals other hindrances . The process of making a decision to make a decision is often overlooked .
 Available information is often insufficient to recognize emergent problems accurately, resulting in decisions made on the basis of partial information and vague memories . Available information should be sufficient to make decisions accurately, experts say .
 Political leaders often rely on bureaucratic organizations to sort, sort, and rearrange information . The available information is often inaccurate because of the way political leaders sort and sort it . Political leaders depend on the advice of bureaucrats to make decisions .
 In April 2009, Obama attended a summit in Prague with 27 members of the European Union . Obama attended the summit in April 2009 .
 game theory shows leaders are limited in their capacity to process information and avoid biases . Preoccupied with preventing losses, leaders are also prone to “wishful thinking” and “shooting from the hip,” which results in irrational decisions .
 Policy makers sometimes pay little heed to warnings, overlook information about dangers, and repeat their past intellectual mistakes . These intellectual propensities explain why policy makers pay little attention to warnings and overlook information . Policy makers often repeat past mistakes .
 Robert Putnam coined the phrase two-level games to better capture the way most leaders make policy decisions . Putnam: "Two level games" is a two level game that most leaders play .
 At the national level, domestic groups pursue their interests by pressuring the government to adopt favorable policies . Politicians seek power by constructing coalitions among these groups, and building coalitions .
 At the international level, national governments seek to maximize their own ability to satisfy domestic pressures, while minimizing the adverse consequences of foreign developments . At the world level, this is a matter of national security, not international policy .
 Two-level games refers to the growing need for national policy makers to make decisions that will meet both domestic and foreign goals . Neither of the two games can be ignored by central decision makers so long as their countries .
 Most leaders must meet the often incompatible demands of internal politics and external diplomacy . It is seldom possible to make policy decisions that respond rationally to both sets of goals, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Many leaders are likely to fuse the two sectors in contemplating policy decisions . This is why many leaders will likely fuse them with policy makers in contemplating their decisions .
 States are administered by individuals with varying beliefs, values, preferences, preferences and psychological needs . Such differences generate disagreements about goals and alternatives that are seldom resolved through orderly, rational processes .
 These individuals are shaped by the socially accepted shared understandings within their own policy-making community and culture . Moreover, these individuals are greatly shaped by their own social understanding of the issues they face .
 There seldom exists a confident basis for making foreign policy decisions, says Obama . Yet there seldom exists an accurate basis for such decisions, he says .
 Decision making often revolves around the difficult task of choosing among values, so that the choice of one option means the sacrifice of others . Decision making is a difficult task for people to choose among values .
 Many decisions tend to produce negative unintended consequences— what economists call externalities . Many decisions often result in negative consequences, economists say . This is the case of externalities, such as externalities in the economy .
 Decision makers’ inability to rapidly gather and digest large quantities of information constrains their capacity to make informed choices . Especially in the realm of foreign policy where risk is high and there is much uncertainty, decision makers are unable to digest large amounts of information, says Andrew Hammond .
 Policy makers work with an overloaded policy agenda and short deadlines . The search for policy options is seldom exhaustive. Policy makers often work with overloaded policy agendas and short deadline deadlines .
 In the choice phase, decision makers rarely make value-maximizing choices . In the decision phase, then, decisions are made by people who want to make the best decisions .
 Instead of selecting the option with the best chance of success, they typically end their evaluation as soon as an alternative appears that seems superior to those already considered . Instead of choosing the best option, they usually end evaluation soon after .
 Decision makers are routinely content to choose the first option that meets minimally acceptable standards . Rather than ‘optimizing’ by seeking the best alternative, they should seek the best option .
 Decision makers are prone to rapidly estimate whether rival options are good or bad, react to these hastily constructed classifications . Decision makers then settle with the relatively good alternative, as opposed to the best .
 Prospect theory challenges idea that decision makers behave rationally . Rooted in the experiments of Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who won the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics, prospect theory .
 Prospect theory looks at how people perceive and misperceive risks when making decisions under conditions of uncertainty . It posits that there are consistent and predictable biases in the way that people depart from rational decision making .
 Leaders tend to overvalue certainty and ‘peace of mind,’ even to their detriment . Like people everywhere, leaders tend to overeat certainty and peace of mind . Leaders should be careful to avoid overvaluing certainty, even to the detriment .
 They do not calculate the consequence of choices, and are more concerned with the potential losses that may result from a change than the potential gains, they say . They say they are concerned about the potential risks of a change rather than potential gains .
 Leaders are prone to cling to failed policies long after their deficiencies have become apparent . As critics lament of George W Bush’s refusal to acknowledge decision-making failures regarding Iraq war .
 Similar criticisms were also made regarding both the Johnson and Nixon administrations’ decisions to keep the U.S. mired in the unpopular war in Vietnam .
 Decision making that departs from rationality can be problematic . Yet irrationality can still produce ‘good’ decisions, says author .
 People tend to incorporate a sense of fairness into their decision making even if it is contrary to their own rational self-interest . Prospect theory is a social psychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty .
 We can still assume that policy makers aspire to rational decision-making behavior, which they may occasionally approximate . Yet rational foreign policy making is more of an ideal than a reality .
 The Bureaucratic Politics of Foreign Policy Decision Making . Leaders must seek information and advice, and must see that the actions their decisions generate are carried out properly. Leaders must also see that their actions generate are done properly .
 Out of necessity, leaders must turn to those with the expertise they lack . Leaders need to turn to experts they lack in order to cope with their lack of expertise .
 Leaders must depend on large-scale organizations for information and advice as they face critical foreign policy choices . In today’s world, leaders need to rely on large organizations for advice and information, experts .
 Bureaucracies are widely believed to increase efficiency and rationality by assigning responsibility for different tasks to different people . Max Weber's theory is based on the theoretical work of the social scientist Max Weber .
 Rules define rules and standard operating procedures that specify how tasks are to be performed . They also divide authority among different organizations to avoid duplication of effort . They often lead to meritocracies by hiring and promoting the most capable individuals .
 Bureaucracies also permit the luxury of engaging in forward planning to determine long-term needs and the means to attain them . Bureaucracy also allows the luxury to engage in planning for the future .
 Unlike leaders, bureaucrats are able to consider the future as well as the present . Unlike leaders whose roles require attention to the crisis of the moment, bureaucrats can focus on the future .
 The presence of several organizations also can result in multiple advocacy of rival choices . This can improve the chance that all possible policy options will be considered .
 The Limits of Bureaucratic Organization . What emerges from our description of bureaucracy is another idealized picture of policy-making process .
 Before jumping to the conclusion that bureaucratic decision making is a modern blessing, however, we should emphasize that the foregoing propositions tell us how bureaucratic decision-making should occur . They do not tell how it does occur, they tell us what it does .
 The actual practice and the foreign policy choices that result show that bureaucracy produces burdens as well as benefits, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The method that U.S. policy makers used in orchestrating a response is often viewed as having nearly approximated the ideal of rational choice . The method of responding to a crisis in Syria is often seen as having been rational choice by policy makers .
 From another decision-making perspective, the missile crisis reveals how decision making by and within organizational contexts sometimes compromises rather than facilitates rational choice . From another . perspective, it reveals how . decisions by and from organizational . contexts sometimes compromise rather than facilitate rational choice.
 The bureaucratic politics model emphasizes how large-scale bureaucratic organizations contribute to the policy-making process by devising standard operating procedures . Bureaucratic organizations are responsible for devising standards to follow in the performance of designated tasks .
 Participants in deliberations that lead to policy choices often define issues and favor policy alternatives . Participants often favor policies that serve their organization’s needs, authors say .
 Diplomats typically favor diplomatic approaches to policy problems, but military officers favor military solutions . Consider why professional diplomats favor diplomacy, military officers do not .
 Rather than being a value-maximizing process, policy making is itself an intensely competitive game of politics . Policy making is a competitive political process, rather than a value maximizing process .
 Splits among key advisers over important foreign policy choices have been frequent . Splits between key advisers are frequent over foreign policy .
 Henry Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld over strategy regarding Vietnam War . Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, repeatedly engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over the Iran hostage crisis . Under Ronald Reagan,
 Such conflicts are not necessarily bad because they force each side to better explain its viewpoint . This allows heads of state the opportunity to weigh their competing advice before making decisions . Head of state should weigh competing advice, says David Cameron .
 Battles among advisers can lead to paralysis and to rash decisions that produce poor results . However, battles among advisers often lead to a rash decision to make decisions .
 Serious divisions within George W Bush administration developed over how and why the president’s goal was to wage war against Saddam Hussein in Iraq .
 Fissures became apparent as key officials debated the wisdom of diplomacy versus invasion . Key officials debated how best to conduct the invasion, and then how to conduct it .
 One view proposes that bureaucratic agencies are parochial and that every administrative unit within a transnational actor’s foreign-policy-making bureaucracy seeks to promote its own purposes and power .
 Organizational needs, such as large staffs and budgets, come before actor’s needs, sometimes encouraging the sacrifice of group interests to bureaucratic interests . bureaucrats come to see their own interests as the same as those of the actor's interests .
 The growth and thickening of government is associated with competition among the growing number of overlapping agencies charged with foreign policy responsibilities . The growth of bureaucratic government is linked to competition among agencies .
 Bureaucrats often take policy positions designed to increase their own influence relative to that of other agencies . Far from being neutral or impartial managers, managers are often not impartial .
 Characteristically, they are driven to enlarge their prerogatives and expand the conception of their mission, seeking to take on other units’ responsibilities and powers . The U.S. Army is the largest military force in the world, with more than 100,000 members .
 The tragic surprise terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, provides a telling example of these ascribed characteristics of bureaucratic politics . 9/11 is the perfect example of bureaucracy .
 The attacks on 9/11 were regarded by many as the worst intelligence failure since Pearl Harbor . The attacks were seen as a failure of intelligence on the attacks .
 America’s chaotic system of intelligence was paralyzed by the morass of cross-cutting bureaucracies responsible . The answer to the problem was first accepted by most analysts was that the system was paralyzed . But now, the problem is that America's chaotic system is paralyzed .
 They engaged in turf battles with one another and did not share vital information that arguably could have identified the A1 Qaeda plot and prevented it . The A1 Al Qaeda plot was thwarted by the U.S. government .
 The signals about the attack were not forwarded to the executive branch in time . The problem was miscommunication and noncommunication, the White House says .
 These problems exist in every administration, but are particularly problematic when intense ideological perspectives are in play . The problems are similar to those of every administration .
 As the horror of 9/11 persisted, so did interest in and concern about who did what prior to September 11,2001, to disrupt the A1 Qaeda terrorist network operation .
 The 9/11 Commission produced a new set of explanations for why so many opportunities to head off the 9-11 disaster were missed were missed .
 The Commission pointed its criticism at the growing complaints about the White House’s inaction and pre9/11 downplaying or ignoring of the loud and clear warnings submitted by U.S. intelligence bureaucracies of a likely terrorist attack .
 The failure of the U.S. government to protect its citizens might have been more due to the unwillingness of American leadership to listen to the warnings of its national security bureaucracies than to the crippling effects of bureaucratic struggles .
 Each agency competes with its rivals and engages in finger-pointing and scapegoating as a blood sport . Each agency is engaged in a battle against each other to win its contracts .
 FBI Special Agent Coleen Rowley testified, “There’s a mutual-protection pact in bureaucracies.” She testified .
 Mid-level managers avoid decisions out of fear a mistake will sidetrack their careers . A rigid hierarchy discourages agents from challenging superiors . Agents are reluctant to challenge superiors .
 The idea that inaction is the key to success manifests itself repeatedly” . groupthink . The propensity for members of a group to accept and agree with the group’s prevailing attitudes, rather than speaking out for what they believe .
 This results in policy decisions that rarely deviate from conventional preferences . This results from policy decisions being made by people who want to change things .
 You are likely to directly observe the efforts of your employer to make rational decisions . In your future employment, you will be likely to see the decisions made by your employer .
 You also are bound to notice firsthand within your organization both the advantages of bureaucratic administration and its liabilities . You also must see firsthand how bureaucratic administration can be beneficial .
 Many students before you have entered the workforce and found that the payoffs of rational choice and the pitfalls of bureaucratic politics surrounding actual practice described here were not figments of scholars’ imagination . Many students have found that rational choice is not a myth .
 These properties and propensities of decision making speak to the real experiences of professionals who have entered into policy-making positions . Rather, these properties of decision-making speak to real experiences, says Simon Tisdall .
 Policy decisions are often made in small groups . Policy decisions often made by small groups of people .
 U.S. President Barack Obama met with his cabinet in June 2009 to discuss the global economic crisis and recovery efforts in the United States .
 From left are Chairman of the Recovery Act Earl Devaney, United States Vice President Joe Biden, and United States Secretary for Housing and Urban Development Shaun Donovan . The Recovery Act was passed by the House of Representatives and the White House .
 The course of history is determined by the decisions of political elites . The Leverage and Impact of Leaders can be traced back to the start of the day .
 Leaders and the kind of leadership they exert shape the way in which foreign policies are made and the consequent behavior of the actors in world politics . Leaders and leaders influence foreign policy and foreign policy .
 Bush Doctrine is the unilateral policies of the George W Bush Administration proclaiming that the U.S. will make decisions to meet America’s perceived national interests, not to concede to other countries’ complaints .
 World leaders are people whose initiatives create global changes . Leaders as Movers of World History is a history-making individuals model of policy making .
 "We expect leaders to lead, and we assume new leaders will make a difference," says CNN.com . We expect new leaders to make the difference. We expect them to lead.
 We reinforce this image when we attach the names of leaders to policies, as though the leaders were synonymous with major international developments, as well as when we ascribe most successes and failures in foreign affairs to the leaders in charge at the time they occurred .
 The equation of U.S. foreign policy with the Bush Doctrine in the 2000s is a recent example . The equation is an example of the Bush doctrine in the US, which is similar to the Clinton administration .
 Citizens are not alone in thinking that leaders are the decisive determinants of states’ foreign policies and, by extension, world history . Citizens think leaders are responsible for foreign policy and history .
 Leaders seek to create impressions of their own self-importance, attributing extraordinary powers to other leaders . Leaders themselves seek to be self-regarded with extraordinary powers, say experts .
 All are influenced by the roles or expectations that by law and tradition steer the decision maker to behave in conformity with prevailing expectations about how the role is to be performed .
 Most people submissively act in accordance with the customary rules that define the positions they hold, such as those of their predecessors . Most people are submissive to the rules, behaving as their predecessors tended to behave .
 Others, however, are by personality or preference more bold and ambitious . Others seek to decisively escape the confines of their new role by redefining how it will be performed .
 Adolf Hitler's ruthless determination to seek military conquest of the entire European continent proved disastrous for Germany . The classic example is Adolf Hitler, whose ruthless determination for military conquest proved disastrous to Germany .
 Theory says survival is the paramount goal of all states and that all leaders engage in rational calculations that advance their countries’ aspirations for self-advantage . That theory says that survival is paramount goal for all states .
 This theory cannot account for the times when leaders make counterproductive decisions, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says the theory is wrong, but it can be applied to other leaders .
 If the realists are correct, even defects in states’ foreign-policy-making processes cannot easily explain wide divergences, they say . Even defects in state’s foreign policy-making process cannot easily be explained, they argue .
 Realism discounts leaders by assuming that global constraints “limit what leaders can do’t do,” says Julian Zelizer . ‘Realism’ discounts leaders’s ability to deal with global constraints, he says .
 The systemic imperatives of anarchy or interdependence are so clear, leaders can only choose from a limited range of alternatives . Leaders only choose a limited set of alternatives, including anarchy, anarchy . Leaders can't choose from an alternative to anarchy, leaders say .
 They are instrumentally rational because they have preferences on which they choose . They are rational because of their preferences, the author says . They have preferences that they choose, he says .
 instrumental rationality is a conceptualization of rationality that emphasizes the tendency of decision makers to compare options with those previously considered and then select the one that has the best chance of success .
 It also suggests that an individual’s actions may be rational even though the process of decision making and its product may appear decidedly irrational .
 Qaddafi's actions were consistent with his preferences, regardless of how “irrational” it was for a fourth-rate military power to take on the world’s preeminent superpower . Because, we can postulate, we . postulate that Qaddafi’
 This and many other examples serve as a reminder of the importance of the human factor in understanding how decisions are made .
 Despite the popularity of the history-making individuals model, we must be wary of ascribing too much importance to individual leaders . Factors Affecting Leadership include factors such as leadership, leadership and personal development .
 President Bill Clinton in 1998 said great presidents don’t do great things . Their influence is likely to be subtler, a probability summed up by Clinton .
 "Tensions... must have some objective causes, and unless we can remove these causes, no personal relationship can possibly deal with them," says the author . Tensions must have objective causes and must be removed from personal relationships, he says .
 We are doing . . ourselves a favor by reducing the issues to a contest of personalities, he says . We're doing ourselves a . favor by . reducing the issue of personalities .
 The question at issue is not whether political elites lead or whether they can make a difference . The question is whether political leaders can lead, not whether they lead, it's whether they're able to change the world .
 Leaders are not in complete control, and their influence is severely constrained . But leaders are in full control of the world's most powerful institutions, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Personality and personal political preferences do not determine foreign policy directly . Personalities and political preferences are not directly related to foreign policy, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The relevant question is not whether leaders’ personal characteristics make a difference, but rather under what conditions their characteristics are influential . The question is whether a leader’s personal characteristics makes a difference in leadership .
 Certain circumstances enhance individuals' potential influence, says CNN.com.com .
 Foreign policy will more likely reflect that leader’s inner needs, author says . Public opinion strongly favors a powerful leader, and when the head of state has an exceptional need for admiration, foreign policy more likely to reflect that need .
 Kaiser Wilhelm II's narcissistic personality allegedly met the German people’s desire for a symbolically powerful leader . German public preferences in turn influenced the foreign policy that Germany pursued during Wilhelm's reign, ending World War I .
 Feminism suggests that men and women tend to see issues such as war, peace, security, and the use of military force in different ways . This may influence the way in which they make decisions and interact with the world around them .
 Social constructivism considers the existence of different values and views between women and men as a product of distinct socialization experiences . The social constructivism is a form of socialization that is different from that of men and women .
 It is likely, therefore, that gender influences the decisionmaking process, even if it does not make a difference in terms of the final decision outcome . Gender is likely to influence the decision-making process in the final decisions .
 Leaders tend to respond in terms of their private needs and psychological drives . For instance, when leaders believe that their own interests and welfare are at stake, they tend to react to their own needs .
 When circumstances are stable, when leaders’ egos are not entangled with policy outcomes, the influence of their personal characteristics is less apparent, says the author .
 When an individual first assumes a leadership position, the formal requirements of that role are least likely to restrict what he or she can do . The formal requirements are less likely to limit what an individual can do in a leadership role, according to experts .
 Newly elected leaders are given relatively free of criticism and excessive pressure . That is especially true during the ‘honeymoon’ period given to newly elected leaders .
 A national crisis is a potent circumstance that increases a leader’s control over foreign policy making, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says a national crisis increases the power of a leader to influence foreign policy .
 Decision making during crises is typically centralized and handled exclusively by the top leadership . Decision making is typically handled by top leadership in crisis situations .
 Crucial information is often unavailable, and leaders see themselves responsible for outcomes . Leaders see themselves as responsible for the outcomes of their decisions .
 Great leaders (e.g., Napoleon Bonaparte, Winston Churchill, and Franklin D Roosevelt) customarily emerge during periods of extreme tumult . Not surprisingly, great leaders typically emerge during these periods of tumult .
 A crisis can liberate a leader from the constraints that normally would inhibit his or her capacity to control events or engineer foreign policy change . Crisis can liberate leaders from constraints that would normally inhibit their ability to engineer events or change foreign policy .
 History abounds with examples of the seminal importance of political leaders who emerge in different times and places and under different circumstances to play critical roles in shaping world history . This is one of many examples of how world leaders emerged from different times, places and circumstances .
 Mikhail Gorbachev dramatically illustrates an individual’s capacity to change the course of history . Mikhail Gorbachev illustrates a person's capacity for change of history, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We must be cautious and remember that leaders are not all-powerful determinants of states’ foreign policy behavior . Having said that the . history-making individuals model may be compelling, we must . remember that leadership is not all the powerful determinants .
 Poiiticai psychoiogy and constructivism teii us that the same option is iikeiyto have different vaiue to different ieaders . The same option can be used in different situations, such as in the art of constructivism .
 In 1971, Americans took to the streets outside the White House to protest the immoraiity of Nixon’s massive bombing of Vietnam . Consider the exampie of Richard Nixon, in 1971, in .
 His reaction to this perceived threat was to shieid himseif from the voice ot the peopie, without success, as it happened . His reaction was to try and find a solution to the problem .
 Nixon said “nobody can know what it means for a president to be sitting in that White House working iate at night and to have hundreds of thousands of demonstrators charging through the streets . Nixon said that “nobody can know’t what’s it means
 Eariier, on a rainy afternoon in 1962, John F Kennedy faced a similar citizen protest . Kennedy faced similar protests in 1962 .
 Americans gathered in front of the White House for a "Ban the Bomb" demonstration . Demonstrators gathered to protest against the Bomb Bomb .
 His response was to send out urns ot coffee and doughnuts and invite the leaders of the protest to come inside to state their case . He said democracy should encourage dissent and debate .
 This comparison suggests that the type of leader can make a difference in determining the kinds of choices likely to be made in response to similar situations . This comparison shows that the kind of leader makes a difference .
 More important than each president’s treatment of the protesters, however, was whether he actually changed his policy decisions based on the protests .
 Kennedy was hospitable to protesters, but he did not ban nuclear weapons . Military spending under Kennedy consumed half of the federal budget .
 Many would protest that Kennedy alone could not be expected to eliminate nuclear weapons . The zeitgeist was dominated by tear ot the Soviet Union and intense concern tor national security .
 The protesters in 1971, however, were more in keeping with the spirit of the times . Protesters in 1971 were more than protesters in the '70s .
 The U.S. ended its participation in the Vietnam war in 1968 . Vietnam was a major source of American involvement in the war .
 These outcomes suggest that leaders are captive to Zeitgeist, or larger forces that drive international relations in their times . Leaders should be held accountable for their actions, says the author .
 Constructivist theorists like to observe constructivist theorists . Zeitgeist the ""spirit of the times," or the dominant cultural norms assumed to influence the behavior of people living in particular periods .
 Multiple factors affect states’ foreign policy decisions . The question may be unanswerable, but at least it reminds us that multiple factors affect state policy decisions.
 The history-making individuals model alone appears too simple an explanation of how transnational actors react to external challenges . The history making individuals model is too simple a simple explanation of transnational challenges .
 The DF States’ INTERNATIDNAL DECISIDNS are considered to be the most important actors in the world . The DF states’ international decision making decisions are considered by the DF States .
 States have the most power, and by international law are the only transnational actors with the capacity to possess territory, to exercise control over activities within borders, and to monopolize the use of military force . States have power by law, and they are the most powerful actors in the world
 States comprise a special category of player on the world stage . States respond to global trends and transformations in ways that are arguably unique . States are unique in their own way of responding to the world's changing trends .
 States’ foreign policy decisions are the most consequential, and the factors that influence them are different from those that impact other transnational actors’ decisions . States are most likely to make decisions to adapt to changes in world politics, experts say .
 Geostrategic location, military might, economic prowess, and system of government are all variables that affect state foreign policy choices . State of state's location, economic might, and economic prowess are all factors in foreign policy .
 It is difficult to generalize about the influence of any one factor or combination of factors . Still, because of the diversity of states as well as their different locations and positions within the contemporary global system, it is difficult for a generalization .
 The global or international system level encompasses all actors’ relationships and the changes in these relations over time . Recall that states and the global system make up two distinct levels; the state level encompasses domestic characteristics .
 Global or “external” influences on foreign policy include all activities occurring beyond a state’s borders that affect the choices its officials and the people they govern make . Global or "external" influences are all activities outside the borders of a state .
 Such factors as the number of military alliances and the changing levels of international trade sometimes profoundly affect the choices of decision makers . Such factors such as the size of the U.S. military and trade in the world sometimes affect the decisions made .
 Internal or “domestic” influences, on the other hand, are those that exist at the level of the state, not the global system . Internal or "domestic" influences exist at state level, not global system, not in global system. Internal or domestic influences are
 Different countries' attributes may influence different countries' foreign policy choices . Military capabilities, level of economic development, and types of government may influence policy .
 The global environment within which states operate shapes opportunities for action . Examples of both types of influences are discussed in the sections that follow .
 The distribution of power among states and the pattern of alliances around the most powerful are the most significant factors of the international environment that make possible certain courses of action but not others . States’ attributes state characteristics that shape foreign policy behavior, such as its size, wealth, and the extent
 Scholars use the term polarity to describe the distribution of power among members of the global system . Scholars say polarity is a form of power distribution in the world . The term is used by scholars to describe how the system is distributed .
 As explained in Chapter 4, unipolar systems have one dominant power center, bipolar systems contain two centers of power, and multipolar systems possess more than two such centers .
 Closely related to the distribution of power is the pattern of alignments among states . State alignments are closely related to power distribution in India .
 The term polarization refers to the degree of which states cluster around the powerful . The polarization of states is a sign that polarization occurs .
 A highly bipolarized system is one in which small and medium-size states form alliances with one of the two dominant powers . For instance, a highly bipolarism is one where small and small-size nations form alliances .
 The network of alliances around the U.S. and Soviet Union during the Cold War exemplified such a system . The alliance system was created by the United States and the Soviet Union .
 Polarity and alliance polarization influence foreign policy by affecting the decision latitude possessed by states . Polarity of alliance polarization influences foreign policy decisions by state .
 Global properties influence the freedom that states have in their international behavior . To illustrate this point, let’s consider two examples of how these global properties affect the freedom of states .
 When power is concentrated in the hands of a single state in a unipolar system, it can more easily choose to use military force and intervene in the affairs of others than it would in a system of shared power, where rivals might obstruct its actions .
 When alliances are tight military blocs, the members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader . The alliance's leader is the leader of the Alliance Alliance, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 When alliances are loosely shifting with fluid membership, smaller states can more readily choose to craft foreign policies independent of the wishes of the powerful . Smaller states can choose foreign policy independent of wishes of powerful states .
 Of course, you could think of other examples to show how the structural properties of the global system affect decision latitude .
 The foreign policy impact of polarity and polarization hinges on the geostrategic position of a given state . What they would show would show is that the impact of foreign policy .
 Some of the most important influences on a state’s foreign policy behavior are its location and physical terrain . Geostrategic Position is the location of a state and the terrain of a country .
 The United States was secure throughout most of its early history because vast oceans separated it from potential threats in Europe and Asia . The U.S. was secure because of vast oceans, not oceans .
 Lowland Terrain New Guinea Coral Sea Pacific Ocean Argentina iJTasman ^ Sea ^ Tasman I I I Flatlands I I Rolling plains I I Hilly plains MAP 6. I I Ice cap: New Guinea .
 How countries act toward others is shaped by the number of neighboring states on their borders . Countries act toward each other's behavior by having borders protected by natural barriers such as mountains and oceans .
 This map suggests how, until recently, the separation of the United States from Eurasia encouraged an isolationist policy during many periods in U.S. history . It suggests how isolationism was encouraged during periods in history .
 Switzerland's easily defended topography has made neutrality a viable foreign policy option . Consider also mountainous Switzerland .
 Great Britain's physical detachment from Europe long served as a buffer separating it from major power disputes on the Continent . Great Britain maintaining autonomy from continental politics has been an enduring theme of foreign policy .
 Most countries are not insular, however, they have many states on their borders, denying them the option of noninvolvement in world affairs . Most countries do not have an option of not being involved in the world's affairs .
 Germany historically has found its domestic political system and foreign policy preferences shaped by its geostrategic position . Germany sits in the geographic center of Europe, located in the heart of Europe .
 Each of these governments was preoccupied with its relations with neighbors but responded to the opportunities and challenges presented by Germany’s position in the middle of the European continent .
 Geostrategic geopolitics is the theoretical postulate that states’ foreign policies are determined by their location, natural resources, and physical environment . In no case, however, withdrawal from involvement in continental affairs is a practical geostrategory option, the author says .
 History is replete with other examples of geography’s influence on states’ foreign policy goals . This is not the first time the U.S. has used geography to influence foreign policy .
 Alfred Thayer Mahan’s The Influence of Sea Power in History maintains that control of the seas shaped national power and foreign policy .
 States with extensive coastlines and ports enjoyed a competitive advantage . States with vast coastlines were able to gain access to ports .
 Geography, size (territory and population), climate, and distance between states are powerful determinants of individual countries’ foreign policies . Later geopoliticians, such as Sir Halford Mackinder and Nicholas Spykman .
 Geopolitics is only one aspect of the global environment that may influence foreign policy, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com . Sutter: "Geopolitics only one of many aspects of the world's foreign policy can influence policy .
 Various domestic factors and national attributes affect the capacity of states to act when foreign policy decisions must be made . The Domestic Sources of Foreign Policy Decisions are discussed .
 To illustrate the impact of internal factors, consider next the three factors regarded by scholars as the most influential .
 Although most states may seek similar goals, their ability to realize them will vary according to their military capabilities . The ability of states to achieve their goals will vary depending on their military capability .
 In the 1980s, Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi repeatedly provoked the U.S. through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric and by supporting various terrorist activities . For instance, in the 80s, Qaddafi .
 Qaddafi was able to act as he did largely because neither bureaucratic organizations nor a mobilized public existed in Libya to constrain his personal whims . Qaddafi acted largely because of his own whims, not bureaucratic organizations or mobilized public .
 Qaddafi was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom his anger was directed . However, Qaddafi's anger was more limited than those of the more capable countries .
 Limited military muscle compared with the U.S. precluded the kinds of belligerent behavior he threatened to practice . The United States' limited military muscle prevented the kind of behavior he had threatened to use .
 Saddam Hussein made strenuous efforts to build Iraq’s military might . By 1990, Iraq had built the world's fourth-largest army . Saddam Hussein built Iraq's fourth largest army .
 "Invasion of Kuwait to seize its oil fields became a feasible foreign policy option," the author says . The Kuwaiti oil fields were captured in the 1990s .
 Iraq’s impressive military power proved ineffective against a vastly superior coalition of military forces, headed by the U.S. In the end, however, even Iraq's impressive military might proved ineffective .
 The 1991 Persian Gulf War forced Saddam Hussein to capitulate and withdraw from the conquered territory . Saddam Hussein was forced to withdraw from conquered territory in 1991 .
 The U.S. invaded Iraq in 2003 and toppled Saddam Hussein from office . Twelve years later, the United States invaded Iraq and ousted Saddam Hussein .
 The lessons; what states believe about their own military capabilities and those of their adversaries guide their decisions about war and peace . The lessons are based on the strength of statesmen who believe in their military capabilities .
 The level of economic and industrial development a state enjoys also affects the foreign policy goals it can pursue . Economic conditions of a state can influence foreign policy decisions .
 The more economically developed a state, the more likely it is to play an activist role in the global political economy . The most economically developed state is likely to play a key role in global political politics .
 Rich states have interests that extend far beyond their borders and typically possess the means to pursue and protect them . Rich states typically have the means of pursuing and protecting their interests . The U.S. is one of the richest states in the world .
 States that enjoy industrial capabilities and extensive involvement in international trade tend to be militarily powerful . That's because military might is a function of economic capabilities . Not coincidentally, states that enjoy economic capabilities tend to have military might .
 Although economically advanced states are more active globally, this does not mean that their privileged circumstances dictate adventuresome policies . Economic advanced states do not have the same privileged circumstances as other countries, says David Cameron .
 They usually perceive the status quo as serving their interests . As a result, they often forge international economic policies to protect and expand their envied position .
 Levels of productivity and prosperity also affect the foreign policies of the poor states at the bottom of the global hierarchy .
 Some economically weak states respond to their situation by complying subserviently with the wishes of the rich on whom they depend . Some economic weak states comply subservently with their wishes, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Others rebel defiantly, sometimes succeeding in resisting efforts by great powers and powerful international organizations to control their behavior . Others rebels defiantly and sometimes succeed in resisting the efforts to control them .
 Generalizations about the economic foundations of states’ international political behavior often prove inaccurate . Thus, generalizations about economic foundations for states' international politics often prove incorrect .
 Although levels of economic development vary widely among states in the global system, they alone do not determine foreign policies . Economic development varies widely among countries in the world, but not all countries' policies .
 Leaders’ perceptions of the opportunities and constraints that their states’ economic resources provide may more powerfully influence their foreign policy choices . Instead, leaders’s perceptions of their economic resources may influence foreign policy .
 A third important attribute affecting states’ international behavior is their type of political system . Type of government is the type of government that affects states' international behavior .
 Realistic predicts that all states will act similarly to protect their interests . But a state’s type of government constrains important choices, including whether threats to use military force are carried out .
 An important distinction is between constitutional democracy and autocratic rule, says David Cameron . Cameron: The difference is between the two ends of the democratic spectrum .
 In neither democratic nor autocratic political systems can political leaders survive long without the support of organized domestic political interests, and sometimes the mass citizenry . The U.S. is not a democracy nor an autocratic state, but a democratic society is democratic .
 In democratic systems, interests are likely to spread beyond the government itself . But in democratic systems it will spread beyond government itself, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Public opinion, interest groups, and the mass media are a more visible part of the policy-making process in democratic systems . Public opinion and interest groups are more visible in the policy making process in democracies .
 The electoral process in democratic societies more meaningfully frames choices and produces results about who will lead than in authoritarian regimes . The process is similar to that of authoritarian regimes, where the real choices are made by elites behind closed doors .
 In a democracy, public opinion and preferences may matter, says Julian Zelizer . Differences in who is allowed to participate and how much they exercise their right to participate are critical .
 The proposition that domestic stimuli, and not simply international events, are a source of foreign policy is not novel . It's not a novel, but the proposition is not new .
 Thucydides observed that what happened within the Greek city-states often did more to shape their external behavior than did their interactions between them . In ancient Greece, for instance, the realist historian observed that the external behavior of the city-state was more important than the interactions between
 Leaders today sometimes make foreign policy decisions for domestic political purposes . Foreign policy decisions are intended to influence election outcomes at home or to divert public attention from economic woes .
 The impact of government type on foreign policy choice has taken on great significance following the rapid conversion of many dictatorships to democratic rule .
 The first wave occurred between 1878 and 1926, and the second between 1943 and 1962, respectively . The first and second wave was between the 1878-191919 and 1962 .
 The third wave began in the 1970s when a large number of nondemocratic countries began to convert their governments to democratic rule . The current wave is the third wave of democratic rule-conversion .
 The once radical idea that democracy is the ideal form of decision making has triumphed . In a remarkable global transformation from past world history, the once radical notion of democracy is now triumphing .
 Many liberals have predicted that the twenty-first century will be safer than its predecessor . This recent growth of democracy has emboldened many liberals to predict that the 20-20 century is safer .
 Immanuel Kant outlined the logic in his 1795 treatise Perpetual Peace . Their reasons for predicting the onset of a democratic peace vary, but rely on the logic that Imman Kant outlined .
 A considerable body of evidence supports the proposition that democracies do not wage war against each other (Rasler and Thompson 2005; Russett 2001; Ray 1995). diversionary theory of war the hypothesis that leaders sometimes initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing national cohesion at home .
 The type of government and, more specifically, whether leaders are accountable to opposition groups through multiparty elections strongly influence foreign policy goals . Foreign policy goals are important to foreign policy decisions .
 Political scientists David Lektzian and Mark Souva attribute the democratic GLOBAL LEADERSHIP to the U.S. The United States is called upon to provide visionary leadership for the world .
 Barack Obama declared that “I will strengthen our common security by investing in our common humanity.” Barack Obama declares that he will strengthen the U.S.-Europe relations with the world by investing .
 Our global engagement cannot be defined by what we are against, it must be guided by a clear sense of what we stand for . We are committed to a global engagement that is guided by our values, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators ranks countries by the level of freedom citizens have to voice opinions and choose their government . The World Bank ranks countries in terms of the freedom citizens in each country have .
 Liberal democratic peace theory predicts that as freedom across countries increases, so will peaceful relations among these democracies . Peaceful relations among democracies will increase as freedom increases, according to theory .
 The United States’ rank fell to thirty-fifth “because of a decreased trust in public officials and restrictions on the freedom of the press” {Time, September 17, 2007, 16). Peace to democracies’ “greater ability to more credibly reveal information
 One realist thesis argues that democracies are inferior to nondemocratic governance . Democracy is a form of democracy, but democracy is not democracy, it's a formative form .
 Dictators and despots such as Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, and Mao Zedong can embark as warmongers on grand international missions and be hailed as great unifiers and builders of grandiose projects . But democratic politicians are “by nature mediocre,” writes David
 The great dictators... give the people a destiny, whereas democrats can only promise happiness under the spell of absolute power . The great dictator gives the people the chance to have their own destiny, says David Cameron .
 Classical realism follows Machiavelli by honoring strong rulers who are able to convince subjects of their need to be ruled by them for the glory of the state . Realists prefer nondemocratic governments to forge foreign policies freely in pursuit of national interests .
 I sometimes wonder whether a democracy is not uncomfortably similar to one of those prehistoric monsters with a body as long as this room and a brain the size of a pin . It is not a democracy with a brain size of the pin .
 He lies there in his comfortable primeval mud and pays little attention to his environment; he is slow to wrath . You practically have to whack his tail off to make him aware that his interests are being disturbed . Once he grasps this, he lays about him with such blind
 A crisis sufficient enough to arouse the attention and activity of a large proportion of the population may need to erupt in order for large changes in policy to come about . A crisis is a crisis that may need a large number of people to erupt to bring about large change in policy .
 As Alexis de Tocqueville argued in 1835, democracies may be inclined to “impulse rather than prudence” because they overreact to perceived external dangers once they recognize them, he said .
 In short, the concentration of power and the suppression of public opposition can be both advantageous and disadvantageous . Concentration of power can be advantageous or disadvantageous, the author says .
 Foreign policy choice takes place in an environment of uncertainty and multiple competing interests . Foreign policy choices are difficult to make, says Obama .
 On occasion, it is also made in situations where policy makers are caught by surprise and a quick decision is needed . Policy makers are also caught by surprised and need to make quick decisions .
 We will consider the concerns that decision makers must wrestle with in confronting armed aggression . Specifically, we will consider what decision makers should wrestle with .
 In Chapter 7, you will have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security . Chapter 7: The global character of global security is examined in Chapter 7 .
 In Chapters 8 through 11, we will weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace . We will also weigh the ideas of the liberal road to peace and realist paths to security .
 You will also be invited to consider the insights that alternative constructivist, radical, and feminist theories provide in grappling with the challenge of finding solutions to the grave threat of armed aggression . We will also discuss the insights .
 Only the United States and the Soviet Union had nuclear capabilities in 1954 . Shown here is a United States test of a nuclear bomb .
 The capacity to wage war with weapons of mass destruction has spread to many countries . The diffusion of such weapons is transforming the global balance of power, says the author .
 Realist theorizing looks on the acquisition of military power and its consequences as the most important dimension of world politics . What to do with such weapons for war and for peace is the central concern of realist theory, says Realist .
 For many people, world politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise by military means of political influence over rivals and other actors on the global stage . For many, it's about arms and alliances, with the exercise of political means of influence .
 Many people equate world politics with war and its threat to their nation, city, and the world at large . Indeed, many people equate the threat to war with their nation and city .
 An attack by an enemy is the most dangerous direct threat to survival . Preventing such death and destruction is a precondition for the attainment of other important values, such as food, water, freedom and freedom .
 Changes are required in the practices of states toward one another if we are to control armed aggression and reduce its frequency and destructiveness . Yet war is a problem, and changes are needed in the practice of states .
 Chapter 7 looks at the military threats to international security posed by wars between states, wars within states, and international terrorism . Chapter 7 includes the threat posed by international terrorism and the threat of war within states .
 In Chapter 8, the pursuit of national interest defined in terms of military power is examined through the lens of realist approaches to national and international security . Chapter 8 includes consideration of trends in weapons of war and alternative military methods .
 Chapter 9 provides an overview of the various roles that realists envision for alliances in international politics . Realists ascribe to alliances as a method for increasing the power of a state against its competitors and their allies . Chapter 9 also provides an account of the risk and costs that Realists warn
 In Chapter 10, you will look at liberal ideas for negotiating at the bargaining table rather than fighting on the battlefield to settle international disputes . You will also look at subjecting inter-state relations to a true system of international law with strong sanctions .
 Chapter 11 introduces the liberal proposal to “beat swords into plowshares” through disarmament of the weapons of war . International organizations for maintaining the collective security of all countries . Economic sanctions as a nonmilitary punishment for aggressors .
 Sunni Muslim insurgents celebrate their attack of an American military convoy outside Fallujah, Iraq . Shown here are Sunni Muslims celebrating their attack on a military convoy .
 The 9/11 attack and the U.S.-led military struggle against insurgents in Iraq, the 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War in Lebanon, and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for peace .
 It is understandable why so many people think that armed aggression is the essence of world politics . It is not the only reason why armed aggression has become an issue of concern .
 In On War, Karl von Clausewitz advanced his famous dictum that war is merely an extension of diplomacy by other means, albeit an extreme form . Clausewitz: War is merely a form of diplomacy, albeit a form .
 This insight underscores the realist belief that war is a policy instrument transnational actors use to resolve their conflicts . War is an important policy instrument for transnational conflict resolution, the author says .
 War, however, is the deadliest instrument of conflict resolution, and its onset usually means that persuasion and negotiations have failed . War is usually followed by negotiations and negotiations, but it is often followed by war .
 In international relations, conflict regularly occurs when actors interact and disputes over incompatible interests arise . Conflict regularly occurs in international relations . Conflict is often a result of the interaction between actors and each other .
 War and conflict are not necessarily threatening, because war and conflict is different . Conflict (like politics) is aimed at getting another actor to do something it would not otherwise do . In and of itself, conflict is not threatening, but it's not threatening .
 Conflict may be seen as inevitable and occurs whenever two parties perceive differences between themselves and seek to resolve those differences to their own satisfaction . Conflict may also occur when two parties see differences between them and resolve them to the satisfaction of their differences .
 Some conflict results whenever people interact and may be generated by religious, ideological, ethnic, economic, political, political or territorial issues . Therefore, we should not regard it as abnormal. Some conflict may result from religious, . ideological, . ethnic, or political, issues .
 The costs of conflict do become threatening when the parties take up arms to settle their perceived irreconcilable differences or use force to settle old scores .
 "When that happens, violence occurs, and we enter the separate sphere of warfare," says President Obama . "We enter into the separate spheres of warfare. That's when violence occurs," he says .
 This chapter presents information and ideas so you can explore the nature of armed aggression in your world . Armed aggression is its types, frequency, and changing characteristics and causes .
 "You will be forced to confront the ethical dilemmas that these military threats create," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "When it is moral or immoral to take up arms, there will be moral or unethical," he says .
 World Politics puts into the spotlight three primary ways that war a condition arising within states (civil war) or between states when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission . Conflict discord arises in international relations over perceived incompatibilities of interest . armed aggression combat between
 Defense Secretary Robert Gates announced that the ban on taking pictures of service members’ coffins returning home would be lifted, with their families’ consent .
 You will have the opportunity to review the leading theories that explain the causes of these three types of armed aggression in world politics . You will also be given the chance to review some of the theories .
 The belief that “only the dead will see the end of war’s is based on the fact that warfare has been an ugly, almost constant factor in a changing world .
 Scientists who study war quantitatively through the scientific methodologies of behavioralism have attempted to estimate the frequency of armed conflicts . They have tried to measure trends and cycles in the global system’s level of violent conflicts .
 Various measures converge on the basic trends and patterns, from different periods of measurement . Nonetheless, various measures converge upon the basic trend .
 In the long term, armed aggression has been continual, with a general trend toward rising incidence . Armed aggression continues to be a problem in the United States .
 In the relative short term (since 1950), however, the pattern has shown fewer, but more deadly, armed conflicts . Since 1950, there have been fewer, less deadly conflicts, but fewer, more deadly conflicts .
 Inventories show that violence and global insecurity are entrenched properties of world politics . These inventories report in different ways what the mass media tell us, say .
 The wars in 2009 in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka, and Gaza cast a dark shadow . The wars were fought in Afghanistan and Iraq, and Afghanistan .
 In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they thought primarily about wars between states, secondarily about civil wars within existing sovereign states . People thought about civil war between sovereign states and civil war within existing states, but not between states .
 Internal wars are now defining the global landscape . However, that began to change thereafter, with internal wars increasingly defining the landscape .
 Civil wars and armed conflicts that does not involve government forces on at least one side have become especially entrenched since 1990 . This new pattern of civil wars has become especially ingrained since 1990, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The conflicts between Eritrea-Ethiopia and India-Pakistan concerned territory, while the war between Iraq and the U.S. and its allies was fought over governmental power .
 The other thirty-three conflicts were waged within states, with nine involving disputes over territory and twenty-two over government . Nine of the 33 conflicts were over territory .
 Four of the major intrastate armed conflicts that were active as 2009 began were internationalized . Troops from states that were not primary parties to the conflict aided the government .
 Measuring frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the figure depicts a gradual increase in the frequency of conflicts untii the peak in 1992 . A deciine transpired that lasted roughly a decade before, in 2003, the number of conflicts again began to rise .
 The type of conflict has changed, with extrasystemic armed aggression becoming, it is hoped, extinct . interstate conflict between countries becoming very rare .
 The occurrence of armed conflict within states has grown, as has the number of internal conflicts where there is intervention from third-party states . insurgency groups; and the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia and the al-Shabab militia . civil wars wars between opposing groups within the same country
 Until 9/11, most security analysts expected civil wars to remain the most common type of global violence . Civil war is the most violent form of violence in the world, analysts say .
 They have had to revise their strategies and thinking to accommodate changing realities . However, they have been forced to adapt to changing realities.
 The characteristics of contemporary warfare appear to be undergoing a major transformation . Many of the traditional characteristics of armed conflict continue to be seen .
 The disappearance of armed aggression between states may be possible in the long-term future . Armed aggression and violence persist, and their frequency is growing inside established states, says the author .
 Next we examine this second face of military threats to the world; armed aggression within states . Next we look at the other face of the world: armed aggression in states .
 Large-scale civil strife is bred by the failure of state governments to effectively govern within their territorial borders . State governments are incapable of effectively governing their territories .
 Governments lacking authority and unable to meet the basic human needs of their citizens is a global trend . Mismanagement by governments lacking authority is an increasing global trend, says CNN.com .
 Government incompetence has led to an epidemic of failed states throughout the globe . Governmental incompetence has resulted in a failed state of the world .
 Failed states are victims of widespread but episodic fighting by insurgents and warlords . Sometimes the armed aggression is confined to local regions that seek secession and independence, or other times it is localized .
 The proliferation of failing states is a growing global danger . Civil wars percolating by state failure lead to waves of immigrants, famine, disease, drug trafficking, environmental degradation, and terrorism .
 The map identifies the world’s thirty-eight weakest countries whose governments are most in danger of failing and most likely to collapse in civil war and anarchy . The map is based on a map of the world's most vulnerable countries .
 An additional ninety-three countries are at a “warning’s level, and thirty-three at a moderate” threshold . Also identified are an additional 90-23 countries at a "warning” level and a ‘moderate’ threshold .
 Potential “failed states” threaten the progress and stability of tbe other sustainable countries . These potential ‘failed state’s ‘threats’ threaten the peace and stability in sustainable countries.
 State failure is particularly evident in tbe higb-risk, weak, and impoverisbed states in Africa . State failure and civil war is particularly visible in African states .
 Failed states share some key characteristics that make them vulnerable to disintegration, civil war, and terrorism . The causes of state failure and civil disintegration are multiple, but many are multiple .
 A strong predictor of state failure is poverty, but extreme income and gender inequality within countries are even better warning signs . The global trend suggests that poverty is a good predictor of failure .
 Most of the sovereign states in the world have one or more of these attributes . It is likely that failed states will grow as a problem in the globalized twenty-first century .
 The globe is speckled with many dangerous flash points where countries are highly vulnerable to dissolution as a result of state failure, mismanagement, civil revolt, and violent government takeovers .
 There are a number of disputed regions poised to declare independence . To add to the grim picture, there are also several disputed regions .
 Kurdish region of Turkey on the Iraqi border, Nagaland in India, Cabinda exclave in Angola, and Baida in southern Somalia . Cabinda is a former colony of the Cabinda region of Angola, Angola and southern Somalia.
 Armed conflicts within states have erupted far more frequently than have armed conflicts between states . Intrastate conflict within states erupts far more often than those within states . Armed conflict between states has erupted more frequently in recent years than in previous years .
 Between 1989 and 2009, internal armed conflict over government or territory has been the most common by far . Internal armed conflict has been most common since 1989-2009 .
 In this period, ninety-three armed conflicts within states took place in comparison to only eight between states . In contrast, only eight armed conflicts took place between states, in the same period .
 As 2009 began, thirty-six armed conflicts were raging in twenty-six locations around the world . In 2009, there were more than 30 armed conflicts in the world than any other country .
 The number of independent states in the global system makes the incidence of civil war statistically more likely . However, this accelerating trend is, in part, a product of the increased number of independence states, the author says .
 Number of internal armed conflicts has risen by almost twenty-five percent since 2003 . Number of civil wars with more than 1000 battle-related deaths is comparatively modest, with five taking place in 2008 .
 Afghanistan, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Liberia, Myanmar, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey, and Uganda . Consider examples of long-lasting and resumed civil wars in
 The number of lives lost in civil violence has always been very high . Civil war casualties since World War II have increased at alarming rates . Civil violence has increased at an alarming rate .
 The cliche that “the most savage conflicts occur in the home” captures the ugly reality, as genocide and mass slaughter aimed at depopulating entire regions have become commonplace in recent civil wars .
 Rwanda's Hutu government orchestrated a genocidal slaughter resulting in the murder of about eight hundred thousand predominantly Tutsi and moderate Hutu people in a matter of weeks .
 Sudan provides another horrifying example of the mass slaughter of civilians that often occurs when governments seek to keep power by destroying minority opposition groups .
 The Arab-controlled Sudanese government that seized power in 1989 suspended democracy and undertook a divide-and-destroy campaign of state-sponsored terrorism against the black Christian and animist peoples living in southern Darfur region .
 By 2008, at least 2 million people were slaughtered and another 4 million became displaced refugees . By 2008 the world had seen 2 million slaughtered and 4 million displaced .
 The bloodbath and mass exodus made this tragic place of death the worst since World War II . The great powers were very late in authorizing UN or African peacekeepers in late 2007 to intervene to stop the killing .
 Civil wars resist negotiated settlement . Civil wars have resistance to negotiations . Civil war is a form of conflict that can be resolved in a long time .
 Making peace is difficult among rival factions that are struggling for power, driven by hatred and poisoned by the inertia of prolonged killing that has become a way of life .
 Few domestic enemies fighting in a civil war have succeeded in ending the combat through negotiated compromise at the bargaining table . Few domestic foes fighting in the civil war succeeded through negotiations .
 Most civil wars end on the battlefield but rarely with a decisive victory of one faction over another . Civil wars rarely end with decisive victory over another faction .
 They join for many reasons: Some are kidnapped and forced to join, others lured by promises of money . Others have lost loved ones and seek vengeance, others are lured by money, others have lost love .
 Eleven-year-old boy stands on the roadside at a Sierra Leone military checkpoint .
 The rise of failing states and their frequent fall into intrastate conflict may make it tempting for you to think of armed aggression within states as stemming exclusively from conditions within those countries . The International Dimensions of Internal Conflict .
 A coup d’etat is a sudden, forcible takeover of government by a small group within that country, typically carried out by violent or illegal means with the goal of Installing their own leadership in power . It is a conflict both between and within political systems; a conflict
 Take, for example, the consequence of violent government takeover through a coup d’etat . Take, example, a violent coup d'etat through a government takeover .
 Successful coups tend to result in authoritarian regimes seizing power, such as Pinochet in Chile or Suharto in Indonesia . Historically, successful coups tended to result of authoritarian regimes .
 Between 1960 and 1990, an average of six coups occurred around the globe every year . 80 percent of the leaders held onto power for at least five years .
 Political scientists Hein Groemans and Nikolay Marinov attribute this changed pattern, in part, to an external factor . “Since the end of Cold War rivalry for spheres of influence.”
 Because the great powers have global interests, they have played roles "behind the scenes" in coup d’etats . Great powers have played behind the scenes, not only in the occurrence of coup d'etats, but also militarily in intrastate conflict .
 Today it is often difficult to determine where an internal war ends and another begins . But today it is difficult to see where the internal conflict ends and begins, says the BBC .
 In the aftermath of external intrusions, the targets’ domestic societies have been transformed . The targets' domestic societies were transformed by the threat of external intrusion .
 At times, external actors have sent interventionary armed forces into failed states to contain and control the civil conflict causing violence and attempt to reestablish governing authority . At times the interventionary forces have been sent into . failed states .
 There is another dimension to the internationalization of intrastate conflict, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Analysts believe domestic insurrections become internationalized when leaders experience internal opposition within their state intentionally seek to provoke an international crisis . Many analysts believe that leaders intentionally try to provoke international crisis in the hope that their citizens will become less rebellious if their attention is diverted to the threat of aggression
 This theory draws a direct connection between civil strife and foreign aggression . This theory is based on the theory that civil strife is linked to foreign aggression.
 It maintains that when leaders sense their country is suffering from conflict at home, they are prone to attempt to contain that domestic strife by waging a war against foreigners . The international danger will take citizens’ attention away from their dissatisfaction with their home leadership, it says .
 It gives him his only chance of being a tyrant and being loved for it at the same time . It is the only chance he can be a tyrant without being loved by the public .
 The theory of war is the hypothesis that leaders initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing their citizens’ approval of them and national cohesion at home . He can introduce the most ruthless forms of control and send thousands of followers to their deaths, he says .
 Niccolo Machiavelli advised leaders to undertake foreign wars whenever turmoil within their state became too great . Niccolo's advice is that foreign wars should be pursued when turmoil within the state becomes too great, Machavelli said in 1513 .
 Hermann Goering, the Nazi adviser to German dictator Adolf Hitler, said “voice or no voice, the people can always be brought to do the bidding of the leaders’s, he said . Goering was echoed by Goering's assertion that the people are brought to
 Whether leaders actually start wars to offset domestic conflict and heighten public approval remains a subject of debate . Whether leaders start wars for domestic conflict to offset public approval is a debate .
 Unpopular leaders may be motivated to exercise caution in foreign affairs and avoid the use of force overseas in order to cultivate a reputation as a peacemaker . Unpopular countries may instead be highly motivated to exercising caution .
 It may be better for leaders facing opposition to avoid further criticism that they are intentionally manipulative by addressing domestic problems rather than engaging in reckless wars overseas . Especially unpopular wars trigger protest demonstrations and reduce leaders’ public opinion approval ratings .
 There is reason to question the link between civil unrest and the initiation of interstate war . Hence, there is reason for doubt the link .
 Armed struggles within countries occur more frequently than those between states, though many have repercussions for world politics more broadly . Armed struggle within countries more often occurs than between states .
 Residents of the Pakistani district of Dir fleeing the fighting between Taliban militants and government in April 2009 .
 In noncrisis times, most leaders are more inclined to concentrate on internal disturbances than to manufacture threats of a foreign war . The U.S. should focus on domestic problems rather than foreign threats of war, he says .
 Intrastate conflict can become internationalized through both the tendency for them to incite external intervention as well as the propensity for leaders of governments failing to wage wars abroad in order to try to control rebellion at home .
 These two trends both are making for the globalization of armed aggression . The two trends are both being made for the global war of aggression, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The threat of global terrorism that knows no borders and that is spreading worldwide. And that globalization is evident in yet another, third type of armed aggression that brings violence to world politics .
 Since the birth of the modern state system some three and a half centuries ago, national leaders have prepared for wars against other countries . This is the first time a nation has prepared for a war against other nations .
 Throughout this period, war has been conceived as large-scale organized violence between the regular armies of sovereign states . War has been thought of as large scale organized violence .
 Leaders today still ready their countries for such clashes, still . Increasingly they are faced with the prospect of asymmetric warfare .
 Terrorism was well known in ancient times, as evident in the campaign of assassinations conducted by the Sicarii (named after a short dagger, or sica) in Judea during the first century .
 In 2010 the United States National CounterTerrorism Center identified dozens of different transnational actors as worldwide terrorist groups . The U.S. National Counterterrorism Center identifies dozens of transnational groups as worldwide terrorists .
 Political terrorism is the deliberate use or threat of violence against noncombatants, calculated to instill fear in an audience beyond the immediate victims . Political terrorism has been defined by the definition of political terrorism .
 The psychological impact of an attack can exceed the physical damage, experts say . Terrorists often strike symbolic targets in a horrific manner, they say . "Psychological impact of a terrorist strike can exceed physical damage"
 Terrorism is not senseless violence; it is a premeditated political strategy that threatens people with a coming danger . asymmetric warfare is armed conflict between belligerents of vastly unequal military strength, in which the weaker side is often a nonstate actor that relies on unconventional tactics .
 Terrorist attacks worldwide returned to approximately the same level in 2008 as they were in 2005 . However, the distrihution has changed dramatically since then . Terrorists attacked the U.S. in 2008 .
 The United States reported that 11,770 terrorist attacks against noncomhatants occurred in 2008 . These strikes claimed a total of almost 16,000 lives . Altogether, the U.S. reported that attacks on noncomatants killed almost 15,000 .
 In Iraq terrorist attacks decreased about 50 percent and deaths by over 60 percent from what they had been in both 2006 and 2007 . Yet, in Iraq terrorists attacks decreased by over 50 percent from 2006 to 2007 . Terrorist attacks in Iraq have decreased by 50 percent .
 South Asia has now surpassed the Near East in terrorist-related deaths . Countries such as Pakistan and Afghanistan in South Asia bear approximately the same burden of terrorist attacks as Iraq and Near East .
 Terrorism can be employed to support or change the political status quo . Terrorism can also be used to change the status quo, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Repressive terror, which is wielded to sustain an existing political order, has been utilized by governments as well as vigilantes . Repressive terrorism has been used by governments and vigilantes in the past, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 From the Gestapo (secret state police) in Nazi Germany to the ‘death squads’ in various countries, various countries have been involved in the death squads . The Gestapo was a secret state police in Germany .
 Dissidents who use terrorism to change the political status quo vary considerably . Dissidents use terrorism as a weapon of power to change status quo, say U.S. officials .
 Some groups, like the MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola), used terrorism to expel colonial rulers . Others, such as ETA (Basque Homeland and Liberty), adopt terrorism as part of an ethnonational separatist struggle . Still others, including the Islamic Jihad,
 Groups such as the Japanese Red Army and Italian Black Order turn to terrorism for left or right-wing ideological reasons . Finally, groups like the Italian Red Army turn to terrorist groups for left-wing ideology .
 Dissident terror may be grounded in anticolonialism, separatism, religion, or secular ideology . Dissident terrorism may be rooted in anti-colonialism or separatism .
 Bombing alone accounts for roughly one-third of all recorded terrorist incidents . Bombing is one of the fastest-growing terrorist incidents in the world .
 Hijacking and hostage taking generally involve more complex operations than planting a bomb in a crowded department store or gunning down travelers in a train station . Hijackers and hostage-taking generally involve complex operations, such as bomb attacks .
 Major methods used by terrorists worldwide in 2008 were revealed in 2008 . The number of deaths caused by each method is based on the number of terrorist deaths worldwide .
 Suicide attacks are carried out by peopie wiiling to kiii enemy targets with methods such as wearing a . conceaied vest carrying explosives or driving a car bomb . As the third most frequently used tactic, suicide attacks are used as a tactic .
 Raed Abdui Hamid Misk blew himself up on a Jerusalem hus hus . Raed Misk killed himself in a suicide attack on a mosque .
 To be successful, these kinds of seizures require detailed preparation and the capacity to guard captives for long periods of time . The seizure is not the first seizure in the U.S. history of this type of seizure .
 Among the payoffs of such efforts is the opportunity to articulate the group’s grievances . The group's grievances are often overlooked by the public .
 The Lebanese group behind the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847 excelled at using U.S. television networks to articulate its grievances to the American public . The Reagan administration could not consider other options while searching for a solution .
 Two other threats could become part of the terrorist repertoire . Beyond the conventional tactics of bombings, assaults, hijacking, and hostage taking, terrorists could use other tactics . The U.S. State Department says it is investigating the possibility of a terrorist attack in Syria .
 Dissidents may acquire weapons of mass destruction to deliver a mortal blow against detested enemies . First, dissidents may acquire . weapons of . mass destruction . The U.S. has a history of terrorism .
 Nuclear armaments are the ultimate terror weapons, but radiological, chemical, and biological weapons also pose extraordinary dangers . Nuclear weapons are the most powerful weapons in the world, according to experts .
 Crude radiological weapons can be fabricated by combining ordinary explosives with nuclear waste or radioactive isotopes, stolen from hospitals, industrial facilities .
 Rudimentary chemical weapons can be made from herbicides, pesticides, and other toxic substances that are available commercially .
 The dispersal of anthrax spores through the mail during the fall of 2001 illustrated that low-technology attacks with bacterial agents in powder form are a frightening possibility . Biological weapons based on viral agents are more difficult to produce .
 Extremists can use the Internet as a recruiting tool and coordinate their activities with like-minded groups . It also allows them to case potential targets by hacking into a foe’s computer system .
 Viruses and other weapons of information warfare could cause havoc if they disable financial institutions . Financial institutions could be targeted by information warfare .
 The conventional view of terrorism as a rare and relatively remote threat was challenged by the events of September 11, 2001 . The New Global Terrorism is the new challenge to the conventional view .
 Terrorists are capable of executing catastrophic attacks almost anywhere, even without an arsenal of sophisticated weapons . Terrorists were able to execute catastrophic attacks even without a sophisticated arsenal of weapons, experts say .
 A1 Qaeda has global reach, but lack of global reach could compensate for that . Stealth, ingenuity, and meticulous planning compensate for their lack of firepower .
 Previously, terrorism was regarded as political theater, a frightening drama where the perpetrators wanted a lot of people watching, not a few people dead . Now, terrorism is no longer a political theater. It's a frightening, frightening drama .
 Global terrorists are driven by searing hatred, and annihilating enemies appears more important to them than winning sympathy for their cause . The United States has been the target of global terrorists for years .
 Another feature of this new strain of terrorism is its organizational form, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 A1 Qaeda possesses a decentralized horizontal structure . Instead of having a hierarchical command structure, A1 Al Qaeda has a decentralized horizontal structure, it has a decentralized structure .
 A1 Qaeda originally resembled a hub-and-spoke organization . Osama bin Laden and a small core of loyalists provided strategic direction and aid to a franchise of affiliated terrorist cells .
 Bin Laden provided financial and logistical support to extremist groups fighting those whom he perceived as archenemies . Rather than serving as a commander, bin Laden functioned as a coordinator .
 Following the Taliban regime in Afghanistan after the U.S.-led military intervention, A1 Qaeda underwent a structural change . The Taliban regime was overthrown by the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The killing or capture of roughly one-third of A1 Qaeda’s leadership transformed the organization into an entity that resembled a chain . Combined with its loss of a safe haven in Afghanistan, the organization's loss of leadership transformed into a chain of fighters .
 Bin Laden and his close associates continued offering ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world . But they no longer were directly involved in the planning and execution of most of the attacks undertaken in A1 Qaeda’s name .
 A1 Qaeda’s diffuse underground cells began to concentrate on “soft’ targets, sometimes attacking in conjunction with sympathetic local forces . Operating independently, without the training, financing, and logistical infrastructure .
 New breed of terrorists who belong to organizations such as A1 Qaeda more lethal than previous terrorists . Their religious fanaticism allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 At one level, terrorism is a means to change the political status quo by punishing those culpable for felt wrongs . Terrorism is also a means of changing the status quo in the U.S. and changing the world .
 Many terrorist groups hide their identity and report to no superiors . Looking like self-funded criminal gangs with no ranks and uncertain allegiances, many hide their identities .
 Bush Doctrine is the declaration that the U.S. intended to behave globally in terms of its perceived national self-interests . Bush Doctrine would consider preemptive military action against any perceived security threat to defeat it before it could attack the United States .
 The threat facing civilization after September 11, 2001, was described by then U.S. President George W Bush as a network of terrorist groups .
 Terrorist groups are a type of transnational nonstate actor, distinguished by using violence as their primary method of exercising influence . Terrorists use violence to exercise influence in order to exert influence .
 U.S. has often financed, trained, equipped, and provided sanctuary for terrorists whose activities serve foreign policy goals . States often finance, train, equip and provide sanctuary for terrorist activities .
 The practice of state-sponsored terrorism is among the charges that the U.S. leveled against Iraq prior to toppling Saddam Hussein in 2003 . It continues to apply to Cuba, Iran, Sudan, Sudan and Syria, and Syria .
 Without agreement on the character and causes of global terrorism, a consensus on the best response is unlikely . However, disagreement about the character, causes of terrorism remain pronounced .
 The plague of the new global terrorism cannot be eradicated until its sources are understood . Much like a disease that cannot be treated until it is accurately diagnosed, the plague of terrorism cannot eradicate until its source is understood .
 Those persuaded by one image of terrorism are drawn to certain counterterrorism policies . Those holding a different image recommend contrary policies, experts say .
 constructivist theorists remind us that what we see depends on what we expect, what we look at, and what we wish to see . What we expect depends on expectations, what people expect, and how we see .
 Consider the diametretrically opposed views of whether repression or conciliation is the most effective counterterrorist policy . Consider the views of those who oppose repression and conciliation .
 Rather than condoning military strikes aimed at exterminating the practitioners of terrorism, they endorse conciliatory policies designed to reduce terrorism’s appeal . The U.S. government has been criticized by some of the world's most prominent politicians .
 The history of terrorism indicates that there is no single counterterrorist orthodoxy on strategic questions . No canon with strict guidelines running from ultimate goals to intermediate objectives to specific tactics .
 Strategic thinking about the use of terrorism in asymmetric warfare has evolved in response to new technologies, new targets of opportunity, and new counterterrorist policies . “Terrorists whose attacks on civilian targets outnumbered attacks on military targets systematically failed to achieve their policy objectives”
 The perpetrators of terrorism are not mindless, they have shown that they have long-term aims . They have shown they have rationally calculate how different operations can accomplish their purposes . The perpetrators have shown how different attacks can accomplish different operations .
 Terrorists' ability to plan, execute, and learn from these operations that makes today's terrorists so dangerous, he says . Terrorists are able to plan and execute operations that make them dangerous, says the author .
 Exposure to terrorism can encourage political exclusionism and threaten the principles of democratic governance, according to the author of the book .
 Terror creates an enormous challenge to the fabric of democratic societies . Alongside heavy losses and fear, terror creates a huge challenge to democracy . Terror creates a challenge to democratic societies, says the author .
 In many cases, there is a difficult inner tension between the fundamental need to feel secure and the aspiration to sustain democratic values and preserve democratic culture . In some cases, the tension is between the need for security and preserving democratic values .
 In times of terrorist threat and severe losses, rage is often aimed at minority groups and their members . Anger is aimed at those who are not able to confront the perpetrators of terrorism . Anger often occurs in times of terrorism and severe loss .
 This rage can be easily translated into support for nondemocratic practices in dealing with minorities . This rage is easily translated to support for non-democratic practices . The rage can also be traced back to the U.S.
 Armed aggression poses a threat of huge proportions to the global future, says President Obama . Armed aggression is a threat to the future of the world, says Obama . The U.S. should not engage in armed aggression, he says .
 It is difficult not to recognize that warfare in all its forms is an extremely dangerous threat to the world, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: 'Warfare in all forms is a dangerous threat'
 The magnitude of armed aggression raises questions about why wars occur . U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his actions in Iraq .
 The question provokes a more fundamental set of related questions about the causes of aggression generally . The question is whether aggression can be attributed to aggression in the United States .
 Consider some of the major contending hypotheses and theories about the sources from which armed conflicts arise . Consider the major theories of armed conflicts .
 There’s nothing quite like a protracted war to shift the landscape of existence . The war is a protracted battle for the U.S. right now .
 In the wake of 9/11, a new conventional wisdom arose: The only way to defeat terrorists is to attack them . Donald Rumsfeld: “If the learned a single lesson from 9-11, it should be that the only way of defeating terrorists is ... to attack
 "You simply cannot defend in every place at every time against every technique," says Paul Scholes . "It is not easy to defend every place, every time," he says .
 This statement reflects the view that even if appeasement is tempting, the only way to respond is relentlessly and thoroughly . This statement expresses the view of Mr. Obama .
 Some argue that to truly undermine terrorism, we must address the underlying conditions that give it appeal . Others argue that we need to address these underlying conditions to undermine terrorism .
 Efforts to defeat Al Qaeda in Afghanistan must include the establishment of a government that can meet the needs of the people, and jobs that provide security and an alternative to fighting . Efforts must also include the creation of an alternative government that provides security and jobs .
 Exactly what approach to take to control the new global terrorism remains controversial . The U.S. government's approach to control terrorism is controversial .
 Many experts question the U.S. characterization of the problem and the ambitious crusade it undertook, including skeptical allies . The United States needs allies on whom the United States depends if the antiterror war is to be won .
 To conduct a worldwide war requires an enduring commitment at high costs, says President Obama . "To conduct a global war requires enduring commitment," says Obama .
 Proposals for an effective and just response to the new global terrorism differ, as do recommendations about how the world can most effectively reduce the probability that 9/11 will be repeated .
 Counterterrorism strategists often fail to distinguish different types of terrorist movements and their diverse origins . What makes counterterrorism so problematic is that strategists don't distinguish different groups of terrorists .
 Counterterrorism strategies construct in the abstract, with a single formula, rather than tailoring approaches for dealing with terrorism’s alternate modes . Therefore they construct counterterrorist strategies in the . abstract, they say .
 Your search for solutions will necessarily spring from incompatible assumptions you make about terrorism’s nature and sources . These assumptions will strongly affect your conclusions about the wisdom or futility of contemplated remedies .
 A counterterrorist program that may succeed in one location may backfire in another . Counterterrorism program may succeed but backfire may also fail in another place . A counterterror program that succeeds in one place may fail elsewhere .
 Throughout history, efforts have been made to explain why people engage in organized violence . Threats have been cited as reasons for violence in the past .
 Some causes directly influence the odds of war . Others are remote and indirect, creating explosive background conditions that enable any one of more proximate factors to trigger violence .
 All wars originate from the decisions of the leaders of states or transnational nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations . Likewise, in a sense, all wars originated from the decision of the leadership of states, such as terrorism, the author says .
 A good starting point for explaining why warfare occurs is to consider the relationship of armed aggression to the choices of individual leaders . So a good start point is to look at the relationship between armed aggression and individual leaders' decisions .
 The repeated outbreak of war has led some to conclude that aggression is an instinctive part of human nature that stems from humans’ genetic psychological programming . Sigmund Freud concluded that aggression stems from human psychological programming.
 Ethologists are joined in their interpretation by adherents of realist theory who believe that all humans are born with an innate drive for power that they cannot avoid . Realist theory says that this instinct leads to competition and war .
 They accept the sociological premise suggested by Charles Darwin’s theories of evolution and natural selection . They therefore accept the idea of evolution as a sociological principle .
 Natural selection eliminates traits that interfere with successful competition . Life entails a struggle for survival of the fittest, and natural selection eliminates the traits that hinder competition . Natural selection is the result of the struggle to survive in a competitive world .
 To realists, pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, which they see as aggressive and power seeking . Realists see pacifism as counterproductive because they see aggression as aggressive .
 pacifism rejects the primary realist policy instrument for ensuring state security . Additionally, by ruling out military action, pacifism also rejects the role of military action .
 Most people reject killing on ethical grounds, rejecting killing as evil, and neither murdering nor accepting others’ killing on behalf of the state or any other cause . Most people, of course, do not . Most of them reject killing, rejecting it as evil .
 In fact, at some fundamental genetic level, human beings are wired to seek consensus, not conflict, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: At some fundamental level, humans are wired not to engage in conflict .
 Genetics fails to explain why individuals may be belligerent only at certain times, research shows . Liberal theory and behavioral social science research suggest that such behavior is not genetic .
 Social Darwinism’s interpretation of the biological influences on human behavior can be countered by examining why people cooperate and act morally . People cooperate, act morally, according to social Darwinism .
 The nature versus nurture debate regarding the biological bases of aggression has not been resolved . Most social scientists now strongly disagree with the realist premise that because humans are essentially selfish, they are also aggressive and murder .
 Aggression is a propensity acquired early in life as a result of socialization, socialization . Aggression was acquired by socialization and socialization early in childhood . Aggressive behavior can be attributed to socialization of children .
 Individuals' willingness to sacrifice their lives in war out of a sense of duty to their leaders and country is one of history’s puzzles . Individuals’ willingness to commit their lives to their country is a puzzle, historian says .
 Self-sacrifice stems from learned beliefs that some convictions are worth dying for, such as loyalty to one’s own country . Clearly, this self-sac sacrifice stems from . learned beliefs . that some conviction are worth . Dying for loyalty to your own country is worth worth dying
 Human nature does not make human nature a cause of war, writes David Frum . Human nature is not a cause for war, he says, even if learned habits of obedience are grounds for participation in aggression authorized by others .
 This suggests that factors beyond national character (the inborn collective traits of particular peoples) better explain why certain countries tend to engage in organized violence . The study suggests that . factors beyond . national character better explain . why certain . countries tend . to engage . organized violence.
 Armed aggression occurs most often as a result of the choices leaders make, not because of the popular preferences of their entire societies . Armed aggression most often occurs because of leaders' decisions, not their popular preferences, experts say .
 To generalize from the whole to the part is to commit what demographers and statisticians call a logical ecological fallacy . Demographers call it a logical fallacy .
 The opposite, what logicians call the individualistic fallacy, is also a mental error . Logicians call it the individualist fallacy, and the opposite is the opposite .
 We cannot generalize safely about the beliefs or behavior of individual leaders . We cannot ascribe them to the prevailing preferences of the collective cultures and states that each of them headed .
 What should be obvious is that some of the foreign policy decisions by leaders are immoral, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Many foreign policy decisions by countries’ leaders are the outcome of flawed decision-making processes . They fail to form to the rational choice model of foreign policy decision making .
 Even intelligent and moral leaders are sometimes prone to make unnecessarily high-risk decisions to wage war . They are pressured through groupthink by influential advisers within their decision-making group .
 This observation about the determinants of leaders’ choices about war and peace directs attention to domestic factors that encourage some states to engage in foreign aggression .
 Conventional wisdom holds that variations in states’ governments, sizes, ideologies, locations, geographical locations, population dynamics, ethnic homogeneity, wealth, economic performance, military capabilities, and level of educational attainment influence whether they will engage in war . States’ internal characteristics influence whether
 We next examine some theories about the internal characteristics of states that influence leaders’ choices regarding the use of force .
 State-level analysis assumes that differences in the types or categories of states determine whether they will engage in war . Implicit in this approach to explaining armed aggression at the state level of analysis is the assumption .
 Armed aggression has often been an instrument through which states have been given—or denied—birth . Armed aggression is often an instrument of statelessness . The U.S. has been accused of using aggression to deny birth of states .
 New states, not long-lasting ones, are the most likely to experience civil wars . New states are also likely to initiate foreign wars and initiate wars .
 Newly independent countries usually go through a period of political unrest following their acquisition of sovereignty and independence as members of the community of states . Newly-independent countries usually experience political unrest after acquiring sovereignty .
 Foreign disputes often expand into larger wars because they have frequently provoked great power intervention, or external interference by other states or nonstate IGOs into the opposed countries’ internal affairs . Such foreign disputes frequently expand into bigger wars because of their nature .
 The high levels of civil wars and wars between neighboring states throughout the Global South may be explained by the fact that nearly all of these less developed countries have recently gained independence from colonialism, many through revolutions . Many of the less developed nations in the South gained independence through revolutions, many of them
 Countries’ behavior is strongly influenced by the cultural and ethical traditions of their peoples . Cultural Traditions and Nationalism are important factors in nationalism .
 Most governments encourage their populations to glorify the state and accept whatever decisions their leaders claim are necessary for national security, including warfare against adversaries . Instead of glorifying the state, most governments encourage people to accept what leaders claim is necessary .
 Advocates of the cultural origins of war argue that most people in most societies live an everyday experience of disengagement, or “numbness,” that disinclines them to oppose their leaders’ decisions to wage war . Advocates say people in society live an
 This leads many to critique nationalism, but many defend it as a virtue that makes for unity and solidarity within a country . This leads to many to say nationalism is a virtue, not a virtue .
 Whatever its consequences, nationalism is widely seen as perhaps the most powerful force in today's world . The idea and ideology animates the constructed images of many .
 Under the fascist dictatorship of Adolf Hitler, the Nazi government glorified the state and claimed that the German people were a superior race . Hitler's rise to power and its lessons can be traced back to the Nazi state .
 What followed from this extreme form of nationalism was a ruthless German world war and campaign of genocide . Six miilion Jews and other ethnic minorities were exterminated by the Nazis .
 United States troops under the command of General George Patton liberated the concentration camp at Buchenwald in May 1945 . But not in time to save the lives of the prisoners whom the Nazi guards had put to death in the gas chambers .
 Gender roles supported by realist values contribute to the prevalence of militarism and warfare, feminist theory contends . Realist gender roles contribute to prevalence of warfare and militarism, according to theory .
 To constructivist theorists, the penchant for warfare does not evolve in a vacuum but is produced by the ways in which societies shape their populations’ beliefs and norms .
 Many governments, through the educational programs they fund in schools, indoctrinate militaristic values in their political culture that condone the practice of war . Many governments fund militarism in schools and other institutions, such as schools .
 In a world of diverse national cultures, messages of obedience and duty to make sacrifices to the state through such cultural conditioning are common . Ironically, in a diverse national culture, these messages are common. Ironically, they are common in the world of nations .
 States disseminate the belief that their right to make war should not be questioned . States believe that ethical principles of religious and secular philosophies prohibiting violence should be disregarded .
 Critics stress existence of powerful institutions that prepare individuals to subconsciously accept warfare as necessary and legitimate .
 It accounts for the fact that the probability of violence increases in cultures in which gender discrimination, inequality, and violence toward women are an accepted way of life, says author .
 A country’s level of economic development affects the probability of its involvement in war and armed revolution . Poverty and relative Deprivation affects the likelihood of an armed revolution in a country .
 discontent with globalization and foreign economic liberalization can result in violent protest and civil war . Underdevelopment is a statistically significant predictor of war, says Bussmann and Schneider .
 Armed aggression, often an angry response to frustration, is a product of relative deprivation . People’s perception that they are unfairly deprived of the wealth and status that they rightly deserve in comparison with others .
 Violence erupts so frequently because hundreds of millions “belong to groups that face some form of cultural exclusion and are disadvantaged or discriminated against relative to others in their country, the U.N. says . The United Nations says violence erupts because of groups that are disadvantaged .
 The same is true for national images of relative deprivation between countries . The images are true for the United States and other countries .
 The probability of armed aggression is the highest in the Global South, where people’ expectations of what they deserve are rising more rapidly than their material rewards . This is because the existing gap in the distribution of wealth and opportunities is widening in the region .
 The relationship between poverty and armed aggression is all the more pronounced in countries where there is a “youth bulge,” where a large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security .
 The most impoverished countries have been the least prone to start wars with their neighbors . Poverty always breeds armed aggression, note that poverty always breeds aggression .
 The poorest countries cannot vent their frustrations aggressively because they lack the military or economic resources to do so . The poorest nations are unable to vent their frustration because of their lack of military and economic resources . The poor do not have access to the military, economic and political resources .
 This does not mean that the poorest countries will always remain peaceful . The poorest nations will always be peaceful, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If the past is a guide to the future, impoverished countries that develop economically will be the most likely to acquire arms and engage in future external wars . impoverished countries will be most at risk of engaging in external wars, says the author .
 This signals looming dangers if the most rapidly growing Global South economies direct their growing resources toward armaments rather than investing in sustainable development . This signals a growing danger if they direct their resources to armaments instead of investing in development .
 The decision in 1998 by both Pakistan and India to acquire nuclear weapons could be followed by other restless countries, such as oil-rich Iran . The decision was made by Pakistan in 1998 .
 The likelihood that a country will undergo armed aggression is strongly affected by key characteristics of its geography, such as low supplies of cropland, fresh water, and treasured natural resources such as oil and gas reserves .
 Large numbers of youth concentrated in large cities and a lack of environmentally sustainable growth increase the odds of civil war . Where there are large numbers of unemployed youth concentrated, the odds increase dramatically .
 Shown are the projected locations of such demographic stress where the likelihood of civil war is expected to be high through the year 2010 under way . Shown here are the areas of such areas of demographic stress .
 A number of demographic factors contribute to the onset of armed aggression . Demographic stress is one of the factors contributing to the rise in armed aggression.
 Map 7. shows that the risk of civil war is greatest in those countries in which population dynamics impact heavily on living conditions . Map 7 shows the risk is the greatest in countries where population dynamics are at a high level .
 The rate of urban population growth and the rate of death among working-age adults are predictors of the outbreak of armed rebellion . For example, such variables are rate of growth and death rates among working age adults .
 Most Global South countries agree with the realists’ thesis that weapons contribute to their security . It is questionable whether the acquisition of military power leads to peace or war, but clearly most countries agree .
 As Global South countries concentrate their budgets on equipping their militaries, many worry that war will become more frequent before it becomes less so . The Global South is focusing its budgets on training and equipment .
 The relationship between changes in military capabilities and war occurred over centuries in Europe . One clue comes from examination of the relationship between war and military capabilities .
 During its transition to the peak of development, Europe was the location of the world’s most frequent and deadly wars . Europe was also the site of the most frequent, deadly wars.
 Not coincidentally, this happened when the developing states of Europe were most energetically arming in competition with one another . Developed states were most energy-intensively arming each other in Europe .
 Great powers with the largest armed forces were the most involved in, and most often initiated, war . Perhaps as a consequence, the great powers often initiated war . Great powers were often involved in war .
 interstate war has not occurred in Europe since 1945 . Since 1945, with the exception of war among the now-independent units of the former Yugoslavia and between Russia and Georgia, interstate war hasn't occurred since 1945.
 As the European countries moved up the ladder of development, they moved away from war with one another . The European countries have been at odds for decades .
 If the Global South follows the model of Europe before 1945, we are likely to see a sea of Global South violence surrounding a European island of peace and prosperity .
 Communist theoreticians claimed capitalism was the primary cause of imperialistic wars and colonialism . Revolution in 1917, communist theorists claimed that capitalism was a major cause of colonialism and imperialism . Communist theorists said capitalism was to blame for the rise of colonialism .
 Lenin’s 1916 explanation of World War I as a war caused by imperialistic capitalists’ efforts “to divert the attention of the laboring masses from the domestic political crisis” of collapsing incomes under capitalism, he said . Lenin: War was a war to divert attention
 According to communist theory of imperialism, capitalism produces surplus capital . According to the communist theory, capitalism produced surplus capital. According to Marxists, this is a form of capitalism .
 The need to export it stimulates wars to capture and protect foreign markets . The need for exports stimulates wars against each other to capture the foreign market .
 laissez-faire economics rationalized militarism and imperialism for economic gain . The U.S. has been in the throes of an economic crisis in the Middle East for decades .
 Marxists believed that the best way to end international war was to end capitalism . Citing the frequency with which wealthy capitalist societies militarily intervened on foreign soil for capital gain, Marxists thought that the end of capitalism was the end to international war .
 Commercial liberalism contends that free-market systems promote peace, not war . Commercial liberalism says free-markets promote peace not war, but war .
 Defenders of capitalism have long believed that free-market countries that practice free trade abroad are more pacific . Free-market nations practice free-trade abroad are less pacific than other countries, they say .
 Commercial enterprises are natural lobbyists for world peace because their profits depend on it, author says . The reasons are multiple, but they center on the premise that commercial enterprises are naturally lobbyists for peace . Commercial enterprises should be natural lobbyists, he says .
 War interferes with trade, blocks profit, destroys property, causes inflation, consumes scarce resources, and necessitates big government, counterproductive regulation of business activity, and high taxes . It also requires big government and counterproductive regulation, high taxes, and big government . It is necessary for war
 As government regulation of internal markets declines, prosperity increases, fewer wars will occur . By extension, this reasoning continues, as government regulation declines, economic prosperity increases .
 Conclusions depend in part on perceptions regarding economic influences on international behavior, in part because alternative perspectives focus on different dimensions of the linkage . Conclusions are based on perceptions of economic influences in international behavior .
 This controversy was at the heart of the ideological debate between East and West during the Cold War . The relative virtues and vices of two radically different economic systems were uppermost in people’s minds .
 The end of the Cold War did not end the historic debate about the link between economics and war . The Cold War was not the end of a Cold War era, but the link remains .
 Type of Government Realist theories discount the importance of government type as an influence on war and peace . Realist theory: Government type is an influence in war, peace and war .
 As Immanuel Kant argued in 1795, when citizens are given basic human rights such as choosing their leaders through ballots, these democracies would be less likely to initiate wars than would countries ruled by dictators and kings .
 This is because a government accountable to the people would be constrained by public opinion from waging war . This would be because of public opinion, a government would not be able to wage war .
 Kant was joined by other liberal reformers, such as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Woodrow Wilson in the United States .
 Madison pictured an ‘empire of liberty’ (as Madison pictured a growing community of liberal democracies) as one freed of the curse of war . The entire past pattern of belligerent international relations would be replaced by a new pacific pattern, he says .
 These liberal predictions have been fulfilled by the passage of time since they were first advanced, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "Liberal predictions have not been fulfilled"
 Democracies unlikely to engage in any kind of militarized disputes with each other or to let any such disputes escalate into war . This pattern provides the cornerstone for the democratic peace proposition .
 Pairs of democratic states have been only one-eighth as likely as other kinds of states to threaten to use force against each other . Only one-tenth as likely actually to do so .
 Established democracies fought no wars against one another during the entire 20th century . Established nations fought no war against each other during that period . The U.S. did not engage in any wars against other nations .
 The more democratic each state is, the more peaceful relations there are likely to be, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 Democracies are more likely to employ ‘democratic’ means of peaceful conflict resolution . Democracies use peaceful means of conflict resolution in order to avoid violence .
 They are readier to reciprocate each other’s behavior, to accept third-party mediation or good offices in settling disputes . They are also more likely to accept binding arbitration and adjudication, and to accept good offices .
 Statistical analyses of countries’ behavior have shown that democracies’ peaceful relations toward each other are not spuriously caused by some other influence such as sharing high levels of wealth, or rapid growth, or ties of alliance .
 The phenomenon of peace between democracies is not limited just to the rich industrialized states of the Global North . The phenomenon is not just limited to rich industrialized countries, it is said .
 The fact that leaders in elective democracies are accountable to public approval does not guarantee that they will not use force to settle disputes with other democracies . It is not the case that they are not using force against other democracies, it is the case .
 In 2009 the fragility of democratic institutions was illustrated by the sham reelection of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in Iran . In 2009, the fragile democracy in Iran was demonstrated by the shame reelection of the president .
 Ahmadinejad won 63 percent of the vote, according to the official result . Analysts had predicted a close race between the incumbent and challenger Mir Hosein Mousavi . Mousavi won the election by 63 percent .
 Most Iranians believe that electoral fraud occurred on an enormous scale . Three days after the election, on June 15, 2009, hundreds of thousands of Iranians took to the street in protest .
 The pillars of the Islamic Republic’s pretensions of democracy were shaken . The government responded with a brutal crackdown that crushed dissent and restricted the opposition .
 After more than two weeks of protest, the government succeeded in quelling the massive demonstrations that challenged Ahmadinejad’s legitimacy . Hardliners called for demonstrators to be shown no mercy .
 Three “waves” in growth of ‘electoral democracy’ worldwide, with competitive and regular multi-party elections conducted openly without massive voting fraud . That has changed in a major giobal transformation, occurring in three ‘waves’ in three "waves�
 Whether this dramatic transformation will produce peace is being tested by the world's first superpower .
 Leading opposition presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi protested at a mass rally in Azadi square in Tehran, Iran .
 The government enacted a clampdown on protesters by the army and police, leaving the opposition with few options and widespread discontent . The opposition has few options but widespread discontent with the government's crackdown .
 This discussion of the characteristics of states that influence their proclivity for war does not exhaust the subject . This discussion is not exhausting the subject. It is a good way to explain the characteristics that influence war .
 Many believe that the nature of the global system is even more critical . But, however important domestic influences might be as a source of war, many believe that global influences are more important .
 The Global System Realism emphasizes that the roots of armed conflict rest in human nature . It emphasizes that human nature is the source of conflict in conflict .
 For realists, wars can occur not only because some states prefer war to peace, but also because of unintended consequences of actions by those who prefer peace to war and are more interested in preserving their position than in enhancing it .
 Even defensively motivated efforts by states to provide for their own security through armaments, alliances and deterrent threats are often perceived as threatening and lead to counteractions and conflict spirals that are difficult to reverse .
 International anarchy or absence of institutions for global governance may promote war’s outbreak . International anarchy, or the absence of global governance, may promote the outbreak .
 anarchy fails to provide a complete explanation of changes in the levels of war and peace over time or why particular wars are fought . Anarchy fails to explain changes in levels of peace and war over time .
 To capture war’s many global determinants, consider also how and why global systems change . To capture the many global . determinants of war, consider how and . why global . systems change. Consider also how . and why . global system change.
 This requires exploring the impact of such global factors as the distribution of military capabilities, balances of power, the number of alliances and international organizations, and the rules of international law . This requires exploration of such factors such as distribution of capabilities and balance of power .
 At issue is how the system’s characteristics and institutions combine to influence changes in war's frequency . At issue: How the system's characteristics, institutions and institutions influence changes .
 World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, and the U.S. attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War . The successive waves of terrorism and war in the Middle East were little more than one .
 The frequency of past wars is correlated with the incidence of wars in later periods . War appears to be contagious and its future outbreak is inevitable, the author says . War is contagious and future outbreak of war is inevitable .
 Those believing in war’s inevitability often cite the historical fact that war has been so repetitive . Those who believe in war's inevitability cite the fact that it's so repetitive, war has so much repetition .
 The fact that a war precedes a later one does not mean that it caused the one that followed . War precedes and precedes wars, but it doesn't mean it caused a later war, says historian .
 Many scholars reject the deterministic view that history is destiny . History is destiny, with outcomes caused by previous events, they say .
 They embrace the bargaining model of war, which sees war as a product of rational choice weighing anticipated costs against benefits . The bargaining model is based on the rational choice between anticipated costs and benefits of war .
 War’s recurrence throughout history does not necessarily mean we will always have it . War recurrence has recurrence in history, but it doesn’t necessarily mean it will always happen again . War is a recurrence of recurrence, but not necessarily a repeat .
 Some societies have never known war and others have been immune to it for prolonged periods . War is not a universal institution; some societies have not known war . Some societies are immune to war, others have never seen war .
 Since 1945 the outbreak of armed aggression between states has greatly declined, despite the large increase in the number of independent countries . Moreover, since 1945, armed aggression has also declined .
 The bargaining modei of war is an interpretation of war’s onset as a choice by the initiator to bargain through aggression with an enemy in order to win on an issue or to obtain things of value, such as territory or oii. This indicates that armed conflict is not
 When changes have occurred in the major states’ military capabilities, war has often resulted . These trends notwithstanding, when changes occurred in major state’s military capabilities have often resulted in war .
 Although not inevitable, war has been likely whenever competitive states’ power ratios have narrowed . War has not been inevitable, but it is likely whenever a competitive state’s power ratio has narrowed .
 Power transition theory is the theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival’s capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power . As Michelle Benson explains, “this theory has proven itself to be the most successful structural theory
 established powers ruled by risk-accepted leaders are often willing to employ force to put the brakes on their relative decline . Conversely, established powers are willing to use force to stop the decline of these countries .
 When advancing and retreating states seek to cope with the changes in their relative power, war becomes especially likely . War between the rising challenger and the declining power has become especially likely, says historian .
 The rapid changes in the power and status that produced the division of Europe among seven great powers are often interpreted as the tinderbox from which World War I ignited . For example, the divisions in Europe among great powers often (along with alliances they nurtured) are interpreted as a t
 Rapid shifts in the global distribution of military power have often preceded outbursts of aggression, especially when the new distribution nears approximate equality and thereby tempts rivals to wage war against their hegemonic challengers .
 Transition in states’ relative capabilities can potentially lead the weaker party to start a war in order to either overtake its rival or protect itself from domination .
 The uncertainty created by a rough equilibrium prompts the challenger’s effort to wage war against a stronger opponent . Presumably, the uncertainty is the result of the rough equilibrium in the world .
 World history seesaws between long cycles of war and peace . The absence of a clear trend in its frequency since the late fifteenth century suggests that world history seesaw .
 Long-cycle theory seeks to explain how an all-powerful invisible hand built into the global system's dynamics causes peaks and valleys in the frequency with which major wars have erupted periodically throughout modern history .
 Long-cycle theory draws insights from the observation that a great power has risen to a hegemonic position about every eighty to one hundred years . The theory is based on the observation of that a large power rises to a dominant position about about 80 to 100 years .
 Over the past five hundred years, five great powers have risen to controi the giobal system . In time each former hegemonic ieader's top status eventuaiiy and a new rivai surfaced and surfaced and fought to be the next leader .
 Portugal and the Netherlands rose at the beginning of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries . The United States became a world leader at the end of World War II and regained its position of global supremacy after the Cold War ended .
 During their reigns, these hegemonic powers monopolized military power and trade and determined the system’s rules . During this period, they monopolized the military, trade and ruled the world .
 In each cycle, overcommitments, the costs of empire, and the appearance of rivals led to the delegitimation of the hegemon’s authority . The appearance of rivaling rivals and the collapse of power globally led to a deconcentration of power in the Middle
 A “global war” has erupted after a long period of peace in each century since 1400 . As challengers to the hegemon’s rule grew in strength, a ‘global war has erupted’
 At the conclusion of each previous general war, a new world leader emerged dominant, and the cyclical process began anew . At the end of each war, the world leader became dominant .
 Theory of power cycles contends that the growth and decline of national power holds the key to understanding the occurrence of extensive wars . Brock Tessman and Steve Chan summarize and explain; The theory of power .
 Changes in national power tend to follow a regular pattern of ascendance, maturation, and decline . These trajectories reflect the major states’ relative competitiveness in the international system .
 When these states encounter an unexpected reversal in the direction or rate of change in their power trajectory, they are subject to various psychological impulses or judgmental challenges that increase the danger of extensive wars . The danger is that these states will be subject to an unexpected reversality .
 The larger the number of major states that And themselves under the duress of such reversals, the greater the tendency for their disputes to become extensive wars . War weariness hypothesis the proposition that fighting a major war is costly in terms of iost iives and income is costly .
 Long-term downswings and recoveries in business cycles profoundly affect subsequent behaviors and conditions . War wars will produce after effects that may last for generations, says John Sutter .
 War seems to be influenced by learning and forgetting over time . Because it takes time to move through these stages, it takes a long time to learn and forget .
 War between states is disappearing, and this inspires hope among optimists that it will vanish from human history . War between state and war is disappearing. This inspires optimists to believe it will disappear from history .
 As security studies experts predict, war may well be ceasing to commend itself to human beings as a desirable or productive, let alone rational, means of reconciling their discontents . “Unlike breathing, eating or sex, war is not something that is somehow required by the human condition
 All of humanity is endangered because of the threat of war between states . However, that threat remains, and because another major war could occur again, all of humanity could be endangered .
 The specter of international terrorism casts a very dark shadow over the world’s future . And, of course, it also casts a dark shadow on the future .
 "Your life and livelihood are certain to be threatened by the continuing onset of armed aggression. But the sad news is that your life is likely to be in danger," says the author .
 Much of world history is written about the causes and consequences of armed aggression from the vantage point of all peoples’ and professions’ perspectives . That threat imperils the future and affects all other aspects of world politics, which is why much of history has been written .
 And, to those royal murderers, whose mean thrones are brought by crimes of treachery and gore. And to those . And to . those . whose mean . thrones brought by . crimes of . treachery or . gore .
 In order to reduce and possibly eliminate, the plague of armed aggression in the world, it is necessary for us to first understand what drives the occurrence of violent conflict . Yet in order for us, we need to understand the causes of conflict in order to prevent it happening .
 In this chapter you also have the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed aggression that theorists have constructed to explain why armed aggression in its various forms erupts .
 It is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that you will next consider . It is also the alternative path to peace and security that you should consider .
 In Chapters 8 and 9, we examine the vision realism advances about dealing with the threat of war . We examine arms, military strategy, alliances, alliances and the balance of power .
 Throughout history, countries have been beguiied by bombs as a method for backing their enemies into surrender .
 Reaiists regard the prudent use of armed force as a powerfui instrument for waging war and projecting military power in world politics . Reaiist regard the use of force as an instrument to waging war, projecting power .
 The method was successfully used by the U.S. and NATO against Serbia in 1999 and unsuccessfully by Israel in 2006 war against Hezbollah terrorists in Lebanon .
 You would face the awesome responsibility for fulfilling the UN’s Charter to preserve world peace . You would have to fulfill the responsibility for . fulfilling the . UN's Charter to . preserve world . peace .
 Looking at the globe, you would likely see that many countries are experiencing armed aggression, and that those wars are highly destructive of life and property . But looking at the world, many countries have experienced armed aggression and that war is highly destructive .
 "Many countries and possibly some transnational terrorist groups now have the capacity to annihilate their enemies with new weapons of mass destruction," he says .
 Many states are living in constant fear of threats to their security while at the same time these armed actors are increasing the military power in their arsenals . And you shudder at the realization that many states are . .
 As a result of the escalating destructive power of modern weapons, you cannot help but wonder about a globe in which the UN members that are most feverishly arming to increase their capacity to resist external and internal threats are the same countries whose national security, or psychological freedom from fear of foreign aggression
 The armaments amassed by each state for what they claim to be defensive purposes are seen by others as threatening, and this has driven the alarmed competitors to undertake, as counter-measures, additional military buildups .
 Policy makers turn to realist theory for guidance in periods when international tension is high . Realist theory is used to explain the meaning of war and peace in the United States .
 The adversaries of the world are not in conflict because they are armed, says President Obama . Obama says the world is not in war because it is armed .
 Richard M Nixon, U.S. President, wrote Realist Approach to War and Peace . "Nearly all states continue to conclude that the anarchical global system requires them, of necessity, to rely on self-help"
 Most states follow the realist roads to national and international security . For this reason, most states follow a realist road to national security .
 In this chapter, you will explore states’ efforts to follow the realist recipes for reducing threats to their national security . You will explore state’s efforts to reduce threats .
 Hobbes advised that successful states are those that hold the “posture of Gladiators; having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another” This chapter introduces the major trends in military spending, the arms trade, and weapons technology that countries are relying on to
 Realists put power in the equation that they believe has, throughout history, driven world politics . The place to begin is to underscore the high place of power that realists put in, say realists . Realists believe that power has, in the form of power, has driven world
 National security is truly a paramount priority for the policy makers responsible for constructing their country’s foreign policy agendas . National security should be a priority for foreign policy makers, the author says .
 Realistic realism recommends that war be placed at the very top of a state’s concerns . To contain dangers, the pursuit of power must be prioritized above all others, the author says .
 Realist theorists have based their thinking and policy recommendations on the belief that all people and states seek power . Realists have long believed that all states and people seek power in order to gain power .
 If you want peace, prepare for war. Premises and Policy Recommendations . Premises Policy Prescriptions .
 No state is to be trusted further than its national interest. Prepare for war. No state should be trusted more than its own interest, says President Obama .
 Standards of right and wrong apply to individuals but not states . In world affairs amoral actions are sometimes necessary for security . Remain vigilant .
 Isolationism is not an alternative to active global involvement. Avoid moralism. Isolation is not a solution to the problems of isolationism. Avoid morality .
 Strive to increase military capabilities and tight rather than submit to subordination . Remain involved and actively intervene in the fight against the Taliban .
 Do not let any other state or coalition of states become predominant. Protect with arms. Do not allow any other country or coalition to become dominant. Protect yourself with arms .
 Negotiate agreements with competitors to maintain a favorable military balance . Preserve the balance of power . Negote with competitors with agreements to maintain the military balance.
 Realists assume that power, which realists assume to be humans’ and states’ primary objective, defies precise definition . That said, this abstraction called power, however, is not a precise definition of power .
 Constructivists recognize that in the broadest sense, power is usually interpreted as the political capacity of one actor to exercise influence over another actor to the first actor’s benefit . Constructivism is a form of power that can be interpreted as a political capacity to exercise power over another
 Most leaders follow realpolitik and operate from the traditional construction that conceives of power as a combination of factors that gives states the capability to promote national interests, to win in international bargaining .
 Power is an ambiguous concept that is difficult to measure . It is defined as the exercise of influence to control others . However, beyond the semantic definition of power as politics, it's difficult to define .
 The answer to this question may predict which party will get its way and which will be forced to make concessions . The answer is whether the parties will get their way or which will have to compromise .
 Analysts rank countries according to the capabilities or resources necessary to achieve influence over others . Analysts estimate the comparative power of states based on the capabilities of countries .
 For such purposes, multiple factors measure countries’ relative power potential . Multiple factors are used to measure a country’s relative power .
 If we could compare each state’s total capabilities, according to this logic, we could then rank them by their relative ability to draw on these resources to exercise influence . We could rank each state's total capabilities by this logic .
 Such a ranking would reveal the global system’s hierarchy of power, differentiating the strong from the weak, the great from the marginal . The capabilities or resources held by a state that is considered necessary to its asserting influence over others are considered necessary .
 Realists see military capability as the central element of state power potential, realists say . Realists say military capability is the central component of state potential .
 Realist theory maintains that the ability to coerce militarily is more important than the . ability to reward favors or to buy concessions is important .
 One way to estimate the power potential of states is to compare the extent to which they spend money on acquiring military capabilities, experts say .
 On this index, the United States is the undisputed military powerhouse in the world . The U.S. is spending for defense at a feverish pace that is leaving all other countries far behind .
 Power potential also derives from factors other than military expenditures, such as military spending .
 Analysts also consider the relative size of a state’s economy, its population and territorial size . Among the so-called elements of power, analysts also consider such capabilities as the relative economy, population, territorial size.
 America's military expenditures have been rising rapidly since 1999, putting the United States far ahead of all other powers . U.S. military expenditures are rising rapidly .
 This commitment to militarization is the principle reason the U.S. is regarded as a true hegemonic superpower, without rival . This commitment is why the United States is considered a hegemon superpower .
 In 2010, U.S. military spending is scheduled to climb again, and includes over $534 billion in base budget, which excludes nuclear expenditures . $130 billion in supplemental appropriations for the war in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 If power potential is measured by territorial size, Russia would be the world's most powerful country . Russia is twice as large as its closest rivals (Canada, China, the United States, Brazil, and Australia, in that order)
 China, India, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, Nigeria and Brazil would be the most powerful countries in the world by 2025 . The UN’s projections for countries’ populations by the year 2025 are based on population projections .
 The leading countries in some dimensions of power potential are not leaders in others because power comes in many forms . The leading nations in some of the world's most powerful countries do not have the same power potential as others .
 There is little consensus on how best to weigh the various factors that contribute to military capability and national power . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 There is no agreement as to what their relative importance should be in making comparisons, or what conditions affect the power potential .
 Such judgments are subjective, as power ratios are not strictly products of measured capabilities, as they are subjective . Such judgments can be made by people who have more to say they have more power than others .
 In addition, power is not a tangible commodity that states can acquire, states can't acquire, it says . Power is not tangible commodity, it is a form of power that states are able to acquire .
 A state can have power over some other actor only when it can prevail over that actor . Power is relational; a state can only have power when it prevails over another actor .
 Both actual and perceived strength determine who wins a political contest, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not a politician. I'm a businessman. I want to make a difference in politics."
 To make a difference, an adversary must know its enemy’s capabilities and its willingness to mobilize those capabilities for coercive purposes . The U.S. needs to know the enemy's capabilities and mobilize those .
 Intentions, especially perceptions, are critically important when making threats . Intentions -- especially perceptions -- are critical to making threats, experts say .
 The mere possession of weapons does not increase a state’s power if its adversaries do not believe it will use them or if they are willing to suffer huge damages to prevail . State does not have weapons if it is willing to use them if it does not believe its adversaries will use
 Historically, those with the largest arsenals have not necessarily triumphed in political conflicts . Historically, the arsenals of the country's most powerful have failed to triumph in the past .
 Weaker states often successfully resist pressure from their military superiors . The U.S. military says it will not tolerate pressure from its superiors . Weaker nations often resist military pressure from superiors .
 Since 1950 weak states have won more than half of all asymmetric wars between belligerents of vastly unequal military strength . In fact, since 1950, they have won over half of the wars in which they are at odds of winning .
 There are many examples of weak transnational actors prevailing in armed conflicts with significantly stronger opponents . There are also examples of strong transnational organizations prevailing in military conflicts with stronger opponents, say experts .
 Another measure of power projection is the number of uniform personnel in sfates’ armies, navies, and air forces . The number of uniforms is a measure of the power projection of a nation .
 The map on the bottom classifies the varying size of each country’s armed forces available for milifary operations . The map is based on each country's size of its military forces available to engage in military operations .
 U.S. superior military power did not prevent North Korea’s seizure of the USS Pueblo in 1968 . North Korea took of American diplomats as hostages a decade later, Iran took hostages . A1 Qaeda terrorist network's 9/11 attack was the result of 9/
 The Soviet Union’s inability, prior to its disintegration, to control political events in Afghanistan, Eastern Europe, or even among its own constituent republics, shows that the impotence of military power is not particular to the United States .
 History is replete with examples of small countries that won wars or defended their independence against much more militarily powerful enemies . Small countries have won wars, defended independence against stronger enemies .
 Switzerland against the Hapsburg Empire, the Netherlands against Spain, and Greece against the Ottomans . Consider the seventeenth century, for example, with Switzerland vs. Spain .
 In each case, intangible factors such as the will of the target population to resist a more powerful army were key elements in the capacity of each of these weaker countries to defend itself .
 Great Britain reluctantly recognized this factor in 1781 when it concluded that the price of reclaiming the far-weaker American colonies was too great . Great Britain decided not to reclaim American colonies .
 The quest for security through arms and the realist belief in military force remain widespread . Nonetheless, the quest for military force remains widespread .
 Security analysts believe military capability is a prerequisite to the successful exercise of coercive diplomacy through the threat of limited force . Most security analysts believe that this is because military capabilities are a prerequisite .
 coercive diplomacy is the use of threats or limited armed force to persuade an adversary to alter its foreign and/ or domestic policies . The use of threat or armed force is a form of coercive diplomacy . Former U.S. President George W Bush asserted that “a dangerous and uncertain world
 The world is spending over $2,785,000 each minute for military preparations . The world spends over $3,000 a minute for each minute preparing for war .
 Historically, rich countries have spent the most money on arms acquisitions, and this pattern has continued . Wealthy countries are spending the most on arms acquisition, but this pattern is continued .
 High-income developed countries’ share of the world total was about 78 percent . Thus, the high-income . developed countries' share of . the world . total was 78 percent, according to the OECD .
 When measured against other factors, the differences became clearer . However, when measured against factors such as the cost of living in the U.S.
 In addition, these two groups’ military spending levels are converging over time . In addition to this, the two groups' military spending is converging . The two groups have been at odds over the years .
 Poor states are copying the past costly military budget habits of the wealthiest states . This trend indicates that poor states copy past military spending habits of wealthy states . Poor states copying past costly defense spending habits, experts say .
 Since 1945, only a handful of states have borne crushing military costs . Only a few states have been burdened with crushing costs since 1945 .
 The others have gained a relative competitive edge by investing in research on the development of goods to export abroad, while conserving resources by relying on allies and global institutions .
 Global military budgets have fluctuated since 1960 . Totai expenditures peaked in 1987, after which they feil about a third until the 9/11 terrorist attacks .
 The miiitary budget of the Giobal South’s developing countries peaked in a 1982-1986 plateau, then declined before rising again to about 14 percent of the world total by 2009 .
 In comparative terms, the United States is slipping by not keeping up with its great power competitors . The U.S. is now facing a “creativity crisis” in education and science, says President Obama .
 Military expenditures incur opportunity costs —when what is gained for one purpose is lost for other purposes . Any particular choice means that the cost of some lost opportunity must be paid .
 Military spending retards economic growth and creates fiscal deficits . Military spending, example, retards growth, creates fiscal deficit .
 The substantial costs of defense can erode national welfare, the authors say . Policy makers hope to defend with military might, they say . The substantial cost of defense is what policy makers want to defend .
 Many analysts argue that “the sources of power are, in general, moving away from the emphasis on military force and conquest that marked earlier eras . Many analysts now argue that . “The sources of . power are ... moving away ... from military force, conquest that marks earlier eras
 In part, this shift is because military force has often proven ineffectual, notably against revisionist states and violent transnational terrorist groups resisting pressure from abroad . The shift is in part because of the lack of military force in the Middle East .
 Intelligence and communications are more critical in fighting counterterrorism than are military capabilities, experts say . Arguably, intelligence and communications is more critical than military capabilities .
 Awareness of the importance of economic competitiveness, environmental protection and human development to a country’s standing in the world has directed increased attention to the nonmilitary underpinnings of national security .
 Soft power is increased when a country's values and conduct are respected throughout the world . These resources provide what is known as soft power — the ability to exercise international influence .
 Unlike so-called hard power associated with military capabilities, soft power is “the ability to achieve goals through attraction rather than coercion” Soft power is the capacity to command global influence when a country’s culture, ideas, and institutions are valued by most other countries . Hard
 Politics requires hard choices about priorities and how public tunds should be spent . Politics requires making hard choices, says CNN's John Sutter .
 One such difficult choice is between ‘guns versus butter’—how to allocate scarce finances for military preparedness as opposed to meeting the human needs of citizens and enabling them to live a secure life .
 The former category looks to arms for national security, and the latter stresses human security . The latter is the latter category, which focuses on human security, not arms .
 Neither goal can be pursued without making some sacrifice for the realization of the other . Neither goal is pursued without sacrificing for the sake of other .
 The relative burden of military spending, the ratio of defense spending to GDP to GDP, is the customary way to measure the sacrifices required by military spending . Defense spending is a key measure of the sacrifices made by the nation's military .
 Many countries allocating high proportions of their total GDP to defense and others spending their wealth to enhance human security . As the map shows, wide variations exist .
 Some comparatively wealthy states bear a heavy burden . Other states that provide a high average income for their citizens have a low average income .
 The citizens of some very poor countries are heavily burdened, whereas those of others are not . Likewise, the citizens of many very poor nations are burdened . The world's poor citizens are not burdened.
 It is difficult to generalize about the relationship between a country’s defense burden and its citizens’ standard of living, human development, or stage of development .
 These skeptics of high military spending believe the high costs can easily reduce citizens’ human security . These skeptics believe the costs of the military can be easily reduced . The skeptics say the cost of military spending is too high .
 These rankings raise serious questions about the true costs of national security . National security is at risk in the U.S.
 The choices in balancing the need for defense against the need to provide for the common welfare are difficult because they involve a necessary tradeoff between competing values . The choices are difficult, but they are necessary to balance competing values, says President Obama .
 Military-spending decisions are highly controversial everywhere . For this reason, military spending decisions are very controversial everywhere.
 In today’s so-called information age, the relative importance of soft power is growing . Soft power is a key part of the U.S. strategy in the world's most powerful nations .
 How governments allocate their revenues reveals their priorities . Similarly, how governments allocate its revenues reveals priorities .
 Many states continue to seek security by spending substantial portions of their national treasures on arms . Examination of national budgets discloses an unmistakable pattern; . Although the sources of global political power may be changing, many states .
 Growing militarization of the United States, the other great powers, and now mobilized nonstate terrorist movements has altered the global distribution of military capabilities . The problem in drfense spending is to figure out how far you should go without destroying from within what you are trying to dfiend
 As a trend in the arms industry, which has increased dramatically as a result of the Iraq war, the growth of private military services enhances military capabilities, as it allows governments to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed .
 During the Cold War, many states sought to increase their security through the purchase of arms produced by suppliers seeking allies and profits from exports . The Cold War saw many states seeking allies, profits from exporting arms .
 Since 1991, when the Cold War ended, and continuing throughout the era of global terrorism that began on 9/11, the total value of all international arms deliveries was $551 billion . Private military services the outsourcing of activities of a miiitaryspecific nature to private companies .
 A persistent trend in a changing world, therefore, has been for the least stable Global South states to spend the largest percentages of their relatively small economies for the purchase of weapons of war .
 The global arms trade has fueled the dispersion of military capability worldwide . Global arms trade fueled the spread of military capabilities worldwide .
 The major recipients of all global arms shipments remain heavily concentrated in a subset of Global South arms purchasers . The world's largest arms recipients are still largely concentrated in the Global South .
 In 2008, weapon deliveries to the top ten recipients accounted for two-thirds of all deliveries in the Global South . Weapons deliveries to top ten recipient accounted for 2.3% of all weapon deliveries in Global South.
 The stream of weapons to these insecure and eager buyers with money to spend is not likely to end soon . The stream is likely to continue for the foreseeable future .
 The continuing global arms trade has led to the globalization of military capabilities throughout the Global North and especially the Global South . The Global South has the largest arms capabilities in the world . The U.S. has a long history of the arms trade .
 Between 2001 and 2008, arms shipments worldwide were a staggering $285 billion . The total value of all arms deliveries by all suppliers has modestly declined since 2004 .
 In 2008, arms deliveries to the Global South accounted for 57 percent of all worldwide arms deliveries . Arms race is the buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other .
 Regional distribution of arms deliveries seems to follow trends in the location of the world’s flash points . The regional distribution of weapons deliveries follows trends in global flash points, experts say .
 Near East is experiencing an intense arms race . With its numerous pairs of competitive states, the Near East has seen an arms race in recent years .
 Countries in the Middle East accounted for only 11 percent of world arms imports in 1967 . That share rose to 18 percent between 2004 and 2008, according to the U.N. Agency .
 The Middle East is not alone as a troubled and insecure region . However, the Middle East has a history of instability in the region .
 Each state’s proportionate share of total weapons purchases is likely to change, depending on the location of the next hot spots and each country’�s involvement in them . Each state will have a share of weapons purchases in proportionate amounts .
 Weapon imports fluctuate sharply from year to year in unstable regions, unstable regions . Economic growth makes financial resources available for arms purchases, such as in economic growth .
 Changes in the activities of arms suppliers are also important . Changes in demand of arms importers is also important for arms importer countries .
 In the post-9/11 global war on terrorism, the U.S. increased its worldwide supply of weapons to countries that agreed to be partners in the ‘coalition of the willing” in wars in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 The United States and Russia dominate the arms export market, supplying 31 and 25 percent of all conventional weapons exports, respectively . The U.S. and Russia supply 31 percent of the conventional weapons export market .
 The U.S. has focused approximately one-third of its exports to the Middle East as a whole . The highest shares of state transfers vary by year but not exceeding 15 percent for any individual state .
 The threat of terrorists acquiring nuclear, ballistic missile, and chemical weapons of mass destruction on the black market through covert suppliers poses a real danger . Terrorists acquire nuclear, missile and nuclear weapons on black market, experts say .
 The extent of the threat is impossible to gauge, however, because this flow of the arms trade is invisible . The flow is invisible, but the extent of this is impossible, says the author .
 Terrorists are widely believed to be actively searching for weapons of mass destruction . Terrorists believed to have been searching for WMDs .
 Companies that provide private military services for hire on the global market are on the rise . Modern-day mercenaries have been likened to modern-day mercenary mercenaries .
 This dilemma was evident during the war in Iraq when employees of the Blackwater security firm killed seventeen Iraqi civilians and did not appear to be subject to either Iraqi, U.S., civilian, or military law . Blackwater employees killed 17 Iraqi civilians .
 As Assistant Defense Secretary during the Reagan administration, Lawrence Korb lamented that “The brakes are off_There is no coherent policy on the transfer of arms.” Korb said .
 Economic gain continues to be an important rationale for foreign military sales . Producers sell arms abroad to subsidize their arms production at home . Arms sales continue to be important for economic gain in the United States .
 U.S. uses arms exports to offset its chronic balance-of-trade deficits and to ensure its lead in the lucrative arms business . Arms exports are used to offset the United States' chronic balance of trade deficits . The United States is using arms exports as a way of offsetting
 The United States government routinely assigns thousands of full-time federal employees to promote U.S. arms deals . The sale of arms is a big trans-border business .
 The military-industrial complex is widely believed to exercise enormous power over U.S. defense budgets and arms sales agreements . It is also believed to have influence over arms sales and defense spending .
 One symptom of the influence of defense contractors is their ability to charge the Pentagon inflated prices for their products . Defense contractors are charged with inflated prices to sell their products to the Pentagon .
 Critics worry about arms manufacturers’ success in lobbying Congress and the Pentagon for high military spending to gain government permission to sell new weapons worldwide . Arms manufacturers seek to increase their profits, but their corporate greed alarms critics .
 Defense contractors increasingly push their production into other countries’ markets as they consolidate their operations and ownership . What is more a sign of the globalization of arms transfers, defense contractors increasingly sell their products everywhere . Defense contractors are increasingly pushing their products into other markets .
 The transfer of arms across borders has produced some unintended and counterproductive consequences . Arms sales in the U.S. have led to some unintended consequences, say experts .
 During the Cold War the U.S. and the Soviet Union thought they could maintain peace by spreading arms to pivotal recipients . For example, the United States and the . Soviet Union believed they could . maintain peace .
 Many recipients went to war with their neighbors or experienced internal rebellion . Yet many of the recipients went on to go to war or experience internal rebellion.
 The toll in lives from the wars in the Global South since 1945 exceeds tens of millions of people . Tens of millions have been killed in the wars since 1945 .
 The import of huge arsenals of weapons aided this level of destruction . Undoubtedly, the import of such weapons aided the destruction . It is not the first time such weapons have been brought into the country .
 The military-industrial complex is a combination of defense estabiishments, contractors who suppiy arms for them, and government agencies that benefit from high military spending . It acts as a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate large expenditures for military preparedness .
 Since 2001, less than three-fifths of U.S. arms have been exported to governments classified by Freedom House as “free’s” Freedom House . Now four fifths of the countries that receive United States arms are classified by the United States State Department as
 The inability of arms suppliers to control the uses to which their military hardware will be put is troubling . Arms suppliers must control the use of military hardware, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The missiles the U.S. supplied to Taliban forces resisting the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion in Afghanistan fell into the hands of terrorists later opposing the United States . This also happened when the Stinger missiles the . United States supplied to . Taliban forces resisted the Soviet . Union�
 Such developments have long-term consequences and are particularly alarming, as in the case of Pakistan, where there is grave concern about the ability of the state to ensure the security of nuclear material . Pakistan's nuclear material has been identified as a source of concern .
 Leading nuclear expert Graham Allison: "The nuclear security of the arsenal is now a lot better than it was" Nuclear security in the U.S. is now "a lot better," Allison says .
 The quest for armaments has created a potentially ‘explosive’ global environment . The widespread quest for weapons technology has created an explosive environment in the world . The search for arms technology has led to the development of weapons technology .
 The description is especially apt when we consider trends in defense expenditures and the arms trade . The destructiveness of modern weapons can be traced to the destruction of modern arms .
 Nuclear Weapons Technological research and development has radically expanded the destructive power of national arsenals . Nuclear weapons have been developed in the past decade .
 Albert Einstein was alarmed by the threat nuclear weapons posed . Einstein's ideas were the basis for the development of nuclear weapons . He was the Nobel Prize-winning physicist whose ideas were used to develop nuclear arms .
 The use of such weapons could not only destroy entire cities and countries but also, conceivably, the world’s entire population . Such weapons could destroy cities, countries and even entire populations .
 Most have been dismantled since the 1986 peak, but 8,392 worldwide remained operational at the start of 2009 . A combined explosive force of at least 1,300,000 Hiroshima atomic bombs is estimated to have been at the peak of 1986 .
 horizontal nuclear proliferation an increase in the number of states that possess nuclear weapons . vertical nuclear proliferation is the expansion of the capabilities of existing nuciear powers to inflict increasing destruction with their nuclear weapons. vertical nuke proliferation is an expansion of existing nuke powers' capabilities . horizontal nuke
 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty seeks to prevent horizontal proliferation by prohibiting further nuclear weapons sales, acquisitions, or production . Treaty is an international agreement that seeks to stop horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 As many as twenty-one other states or NGO terrorist organizations are widely believed to be seeking to join the nuclear club .
 The proliferation of arms is a serious global concern, because the so-called Nth country problem is expected to become an increasing likelihood . The proliferation is a global concern .
 Both horizontal nuclear proliferation (the increase in the number of nuclear states) and vertical nuclear proliferation are probable . Both horizontal and vertical proliferation are likely to occur .
 Consider the successful acquisition of nuclear weapons by India and Pakistan, the conduct of nuclear tests by North Korea, and Iran and Syria’s self-proclaimed aims to acquire nuclear weapons . North Korea and Iran have both successfully acquired nuclear weapons, say experts .
 Nuclear proliferation is likely to continue as the incentives to join the nuclear club and acquire missiles and bombers for their delivery are strong . Argentina, Brazil, Libya, and Taiwan, which once had active nuclear weapons programs, could revive these capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons .
 There is widespread international concern regarding a previously undisclosed uranium enrichment site in Iran that was revealed in 2009 .
 Iran says it is pursuing a peaceful nuclear program . The ability for uranium to be enriched from a low level nuclear fuel to one that provides weapons-grade material is seen by many as a serious threat to global security .
 This sentiment continues to be reflected today by aspiring nuclear powers . This sentiment is reflected today's view of the world's nuclear ambitions .
 Iran and North Korea regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as hypocrisy because it provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others . Many countries regard the treaty as hypocrisy .
 Nuclear-capable states have contributed to the spread of nuclear weapons by providing sensitive nuclear assistance to other non-nuclear states . While the underlying demand for nuclear weapons is rather straightforward, aside from economic motivations, it is less clear why nuclear-capifiable states themselves have contributed .
 Israel built its first nuclear weapon just two years after receiving sensitive nuclear assistance from France in the early 1960s . Israel also received sensitive assistance from the French in the 1960s, but never had a nuclear bomb .
 Pakistan constructed its first nuclear weapon after receiving assistance from China in the early 1980s with its nuclear program .
 Khan operated a black market nuclear proliferation ring in the late 1990s . This is thought to have aided Libya, Iran, and North Korea in efforts to develop nuclear weapons .
 First, the more powerful a state is relative to a potential nuclear recipient, the less likely it is to provide sensitive nuclear assistance . More powerful states are less likely to provide nuclear assistance to potential nuclear recipients .
 States are more likely to provide sensitive nuclear assistance to states with which they share a common enemy . Second, states are likely to help each other in the fight against nuclear weapons, experts say .
 These strategic characteristics of the supplier provide some insight into the nuclear proliferation problem, which is also exacerbated by the widespread availability of materials needed to make a nuclear weapon .
 This is partly because of the widespread use of nuclear technology for generating electricity . Nuclear technology is widely used to generate electricity in Britain .
 Almost eighty new nuclear reactors are now under construction or planned . The number of new operational nuclear reactors is certain to increase . Almost 80 new reactors are currently operational .
 State could choose to reprocess uranium and plutonium, which power plants produce as waste, for clandestine nuclear weapons production .
 Commercial reprocessing reactors produce enough plutonium to make as many as 40,000 nuclear weapons . Commercial reactors are producing enough plutonium for as many of the world's most powerful nukes .
 Conversion of peacetime nuclear energy programs to military purposes can occur either overtly or covertly . India and Pakistan have nuclear power programs that can be converted to military use .
 The safeguards built into the nonproproliferation regime are simply inadequate to detect and prevent secret nuclear weapons development programs . The safeguards are needed to prevent secret weapons development .
 North Korea conducted its second nuclear test in defiance of the United Nations in May . A few weeks later, on May 25, North Korea carried out its second test . The test was the first of its kind since it was carried out in 2009 .
 The United States, along with Russia, China, and other nations, called on North Korea to resume the so-called six-party talks that aimed to provide fuel and other benefits to North Korea if it dismantled its nuclear program . The U.S. and other leading nations called on
 Arms Control Today editor Matthew Bunn says there's not a snowball's chance in hell we’ll eliminate all nuclear weapons from the face of the earth . Bunn: "Not a snowball’s chance" in hell that nuclear weapons will be eliminated .
 Weapons of war are becoming increasingly deadly with ever-greater accuracy . Technology has made it easier to send weapons great distances with ever greater accuracy . The weapons of war have become increasingly deadly in recent years .
 This allows Cold War enemies to launch many warheads on a single missile toward different targets simultaneously and accurately . This allows them to launch missiles at multiple targets simultaneously, accurately .
 One MIRV United States MX Peacekeeper missile could carry ten nuclear warheads . The missile could be enough to wipe out a city and everything else within a fifty-mile radius .
 The world’s combined nuclear inventory grew nearly three times larger than the number of nuclear warheads previously in existence in spite of efforts to limit it . MIRV capability enabled many weapons to be delivered from a singie missiie .
 Technology has led to steady increases in the speed, accuracy, range, and effectiveness of weapons . Other technological improvements have led to increased accuracy and effectiveness .
 Laser weapons, nuclear-armed tactical air-to-surface missiles and stealth air-launched cruise missiles have become a part of the military landscape . They can project force in and wage war from outer space .
 Hexagons represent states that have abandoned their nuclear v/eapons programs . Hexagons represents states that abandoned their nuke programs .
 Aspiring states Squares represent states that have embryonic nuclear weapons programs . Squares are Squares representing countries that have an embryonic nuclear weapon program . Aspiring state Squares represents states with embryonic nuclear programs .
 Since the dawn of the nuclear age, secrets for making nuclear weapons have spread through either intended transfer, leak, or espionage . The secrets of nuclear weapons are spread through intended transfer or leak, and espionage .
 Many others are poised to join the club of nuclear weapon powers, as this figure shows . This figure shows.
 The connections depicted above indicate the flow of information and technology, through either one-way or two-way transfers . The connections are shown to indicate either one way or two way .
 Nuclear proliferation means that nuclear weapons will continue as a key ingredient of national security strategies . National security strategies will continue to prevent fires from racing out of control .
 In the context of modern weaponry, modern weaponry is a psychological barrier . It is designed to prevent even the most intensive forms of conventional combat from escalating into nuclear war .
 The danger is growing that the firebreak is being crossed from both directions . A new generation of near-nuclear conventional weapons capable of levels of violence approximating those of a limited nuclear warhead and a new generation .
 Air Force’s “active denial technology” uses electromagnetic radiation that penetrates clothing, causing water molecules to vibrate and burn skin tissue . Another example is the United States Air Force's ‘active denial tech’ using electromagnetic radiation .
 The Pentagon has considered various nonlethal chemical weapons to disrupt enemy discipline and morale, including aphrodisiacs that would make enemy soldiers sexually irresistible to one another . Nonlethal weapons the wide array of “soft kill,” low-intensity methods of incapacitating an enemy's
 The precision and power of today’s conventional weapons have expanded exponentially, at precisely the moment when the revolution in military technology is leading to ‘the end of infantry” in the computer age . The precision, power and precision of conventional weapons has expanded exponentially .
 They are turning to virtual nuclear arsenals for deterrence of an adversary’s attack . The U.S. is seeking to use virtual nuclear weapons to deter an attack .
 The electromagnetic pulse bomb can immobilize an entire city’s computer and communications systems . Computer viruses of electronic-seating microbytes that can eliminate a country's telephone system . logic bombs that can confuse and redirect traffic on the target country’�s air and rail system .
 The U.S. Air Force’s Commando Solo psychological operations plane can disrupt signals and insert in their place a “morphed” TV program, in which the enemy leader makes unpopular announcements on the screen .
 By the end of 2005 it was 2,400 and it more than doubled the next year . The next year it was more than double the figure .
 Twenty-two different robot systems are now in use on the ground, with prototypes for a variety of others from automated machine guns to robotic stretcher bearers to lethal robots the size of insects .
 The Pentagon is enthusiastic, in part because weapons that are symbols of military might like stealth bombers and nuclear submarines are of little use in today’s “asymmetric” conflicts . Individual soldiers equipped with the latest technologies are needed for search-and-destroy missions .
 Pentagon official: "They're not afraid. They’re not afraid" The Pentagon's Joint Forces Command says robotic forces are "not afraid"
 Technological advances may make obsolete orthodox ways of classifying weapons systems, as well as prior equations for measuring power ratios . Technology advances may also make obsolete ways to classify weapons systems .
 The creation of a range of robotic armed forces to carry out dangerous missions is heralded as a breakthrough in the way weapons are being used . But there are concerns about long-term implications for the robotic forces .
 Some worry that war waged by remote control will become too easy and irresistibly tempting as a means to resolve conflicts . Some worry it will be too easy to use remote control as a weapon of war .
 Biological and Chemical Weapons pose a special and growing threat, especially in the hands of terrorists aiming for mass destruction rather than influencing public opinion . Biological and chemical weapons are a special threat to the world, especially by terrorists .
 These unconventional weapons of mass destruction are sometimes regarded as a “poor man’s atomic bomb” because they can be built at comparatively little cost . Infowar tactics attacks on an adversary's telecommunications and computer networks to penetrate and degrade an enemy whose defense capabilities depend heavily on
 The United States is building a new generation of technologically sophisticated weapons . The U.S. is building new generations of weapons, experts say .
 U.S. soldiers with land mine detectors in Qiqay, Afghanistan, use robots to check for mines, traps, and other weapons that may have been hidden by the Taliban or Al Qaeda fugitives .
 The war in Afghanistan is the first time that robots have been used by the U.S. military for combat purposes . The war is first time the robots have ever been used in combat .
 They are intended to help prevent U.S. casualties and cause widespread injury and death . They are also intended to prevent United States casualties. and causing widespread injury .
 Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, there were fears that the spread of anthrax through the U.S. mail system was the first step in an endless series of future biological warfare by terrorist networks .
 As of May 21, 2009, only Syria, North Korea, Angola, Egypt, and Somalia declined to sign or accede to the Chemical Weapons Convention . Syria is the only country to have signed or acceded to the chemical weapons Convention .
 Iran and Iraq’s use of gas in their eight-year 1980s 1980s war against each other . The use of chemical weapons against its own Kurdish population demonstrates the weaknesses of these legal barriers . Iraq and Iran used chemical weapons in the 1980s and 1990s wars .
 Pervasive insecurity haunts much of the world because there do not exist real supranational controls over the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons . There are no real suprising controls over proliferation of such weapons .
 The twenty-first century has not become the peaceful and prosperous period many people expected . The 20-20th century is not the peaceful, prosperous period people expected, says David Cameron .
 In August 2009, the famous ‘Doomsday Clock’ of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists estimated that the world was only five minutes from nuclear Armageddon . Two minutes closer than when the clock was originally set in 1947 .
 Realists council that what matters greatly in the pursuit of national security are the methods on which states rely on which capabilities they have acquired . However, the possession of overpowering military capabilities does not automatically result in their wise use .
 This question underscores the vital importance of choices about the types of military strategies employed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The dropping of the atomic bomb on Japan on August 6, 1945, is the most important event distinguishing prefrom post-World War II world politics . The atomic bomb dropped on Japan was the most significant event in the world since 1945 .
 In the blinding flash of a single weapon and the shadow of its mushroom cloud, the world was transformed from a “balance of power” to a ‘balance of terror” system . The world was turned into a "balance of terrorism" system, the author says .
 The search for answers was critical because the immediate and delayed effects of a nuclear war were terrifying to contemplate . It was critical to find answers because of the immediate effects of nuclear war .
 Even a short war using a tiny fraction of any great power’s nuclear arsenal would destroy life as we know it . Even a small nuclear war could destroy life in the world .
 “The missiles on board a single SLBM submarine may be enough to initiate nuclear winter” —enough to end human existence . It has been estimated that “the missiles on . board a one SLBM sub may be . enough to start a nuclear winter .
 Weapons of mass destruction have grown since World War II . Strategies have changed with changes with changes in technologies, defense needs, capabilities, and global conditions .
 United States nuclear superiority was the dominant characteristic of this period . The U.S. was dominant in the dominance of the Cold War .
 The second then began and lasted until the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union . The second period of Soviet Union rule lasted until 1991 .
 Growing Soviet military capability was the dominant characteristic of this period, which meant that the U.S. no longer stood alone in its ability to annihilate another country without fear of its own destruction . Growing Soviet capability meant the United States .
 The third phase began after the breakup of the Soviet Union that ended the Cold War . Great powers began to revise their strategic doctrines in the light of new global threats . The great powers began re-evaluating their doctrines after the end of Cold War.
 Countries that possess military preeminence often think of weapons as instruments in diplomatic bargaining . Compellence is a form of diplomacy in the Middle East .
 The U.S. adopted the doctrine of compellence when it enjoyed a clearcut superiority over the Soviet Union .
 The U.S. could exercise influence over enemies simply by demonstrating the existence of its powerful weapons and signalling its willingness to use those weapons . Military capabilities did not have to be used for them to be useful, the author says .
 The United States doctrine of compellence used nuclear weapons as tools of political influence, not for fighting but for convincing others to do what they might not otherwise do . The U.S. doctrine of comprellence used nuclear weapons to persuade others not to fight .
 The United States sought to gain bargaining leverage by conveying the impression that it would actually use nuclear weapons . The U.S. sought to use the impression of using nuclear weapons to gain leverage .
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced brinkmanship during the Eisenhower administration . He deliberately threatened U.S. adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, at the brink of war, they would concede to United States demands .
 Brinkmanship was part of the overall U.S. strategic doctrine known as massive retaliation . Brinksmanship was the United States' strategic doctrine of massive retaliation.
 To contain communism and Soviet expansionism, this doctrine called for a countervalue targeting strategy . Aiming U.S. nuclear weapons at what the Soviets most valued was their population and industrial centers .
 The alternative is a counterforce targeting strategy, which targets an enemy’s military forces and weapons, thus sparing civilians from immediate destruction . Counterforce targeting is the alternative to a counter force targeting strategy . The alternative strategy is to target an enemy's military forces, weapons and weapons .
 Moscow’s ability to deliver nuclear weapons beyond the Eurasian landmass . This demonstrated Moscow's ability to . deliver nuclear . weapons beyond Eurasian . landmass, experts say .
 The United States for the first time faced a nuclear threat to its homeland . Thus, the superpowers’ strategic competition took a new turn, and the U.S. faced a new challenge .
 As U.S. nuclear superiority eroded, policy makers began to question the usefulness of weapons of mass destruction as tools in political bargaining .
 They were horrified by the destruction that could result if compellence should provoke a nuclear exchange . They feared the destruction of the world if a nuclear war broke out .
 Deterrence seeks to dissuade an adversary from undertaking some future action . compellence relies on an offensive coercive threat aimed at persuading an adversary to relinquish something without resistance .
 At the heart of deterrence theory is the assumption that the defender has the ability to punish an adversary with unacceptably high costs if it launches an attack . deterrence theory .
 Key elements of deterrence are the possession of military resources that signal to the adversary that threats of military retaliation are possible . credibility — the belief that the actor is willing to act on its declared threats; and communication — the ability to send a potential aggressor the clear message that the threat will
 The shift from a strategy of compellence to deterrence sped rather than slowed the arms race . Ironically, the shift from the strategy of deterring to deterring has sped up the arms competition .
 A deterrent strategy depends on obtaining the unquestionable ability to inflict intolerable damage on an opponent, says President Obama . The U.S. should be able to inflict unbearable damage on opponents, he says .
 An arming state seeking to deter an enemy must build its weapons to acquire a second-strike capability . This means that an arming state must build weapons that can withstand an adversary’s first strike and still retain the capacity to retaliate .
 To guarantee that an adversary was aware that a second-strike capability existed, deterrence rationalized an unrestrained search for sophisticated retaliatory capabilities . Deterioration rationalized the search for a second strike capability, the author says .
 Under these circumstances, initiating a nuclear war was not a rational choice . The frightening costs outweighed any conceivable benefits, he says .
 Strategic Defense Initiative the so-called Star Wars plan was conceived by the Reagan administration to deploy an antiballistic missile system using space-based lasers that would destroy enemy nuclear missiles before they could enter Earth’s atmosphere .
 Reagan proposed building a space-based defensive shield against ballistic missiles in 1983 . Reagan proposed the idea in a bid to protect the U.S. from missiles .
 The Strategic Defense Initiative called for the development of a defense against ballistic missiles using advanced space-based lasers to destroy weapons launched in fear, anger, or by accident .
 Poland agreed to host ten U.S. two-stage ground-based missile defense interceptors in 2008 . Russia protested the plan, with President Medvedev threatening to point missiles at Europe in retaliation for the development .
 In September 2009, the United States reversed course with its decision to scrap the missile defense shield program in Eastern Europe . The U.S. scrapped the program in September 2009 . The United States scrapped the missile shield in 2009 .
 Citing advances in missile technology and new evidence regarding Iranian missile capabilities as reasons for the change in policy . It was also widely seen as an effort by the United States to improve relations with Russia .
 The United States plans to spend in excess of $60 billion on missile defense over the next six years . The U.S. will also spend more than $100 billion on missiles in the past six years.
 This is an unprecedented sum, the wisdom of which is questionable as the direct threat of ballistic missiles is limited and far less than it was twenty years ago . The wisdom of this is questionable, as it is far less likely to be used as a missile threat .
 The number of medium-range ballistic missiles pointed at U.S. allies in Europe and Asia has fallen 80 percent . The missiles are pointed at United States allies .
 The strategy of compellence conceived of arms as a means for putting enemies in a defensive position and pushing them to make changes in their policies that they did not want to undertake; the strategy of deterrence conceived of using weapons for defense . Deterioration was a means of putting enemies
 Both strategies worked in some ways but failed in others, and both dealt with the problem of armed force by preserving the reliance on arms rather than trying to eliminate the threat .
 The end of the Cold War and with it the huge reduction in the total number of nuclear warheads today has not spelled a relaxation of tension . Preemption .
 Strategic planning continues to find new ways of dealing with the constant danger of emergent military threats . The U.S. military continues to develop new ways to deal with emergent threats .
 As in the past, the U.S. hegemon has led the way in forging new strategies to deal with the post-9/11 threats of global terrorism .
 From that threat has come a radical new strategy of preemptive warfare, says President Obama . "From that threat, there has come an unprecedented new strategy," he says .
 Modern technology allows shadowy terrorist networks to launch catastrophic attacks against the U.S. On the one hand, modern technology allows terrorists to launch attacks on the United States . On the other hand, it allows them to attack on the other side of the world .
 The networks cannot be dissuaded by the threat of punishment because they have no fixed territory or populace to protect . On the other hand, they cannot be deterred by the threats of punishment . The networks are not deterred because of their lack of a fixed territory to protect, he says
 The document argues that the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by global terrorists provided the U.S. with a compelling case for anticipatory self-defense . The document was based on the proposition that “nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves
 The 2002 NSS security strategy affirmed the case for preemptive war, to coerce rather than deter enemies . This requires, in 2002, the NSS said, "preventive war" This requires the use of the U.S. security strategy, it said .
 The 2002 national security strategy was the most sweeping reformulation of U.S. defense policy since the 1947 National Security Act at the start of the Cold War . The 2002 strategy is a sweeping overhaul of the United States defense policy .
 Critics charge that beneath the language of military preemption lies a more radical policy of preventive war . Under international law states have a legal right to defend themselves against aggression as well as imminent attacks .
 A preemptive military attack involves the use of force to quell or mitigate an impending strike by an adversary . The use of military force is a form of form of force used to stop an attack by an enemy .
 A preventive attack entails the use of force to eliminate any possible future strike, even if there is no reason to believe that the capacity to launch an attack currently exists . The U.S. has not been able to use such force in a preventive attack .
 ethicists and legal experts question the morality and legality of preemptive war for preventive purposes . The U.S. has been involved in several wars since 2001 .
 According to critics, preventive uses of military force set a dangerous precedent . The U.S. government has been criticized for using preventive military force .
 Predicting an adversary's future behavior is difficult because its leadership’s intentions are hard to discern . Information on long-term goals may be shrouded in secrecy, and signals of its policy direction may be missed .
 If suspicions about an adversary become a justifiable cause for military action, then every truculent leader would have a rough-and-ready pretext for ordering a first strike .
 In 2009, President Barack Obama signaled a shift from the “unapologetic and implacable demonstrations of will” that had characterized the pre-emptive and unilateral policies of the prior administration .
 He called for an approach that maintained America’s military strength but also sought to move beyond a single-minded focus on Iraq and broaden engagement with the global community . Instead of focusing on Iraq, he called for a focus on global engagement .
 Among his priorities are reducing the threat of nuclear proliferation, securing all nuclear weapons and materials from terrorists and rogue states . Also developing new defenses to protect against cyberterrorism and biological weapons .
 President Obama pledged to renew American diplomacy, with a willingness to engage in dialogue with friend and foe without precondition in order to advance United States interests .
 The ever present threat of nuclear aggression raises anew timeless questions about the conditions under which, and the purposes for which, military force is justifiable . The threat of nukes raises timeless questions .
 Just war theory is the theoretical criteria under which it is morally permissible for a state to go to war and the methods by which a war might be fought . What does prudent precaution require when ruthless countries just war theory?
 The strategy of coercive diplomacy is used in international bargaining to threaten or use limited force to persuade an opponent to stop pursuing an activity it is already undertaking . The strategy is also used in the United States .
 Often, threats to use arms are made to force an adversary to reach a compromise or, even better, to reverse its policies . The threat is often used to force a government to reach an agreement .
 The goal is to alter the target state’s calculation of costs and benefits, so that the enemy is convinced that acceding to demands will be better than defying them . The target state's calculation of benefits and costs will be altered, the author says .
 Coercive diplomacy’s reliance on the threat of force is designed to avoid the bloodshed and expense associated with traditional military campaigns . The use of coercive diplomacy avoids bloodshed and cost of traditional military operations .
 Orchestrating the mix of threats and armed aggression can be done in various ways . Orchestration of the mix is possible, but it can be difficult to do so, experts say .
 The methods range from traditional gunboat diplomacy to threaten an enemy by positioning navies and/or armies near its borders to “tomahawk diplomacy” by striking an adversary with precision-guided cruise missiles .
 Realist policy makers use coercive diplomacy in the arsenal of military options to pursue power . These are among the instruments of coercive diplomacy .
 This chapter looks next at military intervention, the oldest and most widely used approach to military coercion . To explore this strategy, this chapter looks at the most widely-used military intervention .
 States can intervene physically through direct entry of their armies into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through covert operations . States can also intervene physically .
 Overt military intervention is the most visible method of interference inside the borders of another country . Overt intervention is most visible form of interference in another country's borders . Overt military interference is the least visible method to interfere in the country's sovereignty .
 Military intervention has been tradition in the United States since 1945 . States have frequently sent their troops into the sovereign territory of other states in order to influence the target .
 The frequency of this forceful coercive dipiomacy fluctuates from year to year . The fluctuations are dependent on the personal choices of the ieaders authorizing their country’s use of national armed forces for military engagement outside their borders .
 Each act of military intervention had a different rationale and produced different results . The U.S. military has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 Past cases raise tough questions about the use of military intervention for coercive diplomacy . The U.S. military has been involved in several of the world's most recent wars .
 These questions are hotly debated international issues now because of the wave of failed states, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "These questions are now being debated internationally because of this wave of failures"
 Such interventions undercut the principles of state sovereignty and the nonintervention norm in international law . Primarily because such interventions undercut state sovereignty, such interventions undermine the principle of noninterference .
 UN’s call for a ‘new commitment to intervention’ stirred up existing debate about military intervention . The UN's call stirred up the percolating existing debate on military intervention, even in the name of morality, justice, and human rights .
 Policy makers disagree about the appropriate use of military coercion . Today, policy makers disagree over the use of such coercion .
 Research on coercive diplomacy suggests that its success depends upon the context of each specific situation . Research has shown that coercive diplomacy can be successful in each situation .
 The coercing power’s demands must be clearly understood by the target state, says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S. state of Columbia .
 The coercing power must be more highly motivated than the target by what is at stake . The coercion must be motivated by what it's at stake, the author says .
 Military coercion tends to be effective when it occurs prior to the target making a firm commitment on the issue at hand, and when factions exist within the target state’s government . Military coercion can be effective in the U.S. if it occurs before the target makes a commitment on
 It is far more difficult for a coercing power to reverse something that has already been accomplished by the target state . It is more difficult than a coerced power can reverse something already achieved by a target state, says CNN.com .
 The coercing power must create in the adversary’s mind a sense of urgency for compliance with its demand, the author says . The coercion must create an urgency in the mind of the adversary, he says .
 Coercion generally fails when the target has the ability to absorb the punishment delivered by the coercing state . Coercions generally fail when the victim has the capacity to absorb punishment delivered .
 In addition to having political support at home, the coercing power is helped when it can also count on support from key states and international organizations . In Syria, the country's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 The coercing power must be able to articulate the specific conditions for ending the crisis, as well as to give assurances that it will not formulate new demands for greater concessions once the target capitulates . The coercion power must also give assurances not to form new demands after capitulation .
 Although these conditions improve the odds of successful coercive diplomacy, they do not guarantee success . The conditions of coercive diplomacy are not guaranteed success, says David Cameron .
 History teaches that leaders who rely on military intervention for coercive diplomacy often start a process that they later find they cannot control . Leaders who rely upon military intervention often find they can't control, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the aftermath of unsuccessful interventions, confidence in this military method of coercive diplomacy has frequently vanished . The search for other means to exercise power in world politics has intensified, he says .
 Since the beginning of history, preparations for war often have been chosen as a path to security . Preparation for war has been seen as a way to secure the nation's borders .
 The realist call for “peace through strength” is certainly understandable in a world where fear of national vulnerability in an anarchic, self-help environment requires defense planners to assume the worst about other states .
 Even if the military capabilities accumulated by an enemy are defensively motivated, they usually trigger a strong reaction . Even if an enemy is defensive motivated, it usually triggers strong reaction, the reaction is strong .
 The state “always feels itself weak if there is another that is stronger,” observed eighteenth-century Erench political philosopher JeanJacques Rousseau . Rousseau: The state always feels weak if another is stronger . The state is not strong enough to be strong, says Rousse
 Efforts to obtain absolute security by one state tend to be perceived as creating absolute insecurity for others . The result is that everyone becomes locked into an upward spiral of countermeasures that diminishes security of all .
 Scholars refer to this as a security dilemma, a condition that results when each state’s increase in military capabilities is matched by the others . All wind up with no more security than when they began arming, they say . Scholars call it an "security dilemma"
 Many scholars also describe the dynamics of this arms competition as the spiral model . The spiral model is also known as the arms competition model .
 The imagery captures the tendency of defense-enhancing efforts to result in escalating arms races that diminish security of all .
 The increase in armaments, that is intended in each nation to produce consciousness of strength and a sense of security, does not produce these effects . Sir Edward Grey, British foreign secretary before World War I, described this process .
 "It produces a consciousness of the strength of other nations and a sense of fear," he says . "On the contrary, it produces a . consciousness of . other nations," he adds .
 Fear begets suspicion and distrust and evil imaginings of spiral model . The spiral model is a metaphor used to describe the tendency of efforts to enhance defense to result in escalating arms races . The model is used as a metaphor for the tendency to increase defense spending .
 Security dilemma confronts all states’ decisions . Most leaders still refuse to accept vulnerability. Security is a major problem for many states .
 Searching for strength, they often proceed from assumptions that; security is a function of power, military capability; and military might is a measure of national greatness . The U.S. should not seek strength, it says, but strength is a matter of national security .
 Most realists put lasting faith in the realist premise that it is safer to rely on force of arms than on the force of arguments to successfully resolve disputes . The realists and many others continue to put faith in their belief that force is better than argument .
 Security may depend as much on the control of force as on its pursuit . Yet security may depend on control of the force, as much as on pursuit .
 At issue is whether traditional realist emphasis on arms and military strategies that require either the threat or actual use of weapons for coercive diplomacy is the best and safest route to national and international security .
 To be sure, the traditional realist reliance on military capabilities to increase national security continues to resonate .
 Other realists recommend an alternative path: Acquiring allies in order to maintain a balance of power among rivals . This will prevent any transnational actor from the temptation to use force against others .
 This, these other realists believe, provides the safest path to security . This, they say, is the best way to secure the U.S.
 The next chapter reviews realist ideas about alliances, arms control, and their impact in creating a balance of power to keep the peace . The chapter ends with a look at the realist approach to arms control .
 You can evaluate next the prospects, payoffs, and pitfalls of this other primary realist road to international and national security .
 Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 1999-2006 . Grimmett, Richard E. Grimmett wrote about the arms transfers to developing nations .
 In June 2009, the BRICs met in an inaugural summit to discuss a greater say in global policy making and a plan to convert some of their foreign-currency reserves into IMF bonds .
 Brazil’s President Luiz Inacio da Silva among world leaders . China’ President Hu Jintao, Russia’S President Dmitry Medvedev, and India's Prime Minister Manmohan Singh also attend .
 You make the sad discovery that the person you thought was your best friend has been flirting with your girlfriend or boyfriend . You discover that your friend is having an affair with your ex-partner .
 These kinds of hypothetical circumstances and choices for people have a powerful parallel in the real world of international politics .
 Countries, like individuals, make decisions that create friends and enemies . Countries make decisions to create friends, enemies, says CNN's John Defterios .
 These decisions are based on converging and clashing interests and values, says CNN.com . These decisions were made by people with different interests, values and interests .
 Thucydides counseled, “One has to behave as friend or foe according to the circumstances,” and these choices are made on a complex geo-strategic playing field in which today’s enemy may be tomorrow’�s ally .
 Alliances, like some personal friendships, often against rather than for someone or something . Alliances are often against or not for something or something, and friendships are often more personal .
 When relationships and conditions change, new alliances form and established alliances dissolve . Transnational actors—all obsessed with the power of their rivals—realign . New alliances form as transnational actors become more powerful .
 Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate . The U.S. has been involved in the Middle East for more than a decade .
 Liberal theory may provide a key to understanding why and how states join together in alliances . For that reason, it may seem that liberal theory, with its emphasis on the possibility of self-sacrifice for mutual gain, might provide a clue to understanding how states work together .
 realism provides the dominant lens through which the dynamics of alliance formation and decay, and the impact of these dynamics on global security, are most often interpreted . However, realism provides a dominant lens for the dynamics .
 International politics, to realism, is a war of all against all, fought to increase national power and national security by preparing for war and seeking advantages over rivals such as by acquiring superior capabilities .
 Realists picture alliances as temporary, opportunistic agreements to cooperate . Realists believe alliances are temporary and opportunistic alliances .
 Realism provides the most compelling explanation of the coldly calculating motives underlying decisions about alliances . Realists see alliances driven first and foremost as a method for protecting allies from threats posed by common enemies .
 Realist theory is the best paradigm for thinking about the calculations actors make regarding their security and how it might be maximized . Realist theories are the best way to think about security in the realist world .
 Realist theory posits that military alliances are forged when the parties perceive that the advantages of an alliance outweigh the disadvantages . The theory is based on realist theory, which says military alliances should be formed when the advantages outweigh disadvantages .
 This chapter looks at alliances in world politics from the account of realist theory . Realist theory is an interpretation of the preconditions for global security, or how military threats to international stability are best managed .
 As you shall see, realism maintains that alliances are the mechanism by which a “balance of power” can be maintained to prevent an aspiring hegemon from waging imperial wars .
 The basis for international stability and security is more complicated than this introduction implies . You might have already guessed that the basis of international stability is more complex .
 Realpolitik may be the most compelling theory of alliances discussed in government chambers . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a panel of experts on realpolitik in Washington DC .
 Take a look at the leading hypotheses before considering the balance of power that is affected by alliance politics in theory and how that theory applies to trends in global circumstances .
 Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends . Policy makers adhering to the liberal theoretical tradition recommended that the disputants open negotiations to settle their differences at the bargaining table .
 Those abiding by realist foreign policy recommendations see countries’ interests as best served by either unilaterally arming themselves sufficiently to contain an emergent threat or combining their strength with the other threatened states in an alliance .
 To the realist frame of mind, alliances come into being when two or more states face a common security threat . alliances predictably come to be when two nations are at risk of a common threat .
 By acquiring allies, states increase their mutual military capabilities . States acquire allies by acquiring allies to strengthen their military strength .
 alliances form when two or more states combine their military capabilities and promise to coordinate their policies to increase mutual security . Coalitions are coalitions that form when states combine military capabilities to increase their military strength .
 Under anarchy no state can really count on allies to come to its defense if attacked . Their only duty is to follow their interests and whenever possible rely on self-help by relying only on their own state for defense .
 Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah with Crown Prince Sultan Hashem, Mahmoud Ahbas, Khaled Meshaal, Ismail Haniyeh and Mussa Abu Marzuk. Shown is Saudi Arabia's King Abdullah .
 Illustrated is the historical tendency for countries to come together in alliances in order to counter common security threats . Illustrated is a result of countries coming together in alliance to counter security threats such as terrorism .
 The greatest risk to forming alliances is that they bind a state to a commitment that may later become disadvantageous, he says . The risk is that alliances bind states to commitments that could be disadvantageous .
 Realist tradition advises states not to take a fixed position on temporary convergences of national interests . The usefulness of all alliances is certain to change once the common threat that brought the allies together declines, says Realist .
 The posture ot leaders about the advantage or disadvantage of alliances has depended on their personal philosophy and the country’s circumstances . The posture of leaders about alliances depends on the country's circumstances .
 Many states throughout history have chosen to ally because, the risks notwithstanding, the perceived benefits to security in a time of threat justified that decision . Despite their uncertain usefulness, many states have opted to ally .
 To best picture how alliances affect global security, it is instructive to move from the state level of analysis to the global level . The impact of alliances on the frequency of interstate war can be seen from the perspective of individual states’s security .
 This view focuses attention on the possible contribution of alliance formation to maintaining the balance of power . The view is that alliance formation could help maintain the balance in power .
 The concept of a balance of power has a long and controversial history . DF PDWER has a controversial history of trying to balance power in power .
 Critics deny the effectiveness of the balance of power, arguing that it breeds jealousy, intrigue, and antagonism . Critics say the balance breeds jealousy and intrigue .
 “balance of power” alignments the acceptance by a neutral state threatened by foreign enemies of a special relationship short of formal alliance with a stronger power able to protect it from attack . The concept is confusion over what it entails .
 At the core of nearly all the various meanings of “balance of power” is the idea that national security is enhanced when military capabilities are distributed . No one state is strong enough to dominate all others, so that no one state can dominate .
 Balance-of-power theory predicts that if one state gains inordinate power, it will take advantage of its strength and attack weaker neighbors . This gives compelling incentive for those threatened to align and unite in a defensive coalition . Balance of power theory says that if a state gains power it will
 According to the theory, the threatened states’ combined military strength would deter the state harboring expansionist aims . The theory is based on the theory that the threatened state would be deterring expansionist attempts .
 For realists, laissez-faire competition among states striving to maximize their national power yields an international equilibrium, ensuring the survival of all by checking hegemonic ambitions . Realists believe that laissississure of competition in the world is a good thing for all .
 Balance-of-power theory is founded on the realist premise that weakness invites attack . Countervailing power must be used to deter potential aggressors, theory says . Balance of power theory is based on the premise of weakness inviting attack .
 Realists assume that the drive for expanded power guides every state’s actions . Realists believe that every state's actions are guided by a desire to expand power .
 It follows that all countries are potential adversaries and that each must strengthen its military capability to protect itself . Each country's military capability must be strengthened to protect its own interests .
 This reasoning rationalizes the quest for military superiority, because others pursue it as well . Invariably, this reasoning is rationalized by the logic of others pursuing it as also .
 The reasons spring from the realist belief that a system revolving around suspicion, competition, and anarchy will breed caution . uncertainty creates restraints on the initiation of war, the author says . The author's view is that the system of suspicion and competition will breed restraint .
 When all states are independent and, as sovereign actors, free to make rational choices, they have powerful incentives to realign and form coalitions . This would lead to an approximately even distribution of power, curbing the temptation of any great power to imperialistically .
 In classic balance-of-power theory, fear of a third party will encourage alignments . Those threatened would need help to offset the power of the common adversary . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful and powerful .
 An alliance would add the ally's power to the state’s own . The alliance would deny the addition of that power to an enemy .
 Nonalignment is a foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with either of two rival blocs for fear that alliance will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war . aggression would appear unattractive and would be averted .
 To deter an aggressor, counteralliances are expected to form easily . Free riders, states sitting on the sidelines, cannot, as rational actors, risk nonalignment . Counteralliances will form easily, because free riders sit on sidelines, say experts .
 If they refuse to ally, their own vulnerability will encourage an expansionist state to attack them sooner or later . If they don't ally, they will be at risk of an attack on them, says John Defterios .
 Realists recognize that what is required is for national actors to see the value of rapidly shifting alliances . To balance power against power in opposed coalitions approximately equal in strength, realists say .
 Most realists see balancing as the result of deliberate choices undertaken by national leaders to maintain an equilibrium among contending states .
 It is necessary for all leaders to constantly monitor changes in states’ relative capabilities, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says it is necessary to monitor changes to state’s relative capabilities .
 Choices must be made by rational, self-interested actors that recognize the trade-off of costs and benefits between strategic options . Choices need to be made in a rational and self-interest-driven way, says the author .
 Some options, such as expanding military capabilities through armaments and alliances, attempt to add weight to the lighter side of the international balance . For example, some options include expanding armaments, alliances and alliances .
 Others, such as negotiating limits on weaponry and on a great power’s sphere of influence, attempt to reduce the size of the geographical region under the domination of a big power .
 Various theorists have attempted to specify a set of rules that must be heeded in this constructed security regime in order for the balancing process to function effectively .
 Constantly watch foreign developments in order to identify emerging threats and opportunities . Constantly look at foreign developments and opportunities. Constantly monitor foreign developments for emerging threats, opportunities .
 International anarchy makes each state responsible for its own security . States can never be sure of one another’s intentions, self-interest encourages them to maximize their relative power .
 States align with each other when they adopt a common stance toward some shared security problem . States align to each other by adopting a common approach to security .
 An alliance is produced when they formally agree to coordinate their behavior under certain specified circumstances . An alliance can be produced when a group agrees to coordinate its behavior under specific circumstances .
 Short-term adjustments aimed at rectifying imbalances in the distribution of military capabilities . Past experiences should not predispose states to accept or reject any potential partner, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Great Britain once played a balancer role in European diplomacy . Nowhere is this better seen than in the balancing role Great Britain played in Europe . Great Britain's role in Europe has been diminished in recent years .
 Britain’s goal was to “oppose the strongest, most aggressive, most dominating power on the continent” Britain joined with the less strong powers, made a combination among them, “to defeat and frustrated the continental military tyrant whoever he was, whatever he was�
 The purpose of engaging in balance-of-power politics is to survive in a world of potentially dangerous great powers, says David Cameron . "The purpose of engagement in balance of power politics is ... to survive," he says .
 If any state achieves absolute mastery over everyone else, it will be able to act freely . State can act freely if it wants to achieve absolute mastery of everyone else .
 Under such circumstances, the territorial integrity and political autonomy of other states will be in jeopardy . The territorial integrity of such states is in jeopardy, according to the UN .
 By joining forces with the weaker side to prevent the stronger side from reaching preponderance, states can preserve their independence . States should join forces to stop the strong side reaching pre-eminence, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 When a single superpower attains preponderant status, the usual reaction is to engage in “soft balancing” by using “nonmilitary tools to delay, frustrate, and undermine’s “military policies” The usual reaction at first of other major powers
 In the event of war, the winning side should not eliminate the defeated . Winning side of the war should not be eliminated, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Yesterday's enemy may be needed as tomorrow’s ally . Looking forward rather than backward, it should do as little damage to those it has vanquished .
 States that win at the bargaining table can stabilize the balance of power by granting the other side compensation in return for its concessions . Similarly, states that win in the battle of power can stabilize power by giving them compensation .
 These realist policy prescriptions urge states to check the ambitions of any great power that threatens to amass overwhelming power . Aspiring hegemons are a potential threat to everyone, they are a real threat to all .
 Human beings and states, they argue, are by nature selfish, but balancing rival interests stabilizes their interactions . Balance of interest stabilizes interactions between states and human beings, they say .
 The alarmed response by China and Russia to the U.S. 2002 National Security Strategy illustrates the balancing process . The strategy was announced that the United States would do everything to preserve forever America’s supreme global primacy .
 Germany, France, and many other countries opposed the 2003 U.S. decision to launch a war of preemption to prevent Iraq from acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction . Evidence of Iraq’s possession of such weapons, ties to 9/11 terrorist attacks, or intention to
 Critics of balance-of-power theory raise several objections to the proposition that balancing promotes peace . Weak states tend to seek alliance with the strongest power, irrespective of that power’s ideology or type of government .
 They are told to oppose anyone seeking preponderance . On the other hand, they are told that they must oppose those seeking pre-eminence .
 Sometimes bandwagoning with (rather than balancing against) the dominant state can increase a weaker country’s capabilities by allowing it to share in the spoils of a future victory . Yet sometimes bandwagoning (rather) with (instead of balancing) against the dominant states can increase (rather
 History suggests that states that are most content with the status quo tend to balance against rising powers more than do dissatisfied states . States that are contented with status quo often balance against rise powers more .
 Balance-of-power theory assumes policy makers possess accurate, timely information about other states . Balance of power theory assumes . Policy makers must possess accurate and timely information on other states.
 As discussed in the previous chapter, the concept of “power” has multiple meanings . The concept of power has been discussed in this chapter .
 Tangible factors are hard to compare, such as the performance capabilities of the different types of weapons found in an adversary’s arsenal, say experts . Tangible factor is hard to measure is the performance capability of an adversary's weapons .
 An ally who is being counted on to balance the power of an opponent may have secretly agreed to remain neutral in the event of a showdown .
 The actual distribution of power may not resemble the constructed distribution imagined by one side or the other . Consequently, it may not be the same as one side's imagined distribution .
 Balance-of-power politics fuels exaggerated estimates of an adversary’s strength . The intense, reciprocal anxiety that shrouds balance of power politics fuels exaggerating estimates of strength .
 This, in turn, prompts each side to expand the quantity and enhance the quality of its weaponry . Each side has increased the quantity of its weapons .
 Critics of realism warn that if a serious dispute occurs between states locked in relentless arms competition under conditions of mutually assured suspicions, the probability of war increases .
 As prospect theory illuminates, national leaders evaluate risks differently . National leaders evaluate risk differently, says prospect theory . The risk of a terrorist attack in the U.S. is a risk, but not a terrorist threat .
 Rather than being deterred by equivalent power, they prefer gambling on the chance of winning a victory, even if the odds are long . Rather than be deterred, the majority prefer to bet on a victory .
 Marshaling similar power against adversaries with a high tolerance for risk will not have the same effect as it would on those who avoid risks . Marshaling comparable power would not have same effect on adversaries with high tolerance, risk tolerance .
 If the theory’s assumptions are correct, historical periods during which its rules were followed should also have been periods in which war was less frequent . The theory's assumptions should also be true, if the theory is correct, war should have been less frequent during those periods .
 After the 1648 Peace of Westphalia created the global system of independent territorial states, the great powers participated in a series of increasingly destructive general wars that threatened to engulf the entire multistate global system .
 As Inis L Claude soberly concludes, it is difficult to consider these wars ‘as anything other than catastrophic failures, total collapses, of the balance-of-power system’
 Historical record has led some theorists to construct hegemonic stability theory as an alternative to the balance of power .
 A significant problem with the balance-of-power system is its haphazard character . The balance of power system is a problem, says the president of the U.S. Senate .
 To bring order to the global system, the great powers have occasionally tried to institutionalize channels of communication . Great powers have sometimes tried to . institutionalize . channels of communications .
 The Concert of Europe that commenced with the Congress of Vienna in 1815 exemplified this strategy . The concert of Europe was the first to begin in Vienna, Austria, 1815 .
 It is predicated on the belief that the leading centers of power will see their interests advanced by collaborating to prevent conflict from escalating into war in those regions under their collective jurisdiction .
 Concerts still allow “for subtle jockeying and competition to take place among them,’s author says . Concerts are held in the heart of the U.S.
 Power politics is not completely eliminated; members may turn to internal mobilization and coalition formation to pursue divergent interests . Power politics may not be completely eliminated, however .
 A common sense of duty is the glue that holds great-power concerts together . Concerts are held together in a bid to raise money for charity work .
 Overcoming friction requires continuous consultation in order to reinforce expectations of joint responsibilities . Overcoming this friction will need to be discussed regularly, say officials .
 Concert framework can help manage relations among counterpoised great powers, but it's fragile and can erode easily . The normative consensus underpinning this arrangement is fragile, says John Defterios .
 The potential for great power harmony to be replaced by great power rivalry is what alarms many realist observers .
 Most realists conclude that international conflict and competition is permanent in world politics . The best hope is to count on the emergence of a stable balance of power to preserve peace, he says .
 Next, take a look at trends in the historical record and projections for the future about how the balance of power is likely to function . Next, look at how the future of power will function .
 Use of alliances to balance power has shifted over time in a series of redistributions . The use of alliances in the world's most powerful economies has shifted in recent decades .
 At one extreme have been periods in which a powerful state has tried to prevail over another state, which in response usually has built additional arms or sought allies to offset its adversary’s strength .
 At the other extreme, a more fluid competition has emerged, with encroachments by one state against another also precipitating a quest for arms and allies . At times, at times, the conflict has also precipitated an interest in arms and alliances .
 Instead of a rigid, counterbalanced blocs, this kind of military confrontation has triggered shifts by others to produce a kaleidoscope of overlapping alliances . It has produced a checkerboard of multiple great powers competing in balance-of-power politics, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The balance of power is supposed to operate in world politics . The chapter next considers how it actually has functioned in the world .
 The chapter now considers several models of balance-of-power distributions that have arisen since World War II . It looks at the kinds of power divisions that may develop in the twenty-first century’s age of globalization now dominated by U.S. power .
 Models of the Balance of Power—Past and Present global structure . The defining characteristics of the global system are the distribution of military capabilities . These characteristics exist independently of all actors but powerfully shape actions of every actor .
 Historically, these have ranged from highly concentrated power on one end of the continuum to highly dispersed power distributions on the other . Historically, this has ranged from concentrated power to dispersed power distribution .
 The former has included regional empires . The latter is the approximate equality of power held by European powers at the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 .
 Balance-of-power systems evolve in a cyclical fashion . After four transformations, the system concludes the same way it began; unipolarity, 1945-1949; bipolarity, 1949-1991; multipolarity 1991-2001; and another unipolar system today .
 The United States was also the only country with the atomic bomb and had demonstrated its willingness to use the new weapon . The U.S. was the last country to have a nuclear bomb .
 This underscored the fact that it was without rival and incapable of being counterbalanced . This underscores that it is without rival, it was unable to be counterbalanced, it is said .
 The United States was not just stronger than anybody —it was stronger than everybody . President Obama said the U.S. is stronger than any other nation .
 A single hegemon was able to exercise overwhelming influence over all other states, either through leadership or through domination . In the period immediately following World War II, a unipolar distribution of power materialized, because power was concentrated .
 People spoke of a new “American Empire” ruling over an impoverished world ravaged by war . So supremely powerful was the U.S. at that time, people spoke of an American Empire’ ruling over the world .
 The Soviet Union soon began to undermine America’s supremacy and hegemonic status . That was short lived, however, as an ascendant challenger to United States preponderance .
 The United States' ability to act unilaterally in pursuit of its interests and ideals underwent a decline over the next four decades . The U.S. grip on global developments and its ability to influence others eroded .
 The recovery of the Soviet economy, the growth of its military capabilities, its maintenance of a large army, and growing SovietUnited States rivalry less than five years after the end of World War II gave rise to a new distribution of world power . Bipolarity—The United States and Russia
 The Soviets broke the U.S. monopoly on atomic weapons in 1949 . The Soviets exploded a thermonuclear device in 1953, less than a year after the US .
 This achievement symbolized the creation of global bipolarity - the division of the balance of power into two coalitions headed by rival military powers . Each coalition sought to contain the other’s expansion, each seeking to prevent the other's expansion .
 Military capabilities became concentrated in the hands of two competitive “superpowers’s” ‘superpowers,’ says author . ‘Their capacities to massively destroy anyone made comparisons with the other great powers meaningless .
 In interpreting these dynamics, it is important not to use the concepts of polarity and polarization interchangeably . In interpreting this dynamics, don't use the terms "polarity and polarization" interchangeably, say experts .
 Two dimensions of how military power can be combined at any point in time in the global system . They refer to two distinct dimensions of the primary ways in which military power is combined . The two dimensions are the ability to combine military power in the world .
 When states combine arms through alliance formation, the aggregation of power through polarization changes the system’s balance of power . In contrast, when states combine their arms, they change the balance of the power system, the system's balance is changed .
 Polarization increases when the number of cross-cutting alignments declines . Polarization occurs when a number of alignments is reduced . Polarized alignments are more likely to occur in the United States .
 The concept of polarization is especially apt in this context because a pole suggests the metaphor of a magnet—it both repels and attracts . A pole suggests a metaphor of magnetism: It both attracts and repels, and polarization is a good metaphor .
 The formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, linking the United States to the defense of Western Europe, occurred due to this polarization process . The Warsaw Pact was formed due to the former Soviet Union's formal alliance with its Eastern European clients .
 The opposing blocs formed in part because the superpowers competed for allies . The less powerful states looked to one superpower or the other for protection .
 Each superpower's allies gave it forward bases from which to carry on the competition . Correspondingly, each superpower’s allies gave them forward bases . The U.S. and its allies gave each other bases to carry out the mission .
 The involvement of most other states in the superpowers’ struggle globalized the East-West conflict . In addition to the involvement of other states, most other countries in the struggle globalize the conflict .
 Eew states remained outside the superpowers’ rival alliance networks as neutral or nonaligned countries . Eew countries remained outside of the superpower’s rival alliances networks .
 The Cold War’s bipolar structure bred insecurity among all . By grouping the system's states into two blocs, each led by a superpower, it bred insecurity . The system's bipolar structure also bred insecurity in all .
 Each bloc leader, fearing that its adversary would attain hegemony, viewed every move, however defensive, as the first step toward world conquest . The bloc leader feared that every move would be taken to achieve hegemony .
 Zero-sum conflict prevailed as both sides viewed what one side gained as a loss for the other . Both sides viewed the outcome of the conflict as a zero-sum sum sum .
 Bipolarity left little room for compromise or maneuver and worked against the “normalization” of cooperative superpower relations . polarization the degree to which states cluster in alliances around the most powerful members of the global system .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization was created in 1949 to deter a Soviet attack on Western Europe . Since then it has expanded and redefined its mission to emphasize not only the maintenance of peace but also the promotion of democracy .
 Bipolarity first began to disintegrate in the 1960s and early 1970s when the opposed coalitions’ internal cohesion eroded . New centers of power emerged in Iran .
 At the same time, weaker alliance partners were afforded more room for maneuvering, as illustrated by the friendly relations between the United States and Romania and between France and the Soviet Union .
 The superpowers remained dominant militarily, but this less rigid system allowed other states to act more independently . The system was less rigid, allowing other countries to act independently .
 Rapid technological innovation in the superpowers’ major weapons systems was a catalyst in the dissolution of the Cold War blocs and the national strategic doctrines that the adversaries had constructed . Rapid technological innovations in the world’s most powerful weapons systems were a catalyst for the collapse of Cold War
 Intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons through space from one continent to another . lessened the importance of forward bases on allies’ territory for striking at the heart of the adversary .
 The narrowed differences in the superpowers’ arsenals loosened the ties that had previously bound allies to one another . Furthermore, the narrowing differences in superpowers' arsenals loosenened ties .
 The pledge to protect allies through extended deterrence seemed increasingly insincere . The uncertainty became pronounced as the pledge to . protect allies seemed . increasingly insincrerere .
 The movement toward democracy and market economies by some communist states in the late 1980s further eroded the bonds of ideology that had formerly helped these countries face their security problems from a common posture . The movement to democracy in some communist countries further eroded ideology .
 The 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall tore apart the Cold War architecture of competing blocs . The Berlin Wall was dismantled in 1989 .
 The consistency of outlook and singularity of purpose that once bound NATO members together disappeared . With the end of this division, and without the Soviet threat, without a Soviet threat . NATO members once bound each other together, NATO says .
 NATO-Russia Council was established in 2002 to provide a framework for consultation and cooperation between the twentyeight allies and Russia on current security issues . NATO and Russia have a wide range of issues of mutual interest .
 NATO froze formal relations between the alliance and Russia in late 2008 due to what allies saw as disproportionate military action by Russia in Georgia . In June 2009 NATO-Russia talks resumed in the interest of maintaining a forum for productive dialogue, cooperation, and problem solving .
 Relations within NATO have long been marked by disputes . Relations between NATO and Russia have been strained by tensions . NATO has a long history of tension between the two countries .
 United States actions in Iraq and plans for missile defense systems in the region have generated a great degree of controversy within many European societies . U.S. actions in the Iraq and missile defense plans in tbe region have created controversy within Europe .
 Russia's actions in Georgia have driven some of NATO's new NATO members closer toward the U.S. However, the resurgence of Russia has driven some NATO members even closer to the United States .
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, a power transition —a change in the ratio of military capabilities between great power rivals that produces tensions and increases the probability of war between them .
 Analysts conclude that a new era of unipolarity has arisen, with the United States emerging as the world’s only superpower . This prompted many analysts to conclude that the U.S. had emerged as the only superpower in the world .
 The question remains as to whether United States predominance will prove beneficial or damaging . U.S. predominance in the Middle East will be beneficial or harmful, according to experts .
 Against this optimistic view runs a strong suspicion about the future stability of a unipolar world under U.S. management . Against that view, there is also a suspicion that the United States will not manage the world .
 Fears rose in reaction to the assertive Bush Doctrine pledging that the U.S. would unilaterally act however it wishes abroad . The Bush Doctrine pledged that the United States would act unilaterally without approval of others .
 U.S. leadership condemned for its shortsightedness and willingness to put narrow self-interests ahead of ideals . United States condemned for seeking to preserve America’s position as world leader without working through multilateral cooperation with others .
 The global public is optimistic that under President Barack Obama, U.S. relations with the rest of the world will improve . However, there may be winds of change, for the global public .
 Constructivists suggest that the resistance faced by the U.S. is not surprising . The unipolar system depends heavily upon the social system in which it is embedded, they say . The Bush Doctrine is a key part of the Bush Doctrine .
 Constructivists argue that by leading the way as the champion of universal values with widespread appeal and by investing in the development of norms or institutions from which they benefit, a dominant state can greatly enhance its power and induce cooperation from others .
 The United States had great success at this in the period following World War II when it was an ardent promoter of democracy, human rights, and freedom .
 Time will tell, but one trend is certain to influence what unfolds . The eventual erosion of today’s U.S. preponderance is likely to influence the future .
 Where countries sit in the world pyramid of power predicts their posture toward global change . A power transition is a global transition in the way countries sit .
 The more favorable a country’s position is in the world hierarchy, the more satisfied it is with the status quo . States lower in the hierarchy are more dissatisfied and therefore promote change . The more satisfied a country's position in the international status quo is more dissatisfied .
 The power transition theory provides leverage for “anticipating when and where great power and regional wars most likely will occur” The theory is used to predict when great power is likely to occur in the region .
 A mural with a ghostly Statue of Liberty on a wall facing the United States Embassy in Tehran is unlikely to last long . The photo on the right captures the cross-cutting combination of anger and allegiances .
 The power transition will occur sooner rather than later if the U.S. fails to reduce the heavy financial burden of the American global empire . This power transition is likely to occur sooner than later .
 America’s unipolar period in the sun will inevitably fade, and some new distribution of power will develop . Sooner or later, America's unipolar power will fade, says John Avlon .
 The probable consequences of such a transformation in world politics are not clear, says David Cameron . Cameron: "I'm not sure what the future of world politics will be."
 Others see the emergence of a more complex multipolar pattern of balance-of-power competition . The United States, China, Japan, Russia, India and the European Union would constitute six centers of global power .
 Each player will be increasingly assertive, independent, and competitive, leading to confusion about the identity of friends and foes . According to this image of the future, as power becomes more equally distributed, each player will become more assertive .
 The search for the capacity to compete on an equal footing with the other centers of power is characteristically strong when power becomes spread across three or more poles .
 The game of rivalry and balancing is becoming much different from the strategies and alignments that tend to materialize in unipolar and bipolar systems . With the effort by the European Union to enter the playing field alongside the United States, China, Japan, Russia, and other regional players like Brazil
 As power becomes increasingly distributed, each leading power suspiciously confronts the other . Diplomacy displays a nonideological, chesslike character; conflict intensifies as each contender fears the power of its rivals .
 An enlarged global chessboard of multiple geostrategic relationships develops . The world's largest chessboard now has a 'global chessboard' in place .
 Major players align together against others on particular issues, as their interests dictate . The major players align against each other against others in particular issues .
 Behind the diplomatic smiles and handshakes, one-time friends and allies begin to grow apart . Former enemies forge friendly ties and begin making a common cause against other centers of power that threaten them .
 This competition under conditions of multipolarity is already unfolding . This competition is already underway, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The United States can be observed casting itself in the role of balancer, positioned in the middle of disputes between China and Russia . For example, at times the U.S. can be seen casting itself as a balancer in China's disputes with Russia .
 China and Russia signed a friendship treaty in 2007 calling for a new “multipolar world” to oppose American global domination . At other times, the U.S. finds itself opposed by these two neighboring great powers .
 President Bush treated America’s coalition partners as subordinate ‘satellites,’ says EU foreign affairs commissioner . Russia's Vladimir Putin quickly joined the criticism of the U.S. disregard of the interests of the partners in the coalition .
 U.S. President Barack Obama acknowledged in an April 2009 visit to Europe that “there have been times where America’s shown arrogance and been dismissive, even derisive” toward Europe . The Iraq War has strained relations with Europe since that war .
 The renewed emphasis on the geopolitics of the Eurasian region of the world is an indicator of continuing balance-of-power jockeying for global position and independence typical of emergent multipolarity is .
 With Russia’s show of strength in Georgia in 2008, many felt a Cold War chill in the air . Many speculated about a changing tide of strength and strategic interest . Russia's opposition to the expansion of NATO and its perception of the missile defense agreement between the United States and Poland
 It is difficult to confidently predict what the twenty-first century will look like and whether it will be chaotic or stable . However, it is impossible to predict how chaotic or chaotic the 20-20 century will be .
 Should a new multipolar world develop in the mid-twenty-first century, the probable consequences are unclear .
 It would be imprudent to conclude that a new multipolar system will necessarily produce another period of warfare or of peace . Because there is no real consensus on whether systems with a certain number of poles are more prone to war prone than others, it would not be impudent
 Consider the divided opinions about this issue, as represented by three contending schools of thought . Consider the differing views on the issue of abortion .
 One interpretation holds that peace will occur when one hegemonic state acquires enough power to deter others’ expansionist ambitions . Peace is peace when one state becomes powerful enough to deter other expansionist aspirations .
 This view maintains that the concentration of power reduces the chances of war because it allows a single superpower to maintain peace and manage the global system . This view is based on the theory that a single superpower can maintain peace .
 A school of neorealisttUougUt maintains that bipolar systems are the most stable . In contrast, a second school says bipolar systems tend to be stable .
 Under such stark simplicities and balanced symmetries, the two leading rivals have incentives to manage crises so that they do not escalate to war .
 Those who believe that a bipolar world is inherently more stable than its unipolar or multipolar counterparts draw support from the fact that in the 1950s, when the threat of war was endemic, major war did not occur .
 A third school of thought argues that multipolar systems are the least war prone . Multipolar systems are less prone to war, experts say .
 Peace-through-multipolarity school perceives multipolar systems as stable because they encompass a larger number of autonomous actors, giving rise to more potential alliance partners . The peace-through to multipolarity school sees multipolarities as stable .
 Abstract deductions and historical analogies can lead to contradictory conclusions, as the logic underlying these three inconsistent interpretations illustrates . The logic of these three conflicting interpretations illustrates.
 The future will determine which of these rival theories is the most accurate .
 Nonproliferation global power will exert a strong influence on what kind of global system the world will experience . The U.N. Security Council will meet in Washington, D.C. to discuss the future of the world .
 China's rapid rise toward becoming the globe’s biggest economy will translate into Chinese hard power and a military threat . China is expected to become the world's biggest economy, possibly even a new unipolar period .
 Realists think that great power competition will continue because the U.S. military giant is unlikely to gracefully accept a reduction of its stature .
 President Obama visited France, the Czech Republic, Great Britain, Germany, and Turkey . He also met with leaders of Saudi Arabia, Russia, and China .
 A global shift is clearly in the making, although the trajectories in the rise and fall of the great powers’ relative position in the global hierarchy are much in doubt . The trajectory of the world's great powers' relative position is in doubt, according to the UN .
 If the past history of power transitions in the global balance of power is prologue, the global future may be a very dangerous future . As realists warn, if the past has been prologue to a dangerous future, it could be very dangerous .
 When American primacy does wane, the American “hobbled hegemon” will no longer remain in position to play its self-described role of global peacekeeper . The U.S. is no longer in position as a global peacekeeping .
 In the next two chapters, turn your attention away from the balance-of-power politics of realism to examine proposals by liberal theorists to engineer institutional reforms in order to create a more orderly world order .
 To liberal reformers, direct negotiations between adversaries are a crucial step on the path to make peace a possibility . The JUDICIAL ERAMEWORKOE INTERNATIONAL Law's Contribution to Peace and Justice .
 Talks allow both sides to put their interests on the bargaining table and discuss issues openly . Talks are far better than resolving issues on the battiefield than on the battlefield .
 Remembering your pledge to try to make the world a better place before you die, you decide to put your ethical principles above power . You decide to do this in the wake of your death . Remembering the pledge, you decided to put ethical principles before power .
 You are joining Andrew Carnegie, Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, and other exceptionally wealthy philanthropists . Andrew Carnegie chose to give large portions of his fortune to causes that try to change the world for the better .
 You could seek, for example, to strengthen human rights law, provide humanitarian relief for refugees, fight worldwide poverty and disease . Join others in seeking to stem the threat of global warming, or to educate all youth .
 "The greatest threat to the world is the awesome danger of armed aggression," the author says . The author's moral values are based on moral principles, he says .
 You see your mission to be helping others find better ways than military methods for preventing war . Acting on this conviction, you see yourself as a hero of the day .
 Reliance on weapons of war and balances of power has been tried since the beginning of time, but never with lasting success . It has never been successful in the history of the world's first century .
 You have found your cause: finding peaceful methods of controlling armed aggression . So now you have found a cause, find peaceful methods to control armed aggression, say the author .
 You must now go another difficult step in your attempt to clarify your values. Alas, you must now . Alas, it's a difficult step for the president to clarify his values.
 It is time for you to do some homework and draw lessons from policy makers and philosophers who have spent their lifetimes probing the same question you are now asking yourself—how to do good in a wicked world .
 Your Internet search directs you to thinkers who have values compatible with your own . Thinkers who see ideas as powerful forces that shape our reality shape our society .
 The search engine directs you for insight to the knowledge of theorists from both liberal and constructivist perspectives .
 Changing attitudes toward sovereignty are evident in the emerging norms of “sovereignty as responsibility,” and the “responsibility to protect” as well as the work of international relations theorists in the liberal and constructivist schools .
 The paths to peace that are depicted by various liberal thinkers differ greatly in their approach to world order, but they all share your great fear of states’ historic propensity to wage war .
 You are drawn in particular to those sets of premises and perspectives that focus on diplomacy and international law as a means of resolving conflict . You're drawn to those premises, you are drawn to diplomacy, you say .
 Liberal theory places emphasis on the role of collaboration and rule-making in shaping behavior in world politics . Liberal theory says moral behavior reaps higher rewards for all because fair treatment toward others promotes their fair behavior .
 Constructivism informs us that leading ideas have meaningful consequences . Constructivism is a form of constructivism to understand how international rules are created . When a favorable climate of opinion crystallizes about the preferred conduct for relations between states, those .
 Diplomatic negotiations and international law communicate the prevailing international consensus about the rules to govern international relations . Diplomatic diplomacy is the result of international negotiations and law .
 Many experts see international law mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history . For this reason, many experts say international law mirrors constructivist theory .
 Keep these perspectives in mind as you contemplate the benefits and liabilities of alternative roads to peace .
 Diplomatic negotiations, international courts, collective security, and other methods of conflict resolution that are advocated hy policy makers . Diplomats are hoping to bring the use of armed force under meaningful legal controls that restrict the purposes for which armed aggression can be legally conducted, so that the likelihood of taking
 The goal is to exercise influence over an enemy in order to convince that . that acceding to an opposing state’s demands will be less costly than defying those demands . The goal here is political —to exercise influence .
 Realists advise delivering an ultimatum that threatens the target with an immediate threat in order to increase pressure and make it comply with the coercive state’s request . This result, realists advise, can be accomplished by delivering a threat that threatens with an imminent threat . Realists
 The major problem with coercive diplomacy’s reliance on the threat of armed force is that such acts usually create a crisis that escalates to war . Such acts often create crises that escalate to war, the author says .
 The problem that liberal reformers identify is that these crises and armed conflicts could potentially have been settled by diplomatic negotiations had that avenue for dispute settlement been attempted . Crisis crisis a situation in which the threat of escaiation to warfare is high .
 When a crisis erupts, the capacity for reaching coolheaded rational decisions is reduced . The capacity for dealing with a crisis is reduced when it comes to a crisis .
 The threat to use force causes stress and reduces the amount of time available to reach decisions that might successfully end the crisis peacefully . The threat of using force reduces the time available for a peaceful solution to the crisis .
 The frequency has varied over time, but its recurrence attests to states’ compulsion to make threats to use military force to get their way . The frequency of such threats has varied .
 The Suez Crisis of 1956 is an often-cited example of the inherent dangers of the Suez crisis . The crisis was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the crisis .
 To liberals, it is always better to talk about percolating divisive issues at a negotiating table than to let anger and anxieties sizzle and tempt the disputants to take action .
 Only through discussion and bargaining can positions be clarified and, possibly, concession and compromises be reached that terminate the threat of warfare . Only through discussions and bargaining, positions can be clarified .
 Negotiation is a process of bargaining between two or more actors in an effort to deal with an issue or situation in order to reach an agreement that settles the dispute . Negotiating is a form of bargaining .
 At a basic, elementary level, negotiation entails an exchange of communications, with discussion flowing back and forth between the bargaining parties . Negotiating is a basic level of communication, and discussion flows back to the negotiating parties .
 As an approach to conflict management, the goal is to facilitate communication between the parties regarding their intentions and goals, and produce options that address those involved .
 In the give-and-take required to negotiate a compromised solution, there is a strong propensity for some level of reciprocity to emerge from the action and reaction sequence of communications . This is the kind of friendly or hostile communication received from the other party .
 Reciprocal communications can produce greater cooperation or greater conflict . reciprocity can produce cooperation or conflict, or cooperation .
 The Chinese translation of the word “crisis” means both “opportunity” and “danger,” says the Chinese translation . Negotiations provide an opportunity to produce a positive agreement or a dangerous negative outcome that heightens threats .
 Negotiating is not a sure cure-all for the resolution of interstate conflicts and crises, says John Sutter . Sutter: "Negotiating isn't always a good thing for interstate conflicts, crises"
 Negotiations make possible the settlement of disputes, providing the offers of concessions freely given are reciprocated by the target with the same level of similar concessions . Still, negotiations can be made possible if the offer of concessions is reciprocated .
 Vladimir Putin, Russia’s Prime Minister, offered wise counsel saying that “Today to be successful, one must be able to reach agreements.” Vladimir Putin . Vladimir Putin: “To be successful to succeed today, one needs to reach agreement. To be successful today
 Reciprocated gestures of goodwill and empathy for the opponent’s situation pave the way for a compromised agreement . The agreement was reached after a series of compromises .
 A common bargaining approach to induce the other party to reach agreements is through a tit-for-tat strategy that responds to any cooperative offer by immediately reciprocating it with an equal offer . Repeated concessions can facilitate a mutually satisfactory agreement .
 Diplomacy is aimed at resolving international disputes peacefully, which is why diplomacy is favored by liberals . Diplomacy aims to resolve disputes peacefully and to resolve them peacefully .
 Realists, for whom states’ primary interest is the pursuit of power, believe that threats of war preserve peace better than diplomatic efforts . Conversely, realists believe that war is the best way to preserve peace in the world .
 Diplomacy requires great intelligence, information, imagination, flexibility, ingenuity, and honesty to successfully maintain peaceful negotiations . Diplomacy is pursued for the prevention of armed aggression and peaceful settlement of conflicts .
 To quell controversies, manage quarrels without resort to force, is a huge challenge in world politics . To lessen tensions and promote mutual understanding between rivals, world politics is a big challenge .
 Convincing adversaries that their interests are served by forging cordial relations and engaging them in a web of mutual interests is fraught with difficulties . Negotiations between disputants often fail .
 Diplomats are sent to negotiate for his or her country, no matter what their skill or sincerity, they cannot succeed unless they have the full backing of their government’s authority . Compounding the challenge is the common liability that while diplomats are . negotiate for their country, it is
 Diplomats must possess authority to compromise and their leadership must accept the potential for public criticism for partially backing down to an adversary . Diplomats need to possess the authority to deal with an adversary, diplomats say .
 liberals regard negotiation as a preferred method for fostering international peace . Negotiating is a key part of the U.S. strategy to foster peace in the Middle East .
 The alternative to military power is ethically unacceptable to people seeking to avoid war . The alternative is coercive use of military power, the author says . "The alternative" is not acceptable, he says .
 International politics has been inventive in creating supplementary methods to reduce the threat of war . Fortunately, those playing the game of international politics have created supplementary methods .
 Several types of approaches are available for opponents facing dangerous relations and the threat of war . Several of these approaches are known to be available for political opponents .
 All are nested in the laws of nations accepted by the global community . All are now nested in laws of the world accepted by global community.
 Mediation occurs when an outside actor, either another state or a group of states in an intergovernmental organization, participate directly in negotiations between the parties to a dispute to aid them in recognizing their shared interests and proposing solutions based on these common interests .
 mediation is a conflict-resolution procedure in which a third party proposes a nonbinding solution to the disputants . Mediation of international crises has proven less successful when ethnic groups have been a player in the crisis that led to armed aggression .
 Feminist theory stresses the importance of gender in studying world politics . It explores the extent to which a “masculine” conceptualization of key ideas—such as power, interest, and security—shapes the conduct of foreign affairs .
 Others, however, claim that differences exist and are contextual, with each gender being more capable than the other in certain endeavors . Others say that each gender is more capable of certain endeavors than the others .
 realism portrays a competitive world with a preference for an instrumental masculine orientation to decision making . With its emphasis on the role of power in the amoral pursuit of narrow self-interest by rational actors, realism .
 Men are often comfortable negotiating in situations in which controlled conflict is expected . Thus men often negotiate in controlled conflict situations .
 Some argue that as a product of their traditional social roles, women tend to have interdependent self-schemas and a nurturing orientation provides them with valuable perspectives that are an asset to conflict negotiation and mediation .
 Women understand events in terms of a context that takes into account relationships as well as evolving situations . Moreover, women understand events as they take account of relationships and evolving situations.
 Eschewing the realist perspective of power achieved through competition, women tend to be more inclined to a liberal view of mutual empowerment achieved through cooperative interactions that construct connections and understanding .
 UN Resolution 1325 seeks to “increase the participation of women at decision making levels in conflict resolution and peace processes" in the interest of generating new perspectives and options for lasting conflict resolution . Women bring certain values to negotiation and mediation that are derived from their gendered socialization experiences
 As greater numbers of women are included in international negotiations, both will benefit from the perspectives of the other . The role of diplomacy in preventing and resolving conflict will be enhanced, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Liberals have long advocated that international law be strengthened in order to police armed aggression between states and to more capably provide for world order . Liberals say international law should be strengthened to protect against armed aggression .
 When you think about law, it is very likely that you construct an image of how law functions within the country in which you are residing . Law is not only a law in the country but also in the international community . It is an example of how international law functions in the United States
 In this constructed image, when a society perceives a particular type of behavior to be harmful, a law is predictably passed to prohibit it . In this image, the law is expected to be passed to prevent it from being harmful .
 The emergent consensus in many countries that underage drinking and smoking in public places are harmful led to new laws to regulate and prohibit these practices . In the U.S. it has been hard to find a solution to the problem .
 World War II is the first time the world has seen such a major event in the history of the world's history . It was not until recently that such events occurred .
 If murder and killing have been condemned in the precepts of your religion and prohibited by your country, you may be shocked to learn that the military drive for power has been legal in most historical phases of international law .
 Next, the chapter will look at the evolution of international law and how that situation came to be . The chapter will also look at how international law evolved in the past .
 In 1984, the United States announced that it would unilaterally withdraw from the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, or the World Court . The U.S. withdrew from the court in 1984 .
 Nicaragua accuses the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency of illegally attempting to destabilize the elected Sandinista government . This move follows Nicaragua’s accusation that the CIA had illegally attempted to “overthrow and destabilize” the elected government .
 Nicaragua charged the United States had illegally mined its ports and supplied money, military assistance, and training to the rebel contra forces . Nicaragua charged that the U.S. had illegally .
 In so doing, however, it was not acting without precedent; others had done so previously . Others had acted without precedent, but others did .
 Neither the court nor Nicaragua had any means of enforcing the ruling . Yet this ruling had little effect, as neither the country nor the court had any way of enforcing it .
 Many experts question whether international law is really law . International law is based on international law, but it's not always law .
 Most global activity falls within the realm oi private international law . The regulation of the kinds of transnational activities undertaken every day in such areas as commerce, communications, and travel is regulated .
 Private international law is the location for almost all international legal activities . Private law is invisible to the public, invisible to most of the public .
 It is where most transnational disputes are regularly settled and where the record of compliance compares favorably with that achieved in domestic legal systems . It is also where it is regularly settled in the absence of litigation .
 Public international law covers issues of relations between governments and the interactions of governments with intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations . In contrast, public international law focuses on relations between government and non-governmental organizations .
 Some believe that we should use the phrase world law to describe the mixture of public and private, domestic and international transactions that public international law seeks to regulate in an increasingly globalized world . The phrase is often used to refer to the complex nature of world law .
 The regulation of governmentto-government relations dominates the headlines in discussion of public international law . However, it is the regulation of relations between governments and governments that dominates the discussion .
 This area of activity also receives most of the criticism, for here, failures—when they occur—are conspicuous .
 This is especially true with respect to the breakdown of peace and security in Syria . This is particularly true in the country, especially in the aftermath of the Syrian conflict . The country has been in the grip of a crisis in Syria since 2003 .
 When states engage in armed conflict, criticism of public international law’s shortcomings escalates . International law's shortcomings have led to criticism of its shortcomings, says Peter Bergen .
 The inability of international law to control armed aggression is regarded as its greatest weakness . Without a doubt, the inability of public international law can be seen as the country's greatest weakness, he says .
 To cut deeper into the characteristics of contemporary international law, the chapter will next look briefly at some of its other salient characteristics . Private international law law pertaining to routine transnational intercourse between or among states as well as nonstate actors will be examined . Public international law laws pertaining to govern ment
 Core Principles of International Law: State sovereignty . No principle of international law is more important than state sovereignty . State sovereignty is an important part of the law .
 Since the 1648 Treaties of Westphalia, states have tried to reserve the right to perform within their territories in any way they choose .
 No authority is legally above the state, except that which the state voluntarily confers on the international organizations it joins . Sovereignty means that no authority can be legally above a state . No authority can legally be above that of the state .
 All the rules of international law express codes of conduct that protect states’ freedom . In fact, as conceived by theoreticians schooled in the realist tradition since the seventeenth century, all the rules are written in international law .
 Each state is given “a complete freedom of action” to do whatever it takes to preserve its sovereign independence . Each state has a ‘complete freedom to action’ to preserve their sovereignty .
 Nearly every legal doctrine supports and extends the cardinal principle that states are the primary subjects of international law . The United States is one of the world's most powerful states, according to the United Nations .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 expanded concern about states’ treatment of individual people . States remain supreme, but the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled on individual rights .
 The vast majority of rules address the rights and duties of states, not people, says the author of the law . The majority of the rules are designed to protect the rights of states and not people .
 The principle of sovereign equality entitles each state to full respect by other states as well as equal protection by the system’s legal rules . For instance, each state is given full respect and equal protection .
 The right of independence also guarantees states’ autonomy in their domestic affairs and external relations . The independence of each state presumes that of all, the independence of all presumes .
 The doctrine of neutrality permits states to avoid involvement in others’ conflicts and coalitions . Similarly, the doctrine of neutralism allows states not to engage in conflicts or coalitions.
 The noninterference principle forms the basis for the nonintervention norm —requiring states to refrain from uninvited activities within in another country’s territory . Furthermore, states should not engage in uninvite activities within the territory of another country .
 The classic rule gives governments the right to exercise jurisdiction over practically all things on, under, or above their bounded territory . This sometimes-abused classic rule means governments can exercise jurisdiction .
 Domestic jurisdiction permits a state to enact and enforce whatever laws it wishes for its own citizens . In practice, domestic jurisdiction permits states to enact whatever laws they wish for its citizens .
 A citizen was not protected against the state’s abuse of human rights or crimes against humanity . A citizen could not be protected against state's abuse of the human rights . The case was brought to light in a bid to prevent the state's abuses of rights .
 Sovereignty and the legal principles derived from it shape and reinforce international anarchy . Limitations of the International Legal System are limited to sovereignty .
 International law as constructed by realists was designed by states to protect the state, and thereby made sovereignty the core principle to ensure states’ freedom to act in terms of their perceived national interests . Realists constructed international law to ensure the state’s sovereignty .
 "Great powers alone have the capacity to promote wide acceptance and then enforce the transnational norms of statecraft they favor," he says .
 To liberal theoreticians, putting the state ahead of the global community was a serious flaw that undermined international law’s potential effectiveness, they say . To liberal theorists, it was a mistake to put the state of the world ahead of global community .
 Many theorists consider the international legal system institutionally defective due to its dependence on states’ willingness to participate in the legal system .
 Because formal legal institutions are weak at the global level, critics make the following points . Critics make the point that formal legal systems are weak globally .
 In world politics, no legislative body is capable of making binding laws . No legislative body in world politics can make binding laws, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Rules are made only when states willingly observe or embrace them in treaties to which they voluntarily subscribe . Rules are only made when states voluntarily observe them in the treaties they subscribe to them .
 Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice affirms this . Article of Article 38 affirms that the international court of justice affirms the right to freedom of expression . Article 38 states that the right of a person to have a right to an individual to have freedom of
 No judicial body exists to authoritatively identify and record the rules accepted by states, interpret when and how the rules apply, and identify violations . Second, in world politics, no judicial body is able to authorize and record and interpret the rules .
 In world politics, there is no executive body capable of enforcing the rules . Finally, in world politics there are no executive bodies able to enforce the rules, says David Cameron .
 Rule enforcement usually occurs through the unilateral self-help actions of the victims of a transgression . Victims of the transgression or with the assistance of their allies or other interested parties . Rule enforcement is usually through the victim's self help .
 No centralized enforcement procedures exist, and compliance is voluntary . Compliance is voluntary in the United States . The U.S. government has no authority to enforce it .
 The whole system rests on states’ willingness to abide by the rules to which they consent . The international community accepts as what ought to be practiced as what it should be practiced .
 States decide what rules are, when they apply, and how they should be enforced . States themselves, not a higher authority, decide what the rules are and how to enforce them . States are responsible for enforcement of the rules, not for enforcement .
 It is precisely this problem that prompts reformers to restrict the sovereign freedom of states and expand their common pursuit of shared legal norms in order to advance collective global interests over the interests of individual states .
 An effective legal system must represent the norms shared by those it governs, says John Defterios . He says it must be an effective system that reflects the norms of others it governs . Defterio: An effective system must be a model for the future of society .
 Shared community values are a minimal precondition for forming a legal system, says Roman law . According to the precept of Roman law, ubi societas, ibi jus (where there is society, there is law) shared community values must be shared to form a legal
 The contemporary international order is culturally and ideologically pluralistic . It lacks consensus on common values, as evidenced by the ‘clash of civilizations” (Berger and Huntington 2002) and the rejection by terrorists and others of Western-based international legal order .
 International law justifies the competitive pursuit of national advantage without regard to morality or justice . International law is used to justify the pursuit of international advantage, not morality .
 As in any legal system, in world politics what is legal is not necessarily moral . In world politics, the legal system is not always moral, it is not for moral reasons .
 International law is an instrument of the powerful to oppress the weak, says John Defterios . International law was used to oppress weak, he says. International law should not be used as a weapon of oppression, he adds .
 In a voluntary consent system, the rules to which the powerful willingly agree are those that serve their interests . The rules are the rules that serve the powerful, and those of the powerful can't abide by them .
 Hans Kelsen’s contention that “states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved” reflects the positivist legal theory that when a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal . E Adamson Hoebel's dictum that ‘what the most do
 Positivist legal theorists stress states’ customary practices as the most important source from which laws derive in the absence of formal machinery for creating international rules . In fact, highly regarded positivist legal . theorists stress state’s customary practices is the most significant source of laws .
 When the origins of international law are interpreted in this way, the actions of states shape law, not vice versa . The actions of nations shape international law, rather than vice versa, says Simon Tisdall .
 The vague, elastic wording of international law makes it easy for states to define and interpret almost any action as legitimate . It is easy for countries to define, interpret and interpret nearly any action they deem legitimate .
 The Abiding Relevance of International Law should not lead to the conclusion that it is irrelevant or useless . International law has deficiencies, but it should not be dismissed as useless or useless, says Peter Bergen .
 States find international law useful and expend much effort to shape its evolution . States themselves find it useful and spend much effort in shaping it up .
 The major reason that even the most powerful states usually abide by international legal rules is that they recognize that adherence pays benefits that outweigh the costs of expedient rule violation . Admiting international rules pays benefits outweigh the cost of an expedient violation . The most powerful state of the world usually
 Those that play the game of international politics by recognized rules receive rewards . States that ignore international law or opportunistically break customary norms pay costs for doing as they please .
 Violators also must fear retaliation by those victimized, as well as the loss of prestige . Violators must also fear retaliation from those who have been victimized .
 Only the most ambitious or reckless state is apt to disregard accepted standards of conduct . positivist legal theory stresses states' customs and habitual ways of behaving as the most important source of law .
 President Bush defended his government’s interrogation of terrorist suspects at the Guantanamo detainee prison by using such methods as frigid temperatures and simulated drowning . President Bush said the U.S. “does not torture people”
 Law helps shape expectations, and rules reduce uncertainty and enhance predictability, experts say . Rules reduce uncertainty by reducing uncertainty and enhancing predictability in international affairs .
 Transnational norms historically change in conjunction with each major transformation in world politics, such as shifts in the primary foreign policy goals that states are pursuing . As constructivist theory .
 According to this constructivist interpretation, the rules of international statecraft have changed in the aftermath of changes in the customary practices of how states are mostly behaving . This constructivism interpretation is that the rules have changed throughout the world's history .
 Every breakdown of international law, of course, does not prove the existence of general lawlessness . But it does not mean that lawlessness is widespread in the U.S.
 Street crime in cities worldwide at epidemic proportions . Ethnic and religious warfare within countries exacting a deadly toll against hundreds of minority groups . States’ domestic legal systems are clearly failing to prevent killing .
 This suggests that even when strong formal institutions for rule enforcement are in place, they do not and cannot guarantee compliance . This suggests, even when . strong formal . institutions for . rule enforcement do not guarantee compliance, it does not .
 "No legal system can deter all of its members from breaking existing laws," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not going to be able to stop people from breaking laws," he says .
 It is a mistake to expect a legal system to prevent all criminal behavior, says David Gergen . Gergen: It is wrong to expect the law to prevent criminal behavior or to assert any violation of the law proves the inadequacy of the legal structure .
 Law is designed to deter crime, but it is unreasonable to expect it to prevent it . Law is not designed to prevent crime but to deter it, says police chief .
 The allegedly “deficient” international legal system may perform its primary task, inhibiting interstate violence, even more effectively than supposedly more-sophisticated domestic systems .
 Perhaps, then, the usual criteria by which critics assess legal systems are dubious, are dubious . Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps this is not the case for the first time .
 Liberal reformers complain that international law is the weakest in controlling armed aggression . International law is an institutional device for communicating to the policymakers of various states a consensus on the nature of the international system .
 International law may actually encourage war . International law says states are ‘legally bound to respect each other’s independence and other rights, yet free to attack each other at will’
 Changes in international law have followed changes in the moral consensus about the ethics of using armed force in interstate relations, say constructivists .
 Just war doctrine is the moral criteria identifying when a just war may be undertaken and how it shouid be fought once it begins . It is important to understand the origins of just war theory and the way it is evolving today, before reviewing contemporary changes in the legal rules of warfare that
 Many people are confused by international law because it both prohibits and justifies the use of force . The changing ethics of using armed force in the U.S. is changing .
 The Christian was obligated, he felt, to fight against evil and wickedness . The Christian felt obligated to fight evil, he said .
 St. Augustine said the City of Man was inherently sinful, in contrast to God's City of God . Augustine said that in Augustine, the city of God was sinless .
 The modern just war doctrine evolved from this perspective, as developed by such humanist reformers as Hugo Grotius . Just war doctrine was developed in the wake of the Second World War in the 1930s .
 He challenged the warring Catholic and Protestant Christian powers in the Thirty Years’ War to abide by humane standards of conduct .
 For war to be moral, it must also be fought by just means without harm to innocent noncombatants . War must be won by means without harming innocents, the author says . War is moral, but it must be fought without harming innocent people .
 The latter specifies restraints on the range of permissible tactics to be used in fighting a just war . The latter is a set of rules that govern the use of tactics in a war .
 Thomas More contended that the assassination of an evil leader responsible for starting a war was justified if it would prevent the taking of innocent lives . Thomas More said the assassination was justified because it was necessary to prevent the killing of innocent people .
 His treatise called on the great powers to resolve their conflicts by judicial procedures rather than on the battlefield . He specified legal principles he felt could encourage cooperation, peace, and more humane treatment of people .
 These ethical criteria continue to color thinking about the rules of warfare and the circumstances under which the use of armed force is legally permissible .
 Insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on Improvised Explosive Devices planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers . LEDs left in the open in order to kill without risk of death to the killers .
 Today’s lEDs are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs . LEDs were invented by the United States and now on the global black market for purchase by transnational extremists .
 Hugo Grotius, father of international law, 1631, was father-of-international law . Because containment and prevention of violence have become the chief purposes of arms, Mlerevelt, Michiel van .
 Stedelijk Museum Het Prinsenhof, Delft, The Netherland/Erich Lessing/Art Resource, Inc. is a Dutch museum .
 Just war theory reflects the quest to place legal constraints on the use of armed force in order to create a moral consensus about the conditions under which ends justify means, even though disagreements continue about the criteria that should be accepted .
 These differences became especially evident in the heated debate after the U.S. preemptive invasion of Iraq .
 E TO ra ra ra ^ O ■a 9^ £ ■q.h o ro 00 ""o cn 4< T3 o Armed Conflict FIGURE 10. A. To ra ra . O ■ a 9* 9* to ra . A. to ra 9* .
 Legal restraints on the historic right of states to start a war have fluctuated over time . They have increased steadily since World War I when that carnage prompted the global community to make wars of conquest illegal . The global community has made wars of conquests illegal since that war ended in 1918 .
 Since 9/11, these legal prohibitions have been questioned in the aftermath of the U.S. efforts to promote preemption as a legal right to repel the /rofenfenf/a/aggression of another state or nonstate terrorist network even before its threat of attack
 Others disagree, with some suggesting that United States intent in waging war was justifiable, as Saddam Hussein intentionally let the U.S. believe Iraq had weapons of mass destruction . Others disagree .
 The 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq has made the legality of the use of force a hot topic . The legality of using force in Iraq has been a hot question since 2003 .
 Bush administration claimed Saddam Hussein had close ties with Al Qaeda terrorist network that orchestrated the 9/11 attack on the U.S. The Bush administration also claimed that Saddam Hussein has close ties to the Al Qaeda network . Saddam Hussein is accused of having ties to Al Qaeda .
 Saddam Hussein would “stop at nothing until something stops him,"" the U.S. undertook a massive attack to overthrow the rogue dictator .
 More than six years later, American troops remain locked in deadly fighting with Iraqi insurgents and suicide terrorist bombers . U.S. troops are still fighting in Iraq, Afghanistan and Islamic holy lands .
 80 percent of the Iraqi population saw the American troops as an invading army rather than their liberators . Many in the U.S. expected to be welcomed with rice and rose petals .
 As the body toll of American troops climbed to the thousands, criticism of the war’s purposes, conduct, and strategy mounted in U.S. public opinion .
 Even U.S. intelligence agencies could uncover no evidence, as the United States had claimed, that Saddam Hussein had been either hiding weapons of mass destruction or had supported Al Quada’s terrorist attack .
 This “liberal-hawk” abrupt shift in the U.S. rationale tor the Iraq war raises important questions about the conditions, if any, under which it is just for any country to wage war .
 These questions lie at the intersection of the debate between realists and liberals . These types of questions are central to the ethical evaluation of international behavior .
 Policy makers are divided about the purposes for which military force might be justifiably used . Policy makers and analysts are divided over the purposes of using military force .
 Former National Security Advisor General Brent Scowcroft calls himself an “enlightened realist” as well as a “cynical idealist,” who calls himself a liberal idealist . He says a true realist does not employ the military for selfless
 International law has begun to fundamentally revise its traditional prohibition against military intervention in the wake of the recent wave of terrorism by states against their own people .
 The belief that governments have a right, even an obligation, to intervene in the affairs of other states under certain conditions has won advocates . For humanitarian purposes, governments should intervene in other states' affairs, advocates say .
 The result has been the collapse of the Westphalian principle that what a state does within its own borders is its own business . The result of the collapse has been a state doing what it does within the borders, he says . The collapse of this principle has been described as the collapse
 This rule change permits states and international organizations to punish acts of genocide by re-interpreting the traditional rule against external interference in the internal affairs of another state and making outside intervention permissible .
 International law develops and changes most rapidly when global problems arise that require collective solutions and legal military necessity . Violation of the rules of warfare may be excused for defensive purposes during periods of extreme emergency .
 Since 1820, the illegality of intervening in sovereign states has changed, as measured by changes in international law about the prevailing consensus regarding rules for international conduct . Overtime is measured by changing the law's meaning of international law .
 Since 1960, international law has adopted an increasingly permissive posture toward coercive diplomacy for a variety of purposes . This includes humanitarian aid, preventing genocide, protecting civil liberties, promoting democracy through “reform interventions,” and combating terrorism .
 The spread of genocide and atrocities in failed states and countries ruled by tyrants has spawned new sets of legal rules to arrest these dangers . The new legal rules are aimed at stopping the spread of these dangers in these countries .
 The rising frequency of global terrorism has pushed efforts to rewrite international law to permit interventions within countries that provide terrorists a secure base of operations .
 Attention to terrorism has led to increased cooperation and spawned new branches of international law . Attention to the threat of terrorism has also led to greater cooperation and increased international cooperation .
 Terrorism has prompted states to step up their mutual cooperation on criminal matters based on common interest . The cooperation aims to prevent terrorist groups from attacking innocent civilians or state officials .
 These restraints include the principles of discrimination and noncombatant immunity . The principles are intended to protect innocent civilians by restricting military targets to soldiers and supplies .
 Laws of retaliation specify conditions under which certain practices are legitimate . The laws of retaliation can only be applied to certain practices .
 One category of coercive power, reprisals (hostile and illegal acts permitted only if made in proportionate response to prior hostile and illegal act) stipulates procedures for military occupations, blockades, shows of force, and bombardments . One category, reprisal, is permitted only
 Embargoes, boycotts, import quotas, tariffs, and travel restrictions to redress grievances . Retortive retorsion (hostile but legal retaliatory acts made in response to similar legal acts initiated by other states) provides rules for embargoes .
 The advent of a new set of legal justifications for military intervention to protect civilians is explained by the fact that noncombatants have become the primary victims in warfare . Noncombatants are the primary targets in warfare, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 The ratio of soldiers to civilians killed between 1914 and 1918 was about 90 to 10 . The ratio between soldiers and civilians killed in 1914-191919 was about 10 to 90 .
 Liberal and constructivist reformers have a long way to travel to fulfill their wish to see international law strengthen . International law should be more effectively police international armed aggression, they say .
 Reformers take heart from the trends that have recently enabled international law to increase its capacity to manage the threat of war within states, between states, and through global terrorism . However, reformers say they hope that international law will continue to improve .
 International law is and should remain irrelevant to states’ use of armed force, they say . And they question those cynics who still contend that international law is irrelevant to state’s use of force .
 It is a mistake, therefore, to claim that international law has broken down whenever war breaks out, it is said . It is also a mistake to say international law breaks down when it comes to a war .
 Legal procedures exist to resolve conflicts before they erupt into open hostilities . The U.S. military says it has no obligation to engage in military action .
 Legal procedures often make recourse to violence unnecessary by resolving disputes that might otherwise escalate to war . Although law cannot prevent war, legal procedures can often make it unnecessary to resolve disputes .
 International Court of Justice is the primary court established by the United Nations for resolving legal disputes between states . It provides advisory opinions to international agencies and the UN General Assembly .
 The demonstrable capacity of legal methods to reduce the frequency of war does not mean that international adjudicative machinery is well developed or functionally effective . International adjudicatorship machinery is not well developed and functionally effective, says David Cameron .
 The World Court was created after World War II as the highest judicial body on Earth . It is the only international court with universal scope and general jurisdiction . Nowhere is this more evident than in the United States .
 More than three hundred bilateral or multilateral treaties provide for the World Court to have jurisdiction in the resolution of disputes arising from their application for a legal interpretation .
 A weakness in the World Court is that it cannot rule on cases that states do not bring to it . The World Court cannot make rulings only on disputes freely submitted by states exercising their sovereign rights .
 State sovereignty is protected, and many states have traditionally been hesitant to use the court because ICJ decisions are final . There is no opportunity to appeal, and there is no chance to appeal . State sovereignty has been protected by ICJ decision .
 The trends in the World Court’s activity are not encouraging to advocates of world law . The trend in the world court's activity is not encouraging, say experts .
 The number of sovereign states since 1950 has tripled, the court’s caseload has not increased at the same rate . The court has not seen a rise in sovereign states .
 Once the court has ruled on these cases, disputants have complied with ICJ judgments only a little more than half of the time . ICJ rulings have been made by the International Court of Justice only about a little over half of a time . Disputants comply with judgments only
 Most states remain reluctant to voluntarily use judicial procedures to settle their most important international disputes . This record suggests that while approval for using the court of law to resolve international conflicts is increasingly voiced, most states are reluctant .
 International law now holds leaders of countries accountable for war crimes as war criminals . It is encouraging that the global community has radically revised international law to prevent the horror of civilian casualties .
 International law prohibits leaders from allowing their militaries to undertake actions in violation of certain principles accepted by the international community, such as the protection of innocent noncombatants . The United States is prohibited from taking part in any military action against Syria .
 Formerly, when violations occurred, little could be done except to condemn those acts . International law then failed to hold leaders to the same standards it held soldiers and military officers who committed atrocities against enemy civilians and captured soldiers .
 Previously, international law exempted leaders from legal jurisdiction under the doctrine of “sovereign immunity .” Even when their commands ignored the laws of war, they were exempt from legal action .
 The formation of international criminal tribunals in 1993 signaled to would-be perpetrators the global community’s intolerance for these atrocities . The form of the international criminal tribunal signaled the world's intolerance for atrocities .
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia was established in 1993 . It was followed by the International Criminal Tribeses for Rwanda and Rwanda in 1994 .
 Slobodan Milosevic was the architect of four wars in the 1990s that killed more than 250,000 and tore the Balkans apart . He died in March 2006 in his Hague prison cell while facing trial . The former Yugoslav president died in his prison cell .
 The ICTY and the ICTR were set up by the United Nations on an ad hoc basis for a limited time period and a specific jurisdiction . They underscored the need for a permanent global criminal court . Both the U.N. set up in the 1990s were set
 The ICC only pursues a case when a state’s courts are unwilling or unable to do so . It brings charges only against international criminal tribunals . The ICC was established by the United Nations to prosecute those responsible for wartime atrocities and genocide .
 International Criminal Court is a court established by international treaty for indicting and administering justice to people committing war crimes . Court was established by . treaty for . indicting . people committing . war crimes. International Criminal . Court . established by treaty for indictment of people committing crimes .
 A Ticking Bomb state-sponsored terrorism is formal assistance, training, and arming of foreign terrorists by a state in order to achieve foreign policy and/or domestic goais war crimes . The international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of
 ICC has opened investigations into atrocities in Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, and Darfur . In March 2009, the ICC issued a warrant for the arrest of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for genocide .
 ICC could become a useful mechanism for dealing with mid-level thugs and warlords, or retired dicators, where in-country prosecutions are considered too contentious . The ICC could be a useful tool to deal with warlords or retired warlords .
 The current definition of ‘crimes of aggression’ could run contrary to the interests of many states, particularly those in the Global North . Among the most prominent legal issues facing the court is the need to refine the currently vague definition .
 The criminalization of rulers’ state-sponsored terrorism raises the legal restraints on the initiation and conduct of war to an all-time high . Nonetheless, the criminalization . raises the . legal restraints . on the . initiation and . conduct of . war to be legal .
 World order will depend to a considerable extent on the future uses to which states put international law . Law’s Contribution to Peace and Justice will depend on future uses of international law, says Peter Bergen .
 Alleged shortcomings of international law do not lie with the laws but with their creators, states . States and their continuing realpolitik dedication to preserving sovereignty as a legal right in order to protect states' independence and autonomy .
 The crucial factor in determining the future role of international law depends on which trend prevails . The key to determining future role in international law will be the outcome of the current trend .
 The United States reserves the right to decide which cases it will permit the World Court to hear . The U.S. in 2002 pledged that it would continue to act in accordance with its so-called Connally amendment .
 U.S. preference is to try cases in United States courts and let others use U.N. courts as global arbiters of global rights and wrongs . The United States prefers to be seen as a global arbiter of global human rights and rights, not an arbiter .
 It now enables victims of torture, genocide, slavery, and war crimes to try to get justice in U.S. courts . Victims of torture and genocide can now get justice through the courts in the United States .
 Five Chinese civilians sued Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng in an American court for his role in the 1989 crackdown in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square .
 The United States Supreme Court in 2004 upheld this old law by allowing victims of Abu Chraib prison abuses to sue United States contractors . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2004 that the law allows the victims to sue the United States .
 The EU’s twenty-seven members give the European Court of Human Rights the power to exercise authoritative jurisdiction . In Central and South America the Inter-American Court on Human Rights routinely makes binding decisions .
 The global community could, in principle, follow Europe’s and South America's lead and strengthen international law's capacity . Europe could follow the lead of the U.S. and Latin America, says the European Commission .
 In this chapter, you have inspected two of the major liberal paths to peace; procedures for the negotiated settlement of international disputes and the legal control of armed aggression . In the next chapter, we will look at the ways to avoid armed aggression in Syria .
 As the construction of international norms and ideas in world politics evolve to place greater emphasis on global responsibility, humanitarianism, and the importance of justice for all, there are promising prospects for a more just and stable world order . Both routes have pitfalls but, as well, both have pitfalls,
 In the next chapter, you will consider other liberal and constructivist avenues to enhance collective security and international peace . The next chapter will be a look at other ways to enhance security and peace .
 The 21st century must be, if we are to survive it, an age that all nations understand as ill-suited to gladiators and leviathans . An age that will reward countries that share a commitment to transparency, cooperation, and mutual benefit, Talbott says
 They have mobilized to exert pressure to contain arms races, global warming, warfare, and world poverty, among other causes . They have called for the arms race to be stopped .
 Ten demonstrations were held around the world on the same day . Demonstrators pressed for humanitarian aid to fight African poverty in Africa .
 Not all trends are converging, and some are pulling against others in opposite directions . But not all trends have converged, and not all are pulling together .
 Whatever their collective impact on one another, it seems certain that your future world will be different from the one that now exists . Whatever their combined impact on each other, the future world is likely to be different .
 The things you desire cannot all be obtained, and so you will confront making trade-offs among incompatible choices about how to set priorities and best help forge a better world . You will confront having to make difficult choices among incompatible priorities .
 Many of your value preferences lie at the vortex of the contest between realist and liberal thought, and they defy easy reconciliation . Many of these preferences lie in the vortex between realists and liberals .
 You want your country to be militarily powerful for defense, but you do not want other countries to build their military capabilities . You must dread the prospect of a world darkened by the worldwide proliferation of weapons .
 Many of the things you value can only be served by some sacrifice of other values . Many of these things can be served only by sacrifice of others, says author .
 In this chapter, focus your attention on some of the major ways in which liberal international thought directly challenges the assumptions underlying realist thinking about world politics .
 From constructivist and identity perspectives, consider the importance of progressive ideas and norms in shaping international behavior and collective conceptions of world politics . Also consider, from constructivist . perspectives, also consider the . importance of . progressive ideas in shaping . international behavior .
 Three major roads to world order are pursued: disarmament, collective security through international organizations, and the building of a single world culture through the promotion of free trade and free governments worldwide . This will require you to contemplate the consequences that are likely to result if these are pursued .
 All three are questioned and are opposed by the dominant strains of thought in the realist theoretical tradition . The realist theory of realist theories is questioned and opposed .
 If your country is militarily stronger than its rivals, it is not very likely to be attacked . If you are stronger than your rivals, you are less likely to have a chance of being attacked by your country .
 Using counterfactual logic by asking what would be the likely consequences if all countries adhered to this advice and what would happen if your country did not build bigger and better weapons capabilities, you might arrive at another conclusion .
 Your country may become less secure, not more, as it builds its military might . Your country will be less secure if it builds military might, as a result of this .
 In this construction, the security dilemma figures prominently . When a country builds armaments, alarmed neighbors mistrust its claims that the weapons are for defensive purposes, and in fearful reaction begin to vigorously arm themselves also . In fearful reaction, neighboring countries begin to arm themselves .
 All the arming parties are now more vulnerable; wanting peace, war preparations increase the likelihood of war . Want peace, want peace and want to avoid war. Want peace? Want peace. Want war? War preparations increase likelihood of conflict .
 Sir John Frederick Maurice wrote in his memoirs, “I went into the British Army believing that if you want peace you must prepare for war.” Sir Frederick Maurice . Maurice wrote: ‘I went . into the . British Army . believing that . if you . want
 The destructiveness of today’s weapons has inspired many people to embrace the conclusion that reducing the weapons of war can increase the prospects for global peace .
 There is no single constructivist position on armaments or armed aggression, there is a widespread interest in moving beyond a limited traditional conception of security to one that takes into account the consequence of progressive ideas and human creativity .
 Constructivists take into account both the material and communicative sources of war and peace . Realists and liberals emphasize the material underpinnings of war, peace, but constructivists emphasize the communicative source .
 Constructivist perspective is complimentary to the liberal emphasis on institutional and normative paths to peace . Constrained constraints on the development and spread of weapons of war are critical to global security, says author .
 Many feminist scholars share a critical view of the role of weapons of mass destruction in ensuring global security . They say the role is vital to ensuring the world's security .
 There is hope that reduction in armaments will lead to less armed aggression and a safer and more secure world .
 In thinking about the control of the spread of weapons around the world, keep in mind that it is not strictly a tenet of liberal theory alone . The control of weapons in the world is a key part of the liberal theory, but it's not a strictly a theory .
 Realists are reluctant to view arms control as a path to peace . Most policy makers who have negotiated agreements to limit arms have been realists . They perceived such treaties as prudent tools to promote security by balancing military power with the threat of war .
 Theories of International Relations: Realism versus Liberalism . Arms control agreements negotiated cooperatively to set ceilings on military force levels . multilateral agreements among three or more states to ensure that a common problem is alleviated .
 Disarmament versus Arms Control as Routes to Peace must be considered in consideration of international security . Several distinctions must be made in any consideration of this approach to international security, author says .
 It aims to reduce or eliminate armaments or classes of armaments completely, usually by a negotiated reciprocal agreement between two or more rivals . The aim is to prevent the use of those weapons in warfare .
 Arms control is designed to regulate arms levels either by limiting their growth or by restricting how they might be used . Arms control aims to control arms levels by limiting how they are used or by limiting the growth of arms .
 It results from agreements between potential enemies to cooperate in order to reduce the probability that conflicting interests will erupt in warfare . It also reduces the scope of violence in any armed conflict that may nonetheless occur .
 Where they part ways is in their respective posture toward the advantages of disarmament versus arms control, they say .
 Liberals are more willing to take a heroic leap of faith and consider disarmament as a workable possibility for peace . Liberals are willing to make a heroic step of faith, but not disarmament .
 Arms control is based on recognition that a true conflict of interest between rivals exists . Realists who see a positive contribution potentially made when enemies negotiate an agreement to balance their weapons .
 Controlling war by reducing weapons inventories is hardly a novel idea . Instead, it would be a way of controlling the supply of arms and ammunition .
 Few states have negotiated disarmament agreements until recently . Yet, until recently, few countries have negotiated such agreements . The U.S. is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Canada and the U.S. disarmed the Great Lakes region through the 1817 Rush-Bagot Agreement . The agreement was part of the Rush-bagot agreement .
 These kinds of achievements have been relatively rare in history . Nonetheless, they are rare in the world of science fiction and science fiction .
 Most disarmament has been involuntary, the product of reductions imposed by the victors in the immediate aftermath of a war, as when the Allied powers attempted to disarm a defeated Germany after World War 1 . Most disarmaments have been involuntary .
 In addition to arms control and disarmament, you should also distinguish between bilateral agreements and multilateral agreements . The U.S. should also be careful to distinguish between multilateral and bilateral agreements, experts say .
 Because the former involves only two countries, such agreements are often easier to negotiate and to enforce than are the latter, which involve three or more countries . Because of only two nations, the agreement involves only a single country, it's easier to enforce .
 Bilateral arms agreements tend to be more successful than multilateral agreements, experts say . As a result, bilateral arms agreements are more successful, they say . The U.S. has a history of successful arms agreements .
 This chapter will look briefly at the record of SovietAmerican negotiations . It will examine the checkered history of multilateral arms control and disarmament . This chapter looks at the history of the Soviet-American arms negotiations .
 The Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States never degenerated into a trial of military strength . Bilateral Arms Control and Disarmament was first place in the Cold War .
 The 1963 Hot Line Agreement established a direct radio and telegraph communications system between the two governments . The agreement was aimed at stabilizing the military balance and reducing the risk of war .
 Each of these bilateral treaties lowered tensions and helped build a climate of trust that encouraged efforts to negotiate further agreements . Each treaty lowered tensions .
 The most important agreements between the superpowers were the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks of 1972 and 1979 . The Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987 and the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty of 2002 were the most important .
 First two agreements stabilized the nuclear arms race, and the remaining agreements reduced the weapons in each side’s inventories . The first two agreements stabilize the arms race .
 When the Cold War ended in 1991, the U.S. still had more than ninety-five hundred nuclear warheads . Russia had about eight thousand warheads .
 The U.S. and Russia reached a series of historic disarmament agreements that has cut the number of new nuclear warheads in their stockpiles dramatically . After decades in which the two rivals engaged in an arms race, the two nations engaged in a rapidly expanded arms race that increased the size
 Since their 1986 peak, the sizes of the two superpowers’ nuclear arsenals have declined by nearly 90 percent . They will decline much further by 2012 as a result of the 2002 Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty . The treaty was part of the agreement between Washington and Beijing .
 This disarmament achievement has inspired other nuclear powers to discontinue building and expanding their nuclear arsenal . Other nuclear powers have also stopped building their nuclear weapons .
 Most of the other nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear weapons since the 2002 treaty . As a result of the treaty, most of the world's nuclear powers are not stockpiling nuclear weapons .
 Fears that disarmament will not continue are rising . That said, threatened states are always tempted to rearm, and therefore fears are growing .
 The U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and, with the 1997 START-Ill agreement ratified by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of both sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks . The treaty aims to lower the risk of nuclear war
 The U.S.-Russian agreement to reduce the number of strategic warheads to between 1,700 and 2,200 for each country by 2012 . Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty . Treaty .
 Also dispelling disarmament hopes was Russia’s successful test in August 2008 of a new long-range nuclear missile . Russia tested a new nuclear missile in 2008 .
 Topol intercontinental stealth rocket has a range of 6,125 miles, posing a threat to peace in Europe . Designed to dodge defense systems, the Topol can also evade defense systems . Topol is designed to dodge missile defense systems and can reach 6,000 miles .
 The record of successful bilateral arms control and even disarmament between the U.S. and Russia attests to the possibilities for rival military powers to contain by agreement a dangerous arms race .
 Multilateral Arms Control and Disarmament History provides many examples of multilateral arms control and disarmament efforts . History provides examples of arms control efforts .
 As early as the eleventh century, the Second Lateran Council prohibited the use of crossbows in fighting . Crossbows were banned in the 11th century as well as in the 12th century .
 In 1899 and 1907, International Peace Conferences at The Hague restricted the use of some weapons and prohibited others . Peace conferences at the Hague restricted use of weapons and banned others .
 The leaders of the United States, Britain, Japan, France, France and Italy signed treaties at the Washington Naval Conferences agreeing to adjust the relative tonnage of their fleets .
 The 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty prohibited the transfer of nuclear weapons and production technologies to nonnuclear weapons states . The treaty is one of the most restrictive in the history of nuclear disarmament .
 In 2005, painstaking negotiations sought to renew and preserve the NPT, which promotes the nonproliferation that had stopped the spread of nuclear weapons of mass destruction . India and Pakistan, though themselves not signatories to the Npt, broke NPT’s barriers to become nuclear
 The final consensus documents to the 2005 NPT renewal conference are considered politically binding, giving a boost to nonproliferation . The NPT renewals are seen as politically binding by the NPT .
 North Korea violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons . North Korea later violated the nuclear pact with the U.S. to develop nuclear arms .
 Some states that signed the original agreement are wondering whether the deal they were handed by the ‘nuclear club’ in 1968 was a raw one . The deal was signed by the "nuclear club" in 1968 .
 They observe failure of the original nuclear powers to honor their pledge to disarm . The U.S. talk of building new nuclear weapons and using them against nonnuclear states, they say .
 Nearly eighty-four hundred nuclear war heads remain (SIPRI2009, 345), and more and more countries are acquiring the means to produce them . More than 80% of the world's nuclear weapons are produced .
 Eears of nuclear proliferation were inflamed by Iran’s test-firing in late September 2009 of missiles capable of striking Israel, parts of Europe, and parts of the Persian Gulf . Iran has also unveiled a secret underground nuclear plant where nuclear fuel is manufactured .
 U.N. Security Council sought to strengthen rules to stop spread of nuclear weapons in 2009 . U.S. joined efforts to stop nuclear weapons' spread .
 Resolution commits all member states to ratification of test ban treaty, stronger national controls on exports so as to secure nuclear materials within four years . Resolution also calls for review and strengthen the NPT in 2010 .
 On October 1, 2009, Iran agreed to open the facility to international inspection . Iran agreed in talks with the U.S. and other major powers to open it to inspection .
 Some are skeptical of the Security Council’s ability to monitor and punish nuclear development . Yet some continue to be skeptical .
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said the most urgent challenge facing this body is to prevent the tyrants of Tehran from acquiring nuclear weapons . This concern was expressed by Netanyahu who said before the General Assembly that “most urgent challenge’s facing is preventing Iran from getting nuclear weapons’
 Eurther nuclear nonproliferation remains much in doubt, and in recognition of these serious trends . E.N.P.A. nuclear non-prosperity remains a serious question . The U.S. has been involved in nuclear disarmament since the 1970s .
 President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting the spread of nuclear weapons . President Obama challenges the world's commitment to confront the threat .
 The obstacles to arms control and disarmament are formidable . The obstacles are formidable. Arms Control and Disarmament is a key component of disarmament .
 Critics complain that these agreements only regulate obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive for developing in the first place .
 Parties often set ceilings higher than the number of weapons currently deployed, so they do not have to slash their inventories . Even when agreements are reached on modern, sophisticated weapons, they often set higher ceilings .
 A second pitfall is the propensity of limits on one type of weapon system to prompt developments in another system . The limits on a weapon system can lead to development in other systems, experts say .
 Like a balloon that is squeezed at one end but expands at the other, constraints on certain parts of a country’s arsenal can lead to enhancements elsewhere . The U.S. needs to be able to expand its arsenal in the coming years, experts say .
 The 1972 SALT I agreement limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles possessed by the U.S. and Soviet Union . An example can be seen in the 1972 agreement .
 In short, the quantitative freeze on launchers led to qualitative improvements in their warhead delivery systems . antipersonnel landmines are weapons buried below the surface of the soil that explode on contact when any person— soldier or citizen— steps on them .
 Also reducing faith in future meaningful arms control is the slow, weak, and ineffective ability of the global community to ban some of the most dangerous and counterproductive weapons . The global community has been slow to ban such weapons, experts say .
 Landmines cannot discriminate between soldiers and civilians . Consider the case of antipersonnel landmines , which can discriminate between civilians .
 Each year they kill or maim more than twenty-six thousand people—almost all of them civilians . It is estimated that about one mine exists for every fifty people in the world .
 Antipersonnel mines are triggered by the contact or presence of a person . The mines can be triggered by contact, presence or contact of a human .
 Indiscriminate weapons of war that do not recognize a ceasefire or termination of hostilities, they kill or cause injuries such as destroyed limbs, burns and blindness . Weapons of war are not allowed to be used in combat .
 Burin is being treated for the loss of his right leg and other serious wounds that he received while picking strawberries in a field in southern Kosovo . Burin, in a hospital with his mother, is in a stable condition in the hospital .
 In 1994, not a single state would endorse a prohibition on these deadly weapons . Not every state in 1994 would endorse such a ban .
 It took peace activist Jody Williams to organize the International Campaign to Ban Landmines . It led to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines that opened for signature in 1997 .
 A final problem facing those advocating arms control and disarmament is continuous innovation . The problem facing arms control advocates is that they must continue to innovate .
 By the time that limits are negotiated on one type of weapon, a new generation of weapons has emerged . The U.S. has not been able to negotiate limits on how many weapons it can produce .
 Modern technology is creating an ever-widening range of novel weapons . The weapons are increasingly smaller, deadlier, and easier to conceal .
 On the surface, the incentives for meaningful arms control seem numerous . But they are not all the reasons for arms control .
 Realists and liberal theorists both agree that the world could be a better place if countries see their selfinterests served by international cooperation . Realists believe that international cooperation is a good thing for the world .
 Realists and liberals hold differing views about the prospects of cooperation in the U.S.-led world .
 The two schools of thought have been engaged in a controversial debate about why competition often trumps cooperation . The two sides of the debate are engaged in an ongoing debate about cooperation .
 One way to address this question is to examine the logic underlying the well-known “Prisoner’s Dilemma"" game . One way is to address the question: What do you think?
 It illuminates the circumstantial barriers to international cooperation among distrustful transnational actors across many arenas of international politics . It is especially relevant to arms control and arms races, especially .
 District attorney convicts two suspects on illegal weapons charge . The district attorney is certain that they are guilty but only has sufficient evidence to convict them . Imagine two suspects following an armed robbery .
 If one prisoner confesses and the other doesn’t, he will be given immunity from prosecution for providing evidence . His accomplice will get a sentence often years in the state penitentiary . If one of the prisoners confesses, the other will get years in prison .
 If both confesses they will be given a reduced sentence of five years in the penitentiary . If they confess, they will receive a reduced five-year sentence .
 If neither confesses, they will be convicted on the weapons charge and serve only six months in the county jail . If neither confessed, they would be convicted of a weapons charge . If both confesses they will serve six months behind bars .
 The matrix depicts the results that will occur depending on whether each prisoner chooses to cooperate with his accomplice by remaining silent or confessing to the district attorney . The matrix shows the results depending on the outcome of each prisoner choosing to cooperate or defect .
 Both men want as little time behind bars as possible, and they are being interrogated separately so they cannot communicate . Remember that they both want to be behind bars .
 The optimal strategy for both prisoners would be to tacitly cooperate with each other and keep quiet . The structural properties of this situation are such that there are powerful incentives to defect from your partner and provide incriminating evidence to the district attorney .
 First, there is an offensive incentive to defect based on the prospect of getting immunity by confessing . Second, the incentive is to defect because it could be protected from prosecution .
 Second, there is a defensive incentive to defect grounded in the fear of being double-crossed by an accomplice who squeals . There is also a defensive reason to defect, and there is also an incentive to do so so .
 Both prisoners conclude that it is in their self-interest to defect and testify against one another . They both receive a less than optimal result than if they had tacitly cooperated by remaining silent .
 By cooperating to lower arms spending they could devote more resources to other national needs such as education and health care . But given incentives that are similar to those tempting the two prisoners in our earlier example, they both conclude that it is in their individual self-interest to play it safe and arm
 As a result of their joint detection , they end up worse off by locking themselves into an expensive arms race that may destabilize the prevailing balance of power . The U.S. and Russia end up locking themselves in a costly arms race .
 The first number in each celi of this matrix is A’s payoff . The second number is the second number in the matrix . NOTE: This matrix is a matrix of two variables .
 The number 1 represents tbe most preferred outcome, whereas 4 represents the least preferred outcome . The number 4 represents is the least desired outcome .
 This version of the Prisoner's Dilemma game is a simplification that does not take into account what might happen in repeated plays overtime . It highlights for you some of the difficulties in reaching mutually beneficial arms control agreements among self-interested actors .
 Most countries are reluctant to limit their armaments because of the self-help system that requires each state to protect itself . Self-help systems require each country to protect its own interests . Most countries in the world have no right to limit armaments .
 Policy makers say national security is best protected by developing military capabilities, not by reducing armaments or military spending . Policy makers read from the realist script, which insists that national security needs to be protected .
 They counsel against putting faith in arms control treaties because deception and broken promises are to be expected by ruthless leaders in the global jungle .
 Realists advise reliance on reliance on unilateral self-help through military preparedness . Arms control agreements that cannot be enforced can't be enforced, they say .
 The realist mind-set was evident in U.S. decisions at the turn of the century to reject an array of international treaties designed to control the threat of nuclear weapons . The realists were very evident in the United States' rejection of treaties .
 During 2001 alone, the United States decided to abrogate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, withdraw from a UN conference to impose limits on illegal trafficking of small arms, and reject proposed enforcement measures for the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention . The U.S. abrogated the
 This disregard for arms control set a standard for other states to follow, it has been claimed . It has set a new precedent for other countries to follow .
 The 1972 ABM treaty was regarded by many as the cornerstone of nuclear arms control . It was the first time in modern history that the U.S. had renounced a major international accord .
 It ignited fears that a global chain reaction of massive repudiations of arms control agreements by other states would follow .
 In 2007 Russia threatened to quit the INF missile treaty and to place a moratorium on the CFE treaty . Russia has also threatened to pull out of the treaty in 2007 .
 President Obama indicated a renewed interest in controlling the spread of deadly weapons . However, while acknowledging a continued commitment to defensive military preparation, Obama said that “we are spending billions of dollars on missile defense”
 In September 2009 the United States announced plans to scrap its missile defense shield program in Poland and the Czech Republic . Further signaling a change in policy, the U.S. scrapped the program .
 The eight known nuclear states have conducted a total of 2,064 nuclear explosions in twenty-four different locations since 1945 . An average of one test every eleven days since 1945 has been conducted by eight states .
 China and U.S. regularly conduct so-called zero-yield nuclear experiments . China and the United States are suspected of conducting explosive tests so small that they can't be detected .
 Partial test ban treaty of 1963 banned atmospheric and underwater testing but not underground explosions . It did not slow the pace of testing . The partial test ban ban treaty was also not effective .
 Threefourths of all nuclear tests took place after the ban went into effect . The ban was introduced in 1953 .
 The eight known nuclear powers have conducted 2,064 documented tests of their weapons . Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the eight have conducted more than 2,000 documented tests .
 Fear of a wave of new testing has accelerated since North Korea’s 2006 and 2009 tests . North Korea tested nuclear weapons in October 2006 and May 2009 . Testing has declined since the 1960s, but fear of new tests has accelerated .
 Realists are trumping liberals who argue that weapons acquisitions are not a safe road toward world order . It appears that realists, and their abiding emphasis on peace through military preparations, have trumped liberals .
 Wilson's cause of world disarmament may yet triumph, as he hoped and prayed . Someday, Woodrow Wilson’s cause of peace may still triumph, he said .
 As long as the threat of armed aggression haunts the world, leaders are unlikely to think it prudent to disarm . Leaders are likely to be wary of disarmament as long as they fear it will be necessary to defend themselves .
 Many liberals and constructivists perceive other paths to peace as more promising . Many liberals see other ways of peace as better than peace .
 The construction of international organizations for collective security benefits from a more encouraging history . Multilateral cooperation requires multilateral cooperation to be peacefully managed, says Peter Bergen .
 International organizations throughout history have all advanced the preservation of peace as one of the prime rationales for their formation . International organizations have all been involved in preserving peace as a result of their creation .
 An institutional pathway to international peace is sculpted in liberal and constructivist thinking . Liberals focus on interdependence and the possibility of cooperation, constructivists emphasize the centrality of ideas and norms .
 Realist thinkers advocate redistributing power through shifting alliances and alignments . Such an approach is voiced as an alternative to the balance of power advocated by realist thinkers to maintain peace .
 International Organization is opposed vigorously by classical realist thinking . International organization is a key part of the world's future .
 Realism, it should be recalled, prizes the sovereign independence of states as a core value, and berates international organization as a barrier to states’ foreign policy autonomy, freedom, and flexibility of unilateral action .
 Prescriptions for the global community to “get organized’ by creating institutions above states as a route to global stability are rejected by realist thought . Realist thought rejects the idea that global community should be organized by institutions above state .
 By definition, collective security requires collective decisions for collective purposes to contain international armed aggression . An act of aggression by any state will be met with a unified response from the rest of the rest .
 Collective security assumes that every nation perceives every challenge to the international order in the same way, and is prepared to run the same risk to preserve it . International organizations are seen as key to peaceful conflict management .
 World War I discredited the realist argument that peace was a by product of a stable balance of power . World War II discredited the argument that stability was a result of peace .
 Many liberals viewed power balancing as a cause of war instead of as an instrument for its prevention . Citing arms races, secret treaties, and competing alliances as sources of acute tension, many liberals viewed arms races and secret treaties .
 League of Nations was formed to replace the balance of power with a global governance system for world order in which aggression by any state would be met by a united response . This plea led to the formation of the . League of . Nations .
 Wilson and other reformers called for the establishment of the League of Nations . The idea of collective security had been expressed in various peace plans .
 Between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries, French ecclesiastic councils held in Poitiers, Limoges and Toulouse discussed rudimentary versions of collective security . Between the 11th and 13th centuries, the councils discussed rudimentary security .
 Underlying these plans were the belief that an organized ‘community of power’ would be more effective in preserving peace than shifting alliances aimed at balancing power . Underlying this belief, an organized community of power would preserve peace, the author says .
 If aggression anywhere is ignored, it eventually will spread to other countries and become more difficult to stop . An attack on any one state must be regarded as an attack on all states, says Dr. Peter Bergen .
 Instead of maneuvering against one another in rival alliances, states should link up in a single ‘uniting’ alliance . States should not maneuver against each other in rival alliance, says U.S. diplomat .
 Such a universal collectivity, it is assumed, would possess the international legitimacy and strength to keep the peace . Such a collectivity is assumed to possess international legitimacy, it was assumed, to keep peace . It is assumed that such a global collectivity would possess an international legitimacy .
 It assumes that peaceful change is possible when institutions are available to resolve conflicts of interest . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Washington .
 The collective security organization would also contain a judicial organ authorized to issue binding judgments on contentious disputes . In addition to providing a mechanism for the mediation of disagreements, it would also provide a mechanism to issue judgments .
 A final assumption underpinning the theory holds that members of the collective security organization would be willing and able to give mutual assistance to any state suffering an attack . The idea is that members would be able to help each other in any attack .
 Sanctions could range from public condemnation to an economic boycott to military retaliation . Sanctions are possible in the United States .
 Collective Security Organizations aims to control national selfhelp warfare by guaranteeing states’ defense through collective regulation . Putting the pieces of these premises together, this approach to international peace through collective security organizations .
 Liberal reformers accept the use of military might, not to expand state power, but to deter potential aggressors by confronting them with armed force organized by the united opposition of the entire global community . Ironically, this is not the case of expanding state power but instead of expanding it .
 To the disappointment of its advocates, the League of Nations never became an effective collective system . The League never became a successful collective system, but it was a model for the future .
 It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War I . Its members disagreed over how to define “aggression,” as well as how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response to aggress
 The United Nations was established to promote international peace and security after a gruesome world war . Like the League, the U.N. was established in 1945 to promote world peace .
 The architects of the United Nations were painfully aware of the U.N.’s disappointing experience with collective security . The U.S. has had a disappointing experience in collective security in the past .
 They hoped a new structure would make the U.N. more effective than the defunct League . The United Nations hopes to replace the League with a more effective structure .
 The UN Charter established a Security Council of fifteen members, a General Assembly of representatives from all member states, and an administrative apparatus under the leadership of a Secretary-General . Recall from Chapter 5 that the UN charter established a . Security Council .
 UN’s founders voiced support for collective security, they were heavily influenced by the idea of a concert of great powers . The UN was founded in 1903, and the UN was formed from the Organisation of Nations .
 The UN Charter permitted any of the Security Council’s five permanent members (the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, France, and China) to veto and thereby block proposed military actions . The U.S. and Britain are the only permanent members of the UN Security
 The United Nations was hamstrung by great power rivalries, especially between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Security Council could approve military actions only when the permanent members fully agreed .
 The UN’s structure limited its ability to function as a true collective security organization . The UN fell short during the Cold War of many of the ideals its more ambitious founders envisioned .
 UN found other ways to overcome the compromising legal restrictions and lack of great power cooperation that inhibited its capacity to preserve world order . Nevertheless, like any adaptive institution, the UN found ways to . overcome legal restrictions, lack of . great . power cooperation .
 The UN undertook a new approach, peacekeeping, that aimed at separating enemies . For example, in contrast to peace enforcement as in the Korean War, the UN undertook peacekeeping . Peacekeeping aims to separate enemies from enemies .
 The UN Emergency Force was authorized in 1956 by the Uniting for Peace Resolution in the General Assembly in response to the Suez crisis . It was the first of many other peacekeeping operations .
 In 1960, Dag Hammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed preventive diplomacy . He sought to resolve conflicts before they reached the crisis stage, in contrast to ending wars .
 UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating the conditions that make renewed war unlikely, while at the same time working on peacemaking (ending fighting already under way) Annan says .
 UN forces are trained and equipped to use military force if necessary without the prior consent of the disputants . These endeavors have emphasized peace enforcement operations, relying on UN forces that are trained .
 The end of the Cold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to lead in preserving peace . However, the UN is still struggling to find a way to preserve peace in peace .
 In 1999, the Security Council swung into action to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, which it had invaded . The Security Council voted to authorize military coercion in order to force Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait .
 This successful collective security initiative jump started optimism for use of the UN for peacekeeping leadership . The UN has been criticized for using the UN to lead peacekeeping efforts .
 After 1990, the UN launched five times as many peacekeeping missions as it had in its previous forty years of its existence . The UN says it has had five times more peacekeeping operations than the previous 40 years .
 The office of the Secretary-General is seeking to fulfill the UN’s humanitarian and security mandate, especially through intervention, to stop horrific atrocities wherever and whenever they occur . The office seeks to fulfil the UN's humanitarian and . security mandate .
 Critics voice concerns that the UN is inclined to practice selective engagement in sending peacekeeping forces to trouble spots . Security Council's great powers have economic interests in securing access to resources such as oil and other products .
 The number of deaths in a conflict speaks well of the UN’s mission to address costly human suffering . The UN has not been evenhanded in how it responds to deaths in conflict, says UN .
 Perhaps this selective peacekeeping focus is a product of limited financial restraints as much as it is the priorities of the Security Council’s great powers . The focus of peacekeeping is perhaps a result of financial restraints .
 Based on data from the U.N. Department of Public Information .
 In its first forty years, the United Nations undertook a mere 13 peacekeeping operations . UN peacekeeping missions have been limited to 13 operations since 1948 . The U.N. has not been involved in any of these operations since then .
 UN has sent Blue Helmet peacekeepers to forty-eight flash points since 1986 . Since 1986, the UN has been much more active, sending Blue helmet peacekeepers .
 Since 1989, the UN has had seventeen operations under way each year . Most of the sixty-three missions between 1948 and 2010 have been in operation for at least a decade . The UN budget support to 92,876 UN peacekeeping personnel was $7.7 billion in 2009 .
 UN peacekeeping operations remain understaffed, underfunded, and overwhelmed in responding where ‘Blue Helmet’ participation is needed . UN peacekeepers are still understaffing, underfunding, and overstocking in responding to “Blue Helmets”
 The aim of global collective security for all humanity cannot be met with inadequate capabilities . The UN is not empowered to achieve the high purposes for which it was created, the author says .
 The total number of personnel involved in peacekeeping missions has increased fivefold since 1999 . Peacekeepers have increased in the number of peacekeepers in the past five years .
 UN peacekeeping is the victim of its own success, says Philipp Rotmann and Stephan Mergenthaler . The increased demand for peacekeepers has not been matched by increases in infrastructure and training .
 For the UN to succeed, the world community must match the means given to it with the demands made on it . The UN must match its means with those made demands on it, says the UN .
 Despite imperfections, the U.N. remains the only global institution effective at organizing international collaboration to meet security crises in situations where states are unwilling or unprepared to act alone . The United Nations is the only institution to organize international collaboration .
 Regional IGOs are stepping into the breach in those situations where UN Blue Helmets have not been given the support necessary to do the job . However, the use of regional security organizations is rising as the use is rising .
 The kinds of wars raging today do not lend themselves to control by a worldwide body . These conflicts are now almost entirely civil wars, says the U.N. says .
 The UN was designed to manage only international wars between states . It was not organized or legally . authorized to intervene in internal battles within sovereign borders .
 Regional security organizations can be expected to play an increasingly larger role in the future security affairs of their regions . The region's security organizations will play a bigger role in its future security .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is the best-known regional security organization . The organization is based in the United States and Canada .
 Regional organizations with broader political mandates beyond defense include the Organization of American States and the Eeague of Arab States . The Organization of African Unity, the Nordic Council, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Gulf Cooperation Council .
 Regional security organizations face the challenge of preserving consensus and solidarity without a clearly identifiable external enemy or common threat . Many of today’s regional security organizations .
 Cohesion is hard to maintain in the absence of a clear sense of the alliance’s mission . Cohesion will be difficult to maintain if the alliance doesn't have a clear vision of the mission .
 The ambiguous European security setting is now marked by numerous ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle . NATO was designed to deal with the problems of ethnic, religious conflicts in the region .
 Its original charter envisioned only one purpose—mutual self-protection from external attack . The original charter was intended to protect itself from external attacks . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 NATO took charge of all military operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina from the UN in 1995 . It was uncertain whether the alliance could adapt to a broadened purpose .
 NATO joined the war in Afghanistan in a strong show of support for the U.S. in the aftermath of 9/11 . NATO invoked its Article 5, which requires collective defense of a member under attack, in Afghanistan .
 NATO intervened in the war in Afghanistan in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States . In March 1999, NATO undertook an interventionary peacemaking assignment to police the civil violence in Kosovo and in March 1999 it undertook an . interventionary . peacem
 It has transformed itself to become both a military alliance for security between states and within them and for containing the spread of global terrorism, as well as a political alliance for encouraging democracy . The alliance has become both military and political for containing terrorism and containing terrorism .
 NATO’s twenty-eight members are under a security umbrella . An attack on one would be considered an attack on all . The primary purpose of NATO is to protect NATO's members .
 Aibania and Croatia formally joined as the newest members of NATO on April 1,2009 . The twenty-first-century geostrategic iandscape has been transformed by NATO's expansion to twenty-eight fuii members .
 The barriers to collective security faced by regional organizations are similar to those faced by the United Nations . Regional organizations face similar challenges to the U.N. to secure collective security .
 The recent record indicates that there are several key preconditions that must be met for collective security organizations to work both globally and regionally . The recent history indicates that this is not the first time the U.S. military has been involved in the regionally or internationally .
 Security organizations are most capable of creating successful peacekeeping operations only when their most powerful members reach agreement about the benefits of any proposed operation . Peacekeeping operations are most likely to be successful only when they are agreed on by the most powerful, experts say .
 Third-party peacekeeping operations have been most successful in those cases when the target is neither a great power nor has a military alliance with a major power . Second, such peacekeeping ops have been successful when they are not major powers or allies with major powers .
 Past cases indicate that security organizations’ capacity to control controversial conflicts depends on pressure from world public opinion to mobilize international organizations to take action . Security organizations' capacity for control depends on public opinion, says Peter Bergen . Bergen.
 Darfur and Somalia in the Horn of Africa are the most recent examples of inadequate collective global action . The absence of some of these preconditions accounts for the frequent failure of IGOs to engineer a timely response to tragic situations where slaughter and genocide occur .
 Liberal and constructivist perspectives on war and peace, armed aggression, and international security are fundamentally shaped by the importance attached to shared ethics and morality in world politics . UNITING ONE WORLD IN A COMMON CULTURE OF SHARED MORAL VALUES, Liberal and Constructivist perspectives
 Liberalism places the power of principle over the principle of power . Liberalism is based on the conviction that peace depends on acting by moral motives .
 Ethics is about criteria for evaluating right and wrong behavior and motives . morality is about the norms for behavior that should govern actors’ interactions . Ethics is not about morality, it’s about norms that govern interactions, it's about norms .
 Liberals focus on humanitarian concerns and human rights when they emphasize the importance of normative values as factors shaping global conditions . Liberals, and many constructivists, understandably focus on human rights, but not human rights .
 Immanuel Kant was one of the greatest moral ethicists who grappled with war and peace in an immoral world . He grapples with the issue of war in a immoral world in the German philosopher .
 A global civil society is one in which institutions are created to protect civil liberties and use peaceful methods for conflict resolution . The world's civil society should be created in a civil society that uses peaceful methods to resolve conflict .
 The world does not yet benefit from either institutions or agreement about the mores or convictions that should guide international decision making . The world is yet to benefit from these institutions or agreements about mores and normative convictions .
 liberals believe that ethical standards can gain acceptance and create a civil society at the global level of analysis . Liberals believe that these ethical standards will gain acceptance in the world .
 Kant proposed using humans’ capacity to reason rationally to discover paths that would truly serve their real long-term interests in living in an orderly and just world .
 Most powerful states in his era were then great powers practicing narrow mercantilism to expand their national economies at others’ expense through imperialism and colonialism . Monarchies ruled by kings opposed to democratic liberties for the subjects under their absolute reign .
 Kant was repelled by the acceptance and frequent use of warfare by the realist rulers to increase by military means the power of their states . The philosopher of Kant rejected the use of military means to increase their power .
 Kant advocated a total transformation of the realist values on which world politics was then functioning . So Kant's work was to transform world politics into a new reality, he says .
 The radical ideas resonated in the ears of Adam Smith, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison . They later were made pillars of the peace program that Woodrow Wilson proposed in his Fourteen Points Address .
 These twin highways to peace require the global acceptance of the norms for international conduct . They also capture the third major liberal path to international security, the author says .
 When it increases, it ties the trading partners together in an expanding web of interdependence from which all the trading parties to the free-trade agreement benefit . However, there exists another expanding side-payoff to free trade .
 According to liberal economic theory, it is rational to promote free trade . It is therefore rational, according to the theory of free trade, to promote trade .
 Parties to active free exchanges of goods across borders increasingly need each other for the growth of their wealth, they say . They are therefore less tempted to go to war with one another, they are less tempted .
 Armed aggression would end the cooperation that makes their mutual prosperity grow, the U.S. State Department says . Armed aggression is not only stopping cooperation, it would end their cooperation, he says .
 Global economic trade interdependence among nations provides a strong underpinning for peace . In this regard, global economic trade . Interdependence . among nations provide a strong . underpinning of peace for peace, says U.S. diplomat .
 Interdependence fosters the trade-interdependent countries’ mutual need for each other for their own welfare . Interdependency (when the behavior of states greatly affects the others with whom they come into frequent contact) is when states become increasingly mutually vulnerable .
 In this construction, therefore, trade interdependence is a financial path to peace . Commercial liberalism is an economic theory advocating free markets and the removai of barriers to the flow of trade and capitai .
 Constructivists remind us that the global community must accept the norms of behavior on which this approach is predicated . For this nonmilitary path to global security to truly arrive at its preferred pacific destination, constructivists say .
 Realists warn that countries are likely to return to ruthless economic competition and trade protectionism to gain at others’ expense . Realists say that if and when economic conditions deteriorate, countries will return to protectionism .
 Fiberal reformers agree with realist pessimism; they also see a civil society with peace dependent on the preservation of normative values and mores that must retain global acceptance . They say peace is dependent on preserving normative values that must be preserved .
 Should such a free-trade liberal climate of global world opinion decay, so will the prospects for world order, says Andrew Hammond .
 Some have worried about the impact of the current global economic crisis on peace and stability throughout the world . It is with these concerns in mind that some have worried that the current economic crisis will affect peace .
 The far distance the global community has journeyed down the free-trade avenue toward prosperity and peace has instilled growing faith that this progress will persist . Countries continue to recognize that their interests are advanced through peace and economic interdependence . That said,
 Fiberal and constructivist reformers are well aware of the potential fragility of trade interdependence as a condition for fostering international security . The world's security is at risk of a collapse if the US withdraws from international trade .
 There may be a better payoff to an alternative route to cement international peace . The construction and proliferation of liberal norms supporting democratic values may be the best way .
 A Democratic Peace Pact is the theory that because democratic states almost never fight wars with one another, the spread of democratic governance throughout the world will reduce greatly the probability of war . The peace is now widely known as the democratic peace .
 In the globalized marketplace, the level of states’ dependence on exports for economic prosperity is growing . The level of countries’ dependency on exports is growing, says CNN.com .
 Map shows the great extent of which many countries are today dependent on trade . This map shows the extent of the world's dependence on trade, especially in China .
 Immanuel Kant hypothesized that giving peace-loving citizens the right to vote could stop violence . He also hypothesized that allowing ballots for citizens could become a barrier against authoritarian rulers’ habitual use of bullets and bombs .
 History demonstrates that there are sound reasons for accepting this liberal proposition . History shows that there were sound reasons to accept this liberal notion .
 The lesson was not lost on leaders of democratic states seeking to find a principle on which to ground their national security policies . Democracy and Peace is a key principle in national security policy, experts say .
 EU and NATO liberal democracies insisted on states being democratically ruled as a condition for membership . That doctrine was officially endorsed earlier by the other major liberal democracies . The doctrine was formally endorsed by the EU, NATO and the EU .
 Democratic reforms over the past four decades have produced impressive results worldwide . Democratic reforms have been successful in the past 40 years, including in the 1990s .
 Since the mid-1970s, freedom and civil liberties within countries have expanded through a series of liberalizing governmental reforms in many new countries . Since the 1970s, the liberalization of civil liberties in many countries has led to increased freedom .
 As 2009 began, 78 percent of the world's countries were either fuliy or partiaiiy democratic, Freedom House says . This figure shows that as 2009 began in the world, 78 per cent of the countries are democratic .
 This inspires iiherals’s hopes that a glohai peace among democracies wili continue to spread and deepen, even despite times of terrorism and tension .
 Some realist skeptics question whether democracies should really be counted upon to put liberal ideals ahead of their narrow national interests . Some realists question whether they should resist the natural temptation to use armed force .
 Liberal reformers are heartened by past trends, including past trends . These doubts about a lasting peace pact not withstanding, liberal reformers say . But they're heartened that past trends have been successful .
 The existing liberal democracies’ efforts to enlarge their community could usher in a major transformation of world politics . Liberal democracies should abide by their past record of dealing with conflicts through negotiation, mediation, arbitration, and adjudication .
 In 1949 Chiang Kai-shek and his party the Kuomintang lost the Chinese Civil War and retreated trom the Mainland to Taiwan with one to two million tollowers and troops .
 Taiwan began the 1950s poor and ruled by an immigrant, authoritarian regime . Taiwan has been ruled by immigrants since 1950s .
 Policy choices include land reform, extending free and universal education, and emphasizing heavy and then-hightech industrial policy . Policy choices economically transformed Taiwan, including land reform .
 Taiwan was one of the ‘East Asian Tigers"" with a trading economy based on small and medium sized businesses . By the 1990s Taiwan had leadership in many high-tech industries, and an extensive middle class .
 Population grew from 7. to 23 million, GDP per capita grew from $900 in 1949, to $19,000 in 2009 . GDP grew to $5,300 in 1987, and GDP growth per capita in 2009, according to Census data . GDP per cent of GDP grew from
 Taiwan became the only example of a Chinese society with a multiparty democracy . Taiwan stood as a counter to the argument by Malaysia’s and Singapore’�s leaders for the cultural distinctiveness of Asian values and the limits of Asian democracy .
 Democracy advocates and the Taiwanese ethnic majority that were politically repressed by mainlanders were empowered by economic prosperity and pressured the regime to change . First, democracy advocates and Taiwan's ethnic majority were empowered .
 Next, Chiang Ching-kuo and part of the KMT preferred compromise to confrontation . The KMT prefers compromise rather than confrontation . Next, they will try to find a way to avoid confrontation .
 International circumstances made democracy Taiwan’s best hope for support and survival in an ongoing competition with China . Democracy is the best hope of support for Taiwan's best hope in ongoing competition .
 Since 1949, Taiwan has exercised de facto, if not dejure, sovereignty in international affairs . Taiwan exercises de facto sovereignty in the world since 1949 . Taiwan is one of the world's most populous countries .
 China views Taiwan as a “breakaway province,"" taken by Japan as a colony in 1895, occupied by the KMT after World War II, and rightfully a part of China . China, however, rejects this distinction .
 In 2005 China passed an Anti-Secession Law formalizing its long-standing commitment to use “non-peaceful means” if Taiwan declares formal independence . China has long been committed to using ‘non-Peaceful means' if Taiwan seizes independence .
 In Taiwan, the 2000-2008 DPP government envisioned de jure independence . In Taiwan it envisioned de facto independence from Taiwan . In 2008, the DPP's government envisioned independence from the West .
 In 2008-2009 tensions relaxed with a commitment to a diplomatic truce by the new KMT President, Ma Ying-jeou . The new president of the KMT is now the leader of Taiwan .
 Trade also increasingly links Taiwan to the mainland, with as much as $200 billion invested . There are as many as one million Taiwanese managers living in China .
 A democratic China might allow Taiwan to go its own way peacefully or make unification palatable to the Taiwanese . Linked closely by trade, China might either allow Taiwan's independence or make it easier to unify .
 Taiwan Strait remains one of the world’s most dangerous places where two nuclear powers could come into conflict . The Taiwan Strait is a dangerous place where nuclear weapons could be used in conflict .
 As a result of the Cold War, the U.S. limited diplomatic dealings with China until President Nixon’s 1972 visit . The United States limited diplomatic relations with China .
 In 1979, the United States diplomatically recognized China, and Taiwanese recognition was withdrawn . The U.S. withdrew Taiwan's recognition of China in 1979 .
 Taiwan Relations Act states that any threat to the peace and security of Taiwan is of grave concern to the United States . The act committed America to provide Taiwan with defensive weapons . The U.S. Congress then passed the Taiwan relations Act .
 America has a deep, multifaceted relationship with China, balanced against nervousness about China’s future role and commitments to Taiwan . Yet America has been nervous about the future of China's future role .
 North Korea, nonproliferation, and global finance, intensify the linkage . North Korea and North Korea are linked to North Korea's nuclear program .
 President Clinton deployed aircraft carrier battle groups toward the Taiwan Strait . President Clinton sent aircraft carriers to the Taiwan strait .
 American-Chinese tensions similarly escalated in the 1999 NATO bombing of China’s Embassy in Belgrade, in the 2001 mid-air collision between a U.S. surveillance plane and a Chinese plane .
 Chinese nationalism was inflamed by these incidents, and the 2008 Olympics showcased Chinese pride and China’s aspirations as a major global power .
 China’s path to democracy is uncertain, and even if China democratizes without major civil strife, there will be a transitional period . Even if China democracy is achieved, it will be an uncertain period .
 Democracies don’t tight each other, but transitional regimes are often belligerent . Transitionary regimes often are belligerent, says Julian Zelizer .
 Politicians may use nationalism or demonizing each other to secure their own power . This is partly because domestic democratic institutions are young, and politicians may use nationalist or demonize each other . Politicians are also using nationalism and demonization to secure power .
 A democratic China may offer solutions both to Taiwan’s future and to the structuring of peace in East Asia . In the long term, a democratic China could offer solutions to Taiwan's future and the structured of peace .
 "There is more and more of an overlap between national interests and global responsibilities," says President Obama . Obama: "There are very few countries with more of a strong presence in the world"
 The task of multilateral diplomacy is to cope with new issues, new demands and new situations “shared responsibilities” and “strengthenedpartnerships.” Multilateral diplomacy must be able to cope, he says .
 liberals advocate institutional methods to pool sovereignty in order to collectively manage global problems . Liberals advocate pooling sovereignty to manage global issues .
 constructivists envision greater possibilities for the peaceful resolution of situations that might otherwise lead to armed aggression . Constructivists see the expansion of global norms supporting collective solutions to conflicts in world politics .
 We must remain cognizant of the various concerns about the capacity of independent and competing sovereign states to engineer a hopeful future for humanity . Yet we must remain mindful of the different concerns, we say .
 "On balance, sovereign states have not used their foreign policies to create a safe and secure global environment," says the author . "Sovereign states' foreign policies have not created a safe environment," he says .
 It is a paradox that despite their continuing power, the governments of sovereign states’ governments have proven to be very weak at either preventing armed aggression within their borders or commanding widespread citizen loyalty .
 Borders and oceans cannot isolate or insulate states from threats to security . They can only be controlled in the global commons by a collective effort . Borders cannot be isolated or isolated states, but they can be controlled by a global commons .
 It is for this reason that many international organizations originally came into being, and it is the persistence of collective threats produced by an increasingly globalized world that makes these institutions durable . It is the reason that international organizations came to be .
 Countries are making bold efforts to unite in a common civic culture behind common values to construct global institutions to jointly protect themselves against the many problems they face in common .
 Kofi Annan argues that “a new, broader definition of national interest is needed” that would unify states to work on common goals that transcend national interests . They appear to increasingly accept the once radical liberal view .
 Global agenda facing the world is huge. But what is clear at this time is that the global agenda facing it is huge . It is clear that this is not the first time the world has faced a global agenda .
 The biggest problems facing humanity are transnational, and none can be solved effectively with a unilateral national response . None of the world's biggest problems can be resolved with a national response, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 A multilateral approach is required to address the staggering number of global problems that require peaceful management through collective solutions . The United Nations is committed to a multi-multilateral approach to the world's problems .
 This survey can aid understanding of the world as it presently exists and allow you to contemplate, as caring and responsible global citizens, the prospects for transformations that could create a better world .
 Take an Online Practice Quiz www.cengage.com/politicalscience/kegley/worlclpolitics13e I Suggested Readings .
 The growing web of globalization is creating an interdependent world . We know that elections are won and lost on local issues . But it is global issues that will shape the world our children live in .
 2008 Beijing Olympics opened with a celebration of Chinese culture and international goodwill . Shown here are the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games .
 They point to crass commercialism, masking of human rights abuse, and the air of legitimacy granted to unsavory governments . As evidence of this, they point to commercialism and the masking .
 Each explores some facet of the challenges to prosperity and human security that we face in our globalized world . We have the ability, and responsibility, to respond and seek solutions to them .
 Chapter 12 inspects how the globalization of finance is altering the world's economic landscape . Chapter 13 considers how globalization of international trade is transforming the world . Chapter 11 inspects the impact of the global financial crisis .
 Chapter 14 examines the demographic dimensions of globalization as well as how the rise of the global information age is shaping culture and perceptions of identity . Chapter 14 then examines the demographics of globalization and how it's shaping culture in the information age .
 Chapter 15 looks at the human condition, and how global actors and their activities affect the welfare and basic rights of all humanity . Chapter 15: How global actors affect human welfare and human rights .
 Chapter 16 considers threats to the global environment that many people now see as a serious danger to the well-being of the planet and humanity’s continued survival . Chapter 17 considers threats that threaten humanity's continued survival in the world . Chapter 16 includes threats to global environment .
 The Globalization of Finance is no longer a buzzword: it has arrived . Globalization has arrived in the world of finance . It is now a form of globalization .
 There is substantial evidence for an increasingly globalized marketplace, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 World trade is expanding much faster than world production and cross-border investments are growing at a more rapid rate than trade . Cross-border investment is growing more rapidly than trade, according to the World Trade Council .
 The leaders of the G-20 met in London in April 2009 to discuss recovery strategies . The informal group of the twenty largest economies meets periodically to discuss coordination of financial policy .
 Chinese President Hu Jintao in the center-front of the photo line-up, which the Chinese press interpreted as among the most honored of the group . Of particular note is the position of the president .
 China, the country with the largest amount of currency reserves, demonstrated at the meeting . Such symbolism was matched by a new assertiveness that China demonstrated at meeting .
 They all contain elements of truth, even though such aphorisms and cliches are somewhat contradictory, says author . "Such aphorism and clichés are somewhat contradictoristic, but they are not contradictory," he says .
 Your challenge is to separate fact from fantasy by sorting out the place of money in your life and in the world in which you live . Your challenge will be to separate facts from fantasy .
 Money is a factor affecting many dimensions of world politics—and your own personal future financial fate . However, the wisdom or folly of your conclusions will depend on your analytic skills .
 Increasingly, this age-old intellectual task is more difficult than in the past, says David Cameron . "Increasingly, it's more difficult to understand than ever before," he says .
 Money truly is moving around the world, and at everquickening speed . Today, more than ever, money truly is moved around the globe . The world's money is moving at everchanging speed .
 The rapidity of the movement of finance capital across borders directly affects your quality of life every day . And the rapidity . of the . movement of . finance capital . across borders . directly affects the quality of . life of people in the UK .
 When you make a purchase, the odds are now very high that the goods have been produced overseas . When you buy something from overseas, you can be sure that it's produced in the U.S.
 When you buy a sandwich, a sweater, a car, or gasoline to make it run, the cost of your payment is very likely to be affected by the rate at which your own country’s currency is valued and exchanged for the currency of the producer abroad . The cost of
 The global exchange of national currencies will determine whether you can afford to attend a concert or buy an extra bottle of wine . You will instantly discover how powerfully the global exchange is .
 This chapter is about how money markets in the global financial system operate . This chapter includes a look at how the world's money markets operate .
 It looks at the processes governing currency exchanges, concentrating on how the transfer of money across borders affects levels of prosperity and human security .
 This article is an introduction to the coverage in Chapter 13 on international trade in the global political economy . Note that this topic is part of the larger one of international economics in general .
 Money and markets drive the rise and fall of wealth for individuals and for countries . Neither dimension of international economics can be considered without the other; the two are tied intimately .
 You therefore will be looking at a phenomenon as old as recorded history and inspecting how it is influencing life in the twenty-first century . You will also look at the phenomenon as well as its origins and its influence on life .
 When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Of all the many recent changes, perhaps none has been more invasive and far-reaching than those occurring in the economic world . The world's economic world is constantly changing, and perhaps none more invasive than those of recent years .
 This is one of the main fields on which the game of world politics is played . This is the main field of the world politics, says David Cameron . He says the game is played by world politics .
 A large body of theory has been constructed that speaks to questions about how changes in one country’s economics and politics influence trends in world politics and the global economy . International Political Economy is a theory of how one country's economic and political changes influence trends .
 The fall of the Bretton Woods order and the Oil Crisis of 1973 led to a fourfold increase in the price of oil as a result of an embargo by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries . International political economy emerged in the early 1970s .
 IPE began to investigate many key issues that lay at the intersection of the two . The political fallout of these economic events called into question the traditional partitions between the study of international economics and international politics, and IPE .
 The growth of the interdependence of states’ economies can be viewed as the recent culmination of a trend that began more than a century ago, but its current level is without precedent . The current level of state-to-state interdependency is not without precedent, experts say
 As states’ economies have become more closely linked, traditional ideas about states, currency exchange mechanisms, trade, and markets have been reexamined in a new light .
 Contest between rich states in the Global North and poor states in Global South has risen to the top of the international agenda in policy and theoretical debates . The contest between the rich and poor has become a global issue in policy, theoretical debates.
 The economic game of world politics has assumed increasing importance because of the undercurrents in economics are shaping the foundation of international politics . Economic game of the world politics assumes increasing importance .
 High interest rates in one country lead to high rates in others . Today, high interest rates lead to higher rates in other countries .
 Inflation is shared everywhere, and it now seems beyond the control of any single actor . Inflation now seems like it is beyond any one actor's control of it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The balance of fiscal power is now as important to a country’s national security as is the global balance of military power . The balance is now more important to the national security of a country than a global military power, says Andrew Hammond .
 Globalization has become a very common term in the language of international relations . Hundreds of attempts have been made to define it. Globalization is the most ubiquitous term in international relations’s language .
 Globalization is shorthand for a cluster of interconnected phenomena . It is often used to describe a process, a policy, a predicament, or the product of vast invisible international forces producing massive changes worldwide . Globalization can be used to refer to process, policy, predicament or product of massive changes
 Most analysts would probably agree that globalization is a permanent trend leading to the probable transformation of world politics . The end of one historic pattern and the beginning of a new one in history, he says .
 The remaining chapters in World Politics will deal with different dimensions of globalization and their implications . Given the broad and multifaceted scope of globalization, this chapter, as well as the remaining chapters of World Politics, will focus on different dimensions .
 The short answer is that globalization is the integration of everything with everything else . "The short answer to globalization is globalization," he says. "It's the integration that integration is everything else."
 A more complete definition of globalization is that globalization is the integration of markets, finance, and technology in a way that makes it possible . MAP 12.1: Globalization is a form of integration that includes markets, technology, finance and technology .
 The index is based on twenty-four different measures of economic, social, and political aspects of globalization . The index includes trade flows, personal contacts across borders, and participation in international organizations .
 Some trends among the least globalized countries tend to be underdeveloped and largely autocratic regimes such as Myanmar, Congo, and Bangladesh . There are also some trends among some trends .
 International finance is integrated into the world of international finance and capital . Nowhere is this integration more apparent than in this world of capital .
 We will next focus on the dynamics of the international monetary system through which currencies and credits are calculated . Capital freely moves across national boundaries through investments, trade, foreign aid, and loans .
 State governments have taken some tentative steps to create rules for adjusting their currencies with one another and stabilizing wide fluctuations in their exchange rates . State governments are taking tentative steps for adjusting currencies with each other .
 Money exchanged after transactions have been conducted does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions . However, the process through which money between and among countries is exchanged after financial transactions are conducted has not been strong enough to have strong regulatory institutions.
 States often have very limited ability in controlling transactions or the relative value of their currencies on the world market . States have limited ability to control transactions or value of currencies on world market, says economist .
 At the same time, these transactions, as noted, are escalating with feverish pitch . At the time, they are escalating in a feverish way .
 Global finance encompasses a broad variety of portfolio-type transactions, including international loans, foreign aid, and currency trading . Cross-border investments such as the purchases of stocks, bonds, or derivatives .
 Globalization of finance refers to the increasing transnationalization or centralization of markets through the worldwide integration of capital flows . Along these lines, the globalization of finance is seen as centralizing or centralizing of these markets .
 The central characteristic of the emerging globalization of finance is the increasing transnationalization of national markets through the worldwide integration of capital flows . National markets are becoming more transnationalized through the integration of global capital flows, the author says .
 globalization implies the growth of a single, unified global market . Thus, globalization implies growth of the global market, according to experts . globalization implies a single global market.
 Financial specialists talk about the ‘end of geography’ because geographic location is no longer important to finance . Financial specialists say that geographic location has become irrelevant to finance. Financial specialists also talk about ‘death of distance’
 Since World War II the volume of cross-border capital flows has increased even more . Although trade has grown dramatically, it has also increased in the past decade .
 The growth in the arbitrage market has been truly staggering . It's in which currencies are bought and sold for profit based off differences in their relative values .
 Since 1973 this market has grown sixty times faster than the value of world trade . It routinely handles over $2 trillion worth of currency on a daily basis .
 Global capital market's rise has far exceeded the actual rise in global GDP . New, more speculative, financial instruments have exponentially increased the size and scope of these capital flows .
 The total value of all bonds, domestic and international, was even higher at $68 trillion . Total value of global bonds is even more than $70 trillion .
 The value of the derivatives market is much greater than stocks and bonds . Derivatives are essentially “side bets’ placed on the prospective future value of assets such as stocks .
 During that same year, $473 trillion of derivatives were bought and sold . During that year, the world's largest derivatives market was in the form of $47 trillion .
 In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North $eas, and city-states such as Fiibeck, Hamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading .
 International financial crises are certainly nothing new, economist Charles Kindlberger notes . The “manics, panics, and crashes” of global finance began in the early seventeenth century, he says .
 Financial centers are proliferating, and big transactions are made by many participants “sitting in front of computer screens, moving zillions of dollars, pounds, euros and yen around the globe at the flick of a key”
 Technology, mobility of capital and the spread of deregulation around the globe have created a vibrant and growing network of financial centers . Investors have diversified across regions as investors diversified .
 Globalized finance creates linkages across the world at unprecedented levels, connecting capital, people, and exchanges . These trends expand cross-border consolidation as globalized finance expands .
 These developments, combined with the trends toward market deregulation that began to take hold across much of the world during the 1980s and 1990s, represented a marked policy shift toward commercial liberalism . These developments combined with market deregulation, they were part of the trend .
 Commercial liberals heralded this policy shift as a means to bring economic growth into the Global South and ensure continued success in the Global North . The policy shift was heralded by commercial liberals .
 Recent financial crisis has caused many to reexamine the merits of this approach . However, the recent financial crisis prompted many to rethink the approach .
 The globalization of finance has had broader political and economic influences upon the international system . The global financial crisis has been a major factor in the world's economic growth .
 As the global financial market has become increasingly interconnected, capital has become extremely mobile . Capital has become very mobile. Capital has been extremely mobile.
 The need for a reliable system of money exchange to cope with the broadening array of fluctuating national currencies has made imperative . Such ties have made imperative the need for reliable currency exchange, experts say .
 Politically, the global capital market reveals limitations in the power of the state . The world's capital market is a test of the strength of the government in the world, experts say .
 As the volume of currencies traded far exceeds the actual amount of reserve currencies held by governments, the ability of governments to influence exchange rates is increasingly limited . Governments are increasingly limited to influence foreign exchange rates .
 The powerlessness of the U.S. government to raise the price of the Chinese yuan against the United States dollar speaks volumes about the breakdown of governments’ ability to modify the rates at which their currencies are exchanged, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Commercial liberals argue that such a system benefits all countries . But the globalization of finance does not affect all countries equally equally .
 A vast majority of global capital goes to the Global North and Global East . All countries are mutually vulnerable to rapid transfers of capital in this globalized system .
 The Global South is the most dependent and vulnerable, and has been exposed to shifts in the financial marketplace . However, the Global South has been very exposed to the financial market shifts in recent years .
 Banks and economists have called for the creation of more reliable multilateral mechanisms for policy coordination to better manage the massive movement of cross-border capital . This circumstance suggests why bankers and economists call for more reliable multiilateral mechanisms .
 The globalization of finance also has implications for international trade (see Chapter 13) Concerns have understandably increased about monetary factors underlying trade transactions .
 Controversies have risen over whether the international monetary system is causing inequalities or, worse still, reducing growth in international commerce . Controversy has raised over whether it is causing inequality or reducing growth .
 States’ exports and imports depend on many factors, such as changes in global demand for the goods and services countries produce, and the prices they charge in the global marketplace . The United States is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world .
 The mechanisms that set the currency exchange rate by which goods are priced heavily influence changes in the flow of international trade across borders .
 The monetary system is the most critical factor allowing for international trade, he says . Indeed, the monetary system allows international trade to thrive, he adds .
 Without a stable and predictable method for calculating the value of sales and foreign investments, transactions would become too risky . Trade and investment activities would fall, and trade and investment would fall .
 In assessing the implications of capital mobility for the global system, it is necessary to understand the international monetary system, the processes through which the relative value of each state’s currencies are set .
 We will next examine the core concepts of the global monetary system, some of the key issues and dilemmas surrounding monetary policy, and the some of its historical context .
 As you read through these explanations, keep in mind that these are not separate phenomena but a related set of factors through which the global financial system operates . The explanations are explained by CNN iReport .
 The importance of a state’s monetary policy as a determinant of its well-being will be discussed . We will consider why a country's exchange rate fluctuates daily and the challenges states face in dealing with these fluctuations .
 As you will see, states face a variety of ‘trade-offs’ in navigating monetary policies . States must seek a difficult balance between sometimes competing values, goals, and priorities .
 States are ultimately limited in their ability to control monetary outcomes, authors say . States are also limited to controlling monetary outcomes. States can't control the outcome of the economy, they say .
 First, money must be widely accepted, so that people earning it can use it to buy goods and services from others . Money must also be accepted by people who earn it, so it can be used to help others buy goods from others, says David Cameron .
 Money must serve to store value, so that people will be willing to keep some of their wealth in the form of money . Second, money must serve as a store of value for people to keep their wealth . Money must also serve as an asset for people who want to keep it in
 Third, money must act as a standard of deferred payment, so that people will be willing to lend money knowing that when the money is repaid in the future, it will still have purchasing power . Money must also act as an example of how it can be repaid in a future, so
 Movements in a state’s exchange rate occur in part when changes develop in peoples’ assessment of the national currency . Movements occur when people’ assesses the value of the currency or the ability of its government to maintain its value .
 A deficit in a country’s balance of payments, for example, would likely cause a decline in the value of its currency relative to that of other countries . A deficit would likely lead to a fall in value of the country's currency compared to other countries' .
 This happens when the supply of the currency is greater than the demand for it . This is when the demand is higher than the supply for it. This is the result of a currency shortage .
 When those engaged in international economic transactions change their expectations about a currency’s future value, they might reschedule their lending and borrowing . Similarly, when those engaged with international transactions change expectations about the currency's future value .
 Arbitrage speculators who buy and sell money also affect the international stability of a country’s currency . Arbitrage speculation also affects the stability of the currency in a country .
 If they believe that the Japanese yen will be worth more in three months than it is now, they can buy yen today and sell them for a profit three months later . If, for instance, they will be able to buy yen in the future and sell it for profit .
 States’ central banks to change the country’s money suppiy in an effort to manage the national economy and control inflation, using fiscal policies such as changing the money supply and interest rates .
 If a country imports more than it exports, it is said to have a balance-of-trade deficit . This is a balance of trade deficit . It is a deficit of more imports than exports .
 It is responsible for issuing currency, setting monetary policy, acting as a bank for the government . It is also responsible for setting monetary policies and administering the state’s banking industry . It also helps to set monetary policy and administer the state's banking industry.
 Central bank policy tools for managing their economies . Monetary Policy is a central policy tool for managing the economy .
 An expansionary monetary policy would involve selling additional bonds and lowering interest rates . The central bank would then lower interest rates and sell additional bonds to raise money .
 Such policies would make money relatively more plentiful and less expensive to borrow . It would also make it easier to borrow money for the next few years .
 An expansionary fiscal policy would consist of lowering taxes and/or increasing spending . A “tight” or contractionary policy would involve raising taxes and decreasing spending .
 Devaluation is the lowering of the official exchange rate of one country’s currency relative to other currencies . The lowering of official exchange rates is when one country's currency is devalued . The official rate is the official rate of the country's official currency .
 This is generally done to increase exports, as devaluation lowers the relative prices of a country’s exports . The devaluation is done to reduce the relative price of the country's exports . This is usually done to boost exports .
 It can reduce the spending power of citizens within that country . However, it can also reduce the amount of people in that country's economy .
 Exchange Rate Rate Rate is rate at which one state’s currency is exchanged for another state's currency in the global marketplace . Rate is the rate at the exchange rate of currency exchanged for other states' currency . Rate at exchange rate is rate of exchange rate between state currencies .
 For example, dollaryou would have received 0.71 euro or 13.16 Mexican pesos in 2009 .
 Daily changes are generally very small, though they can vary greatly over the long run . Daily changes can be quite small, but they can be very different over the years .
 On June 28, 2001, the United States dollar was worth 1.17 euros and 9.08 Mexican pesos . The U.S. dollar is now worth $1.16 euros .
 Fixed Exchange Rate is a system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country’s currency (usually the United States dollar) or another measure of value (such as a group of different currencies or a precious metal such as
 Floating Exchange Rate System in which the relative value of a country’s currency is set by market forces . Relative value of the currency is based on market forces, rather than the value of it . Floating Exchange Rates System is a system that allows the country's currency to be set by
 In principle, the value of a country’s currency is indicative of the underlying strengths and weaknesses of its economy . The value of the currency should be indicative of its underlying strength and weaknesses, the economist says .
 Fixed-but-Adjustable Exchange Rate System A system in which a government fixes its currency in relation to that of another country’s currency . A system that may still change the fixed price to reflect changes in the underlying strengths and weaknesses of their economies . Fixed-fixable Exchange
 The general expectation is that such changes are rare and only occur under specially defined circumstances . The expectation of such changes is that they will only occur in special circumstances, say officials .
 It is generally expressed in percentages and calculated on a yearly basis . It is used to be expressed in percentage terms .
 Inflation reduces the buying power of citizens, as it decreases the value of their currency . In inflation reduces the purchasing power of people in the United States .
 Very high levels of inflation can cause severe disruptions within a society, as the currency becomes largely worthless . Very high inflation rates can lead to severe disruptions in a society .
 Inflation rate of Zimbabwe reached 231,000,000% by the start of 2009 . Zimbabwe's inflation rate was 231,00,000 percent by the end of the decade .
 Government attempts to limit or prevent global capital transactions . Capital controls are aimed at limiting or preventing capital transactions in the world .
 Foreign exchange bans include taxes on foreign exchanges and outright bans on the movement of capital out of a country . Examples range from placing taxes on currency exchanges to outright bans .
 These policies are generally intended as a means to ‘insulate’ an economy from the global capital market . fewer dollars, making a profit. fewer dollars . These policies generally intended to “insulate an economy . from . the global . capital market, making profit, making
 The globalization of finance now also encourages managers of investment portfolios to rapidly move funds from one currency to another in order to realize gains .
 In the same way that governments try to protect the value of their currencies at home, they often try to . protect them internationally by . intervening in currency markets .
 Currency traders depend on predictability in the value of the currencies in which they deal to carry out transnational exchanges . Their willingness to do so is important to importers and exporters, they say .
 Governments intervene when countries’ central banks buy or sell currencies to change the value of their own currencies . The value of currencies in relation to those of others is affected by central banks' actions .
 Unlike speculators, governments are pledged not to manipulate exchange rates so as to gain unfair advantages . States’ reputations as custodians of monetary stability are valuable, for states' reputations .
 Governments are faced with the difficult task of balancing the demands of the global currency market with the need to manage their own economies . Within this system, governments must balance the needs of global currency markets and manage their economies .
 The figure shows changes over time of the weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the United States dollar against a subset of the currencies of a large group of major U.S. trading partners . The figure pictured on the left shows changes .
 Economists usually calculate currency exchange rates in terms of purchasing power of parity . The index of the value of exchange rates measures the cost of identical goods or services in two countries .
 The least expensive burger could be purchased in Hong Kong for $1.72 (13.72) Hong Kong burger is the world's most expensive burger . Hong Kong's least expensive burgers can be purchased at least $1 per burger .
 Hong Kong dollars at the August 8,2009, exchange rate was $3.57 in the United States. Hong Kong dollar exchange rate is $3 .57 in U.S. dollars .
 To make the two prices equal would require an exchange rate of 2.08 HKD to the dollar, rather than the market rate of 7.75 . The euro was 29 percent overvalued, while the Swiss franc was 88 percent overvalued .
 Money supply the total amount of currency in circulation in a state, calculated to include demand deposits, such as checking accounts in commercial banks, and time deposits . versus unemployment, strong versus weak currency valuation strategies, and the competing values of stability versus autonomy . Chicago, Atlanta, and San Francisco
 Inflation occurs when the government creates too much money in relation to the goods and services produced in the economy . Inflation is caused when the money is created too much to meet the demand for a product .
 The creation of money does serve to stimulate the economy, at least in the short term, economist says . However, the creation of the money supply does not serve the economy as well as interest rates .
 Such actions are generally associated with increased unemployment and even recession . Yet such actions slow an economy down, which is associated with higher unemployment .
 This is one of the most commonly noted trade-offs associated with monetary policy . Inflation versus unemployment is a key trade-off between monetary policy and unemployment . This is the case of inflation versus unemployment in the United States .
 A related dilemma regards currency values, specifically whether states should seek to maintain “strong” or relatively “weak” currencies . A related dilemmas regards how states should maintain strong or weak currencies .
 As mentioned, states are generally encouraged to refrain from manipulating the value of their currencies, or the currencies of other countries, in order to maintain predictability and stability . States are encouraged not to manipulate currencies or currencies .
 There are benefits to maintaining a weak currency, through capital controls, fixing exchange rates, or even currency devaluations . However, there are also benefits to capital controls and currency devaluation .
 A weaker currency has a negative effect on the spending power of the domestic consumers . However, it makes exporting industries more competitive in that their goods are relatively less expensive in the global marketplace .
 Critics contend that the unduly low exchange rate represents unfair competition in the global trade arena . This is one of the primary controversies surrounding the value of the Chinese Renminbi, as critics contend .
 Currency that are relatively strong face the opposite dilemma— though their consumers have relatively more spending power, both at home and abroad, their exporting industries suffer, and they are more likely to run a balance-of-trade deficit . Alternatively, currencies that have relatively strong currency are relatively more likely
 This taps into a trade-off that is at the core of global monetary policy . The choice between currency stability and policy autonomy is the key to monetary policy, says Mark Carney .
 The basic problem is that in a system where capital flows freely (that is, there are no substantial capital controls), it is impossible to have both stability and autonomy . In a system that allows capital to flow freely, capital controls are difficult to maintain stability .
 Autonomy gives states the flexibility to pursue monetary policies that best suit their particular economic situation . States can use expansionary policies to stimulate growth, such as the use of expansionary policy .
 A flexible exchange rate regime gives states autonomy to conduct their own monetary policies . It also gives states the power to conduct its own monetary policy .
 In this case, autonomy is gained, though there is no guarantee of stability, as the currency is subject to the vicissitudes of the global currency markets .
 A fixed exchange rate could not move to take the decreased demand for the currency into account . For example, if a country with a fixed rate was to lower interest rates, the exchange rate would not move accordingly .
 To fill this deficit, the country would need to intervene into the foreign exchange market to reduce the over supply of currency . A ‘tight’ monetary policy that would essentially undo the initial policy would be necessary .
 Such dilemmas were faced by the U.S. near the end of the Bretton Woods era, France in the early 1980s, and Argentina in the late 1990s .
 In conducting monetary policy, states have to balance competing interests . States must balance the desire to help their economy grow with the necessity to maintain their currencies, the relative utility of strong versus weak currency valuation .
 States face all of these dilemmas within the context of a global monetary system over which they have very little actual control . The world's monetary system is over which states face very few actual control of it, he says .
 It is important to keep these trade-offs and limitations on state power in mind as you consider the monetary policies of the Bretton Woods era .
 As the world’s preeminent economic and military power, the U.S. played the leading role . The United States played a leading role in the Vietnam War .
 Its proposals were shaped by the perceived causes of the 1930s economic catastrophe and its beliefs about the need for active U.S. leadership .
 The United States sought free trade, open markets, and monetary stability . The Bretton Woods system was based on the theoretical premises of commercial liberalism, which advocates free markets .
 The British delegation won support for the principle of strong government action by states facing economic problems . John Maynard Keynes' theories about the state's role in managing inflation, unemployment, and growth still influence economic thinking .
 The rules established at Bretton Woods reflected a remarkable level of agreement . Despite these differences, the rules were unanimous in the world of golf .
 First, power was concentrated in rich Western European and North American countries, which reduced the number of states whose agreement was necessary for effective management . Then, the then-communist Soviet Union and its sphere of influence in Eastern Europe was limited .
 The onset of the Cold War helped cement Western unity along these lines . Indeed, the onset of Cold War cemented Western unity in Europe .
 Second, a compromise was reached between the contrasting ideologies of the U.S. and Britain . Second, the United States and Britain's ideologies were reached through compromise .
 In particular, the emergent order honored both commercial liberal preferences for an open international economy and the more mercantilist desires for active state involvement in their domestic economies .
 Bretton Woods worked because the U.S. assumed the burdens of hegemonic leadership, and others willingly accepted that leadership . Third, the United States assumed the burden of leadership, the other countries willingly accepted it .
 Commercial liberalism’s preference for open markets spread worldwide during this time and remains dominant today . Commercial liberalism was dominant in Europe during this period .
 The Bretton Woods system combined open international markets with domestic state intervention to attain such goais as full employment and social welfare . Thus, it is still useful to embedded liberalism dominant economic approach .
 The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade was formed to encourage trade liberalization . The World Trade Organization later became the World Trade Organisation . The organization was formed in order to encourage free trade .
 Speculation attacks massive sales of a country’s currency, caused by the anticipation of a future decline In Its value . Speculative attacks on a country's currency caused by anticipation of future decline in its value .
 The global economic collapse of the 1930s provided specific lessons for monetary relations . The 1930s was a time when the world's economic collapse was the worst in the world .
 In particular, as major economies contracted in the late 1920s, they found themselves unable to maintain their fixed exchange rate regime . The major economies were unable to keep their fixed rate regime in place .
 The resultant flexible regime was highly unstable, replete with speculative attacks on currencies and currency devaluations . The resulting flexible regime has been highly unstable .
 Currency now moves effortlessly across borders, and the globalization of international finance is wreaking bavoc on the efforts of state governments to control rapid fluctuations in rates of exchange rates .
 The negotiating parties agreed that the postwar monetary regime should be based on fixed exchange rates . Governments were assigned primary responsibility for enforcing the rules of the new order .
 The IMF was to function somewhat like a global ‘credit union’—countries contributed to the fund and were able to draw capital from it to help them maintain balance-of-payments equilibrium, and hence exchange rate stability .
 Along somewhat similar lines, they established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, later known as the World Bank . The World Bank provides capital for longer-term development and recovery projects .
 Today the IMF and World Bank are important, if controversial, players in the global monetary and financial systems . The IMF and the World Bank were important, but controversial, in the 1980s and '90s .
 In the period immediately after World War II, these institutions commanded too little authority and too few resources to cope with the enormous devastation of the war . The institutions were too small and too little to cope .
 The United States dollar became the key to the hegemonic role that the United States eagerly assumed as manager of the international monetary system . The U.S. dollar is now the world's most important currency .
 It was accepted in exchange markets as the reserve used by monetary authorities in most countries and by private banks, corporations, and individuals for international trade and capital transactions .
 Central banks in other countries used the dollar to raise or depress the value of their currencies . Central banks raised or lowered the dollar's value in order to maintain it .
 The Bretton Woods monetary regime was based on fixed-but-adjustable exchange rates based on the dollar and gold . It ultimately required a measure of government intervention for its operation .
 The Marshall Plan provided Western European states billions of dollars in aid to buy fixed exchange rate a system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country's currency . The exchange vaiue is not free to fluctuate in the global
 The United States encouraged deficits in its own balance of payments as a way of providing international liquidity . The U.S. encouraged deficits to provide international liquidity as a result of international cooperation .
 Such liquidity was intended to enable these countries to pursue expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, as well as to facilitate their participation in the global economy . Such liquidity is intended to support these countries' economic growth and participation .
 The U.S. assumed a disproportionate share of the burden of rejuvenating Western Europe and Japan . In addition to providing liquidity, the United States has also provided liquidity to the region .
 The U.S. willingly agreed to pay these costs of leadership because subsidizing economic growth in Europe and Japan increased the United States export markets and strengthened the West against communism's possible popular appeal .
 The End of Bretton Woods dollar overhang condition that precipitated the end of the era . In which total holdings of dollars outside of the U.S. central bank exceeded the amount of dollars actually backed by gold . The end was the result of an overhang in the United States
 By the 1960s it became apparent that the system was ultimately unsustainable . By the 1970s it had become apparent that it was unsustainable .
 As use of the dollar grew, the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit became increasingly problematic . The dollar's use of dollars in circulation and the amount of money in circulation became more frequent .
 The United States was not able to adjust the value of its currency, as it was pegged to gold . Unlike other countries, the U.S. could not adjust its currency value . The value of the United States currency was not adjusted to gold, but the value was tied to gold
 The U.S. pursued expansionary macroeconomic tactics during the 1960s to finance policies such as the Vietnam War and increased social spending . The United States began to pursue expansionary policies during the 1970s .
 The gap between the amount of dollars in circulation and the amount supported by gold holdings was known as dollar overhang . This gap is known as "dollar overhang" in the U.S.
 Though the dollar was officially “as good as gold,’s monetary reality was far different . Simply put, though the U.S. dollar was . as good as . gold, the monetary reality in the United States was far more .
 This left the Bretton Woods system in a tenuous position, and the U.S. very constrained in its options . The United States was left in a very difficult position in the world of diplomacy .
 Tight monetary policies on behalf of the U.S. would have reduced the balance-of-payments deficit . Tight monetary policy would have helped reduce the deficit .
 Given the scope of the deficit, such cuts would have dealt a major shock to the U.S. economy . However, given the size of the budget cuts, such a cut would have been a shock to many .
 Another potential option, currency devaluation, could conceivably have reduced the balance-of-payments problem . Currency devaluation could have also been a solution .
 Though some of the other major economies were willing to intervene to support the dollar, there were limits to what these countries would do . The status quo was not sustainable, and it was widely known that the status quo wasn't sustainable .
 The architecture of the international finance system must be reformed to reduce the susceptibility to crises, says David Cameron . Cameron says the system must also be reformed in order to reduce its vulnerability to crises .
 In 1971, Richard Nixon cut this “Gordian knot” by abruptly announcing that the United States would no longer exchange dollars for gold . The ultimate key is not economics or finance, but politics, says Robert Rubin, former Secretary of the Treasury .
 Bretton Woods system gave way to a substitute system based on floating exchange rates . With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton-Woods system was replaced .
 Market forces, rather than government intervention, now determine currency values . Market forces will now determine the value of the currency, not the government's .
 A country experiencing adverse economic conditions now sees the value of its currency fall in response to the choices of traders, bankers, and businesspeople . The value of the country's currency is now a reflection of the choices made by traders and bankers in the past .
 This was expected to make exports cheaper and imports more expensive, which in turn would pull the currency’s value back toward equilibrium . All without the need for central bankers to support the value of its currency, central bankers would not have to do so .
 In this way, it was hoped that the politically humiliating devaluations of the past could be avoided . It is hoped that this will avoid politically humiliating .
 The same market forces hold governments accountable for their policies and actions, says David Cameron . He says flexible exchange rates give governments autonomy to conduct their own fiscal and monetary policies .
 floating exchange rates an unmanaged process in which governments neither establish an official rate for their currencies nor intervene to affect the value of their currencies, and instead allow market forces and private investors to influence the relative rate of exchange for currencies between countries . As a result, states should be forced to
 Beginning in the late 1970s, escalating in the 1980s, and persisting through the present, a rising wave of financial crises occurred . The financial crises, both in currency and banking, occurred .
 This chronic problem in the crushing sea of circulating capital flows throughout the globe has strained the international monetary process to the brink of collapse . The global monetary process is strained by the global financial crisis .
 This staggering debt load greatly reduces these countries’ capability to chart their future by themselves . Needless to say, this staggering debt loads greatly reduce these countries' capability . Sovereign states are supposed to do, as sovereign states should do .
 The post-Bretton Woods era has been plagued by financial crises . $uch crises have become increasingly frequent throughout the world as a result of the inability of states to manage their debt, inflation, and interest rates .
 In the past forty-five years, more than one hundred major episodes of banking insolvency occurred in nine of ten rapidly growing Global East countries . In nine of 10 rapidly growing global East countries, such as China, it has had a history of major banking crises .
 This financial disease is also spreading to the Global North countries and their banking institutions . The global North countries are also suffering from the financial disease, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The financial cost of these currency crises, in terms of the percentage of GDP lost, has been huge and threatens to increase . The financial costs of the currency crises have been huge, says David Cameron .
 The call has risen with increasing voice about the need for the great powers and all others to collectively coordinate, through multilateral agreements, the stabilization of international exchange rates . In reaction to growing awareness of the extent of the global prosperity of each country depends on a stable international currency system .
 Protests and riots against the IMF and the World Bank have become relatively commonplace . Protests have become more commonplace in recent years .
 In some instances, such as the 2003 “Black Friday’s protests in Bolivia in which thirty-three people were killed, the violence can turn deadly . The 2003 "Black Friday" protests in Bolivian were the deadliest in the country .
 Protests and riots can sometimes help to overturn a government . In the case ot Indonesia in 1998, such protests and riots helped to overturn the government .
 Structural Adjustment Policies are the package of policy reforms that accompany IMF and World Bank financial assistance . Of great contention are Structural . Adjustments Policies .
 The basic goal of SAPs is to help countries repay their foreign debts through a combination of fiscal and monetary policy reforms, as well as increased participation in the global economy . SAPs are designed to help debtors repay their debts through fiscal and economic reforms .
 SAPs were first introduced in the early 1980s as a way of helping countries in Latin America recover from the debt crisis . SAPs first introduced to help Latin American countries recover from debt crisis in the 1980s . The SAPs are now used in more than 100 countries around the world
 The political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of criticism . Though this “playbook"" is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, it has been criticized .
 SAPs are very recessionary, particularly in the short run, economist says . SAPs, often enacted very rapidly, are very short-lived, he says . "SAPs, which are often implemented very rapidly," are often enacted too rapidly .
 Decreases in government spending often translate into decreases in government jobs . Government spending often translates into decreased levels of support for education, healthcare, and economic welfare .
 Interest rate increases make it more expensive for citizens to acquire loans, while currency devaluation lowers individual spending power . Interest rates are more expensive than for individuals to obtain loans .
 In many instances, the reduction of state subsidies may result in drastic increases in the prices that citizens pay for basic services, such as electricity and water, or goods that were formerly subsidized, including fuel and food .
 These difficulties can be further exacerbated by trade liberalization, as inefficient domestic industries may be incapable of competing with their foreign counterparts . The difficulties are further exacerbated if liberalization is implemented .
 These industries may be forced to cut jobs or close down entirely . As a result, these industries may have to close down completely .
 Countries in the Global South may view these institutions as another manitestation of “neocolonialism,"" which serves more to meet the interests of global investors and corporations rather than citizens of the global South .
 Many large state-run industries are sold off to multinational corporations from the Global North . Indeed, in many instances “privatization"" results in many large state run industries being sold off .
 Many of the criticisms against the IMF were primarily from more populist and Marxist sources . The IMF has been criticized by some of the world's most prominent figures in recent years .
 Flowever, recent studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs upon their recipient states . Flowever says SAPs have been successful in some areas of the world, including Russia and China, but not all countries .
 The World Bank and the IMF defend their role in the international financial system . Though acknowledging an imperfect record, the World Bank acknowledges its imperfect record . The IMF and World Bank say they are committed to the world's economic stability .
 IMF has played a key role in helping countries recover, officials say . Pointing to successes such as Poland, officials note that the IMF has helped countries recover . Officials say the IMF is a key part of the recovery process .
 Countries only apply for help when they are in financial trouble, and thus it is hard to blame these organizations for problems that the country was facing anyway . Moreover, countries only apply to help with financial problems, so it is not easy to blame them .
 Political leaders may find it expedient to “scapegoat’t the IMF and the World Bank, which can provide them “cover” for enacting unpopular economic policies . The IMF and World Bank provides them ‘cover’ for unpopular, though unpopular,
 IMF economist Kenneth Rogoff: Countries would be worse off if they isolated themselves from the global economy . Ultimately, as argued by Rogoff, countries would be much worse off in isolation .
 The current global financial system is still recovering from the massive crisis that came to a head in 2008 . TFie current financial system still recovering after massive financial crisis .
 The first phase of a crisis cycle is “displacement,” which refers to a change in the system that alters profit opportunities and creates new opportunities for financial gain . “Displacement’s” is a change that alters the system and creates opportunities for
 There were several developments that brought increased attention to the mortgage and securities markets during the beginning of the century . The real estate boom in the U.S. and extremely low interest rates in the United States also brought attention to mortgage markets .
 The initial dilemma that led to this crisis was how to put the “giant pool of money” that these states were holding into use . These factors were inextricably linked .
 Low interest rates in the U.S. meant that mortgages were less expensive for homeowners . At the same time, the low interest rates meant that mortgage prices were less than inflation .
 As housing prices were increasing, buying new or larger homes was a good “investment” for homeowners . Buyers were able to buy a larger home or a new home in a good investment .
 Banks created instruments to link the ‘pool’ of money to the housing market, by selling securities based off of these mortgages to large investors . Sensing opportunity, banks created instruments .
 Investors made a higher rate of return from the mortgages, homeowners reaped the benefits of lower interest rates, and banks made billions of dollars as intermediaries . As a result of the lower rates, the investors made higher rates of return .
 The second phase of the crisis—the so-called “boom’s period in which money pours into these new opportunities—thus began . Money pours in into new opportunities .
 As the investors and bankers continued to reap profits, the “pool of money” became ever larger, and trillions of dollars continued to flow into this market . As the . investors and . bankers . continue to reap . profits, as the ‘pool of . money’
 Banks began to invent more investment instruments based off of this market (essentially different ways to “bundle” these mortgages together), and huge investment instruments began to emerge . Huge speculative markets based off the performance of these instruments emerged .
 The “pool” continued to grow, and demand for these securities continued . Yet the ‘pool’ of securities continued, with demand for them continuing .
 To keep the market going, banks began to sell mortgages to “subprime” buyers who would have never qualified for mortgages under normal circumstances . The subprime mortgage market collapsed in 2008 .
 The rationalization for doing this was that even if some loans were not repaid, there would still be a sufficient flow of capital to keep the overall securities serviced . Even if some of the loans are not repaid they would still have to be repaid, the government said .
 Even if the loans defaulted, the banks would get the real estate, which was considered to be an appreciating asset, they would get it . The real estate is considered an appreciated asset .
 As homeowners fail to repay the mortgages, banks quickly found themselves without a stream of income from mortgage holders, holding properties whose value was declining and that they were unable to sell, and facing debt loads that were sometimes over thirty times greater than their own net worth .
 As mortgage market began to fall, speculative markets and instruments built around it collapsed . Speculators built around the mortgage market were many times more than the value of the mortgages themselves .
 The credit market in the U.S. and much of the world collapsed in 2008 . As a result, banks and investors literally ran out of money, and the credit market collapsed .
 The current crisis has had a profound impact upon the global financial order, as well as the international system as a whole . Though financial crises are not new to the financial system, the current crisis is a particularly profound impact .
 The crisis has brought into question the leadership of the U.S. in maintaining the liberal financial order, as well as the prevalence of the dollar as the currency of choice in international finance . This crisis has thus brought questions about some of the ideals of the global financial system .
 IMF: 64 percent of all foreign exchange reserves were in dollars in 2008 . IMF: In 2008, 64 per cent of the country's foreign reserves were dollar-based .
 The value of the dollar on the world market has recovered somewhat since the onset of the crisis . Leading economies in the world have suggested that the dollar be replaced as the major currency of the global marketplace .
 The general need for a dominant currency is broadly noted among economists . There is “no obvious replacement” for the dollar as the dominant currency, economists say . Such suggestions do indicate damage to the reputation of the dollar and the possibility of a less dollar-centered global economy .
 The free exchanges of currencies and the free movement of capital are viewed as foundational to liberal economics . The financial crisis has served to undercut basic contentions regarding the efficacy of the marketplace .
 Among the larger economies of the world, the ones that fared the best in the crisis were India and China . The two major countries most insulated from the global financial order were China and India .
 Moldova, a very small country with a “cash-only system” of finance, was recently ranked by a leading financial journal as the fifth most stable economy in the world .
 Roger Altman, a former U.S. Treasury Department official and a leading adviser to President Clinton, says globalization itself is reversing . Altman: “The long movement towards market liberalization has stopped,” and “globalization is reversing.”
 To critics of liberalism, the crisis has revealed strengths in alternative perspectives on the global economy . The crisis has also revealed strengths of alternatives perspectives on global economy, says David Cameron .
 Marxists have long noted the inherent instability of capitalism, its susceptibility to speculative panics, and the need for strong state intervention into the financial system . Marxists say capitalism is unstable and needs state intervention in financial systems .
 Financial crises starkly reveal the drawbacks to the globalization of finance . Giro Domenico/Landov The Globalization of International Finance The DOMINO EFFECT IN GLOBAL FINANCE .
 When a country’s banks go bankrupt and its economy collapses, foreign capital flees in panic, which can often exacerbate the crisis . Foreign capital can often be seen fleeing the country's banks and collapsing economies .
 Money problems in one country can lead to money problems in others, say experts . There is no worldwide central bank to cushion such crashes, experts say .
 This can create currency depreciations and plunges in stock prices at home and abroad . This can also create plunging stock prices .
 The current financial crisis will have a disproportionate impact upon males . Just as the crisis was driven by male dominance, the crisis will be driven by males . The financial crisis has been driven by men, according to experts .
 In the United States, over 80 percent of the job losses since November 2008 fell upon men, as traditionally male sectors (e.g., construction and manufacturing) were hardest hit .
 For their part, feminist scholars note that males are both primarily responsible for the crisis and suffering the most from its effects . As one scholar concludes, the financial crisis “will be not only a blow to the macho men’s club called finance capitalism that got the world into
 To the extent that the crisis weakens the economic and ideological power of the United States and its Western allies, the U.S. is less able to assert itself in international negotiations . The United States will be less able, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The economic downturn has the potential to increase political instability in various regions of the world . The impact of this crisis has spilled over into many developing countries, including fragile states such as Pakistan and the Democratic Republic of Congo . The situation has also spilled over to resource-driven countries such as Iran
 Financial crises have traditionally been followed by a multitude of suggestions for reform . Financial crises are traditionally followed by proposals for reform, such as financial reform .
 In dealing with the crisis of 2008, efforts were made to improve the rather informal system of financial cooperation between states .
 Group consisting of the twenty largest economies met to discuss ways to deal with financial crisis . Such matters were traditionally discussed among the seven or eight largest economies .
 The rationale behind the larger group was that the larger economies of the developing world, such as Argentina, Brazil, and Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia, should have input into forging a common response to the crisis .
 What these and other proposals seek is a mechanism for creating the currency stability and flexibility on which prosperity depends, says Susan Strange, economist and international relations scholar .
 With the spread of democracy throughout the globe, most governments now face increasing domestic pressures to sacrifice such goals as exchange rate stability for unemployment reduction .
 floating exchange rates, with all their costs and uncertainties, are here to stay . So it seems likely that the reality of a new financial system will remain elusive . Floating exchange rates are likely to stay in the future .
 IMF remains preferred instrument for coping with financial crises, says IMF . IMF remains a preferred instrument to cope with financial crisis, IMF says . IMF will continue to be an instrument for dealing with crises .
 Flence, while schemes for alternatives proliferate, the prospects are for incremental tinkering rather than wholesale restructuring . Flence: "The prospects are ... for incremental . tinkering"
 The mixed results of the G-20 summit illustrate the difficulty in bringing about any fundamental change . G20 summit highlights the difficulty of bringing about fundamental change in the world .
 Despite their common interest in recovering from the current crisis, the members could not agree on a common set of policies to help their own economies recover . They did not want to establish a supranational regulatory body to deal with global financial exchanges .
 In each instance, countries valued their own domestic policy autonomy over their common interest in monetary stability . In each case, each country valued its own own policy autonomy .
 Global investment flows continue to proliferate, and there is every reason to expect that the currency dilemmas facing the world will continue to intensify . The world's currency crises are likely to continue to grow in the next few years .
 The EU created the euro in the hopes that a single currency would make the EU a single market for business . To this end, the euro would promote economic growth, cross-border investment, corporate innovation and efficiency .
 As innovative as the creation of the euro appears, it may not serve as a model for other countries and regions . The euro was created in 1998 to create a common currency currency currency .
 The EU’s common currency represents much more than an economic policy, but the end result of a decades-long process of economic integration . The European Union's common currency is the result of decades of integration in the EU .
 A controversy surrounding multilateral institutions is that their policies are seen as another way in which powerful states of the Global North seek domination over those in the Global South . The IMF is seen as a way of trying to protect the interests of the global South .
 Indonesian President Suharto signs an agreement for a $43 billion assistance and reform package . IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus looks on in this picture .
 Indonesians place a great value on symbolism and body language . Indonesians view the picture as a humiliating loss of face for the president . He was forced out of office four months later .
 Suharto subsequently reneged on many aspects of the deal, particularly those that called for the dismantling of business monopolies owned by his family members . The deal was designed to create a European superstate and erase the individuality and economic and political sovereignty of European states .
 Currency integration in Europe is best seen as a response to U.S. domination of the global economy . Europe's currency integration is seen as an economic response to the United States domination of global markets .
 The United States dollar remains the primary global currency for settling international accounts . It is doubtful that countries with smaller economies could successfully create their own regional currency blocs .
 Economic globalization would largely mean the “dollarization” of the international political economy . Along those lines, economic globalization would be largely the "dollarization" of the world's political economy, economist says .
 The debate over currency and monetary policies will remain as intense as ever, particularly in the turbulent arena of international trade . This means that the debate over currencies and monetary policy will remain intense .
 It is that twin dimension of economic globalization that we will next consider in Chapter 13 . The twin dimension will be discussed in Chapter 12 .
 Coca-Cola logo is one of the most recognizable images in the world, and the global reach of this product is massive . World Trade and the Financial Crisis are the result of a global crisis .
 Coca-Cola: Average global per capita consumption of its products over tbe course of a year is eighty-five cans . Over 1. hillion servings are consumed daily, according to company reports .
 Coca-Cola controls over half of China’s carbonated beverage market . Coke has been active in China for over eighty years, and controls half of the country's carbonated drink market . Coca-Cola controls the world's largest carbonated beverages .
 Coca-Cola attempted to buy the Huiyuan Company in 2009 . The bottle in the middle is from a bottle from the company, which is in China . Coca-Cola tried to buy it in 2009, but the bottle was rejected .
 His employer has decided to move its production to India in order to save money by hiring lower-paid foreign workers without trade unions . The move will save money and save the company by hiring foreign workers .
 The downside of globalized international trade has come home to roost . The quality of your life is declining, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Levi jeans are no longer produced in the United States . Calvin Klein shirts are made in China . Levi jeans no longer made in the U.S.
 You race off to your international economics course to find meaning in the whirlwind of international trade going on around you .
 Trade across national borders is the biggest part of the globalization of world politics, says CNN's Nina dos Santos . She introduces her topic by telling you that trade is a big part of global politics .
 As you learn, scholars also hold competing views about the consequences of international trade . As you next learn, you will learn about the impact of globalization .
 To construct an objective evaluation of these rival interpretations, begin by stepping backward to understand leading ideas about states’ trade policies, which are rooted in past thinking . To begin by step backward, step back to understand how states' trade policies have evolved .
 In this chapter, you will focus on the contest between liberalism and mercantilism . Two dominant sets of values underlie the different trade strategies states pursue in their quest for power and wealth .
 Data shows trends in the globalization of international trade . But to provide a broader context, the place to start is with data .
 Evidence of global trade is as close to you as the clothes you wear and the coffee you drink in the morning . We must ensure that the global market is embedded in broadly shared values and practices that reflect global social needs, Kofi Annan says .
 Measuring global trade as a percentage of GDP is perhaps the simplest and most straightforward measure of globalization, says Michael Mazarr .
 Index of trade integration reveals that international trade has become increasingly global over the past decades . International trade has been increasingly global since the 1970s .
 When the percentage change each year in the volume of world trade grows faster than the annual rate of growth of the combined world economy, “trade integration” increases . iNTEGRATiON 1998-2008 chart shows the growth of global trade in the past two decades .
 Though the general trend is toward greater integration, countries differ in the degree to which their economies participate in global commerce . Countries differ on the degree of participation in global trade .
 Global trade integration has become most rapid as a result of the contribution of the Global East and Global South to world trade . Global trade is also important to continued economic growth in the Global North, says David Cameron .
 The Global South’s share of global exports in manufactured products has grown from 10 percent in 1980 to 30 percent in 2009 . The Global East has the fastest growth in the share of new export products .
 Trade in services (intangible products such as tourism and banking financial assistance) and telecommunications are increasing as well . Tourism and financial assistance are also increasing as also .
 Commercial ties have expanded more than threefold since 1980, with the Global North reaping most of the benefits . Commercial ties between the two nations have expanded threefold in 30 years .
 The World Bank predicts that developing countries will capture an increasing share of world trade in services . However, the spread of information technology, the ease with which new business software can be used, and the comparatively lower wage costs in developing economies are among reasons for the increase in services trade .
 Global East countries such as India, with significant numbers of educated, English-speaking citizens, are already operating call centers and consumer assistance hotlines for Global North companies .
 Trade is one of the most prevalent and visible aspects of the globalized world economy . Trade is an important part of the world's economic growth .
 globalization is a multifaceted phenomenon (see Chapter 9), encompassing a variety of often interrelated actions . However, globalization is also a multi-phenomenon that is often interdependent .
 There is a close relationship between trade and the global financial markets . Exchange rates set the values for the goods traded, and capital flows are often necessary to finance these commercial activities .
 Trade is inextricably linked to two other aspects of globalization, the globalization of production and labor . The globalization of labor and production are also linked to each other . Trade is linked to both production and production .
 Understanding these components of globalization, as well as their relationship with trade, is important to understanding the complexities of the world economy . Understanding the relationship between globalization and trade is essential to understanding these components .
 Selling products to consumers in another country often requires companies to establish a presence abroad, where they can produce goods and offer services . But economically, countries depend on each other .
 The pattern today is to dismantle the hub by dispersing production facilities worldwide, which was made economically feasible by the revolutions in communication and transportation, it was made economic feasible .
 Production of goods is commonly dispersed as different components are made in different countries . As a result, the production of goods can be dispersed as a result .
 Every Dell computer that is sold is, in effect, generating trade between nine different countries . The Dell computer is generating trade in nine countries, the company says .
 This globalization of production is transforming the international political economy, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Globalization of production will transform the world's political economy .
 National account statistics are still gathered with states as the unit of analysis . It once made sense to count trade in terms of flows between countries, but that practice continues .
 Together MNCs are responsible for about onefourth of the world’s production and two-thirds of global exports . Together they are now responsible for onefifth of the global production . MNCS are now . responsible for . about one fourth of the . world's production and
 Supply chains such as this have a significant influence on the world economy . Supply chains reflect increasing levels of cross-border integration and the ‘networked’ nature of interdependence . Supply chain is a key part of the global economy .
 Thomas Friedman even goes so far as to offer a “Dell Theory” of conflict prevention . It posits that states that are part of common major supply chains are less likely to go to war .
 Global actors have grown in influence also because many MNC parent companies are now linked with one another in virtual corporations . Virtual corporations and alliances of co-ownership and coproduction .
 MNC networks pursue truly global strategies for financial gain, often through long-term supplier agreements and licensing and franchising contracts . These MNC network networks pursue globally .
 As they funnel large financial flows across national borders, these global corporate conglomerates are integrating national economies into a worldwide market . These global corporate giants are merging national economies with a global market .
 It is important to know not only how much FDI a country receives but from where . FDI is important for a country to know how much it receives from where it receives .
 The effect of inward FDI needs to be appreciated beyond its usual role of alleviating resource scarcities and creating jobs in host countries . FDI is a key part of the economy's growth in the Middle East economy .
 The globalization of production has implications for the economic norms and practices of societies throughout the world . In addition to changing the way that we view world trade, we view the world trade as a matter of concern .
 In short, it affects global identities as well as global trade . intra-firm trade cross-national trade of intermediate goods and services within the same firm . virtual corporations agreements between otherwise competitive MNCs, often temporary, to join forces .
 The ultimate effects of FDI are controversial . There is agreement that the globalization of production will only increase . FDI is a form of globalization that will continue to increase .
 The direction of FDI flows is constantly changing, but a trend is apparent in the rise of the Global East and the Global $outh as fully engaged participants in this enormous transnational investment activity .
 The globalization of production is inextricably linked to the globalization of labor as well as trade . Production is linked to labor, labor and trade, and the globalization of labor is linked .
 The globalization of labor has emerged as a result of interrelated changes in the world economy and global demographics . Globalization of labor emerged as result of changes in world economy, demographics .
 As evidenced by the large volume of global FDI, an increasing amount of productive capital is mobile, and can readily change locations according to the specific needs of the firm and the perceived advantages of prospective host countries .
 Businesses are FDI inflows, global and by groups of economies, 1990-2009 2,000 1,800 1,700 1,600 1,400 Oi— cMco .
 As the figure demonstrates, there has been dramatic growth in FDI since 1990 . FDI has increased dramatically since then .
 Between 1990 and 2007, global foreign direct investment increased roughly ten-fold, from about $200 billion to a record $1.98 trillion . Global foreign direct investments increased roughly 10-fold in the last decade .
 This was followed by a sharp decline in global FDI in 2008, due to tbe worldwide financial crisis . The decline in FDI was due to the global financial crisis in 2008 .
 Tbe figure on the right shows the distribution of FDI between the Global North and the Global South . The figure is based on FDI from the North to the South .
 Developed countries experienced a dramatic drop in FDI during 2008, reflecting their susceptibility to the immediate effects of the financial crisis and the failures of their financial institutions . Dverall, a majority of FDI still flows into the Global North, though most of it still flows to the Global
 There is mobility in the workforce as individuals move from one country to another . At the same time, there is mobility for individuals to move from country to country .
 The overall size of the global workforce has increased greatly over the past few decades . Moreover, the overall number of people working in the workforce has also increased greatly .
 Companies that once were anchored in their communities can easily pick up and relocate . The mobile nature of capital could further weaken labor’s position, says economist .
 In fact, companies which do not go where they can manufacture and operate most efficiently will soon be overtaken by those which do . Companies which go where it can manufacture, operate best efficiently, will soon lose ground .
 Globalization of labor integration of labor markets predicated by the giobai nature of production as weii as the increased size and mobility of the global labor force . So capital can move, but labor can’t; business executives are in a strong bargaining position, but workers
 The logic of supply and demand does bode poorly for the wage levels of workers . But it oversimplifies the situation by treating labor as a relatively homogeneous, and thus interchangeable, good .
 Such a view ignores a key factor in business decisions, the productivity of labor, says John Defterios . He says productivity is a key to business decisions . The productivity of a person's labor is a vital part of business, he says .
 For example, it would not make sense for a corporation to move to a place where labor is 50 percent less expensive if the productivity of that labor was 75 percent less than the current location . Such a move would result in a net increase in operating expenses, the author says .
 Wages are not the only factor that determines where global capital will locate, say experts . Wages and wages are not only factors that determine where capital will go, they say .
 globalization acts to increase the purchasing power of these workers . Even though some workers may face lower wages, globalization increases their purchasing power . Globalization increases purchasing power for some workers .
 Along the lines of liberal economic theory, global commerce enables consumers to purchase greater selections of goods at lower prices than would be the case without globalization . Global commerce is a form of economic theory that allows consumers to buy more goods at less expensive prices .
 A similar dynamic is apparent between the globalization of labor and labor rights . The globalization of labor is similar to that of the U.S. labor movement .
 Competition for capital and the increased supply of labor could prove harmful to the protection of labor rights, including the right to form unions and to legal protections from morally questionable labor practices such as child labor .
 Anecdotal evidence about “sweatshops” and the repression of union rights in the name of foreign investment abound . Unocal, Walt Disney, and Nike have suffered embarrassment and financial costs for their associations with poor labor practices .
 Globalization is sped by the rapid expansion of technology and the availability of cheap labor in some countries that take advantage of their peoples’ low wages to make products highly competitive in the globalized marketplace .
 Child labors under hazardous conditions and at near slave wages in Bangladesh . The child is producing goods that cost less than those made where labor unions protect workers .
 Most studies have found the globalization of production and labor to be-on-balance . But gains have not been spread equally across or within societies, they say .
 Fears persist about globalization and societal well-being . But fears about it persist . Globalization is a key part of society's future .
 Though globalization creates winners and losers, the negative consequences of globalization are visible . Companies “outsourcing’s work or using child labor are quite visible and strike deeply into people's lives, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The gains from globalization, such as less expensive products and the gradual diffusion of technologies, are often unnoticed . Alternatively, the gains of globalization are often overlooked .
 Similar dynamics are apparent in many of the controversies surrounding trade policy . The U.S. has been criticized for its trade policies in recent years .
 International trade is a far-reaching dimension of globalization and is one of the most hotly debated . As you have learned, international trade is an important part of globalization .
 Disputes intensified because major participants in international trade are taking opposed foreign economic policy approaches . Disputes have intensified because of the major participants taking opposing foreign economic policies, experts say .
 To understand the trade strategies different states are pursuing, it is important to understand the economic philosophies of liberalism and mercantilism that guide their international economic decisions .
 The leaders founded the liberal economic order based around the convertible currencies and the free flows of goods and capital . Over the course of the next three years, the leaders founded an economic order that was based on convertible currencies .
 The basic mission of the GATT was to encourage free trade among countries by reducing barriers to trade . GATT is a common forum for resolving trade disputes .
 The basic reciprocity premise of the GATT was for the mutual lowering of trade barriers, thus countries that lowered their tariffs could expect their trading partners to do the same . The GATT principle was for countries to lower their tariffs .
 In particular, nondiscrimination was put into practice in two specific forms, most-favored nation principle and national treatment . Most-Favored nations principle was put in practice in the United States .
 The MFN principle holds that tariff preferences granted to one state must be granted to all others . There could be no "favored nation" among members of the MFN group .
 National treatment means foreign goods are treated equally with domestic goods . Countries are not able to enact policies to give their domestic products any advantage over foreign products .
 GATT called for transparency in trade policy, meaning that trade regulations and barriers need to be clearly known among all states . Third, the GATT also called for transparent trade regulations .
 In a series of successive meetings or “rounds” held from 1947 to 1994, average tariff levels were lowered from 40 percent to just under 5 percent . Average tariff levels in the U.S. have been lowered since 1994 .
 The Uruguay Round was concluded in 1994 the GATT became the World Trade Organization . The organization was given the power to settle disputes between members .
 Shown here is one example of China's growing consumerism: a view of the huge South China Mall in Donggum, the world’s biggest shopping center . The world's biggest shopping mall is in South China, China's biggest mall .
 Opened in 2005, the mall has 7. million feet of leasable shopping area, and includes windmills and theme parks . The mall has a 7.million-foot area of shopping area .
 China has embraced America’s ‘shop-’til-you-drop’ ethos and is in the midst of a buyat-the-mall frenzy . China has been involved in a number of disputes among its members since 1994 .
 Since 1947, the organization has grown stronger in terms of members . Since 1947 its membership has grown from 23 countries to 153 .
 Not all states consistently support the liberal tenet that governments should not interfere by managing trade flows . Though liberalization has spread worldwide as a policy principle, not all countries consistently support it .
 We will next review the basic philosophical stances underlying trade policy and the role of trade within the global political system . We will also assess some of the specific policy tools that states use in international trade .
 Governments must try to reconcile the overriding need for states to cooperate in trade liberalization with the natural competitive desire to put its own welfare first . They need to be able to maximize their wealth with each state’s natural competitive .
 Most controversies in international political economy are ultimately reducible to differences between liberalism and mercantilism . Most of the world's political economy is based on liberalism, the author says .
 Commercial liberalism proceeds from the premise that humankind’s natural inclination is to cooperate . Commercial liberalism is based on the idea that humankind's natural inclination to cooperate.
 Progress through mutually beneficial exchanges is possible, both to increase prosperity and enlarge individual liberty under law . Progress through mutual beneficial exchanges can increase prosperity, enlarge individual freedom .
 In commercial liberalism, economic activity can lead to global welfare, says Julian Zelizer . The major problems of capitalism can be managed, he says . Zelizer says .
 Liberalism and Mercantilism have key differences in economic relations . Liberalism aims to serve the welfare of the nation and serve the nation's interests . Mercantillism is a form of economic nationalism that aims to promote economic prosperity .
 An unregulated market fueled by humans’ natural tendency to “truck, barter, and exchange” in pursuit of private interest could serve the globe’s collective or public interest by permitting efficiency and gains .
 Smith: If individuals rationally pursue their own self-interest, they will maximize societal interests as well . Smith: Individuals should be aware of their own interests in society . Smith says individuals should be more aware of society's interests .
 The key concept that Smith fostered was the idea of absolute advantage, the idea that countries should produce goods in which their costs of production are lowest in comparison with other countries . Smith's idea was that countries produce goods that have the lowest costs of producing them .
 This issue was addressed by another eighteenth-century political economist, David Ricardo, and his concept of comparative advantage . Ricardo, an economist of the same time, argued that comparative advantage is a form of advantage .
 Ricardo argued that all parties, even those with no absolute advantage in anything, can benefit from trade . Ricardo: All parties, including those who have no absolute advantages, benefit from trading . Ricardo argues that trade is a form of democracy .
 A country should focus on the production of goods that it produces comparatively cheaply, rather than other goods that could conceivably be produced at a higher cost . In other words, a country should be focused on producing goods that can be produced comparatively cheaply .
 This was a very profound concept with important implications for liberal theory as well as the discipline of economics . It was a profound concept that has important implications to liberal theory .
 Commercial liberalism advocates free trade as a means for all countries to mutually achieve economic progress . As it shows that trade benefits all parties that partake in it, this principle is the basis for commercial liberalism’s advocacy of free trade .
 Consider a hypothetical situation to help clarify the logic behind comparative advantage . Consider a brief hypothetical situation with the help of a hypothetical advantage .
 Assume an “economy” of two people, golfing legend Tiger Woods and yourself, and two “goods,” golfing and grass-cutting . Golfing legend Woods and himself are golfing legends .
 Given his athleticism, he could earn $50 per hour in this line of work . However, he is also good at cutting grass, and could earn more than $50 an hour .
 As such your golfing skills only command $10 per hour and your grass-cutting is only worth $20 per hour . As such, your skills are only available to golfers and grass-cutters .
 Tiger Woods needs to hire someone who specializes in what he does relatively best . Tiger Woods will have more time to devote to golf than anyone else in the world .
 The implicit assumption is that markets succeed according to their own logic . Markets succeed in markets according to the implicit assumption that they will succeed, the author says .
 For liberals, state regulation of the national economy should be minimal to maximize growth and prosperity . State regulation of national economies should maximize growth, prosperity, liberals say .
 The best government is one that stays out of business, and politics should be divorced from the economic market, says David Frum . Frum says . He says the best government should be that it's not in business .
 Commercial liberal theory promises that the ‘invisible hand’ will maximize efficiency so that everyone will gain . But commercial liberal theory does not promise that everyone gains equally . It does not guarantee that everyone benefits equally .
 "Everyone will gain in accordance with his or her contribution to the whole, but not everyone will gain equally because individual productivities differ," the author says .
 The gains from international trade are distributed unequally, even if the principle of comparative advantage governs . The gains are distributed quite unequally in the world, writes David Cameron .
 Commercial liberal theory ignores these differences, as it is most concerned with absolute gains for all rather than relative gains . Commercial liberal theorists are concerned with relative gains, rather than absolute gains .
 Mercantilist theory is more concerned with the political competition among states that determines how economic rewards are distributed . Mercantillist theory, in contrast, is concerned with political competition in which states compete .
 Mercantilism is largely an economic extension of realist thinking . Mercantillism is an extension of the realist approach to economic policy .
 Mutual mercantilism is a political economic perspective that views international trade in zero-sum terms . It calls for active state intervention into domestic economies . Unlike liberals, it focuses on the rationality of the marketplace .
 Classic mercantilists viewed the acquisition of gold and silver as the route to state power and wealth . Imperialistically acquiring overseas colonies was seen as a means to that end .
 What we now call mercantilism (also called economic nationalism) emerged largely as a response to the rise of liberalism . Friedrich List’s National System of Political Economy, is to a large extent a direct critique of The Wealth of Nations .
 Economic nationalists draw from some of the core ideas of liberalism, such as the importance of productivity and the benefits of specialization . They draw a different set of political conclusions, they say .
 In particular, mercantilists diverge from liberal thought in three main ways . Mercantilistists differ from liberal thinking in three ways, including in particular .
 Liberals view wealth and economic growth as ends in themselves . Mercantilists view them as instruments toward increasing national power . The mercantilist view wealth as an instrument toward increasing power .
 While liberal thought expounds upon the gains of specialization, it implicitly treats all specializations as equal in value . Second, liberal thought treats specializations equally equally in value, as a matter of principle .
 Alexander Hamilton recommended that the U.S. specialize in manufacturing instead of agriculture in the early years of the United States . Alexander Hamilton said it would better serve United States national interests . Hamilton: Manufacturing would serve national interests better .
 As opposed to agriculture, manufacturing required higher levels of technological advancement . Manufacturing requires technology to be more advanced than agriculture, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Such industrialization would increase the ‘diversity of talents” in the country, says the author . Industrial capabilities would be more readily convertible to military might, he says .
 Mercantilists view the state has having an active and vital role in their economies . The state has an active role in helping the economy, they say .
 As some specializations are superior to others, states can encourage the development of certain industries by subsidizing them and “protecting” them from foreign competition . States can subsidize certain industries and protect them from competition from foreign competitors .
 Commercial liberals emphasize the mutual benefits of cooperative economic agreements . Mercantilists focus on the likelihood of zero-sum competition and are therefore more concerned that the gains realized by one party in a trade exchange will come at the expense of the other trade partner .
 For mercantilists, relative gains are more important than absolute gains . Both parties' absolute gains are relative gains, the Mercantilist says .
 Though mercantilists recognize the superior efficiency of free trade, they have a more guarded view of its political benefits . Mercantilistists are wary of the political benefits of the trade .
 They view free trade as an acceptable practice for a powerful country, in that it often serves to solidify power . Free trade is seen as a way of solidifying power in the United States, they say .
 In many instances adherence to liberal trade can undermine national security and long-term economic development . However, in many instances, it can undermine the pursuit of national security, the author says .
 As mercantilists point out, powerful countries who profess to liberal practices were quite protectionist when their industries were developing . “While American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire.”
 Trade plays a central role in the global system . Trade is a key part of the global economic system .
 In addition to economic globalization, it has many implications for the global political system . Globalization is a key facet of economic globalization . It has implications for political system, including for the future of global politics .
 At the systemic level, one of the most influential theories involving global trade is hegemonic stability theory . The theory is based on the theory of global trade in the form of hegemon stability .
 Hegemonic stability theory is based on the proposition that free trade and international peace depend on a single predominant great power, or hegemon, that is willing to use its economic and military strength to protect rules for international interaction .
 A hegemon is much more than a powerful state; rather it refers to an instance where a single state has a preponderance of economic and military power, a dominant ideology shared throughout the world, and the willingness to be the leading state in the international system .
 The underlying assumption to hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a public or collective good, such as drinking water, from which everyone benefits . The assumption is that the global economy is a public good .
 This is due to the problematic nature of providing public goods, the collective action dilemma . This is because of the problem of public goods providing them to the public .
 In this dilemma, the provision of public goods is problematic due to two basic problems, accountability and rationality, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Public goods are a problem due to a lack of accountability and rational thinking .
 Though a public good generates benefits, there are certain costs associated with providing or maintaining the good . The cost of maintaining a good is also a cost of providing or providing a good, the author says .
 If the benefit has a large group of potential recipients, it is not possible to hold any single party accountable for paying the costs to provide this good . If the benefits are given to large groups of people, it will not be held accountable for the costs of providing the good .
 If everyone is "rational, then no one will pay to maintain the good and it will eventually disappear . However, if everyone is “rational,” then everyone will pay for maintaining the good .
 Some may try to come and enjoy the benefits of the park without pitching in . The park will be open to the public for the first time this year .
 If enough people realize that they can get away with this they can enjoy a beautiful park without helping with its upkeep, it will not be long before the once beautiful park looks shabby .
 Many states that enjoy the collective good of an orderly, open, freemarket economy pay little or nothing for it . This is also the case with a liberal international economy, because many states enjoy it too .
 A hegemon typically tolerates free-riders, partly because of the benefits that the hegeman provides, such as a stable global currency, encourage other states to accept the leader’s dictates . The benefits of a leader's position are often greater than that of a
 liberalism sees the benefits of cooperation as an absolute gain outcome because all parties to a bargain stand to benefit from their exchanges . Thus, both sides gain—much as liberalism sees cooperation as a positive outcome .
 If the costs of leadership begin to multiply, a hegemon will tend to become less tolerant of others’ free riding . If the cost of leadership begins to grow, it will become harder for leaders to be tough on others .
 Cooperation will increasingly be seen as onesided or zero-sum because most of the benefits come at the expense of the hegemon . In such a situation, cooperation will increasingly become increasingly seen as one-sided . Cooperation is increasingly seen to be one of the biggest problems in the world
 Then the open global economy will crumble amid a competitive race for individual gain at others’s expense . Then the race will continue to be competitive, the author says . Then it will be a race for individuals to gain individual gains at others' expense .
 The theory is quite parsimonious in that it explains very broad political and economic trends in terms of the presence of one condition—hegemonic leadership . The theory explains broad political, economic trends as they are linked to one condition, he says .
 The U.S. is the most recent case of hegemony in the United States during the post-World War II period . The United States has been dominant in the world since 1945 .
 Russett and Oneal posit that trade, alongside democracy and international organizations, is a key part of the “Kantian triad” that encourages lasting peace between states . Trade, democracy, international organizations and democracy are key to the triad, they say .
 The exponential growth of trade contributes enormously to economic prosperity, as the last sixty years suggest . That fact accounts for the continuing popularity of the liberal belief that the exponential growth in trade contributes to prosperity .
 Trade is also used as both a “carrot” and a ‘stick” in interstate relations . Trade is both used as a "carrot" and a "stick" Trade is used as an 'carrot' and 'stick'
 Trade ties are commonly established with developing countries as a way to help them compete in the global market and thus achieve economic growth . Trade ties, and the granting of preferential access to markets, are common .
 Leading examples include the Lome Convention, which gives seventy-one developing countries preferential access to the EU markets, and the African Growth and Opportunities Act . Sub-Saharan African countries have duty-free access to U.S. market .
 Economic sanctions are common ways that trade ties are used as a tool for coercive diplomacy . Economic sanctions —deliberate actions against a target country to deprive it of the benefits of continuing economic relations .
 Sanctions have been used with increasing frequency since WWII, and particularly since the end of the Cold War . Indeed, sanctions have been in place since then, and since end of Cold War, since .
 A considerable body of work has examined the utility of sanctions, and most question their usefulness as a strategic tool . Most question the usefulness of sanctions as a tool .
 Sanctions “are seldom effective in impairing the military potential” of their targets . Sanctions are rarely successful as a substitute to warfare, the U.S. State Department says .
 Sanctions are punitive economic actions, such as the cessation of trade or financial ties, by one global actor against another to retaliate for objectionable behavior . As revealed by such economic sanctions punitive economic action, such actions can be taken to retaliate .
 In 1962, the United States extended sanctions on Cuba to a near-total commercial, economic, and financial embargo . The U.S. extended the embargo in 1962 . Cuba is still a major source of commerce in the world .
 Protests in front of the United Nations headquarters in Nicaragua on April 17,2009 demanding the end of the blockade .
 "Sanctions are like the Energizer Bunny of foreign policy," says Fareed Zakaria . Zakaria: Sanctions are the "Energizer bunny" of foreign diplomacy .
 Sanctions are perceived as a ‘cheap’ tool that allows governments to symbolically demonstrate to their citizens and other countries that they are punishing unacceptable behavior . Though sanctions do impose economic costs to the sender, as it forgoes a potential trading partner, they are still perceived
 Baldwin argues that examining whether or not sanctions are “effective’s” in meeting a given end may not be the correct way to view the situation . Moreover, as Baldwin argues, looking at sanctions is not the correct view of the situation.
 Policymakers have a variety of “tools” at their disposal, all of which have various costs and benefits . Policymakers can use the tools to make decisions about the future of the U.S.
 "It is not enough to show the disadvantages of sanctions, one must show that some other policy option is better" for a given situation, he says . Thus “it must be shown that other policy options are better” for the situation .
 Economic liberals and mercantilists portray two different visions of international economics . One in which the market has virtually free reign and the other in which state actively intervenes to regulate and manipulate market forces .
 The reality is more nuanced, as there are differences in the degree to which free markets operate within each state . Yet, there are states with different levels of free markets operating in each state, according to experts .
 Economic freedom appears to be a strong relationship between economic freedom and prosperity . There are differences in the degree to which economic freedom is enjoyed across countries .
 Given the benefits of trade, it is not surprising that many states today welcome an open trading system . The benefits of an open trade system are not surprising .
 Many states still attempt to increase their own domestic standard of living through trade protectionism . These payoffs notwithstanding, there persist many reasons why so many states still try to increase domestic standards .
 Some feel free trade is neither free nor fair because it does not benefit everyone equally . Some of these people feel that free trade does not help everyone equally equally .
 The percentage of countries practicing ‘domestic economic liberty’ has increased throughout the globe for twelve straight years . Many states remain unwilling to open their domestic markets to foreign imports because they are also unwilling to undertake reforms at home to create a free domestic economy .
 At the start of 2009 only seven countries in the world had more economic freedom than Iran .
 Economic freedom at home may produce the highest economic growth rates, provide the safest environments with the least risk for investments, and lead to foreign trade . Many governments are unwilling to realize these benefits through the liberalization of their local economies .
 It is not an accident that economically closed governments rule countries that also tend to be the poorest and the most corrupt . This is largely to their detriment, as it is not a coincidence that they rule economically closed countries with the poorest, most corrupt governments .
 This evidence underscores the influence of internal conditions on states’ international economic practices, says the author of the book .
 The future preservation of the free-trade regime is unlikely in the absence of increases in the globe’s percentage of free governments and free economies . It suggests that the preservation of free trade is unlikely .
 Although many countries have reduced tariff barriers restricting imports from the rest of the world, there is much room for additional reductions . The fate of free trade in the world is still to be seen .
 The threats to global prosperity are multiplying at the same time that countries’ dependency on volatile export and import markets is creating a precariously unstable situation . Unfortunately for the fate of the existing liberal rules supporting freer trade, the fate is uncertain for the future .
 If the entire global economy begins to decline, scores of countries are likely to turn away from the free-trade regime . Free-trade has engineered their previous period of unprecedented growth .
 In hard times, people are tempted to build barriers against foreign competitors . "In hard times," people will be tempted to make barriers to foreign competitors," he says. "I'm not going to be surprised by this," he adds .
 Even in many economically open countries, protectionist pressures inevitably increase when jobs are lost . Protectionist pressures rise when a job is lost, so do protectionist measures .
 U.S. Congresswoman Maxine Waters’ call in October 2009 to “bring jobs back home” as a way to reduce the unemployment rate in the United States. Such was reflected in her call to ‘bring jobs home’
 Before assessing current issues facing the world trading order, it is helpful to develop an understanding of the ‘trade tricks’ that countries can use . Thus before assessing current . issues facing . the world . trading order it is useful to develop a . understanding of . the “trade
 Free trade has played a key role in the growth of the global economy since World War II . There is virtual unanimity among economists regarding the potential benefits of free trade .
 This is due to the nature of the costs and benefits that accompany free trade . Free trade is a form of free trade in the United States . The U.S. is the world's largest economy, with the majority of countries in the world having free trade.
 In the aggregate, the societal benefits of free trade greatly outweigh the costs of trade, economist says . Free trade "greatly outweighs the costs," he says. Free trade is a trade-free society, he says .
 These benefits are spread throughout an entire society, and often not noticed . Yet these benefits, particularly the consumer gains that result from imports, are spread across society, they are often noticed . The benefits are often spread throughout the society, but not noticed by many .
 You are probably unaware that imports are the reason behind your savings . For example, though foreign trade may enable you to save ten dollars on a sweatshirt, you are likely unaware .
 If you discovered that the price of sweatshirts had risen by ten dollars, you would probably not take the time to organize “pro-import” protest marches . There is thus little incentive to politically organize in the interests of imports .
 It is quite common to hear of plants being closed and jobs being lost due to the presence of cheaper imports . It is also common, for example, that plants are being closed or jobs are lost .
 There are therefore greater political incentives to organize against free trade . There are also greater incentives to oppose free trade and for these forces to influence the political process .
 Given this dilemma, trade squabbles are likely to continue, as states have political incentives to enact mercantilist policies . States have a political incentive to enact such policies .
 This section will explain some of these policy tools, all which fall under the broad rubric of protectionism . All these policies are designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition .
 Average tariff levels have greatly decreased due to the WTO, but they are still occasionally employed .
 President Bush imposed tariffs ranging from 8 percent to 30 percent on steel imports in 2002 .
 In the late 1950s, the United States established import quotas on oil, arguing that they were necessary to protect U.S. national security . The United States has a long history of setting national security standards .
 Tariffs and quotas protect local industries from competition for the purchase of products local manufacturers produce . quotas numerical limit on the quantity of particular products that can be imported into a country .
 Export quotas result from negotiated agreements between producers and consumers . They restrict the flow of products from the former to the latter . Export quotas are negotiated agreements .
 Orderly market arrangements are formal agreements through which a country accepts limiting the export of products that might impair workers in the importing country, often under specific rules designed to monitor and manage trade flows .
 Exporting countries are willing to accept restrictions in exchange for concessions from the importing countries . Exporting nations are willing in return for concessions, such as concessions from importing countries.
 The MultiFiber Arrangement was an example of an elaborate OMA that restricted exports of textiles and apparel . OMA was a complex OMA system that restricted textile exports .
 It originated in the early 1960s, when the U.S. formalized earlier voluntary export restrictions with Japan and Hong Kong . The restrictions were meant to protect domestic producers from cheap cotton imports . The United States formalized the restrictions in 1960s .
 As quotas and tariffs have been reduced, a broader category of trade restrictions known as nontariff barriers has been created to impede imports without direct tax levies . Nontariff restrictions have been created as a result of reduced tariffs and quotas .
 Unlike tariffs and quotas, NTBs are more difficult to detect and dismantle . Unlike tariffs, quotas, they are more likely to be difficult to dismantle .
 The infant industry argument is often used to justify mercantilist trade policies . Among developing countries, domestic industrialization goals may be hindered by protection from the Global North’s more efficient firms .
 Tariffs or other forms of protection are necessary to nurture young industries until they mature and lower production costs to compete in the global marketplace . According to this argument, it is necessary to protect young industries .
 Fatin America and elsewhere, often depended on protection of infant industries . Government subsidies for particular domestic industries helped them gain competitive advantages over foreign producers .
 In the Global North and Global East, creating comparative advantages now motivates the use of what is known as strategic trade policy as a mercantilist method to ensure that a country’s industries will remain competitive .
 Strategic trade policies focus government subsidies toward particular industries so they gain comparative advantages over foreign producers . Government subsidies are aimed at particular industries .
 Countervailing duties impose tariffs to offset alleged subsidies, and their use is fairly common in the U.S. They are used to offset agricultural subsidies . Countervials impose tariffs on agricultural products .
 Antidumping duties counter competitors’ sale of products below the cost of production . Antisisolation duties are countermeasures against competitors selling products below their production costs. Antisolation duty is countermeditated by competitors .
 Realist theory helps to account for states’ impulse to pursue mercantilist policies . The realist theory is based on the virtues of free trade, but not free trade . The theory explains why states should pursue free trade policies .
 realism argues that states often compete rather than cooperate because international anarchy without global governance feeds states’ distrust of each other . Realism argues that international anarchy feeds states' distrust of other nations . The U.S. has been in the midst of a global crisis since 2001 .
 In this sense, mercantilist strategic trade is a prime example of this realist explanation of states’ concern for self-interest and relative gains .
 It explicitly aims to achieve trade surpluses and large dollar reserves . The U.S. has a long history of trying to achieve large dollar surplaces .
 Countervailing duties government tariffs to offset suspected subsidies provided by foreign governments to their producers . antidumping duties taxes placed on another exporting state’s alleged selling of a product at a price below the cost to produce it . rents higher-than-normal financial returns on investments that are
 Given the political advantages of mercantilism, states often have a hard time resisting the constant demands of domestic industries and interest groups for protection . The Uneasy Coexistence of Liberalism and Mercantilistism is an uneasy coexistence of the two .
 Trade partners retaliate with clever and innovative new counter-protectionist actions . They do so even if, according to liberalism, their relations with their trade partners will deteriorate . All will suffer in the long run, as trade partners retaliate .
 The result is that states simultaneously pursue liberalism and mercantilism, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The result of this is that the state is pursuing liberalism and the state of its own interests .
 Such a paradoxical approach to trade policy shows states’ determination to reap the benefits of interdependence while minimizing its costs . States’ decision to reap benefits of the benefits while minimize its costs is paradoxical, says author .
 It also reveals the tension between states and markets, between the promise that everyone will benefit and the fear that the benefits will not be equally distributed . The tension is also revealed as a tension between state and markets .
 The absence of world government encourages each state to be more concerned with how it fares competitively in relation to other states . Each state is concerned with its relative gains, rather than its absolute gains .
 America’s trade competitors have long noted that the U.S. has often failed to live up to its own rhetoric and has increasingly engaged in protectionism . The United States has long been an advocate of free trade in the post-World War II era .
 Some of the ways in which the U.S. uses its foreign economic tools are illustrative in this regard .
 A major portion of U.S. foreign aid is ‘tied’ to the purchase of United States goods and services . A major part of the aid is tied to the purchases of goods by the United States, experts say .
 Certain types of aid are legally required to be used to purchase goods made in the U.S. Certain aid, such as food, is legally required in the United States . The aid is required to buy goods from the United Nations .
 Foreign aid 'turns foreign aid into a de facto subsidy for domestic corporations' Foreign aid is often a subsidy to domestic corporations, says David Frum .
 Security aims can also figure into U.S. trade liberalization efforts . Security aims are also important to U.K. Security aims .
 The implementation of the African Growth and Opportunities Act has been particularly contentious in this regard . The implementation has been especially contentious .
 The original mandate of the AGOA was to encourage democratic governance and respect for human rights . However, this emphasis has reportedly been supplanted by strategic interests . This emphasis is reportedly being replaced with strategic interests in the country .
 Overall tariff levels in the United States are lower than those in the developing world . However, the U.S. still protects several key sectors, most notably agriculture . The United States, like the rest of the developed countries, protects agriculture .
 Such mercantilist moves are particularly damaging to the liberal trade regime, given the U.S. stature as the globe’s leading economic superpower .
 This is particularly troublesome for developing countries, as they often have very powerful agricultural sectors as well . Developed countries often have a powerful agricultural sector as well as a powerful agriculture sector .
 The gap between the ideals and the actions of the developed world also brings back vestiges of colonialism and past hypocrisy on the part of the rich countries . The gap is also a sign of colonial hypocrisy, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The pressures on free trade notwithstanding, “rapid globalization has done nothing to undermine the confidence liberals have always placed in trade.” “Rapid globalization’s done nothing,” he says .
 Let us next examine the progression of the liberal trade order, as well as the current issues it faces . To better assess this key issue, let us better assess the key issue .
 The Development of the WTO has a better-developed “architecture” than the global financial system . Though it is difficult to maintain a liberal trade regime, there are problems with the global trading system . The WTO has been criticized for its lack of transparency, but it has
 The current system is prone to ‘manics, panics, and crashes’ —currencies fluctuate according to the dictates of the markets . The IMF merely provides for the monitoring of financial systems and ‘crisis management” for countries that are in dire financial stra
 The WTO provides a well-developed institutional structure for the world trading system . By contrast, the WTO provides an institutional structure to the world trade system .
 The GATTA)7TO has had a rather tumultuous and uneven history and has been criticized for its lack of progress throughout its existence . The GATA7TO was founded in 1973 .
 Rumors of the institution’s death have been “greatly exaggerated,” says Mark Twain . GATT and WTO made progress in liberalizing global trade, he says .
 During Bretton Woods era, successive meetings or “rounds” of the GATT were very successful in cutting tariffs . GATT was very successful during the Bretton-Woods era .
 The initial Geneva Round of negotiations in 1947 reduced tariffs by 35 percent . successive rounds of negotiations virtually eliminated tariffs on manufactured goods . In the 1950s, 1960s, . 1960s and . 1970s, and the 1980s and 1990s virtually eliminated .
 The Doha Round, which officially began in 2002, has an ambitious agenda for trade liberalization . Doha aims to address many of the remaining nontariff barriers as well as other trade-related items that are high on the global agenda .
 When the GATT began in 1949Jt had twenty-three members . The GATT was founded by the World Trade Organization .
 The WTO's near universal membership attests to the appeal of the institution among political leaders . The WTO has been criticized for its membership in recent years, but its membership is now widespread .
 The WTO has handled around three hundred disputes since 1995 . The WTO can hold even its most powerful members accountable for their trade practices . It can hold members of the U.S. to account for their practices .
 Aaronson and Zimmerman note that the WTO accession process, as well as the periodic trade policy reviews required of WTO members, may have positive effects for the overall quality of governance within states .
 The WTO is, to a large extent, a ‘victim’ of its successes. Yet ironically, the WTO is a “victim of’s successes. The WTO has been a victim of its own successes.
 When the GATT was formed it contained twenty-three members and was charged with one central goal—the reduction of tariffs . The GATT is now the world's largest trade-protection agency .
 As tariffs have declined as a policy tool, the WTO has begun to confront a broad variety of issues related to international trade, including agricultural policy, intellectual property rights, trade in services and environmental protection measures .
 New issues may contradict the laws of individual countries, such as South Korea . As demonstrated by the wave of protests in South Korea regarding United States beef imports, these new issues are much more difficult to resolve than the reduction of tariff levels .
 The Millennium Roundm trade negotiations were the follow-up to the Uruguay Round of trade talks completed in 1993 . In late November 1999, the then-135 member countries of the World Trade Organization and thirty additional observer states made final preparations to stage in Seattle .
 The meeting promised to celebrate the free-trade regime for the global marketplace . Lower trade barriers arguably had made to the growth of international exports and, for many members (particularly the United States), their longest peacetime economic expansion in the twentieth century .
 There appeared to be widespread recognition that a half-century of generally rising prosperity had generated a climate of enthusiasm for the power of free trade .
 Leaders in the twilight of the twentieth century emphasized the sunnier side of free trade . Fears of imports tend to recede in good economic times, with the best decade ever .
 The goal of this meeting was to attain some consensus on how to build upon the success of the Uruguay Round . The Uruguay Round was held in Uruguay last week .
 The mood and seeming consensus on which it was based were shattered when the Seattle trade talks opened . That mood was shattered when Seattle traded for the Seattle Seahawks . The Seahawks are expected to make a trade deal with the Washington Redskins .
 An estimated fifty to one hundred thousand protesters and grassroots anti-WTO activists joined hands to shout their common opposition to the idea of globalization and free trade . An estimated 50 to one 100 thousand protesters joined hands .
 The immediate target of the demonstrations was the WTO . However, the organization itself was simply a convenient symbol of a much larger sea of discontent . The WTO is simply a symbol of the much larger discontent .
 The WTO protests exposed the deep divisions about the best ways to open global commerce and adopt new rules at a time of rapid change . The failure of the WTO conference attendees to compromise on tightly held positions and agree on even a minimal accord exposed deep divisions .
 Controversy about globalization, free trade, and global governance are multiple . Controversies about globalization and free trade are multiple. Global governance is multiple.
 At the core is the question of whether globalization is an antidote to suffering or an enemy of human welfare . At the heart of the debate is whether globalization should be a good antidote to human suffering or a foe of human rights .
 The debates are explosive, because everyone is affected, but in quite different ways, says CNN's John Sutter . The debates will be explosive, he says, because of the impact of the debates .
 Many enjoyed the 1990s boom years under liberalized trade engineered by the WTO’s trade agreements . Many of the world's biggest exporters enjoyed the boom years of trade liberalization .
 The celebration is confined largely to the top—the privileged, powerful, and prosperous . But the celebration is largely confined to the wealthy, powerful .
 Many see themselves as clear victims of an open global economy, as when a factory closes and workers lose their jobs . Many others say they are victims of a global economy in a way of being a victim .
 Those discontented with globalized free trade include a diverse coalition of protestors . Many of the protestors harbor specific concerns about wages, the environment, and human rights issues .
 Labor leaders contend that the WTO is sacrificing worker rights in the pursuit of free markets . Environmental groups complain that when green values collide with world commerce, environmental standards are left out of trade negotiations . Human rights activists accuse the WTO of undercutting human rights .
 Some Global South trade ministers view efforts by the Global North to address labor and environmental standards as thinly guised efforts at “murky protectionism” The Global North’s high-sounding rules are an excuse to impose high tariffs on their products, they say .
 G-20 nations recently pledged to have the Doha Round concluded by 2010 . No one viewed the pledge as sincere or workable . The pledge was met with skepticism .
 These issues are particularly difficult in that they raise concerns beyond free trade and protectionism . These issues have been particularly difficult to deal with, especially in the case of China .
 In particular, labor and environmental standards take the discussions into deeper controversies about core human rights and the policies a state should enact .
 The increase in membership has also brought additional challenges to WTO negotiations . WTO negotiations have also brought challenges to the organization .
 Traditionally GATT/WTO negotiations followed a ‘club model’ in which a small group of trade officials ironed out policy largely out of the public eye . Traditionally a “club’ model” was used to iron out policy .
 The conclusion of the Tokyo Round was widely heralded by experts as a sweeping victory for trade liberalization . It was reported on page 18 of the Washington Post —hardly prime placement for news items .
 U.S., EU, Japan, EU, and Japan lead rounds of rounds of voting . The rounds were led by a small group of states, namely the United States, EU and Japan .
 The liberalization of agriculture has long been one of the most intractable items on the WTO agenda . Agriculture liberalization is long a thorny issue on the world's most difficult to solve .
 Many countries view agriculture as a vital part of their culture and security . Many countries often have visceral responses to any potential “threat” to the status quo . Agriculture is vital to national security and the economy .
 South Korea is certainly no exception to this, particularly with regard to its rice market . South Korea's rice market is booming, especially in recent years .
 This picture was taken at the 2003 WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun, Mexico . It shows South Korean rice farmer Lee Kyung Hae protesting rice liberalization .
 Shortly after this picture was taken, Lee, a longtime advocate for rice farmers, publicly stabbed himself in the heart as a dramatic display of his opposition to trade liberalization . Lee died shortly thereafter .
 WTO rounds now generate vigorous public attention, with massive protests that have become ubiquitous at every meeting . As evidenced by the massive protests, massive protests are now commonplace at every WTO round .
 The WTO has largely succeeded in its goal of lowering tariffs, and has attracted almost every state into the organization . However, it is now tasked with getting an increasing number of states to agree on an increase number of very difficult and contentious issues .
 The current economic context has hardly served to make these matters easier . Regional trade agreements treaties that integrate the economies of members through the reduction of trade barriers are difficult to negotiate .
 Regional and bilateral trade agreements have been proliferating in recent years . Trade agreements are also proliferating across the world .
 EU was the earliest and most successful example of regional integration . Similar, albeit less successful, initiatives occurred elsewhere in the Global North during the 1960s and 1970s .
 According to the WTO the number of trade agreements in force increased over tenfold since 1990 . However, the rapid proliferation of regional trade agreements and bilateral trade agreements began in earnest in the early 1990s .
 Every state except Mongolia belongs to at least one such organization . RTAs and bilateral agreements are thus everywhere; every state except Mongolian belongs to such an organization .
 Mercosur trade between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay increased to $63 billion in 2007 from only $8 billion in 1990 . Trade among the full members of the full . members of Mercosuro— Argentina, . Brazil, . Paraguay and Uruguay .
 Many feel that NAFTA and other regional free-trade zones are consistent with WTO principles . Many feel NAFTA and others have been consistent with the principles of free trade zones .
 They see regional trade agreements as catalysts to trade because they encourage trade liberalization, albeit among smaller groups of states . Regional trade agreements are seen as a catalyst to trade .
 Political leaders assume that there is no natural conflict between bilateralism, regionalism, and multilateralism . The U.S. should be able to reach a consensus on bilateralism and regionalism without conflict .
 This map indicates the levels of trade volume both within and between major regions . The volume of trade flows within and within major regions is shown . The map was created by World Trade Day .
 While trade flows within regions comprise the highest share of world trade, there are notable differences in the pattern across various regions of the world .
 The European Union’s growth is more intra-regional due to its deepening economic integration . Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and the former Soviet Republic states (Commonwealth of Independent States CIS) are experiencing growth in trade .
 The Contagious Economy former U.S. trade representative and current president of the World Bank, argued that through a process of “competitive liberalization,” the formation of bilateral and regional trade deals could pressure countries into strengthening multilateral institutions .
 Others who support a liberal trading order are less sanguine about these agreements . Yet others who support these agreements are less concerned about the agreements .
 Politically, they argue that such agreements represent a ‘chimera’ in which “attention and lobbying has been diverted to inconsequential deals” at the cost of pushing for multilateralism, they say . They argue .
 Legally, the end result of these various deals is a confusing and sometimes contradictory “spaghetti bowl” of regulations, which creates a muddled legal foundation for trade . The end result is the result of a confusing, sometimes contradictory "spaghetti Bowl" of regulations .
 The WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, but they do violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MFN . RTAs give some WTO members advantages over others, as they give some advantages .
 The European Union applied its MFN tariff to only six countries, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the U.S. All other nations enjoy more favorable tariffs . The EU started the pandemic (of regionalism)
 In assessing global trade, it is important to keep the global context in mind, as all of these issues and struggles are taking place in the midst of the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression .
 As noted in Chapter 12, world trade fell 9 percent in 2008—the first time that annual world trade has decreased since 1982 . As noted, this is the first time since 1982 that the world has seen a decrease in trade .
 The crisis provides insights into the interdependent nature of the global economy, as well as how economic downturns embolden mercantilist policies . The crisis, and its relationship to world trade, provides insights .
 The linkages between the financial crisis and the collapse of world trade reveal much about how the facets of economic globalization impact each other . The collapse of global trade and the global financial crisis reveal much more about how economic globalization impacts each other.
 Three main ways that the financial crisis precipitated the drop in world trade . There are three main ways to precipitate the drop of world trade.
 First, the crisis led to a downturn in the overall world economy, which created a huge fall in consumer demand . Second, the fall of consumer demand was created by the fall in demand for goods and services from abroad .
 There was thus less of a market for foreign goods, as well as products in general . There was also less of an international market for goods in general, and there were less foreign goods .
 The globalization of production, particular the nature of supply chains, has magnified this effect . The globalization of production has also magnified the effect on supply chains in recent years .
 For each unit decrease in sales of Dell computers in the U.S. in the United States, trade between nine countries is reduced . Using a prior example, for each drop in sales, nine countries are reduced .
 Global supply chains mean that trade reduction has a “multiplier effect” and that the pain of trade contractions is shared among a larger group of companies . The pain of contractions in trade contracts is shared by larger groups of companies, the authors say .
 Exporters, for example, may need short-term loans during the time period between when their goods are produced and when the revenue from their sales makes it back . Exporporters may need loans during that period .
 The end result was a contraction in trade that was “sudden, severe, and synchronized” (Baldwin and Evenett 2009) across the major trading states . The contraction was ‘sudden and severe” across major trade states .
 Economic downturns tend to encourage protectionism, and the recent financial crisis is no exception . The U.S. economy has been in the throes of a recession .
 Protectionist measures of individual states triggered a series of retaliatory measures and eventually the collapse of world trade . Yet it is unlikely that the world’s economies will repeat the mistakes of the Great Depression .
 17 of the G-20 countries put in place a total of forty-seven trade-restricting measures since the crisis . The measures include subsidies to automobile industries, European subsidies to various dairy products, and a variety of smaller measures such as India's banning of Chinese toys .
 Though none of these measures were particularly sweeping, they do not bode well for trade liberalization . The measures were not particularly sweeping .
 The automobile subsidies are particularly problematic, as they may be indicative of broader shifts toward what Baldwin and Evenett (2009) call murky protectionism . The automobile subsidy may be particularly problematic .
 This refers to more subtle NTBs that may murky protectionism nontariff barriers to trade that may be “hidden” in government policies not directiy reiated to trade, such as environmental initiatives and government spending . The trade barriers may be murky and may be hidden in
 Examples of protectionism include abuses of safety and environmental initiatives, as well as policies related to government spending and procurement . Examples of such protectionism are those related to safety, environmental initiatives .
 The stimulus packages that countries are enacting may also discriminate against foreign trade . Stimulus packages call for increases in public works and other government spending .
 In the UK, banks receiving government assistance are encouraged to make loans exclusively to domestic borrowers . Banks receiving government help are encouraged by the government to make domestic loans .
 There are also contentious “buy American” clauses in the U.S. stimulus package that give steel and manufactured goods preferential access to government contracts .
 The most controversial example thus far is the U.S. “bailout” of its domestic automobile industries with $30 billion in subsidies . The most recent example is the United States ‘bail-out’ of domestic automobile industry .
 This was quickly pounced upon by foreign governments as unfair to international trade, whose economies were also suffering and whose industries were also requesting assistance . Foreign governments were also keen to help their economies .
 Most agree a return to the rampant protectionism of the 1930s is unlikely . Most agree return to a return is unlikely, but it is unlikely it will happen again .
 Unlike the 1930s, there is an institutional structure to safeguard free trade . Not only is the level of market integration higher, but there is a higher level of free trade in Europe than in 1930s .
 The financial crisis has not helped the WTO in its attempt to reach agreement on the Doha Round . Yet the financial crisis, and the resultant contraction of international trade, has certainly not helped .
 As countries scramble to pull their own economies out of recessions, it is hard to take on the nuanced and complex tasks necessary for completing the Doha Round . The Doha round will take place in Doha, Qatar .
 As political scientist Daniel Drezner concludes, “Too many people benefit too much from cross-border trade for the world to revisit the nineteen thirties.” “The world is too much in need of revisiting the nineteen-thirties”
 The world trading system is in a precarious position, as countries look at mercantilist measures to help their economies recover . The WTO encounters continued difficulties in expanding its power and legitimacy in a more multipolar system .
 Countries will focus on their domestic interests when threats arise, be they economic or political . Such problems in the trading system do provide some corroboration to the realist viewpoint that there are definite limits to the strength of international organizations, as countries focus on domestic interests .
 A liberal case can be made—for the WTO to maintain legitimacy during such tumultuous times does attest to its underlying strength and utility within the global economy . Yet at the same time, a liberal case is made .
 The perennial struggle between mercantilism and liberalism will continue into the future . Whatever the current “balance’s” between the two, the perennial struggle will continue to the future.
 Trade is not the cause of the current economic crisis, but is likely to be one of its most important casualties . This chapter, as well as the previous one, has shown that globalization is a ‘double-edged sword”
 Global finance, production, labor, and trade are interdependent aspects of economic globalization . The linkages between global finance and production are also interdependent, says David Frum .
 Globalization is more than just economics; it involves individuals and cultures . Yet globalization is not just economics, it involves people and cultures, it also involves individuals .
 The next chapter will take you beyond the economics of globalization, by addressing the cultural and demographic dimensions of our global society . To understand that part of the broader puzzle, globalization, the next chapter is to understand the cultural dimension of globalization .
 Some people regard globalization as little more than the spread of values and beliefs of the U.S. The United States is the world's reigning hegemon, the United States .
 Hanoi, Vietnam, is a predominantly Buddhist city still subscribing to communist principles . The city is still emphasizing the greed of market capitalism and class divisions it is believed to create .
 Under the skin, beneath the skin every human being is essentially similar . As you probably already have already imagined, under the skin all human beings are essentially similar.
 We all tend to respond to the same experiences that almost everyone everywhere feels at one time or another . Love, fear, alienation, or a sense of a common community and destiny are common themes .
 There is rising expectation that this universal hope will be fulfilled. There are rising expectations that it will soon be fulfilled . There is also a rising expectation of a universal hope that this is fulfilled.
 globalization is bringing all of humanity together as never before in bonds of interdependence . One explanation is that growing numbers of people throughout the world are pursuing these human goals .
 "This chapter opens a door to evaluating the prospect for such a jaw-dropping development," the author says .
 You will be asked to consider if global trends might transform the world, and the world politics that condition it . CNN.com will feature a panel of experts from around the world .
 In the minutes to come, there will be another, another, then another . In the next few minutes, there are more than a dozen people expected to be killed in the attack .
 By next year, all those minutes will have produced millions of newcomers in the great human mosh pit .
 As the population on this planet increases, globalization is bringing us closer together in a crowded global village . Transnational challenges characterize our borderless world .
 Others claim that controls on family size are necessary because unregulated population will ‘parent’ a crowded and unlivable future world without the resources necessary to sustain life for all people .
 Politics is the exercise of influence in an attempt to resolve controversial issues in one’s favor . For this reason, politics surrounds debate about population policies . Politics is a form of influence, but it is not the only way to solve controversial issues .
 To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic .
 When population increases at such a geometric rate, the acceleration can be staggering . The acceleration is staggering. When population grows, it will be staggering. It will be difficult to predict how the population will respond .
 The next most important piece was the Grand Vizier— just what we might expect of a game invented by a Grand Viziers . The game was created by a French grand Vizier who invented the game .
 The object of the game was to capture the enemy King, and so the game is called, in Persian, shahmat—shah for king, mat for dead . In Persian, it was called shahm, shamat, which means 'shah' and '
 In Russia it is still called shakhmaty, which perhaps conveys a lingering revolutionary ardor . In Russia, it is also known as shakhmay, meaning revolutionary .
 There is, for example, no longer a piece called the Grand Vizier—it has become transmogrified into a Queen, with much more formidable powers . The Queen is now a Queen of England .
 Why a king should delight in the creation of a game called “Death to the King” is a mystery .
 The Grand Vizier was so pleased that he asked him to name his own reward for such a splendid invention . But, the story goes, he asked for a reward .
 He asked that he be given a single grain of wheat on the first square, twice that on the second, twice on the third, and so on, until each square had its complement of wheat . Each square had a complement of grain on each of the columns and eight rows of squares
 The King consented to the unselfishness of his counselor, the King graciously consented . So, secretly marveling at the unkindness, he secretly marveled at his counselor .
 When the Master of the Royal Granary began to count out the grains, however, the King was in for a rude surprise .
 By the time the 64th square is approached, the number becomes colossal, staggering . But by the . time the . 64th . square is approaching, it becomes colossal .
 If each grain were 2 millimeters in size, all the grains together would weigh 75 billion metric tons . The King’s granaries were too small to store the grains in the King's granaries .
 The annual rate of population growth in the twentieth century increased from less than 1 percent in 1900 to a peak of 2. percent in 1964 . The population growth rate in the U.S. peaked in 1964 at 2.2 percent .
 In terms of absolute numbers, the world population has grown dramatically in the last century . World population has also grown dramatically since 1900s .
 Population is growing much more rapidly in the developing Global South countries (which are least able to support their existing populations) than in the wealthy Global North countries . The Demographic Divide between Global North and Global South population is growing more rapidly .
 By 2050 an additional 2. billion people are forecast to be living on the Earth, the UN predicts, raising the total to over 9 billion . The UN estimates the total population will reach 9 billion by 2050 .
 Global North and a burgeoning youth bulge in the Global South are contributing to this trend . Such predictions are uncertain because growth rates depend on a variety of factors, such as longevity and youth .
 UN figure on fhe left depicts decreasing fertility rates in high, medium, and low income countries . The UN figure is based on the decreasing fertility rate in high and medium income nations .
 The figure on the right displays the range of world population forecasts by the year 2050 . The figure is based on a range of population forecasts .
 North, where population declines gradually despite increasingly longer life spans, is declining gradually despite longer life span . North .
 Of the population growth the world has experienced since 1900, most of the growth has been in the Global South . 80 percent of the world's population growth since 1950 has been since 1950, most growth in the global south .
 Total fertility rate, the worldwide average number of children born to a woman, falls from 2.2 to 2.1 . That will not happen until the total fertility rate falls from the rate of 2.0 to 2 .1 .
 World population is projected to continue to surge for decades in the future . Birthrates are likely to decline throughout the twenty-first century . Population momentum is resulting from ‘population momentum’ resulting from women entering childbearing years .
 Population growth simply cannot be halted even with an immediate, full application of the brakes . Eike the inertia of a descending airliner when it first touches down on the runway, population growth cannot be stopped .
 High fertility means more women are entering their reproductive years than in the past . Many years of high fertility mean that more women will be entering reproductive years . The fertility expert says that is not the result of a decline in fertility rates .
 Not until the size of the generation giving birth to children is no larger than the generation among which deaths are occurring will the population “airplane” come to a halt . The population "airplane" will come to an end when the population is no longer the generation of which
 World’s population will grow by a third over the next four decades, experts say . This is unlikely to happen because forecasts are that the population will rise by one third .
 Western Europe and sub-Saharan Africa illustrate the force of two different pictures of population momentum . Western Europe's population growth has been slowing in recent years .
 Africa’s demographic profile is one of rapid population growth, as each new age group contains more people than the one before it . Africa's demographic profile has been described as one of the continent's fastest growing economies .
 Africa's population will continue to grow because there are now more men and women of childbearing age than ever before . Even if individual African couples choose to have fewer children than their parents, Africa’s population will grow .
 It took until the early 1800s for world population to reach 1 billion people, and today another billion people are added every twelve to fourteen years . Another billion people added every 12 to 14 years .
 World population is expected to exceed 9. billion by 2050, with almost all of the population growth occurring in the Global South . World population expected to reach 9.billion by 2050 .
 Europe has moved beyond replacement-level fertility to become a stagnant population with low birthrates and a growing number of people who survive middle age . Europe's stagnant population has low birth rates and a small number of middle ageers who survive .
 Europe is best described as an aging society, where low birthrates and aging populations have caused alarm that the number of European newborns will not be sufficient to renew populations . Low birthrates, low death rates, and increased longevity have led to an aging population .
 Consider the demographic divide between the Global South and the Global North further . Consider the demographics of the global South and Global North more .
 Eertility rates in the Global South are roughly twice as high as the Global North . The Global South has the highest rates of fertility in the world, and the lowest in the North .
 The number of young men and women entering their reproductive years continues to grow . Because each cohort is typically larger than the one before it, each cohort has a larger population .
 People between the ages of 15 and 29 comprise more than 25 percent of the population in much of North Africa and the Middle East . Children under the age of 15 comprise about 30 percent of population throughout the Global South .
 High birthrates pose challenges for economic growth and political stability . A low birthrate is seen by some as a prerequisite for successful development .
 As a youth bulge develops, a burgeoning youth population in the Global South faces poor economic conditions and a lack of resources to provide for a family . Many are turning to religious fundamentalism to counter their frustration .
 Life expectancy at birth at birth worldwide at a record-high of sixty-nine years and rising . At the same time, a revolution in longevity is unfolding, with life expectancy in the world at record high .
 Eife expectancy at birth at birth is expected to rise by the year 2015 to seventy-five years . Eife expectancies at birth are expected to increase by 2015 .
 Global aging is occurring at rates never seen before, in part because of improvements in medicine and healthcare . The world's oldest population is aging at a rate of never-before-seen rates .
 The “aging and greying” of the human population is a global population trend that poses its own set of public policy dilemmas . The trend is more pronounced in the Global North than the Global South .
 There are concerns that due to rapidly aging populations, the Global North will be especially burdened by rising old-age dependency . The Global North faces an array of economic, budgetary, and social challenges .
 While the effects are expected to vary among developed countries, these could include a decreasing labor supply, a decline in economic growth and per capita income . Increased demand for public expenditures on healthcare, long-term care, and pensions .
 Resolving this dilemma in the Global North will require, in part, the promotion of demographic renewal by creating better conditions for families . Resolving the dilemma will need, part of the solution to the problem, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Demographic renewal requires action to develop an overall societal climate receptive of the needs of families, a shift towards a children-friendly society, and creating conditions allowing a better work-life balance .
 In countries where it is difficult to reconcile work and private life, employment rates of women tend to be low, as mothers often drop out of the labour market . Birth rates are low because many people feel that they cannot afford to have children .
 There has been growing debate within the Global North, particularly Europe, as to whether policy makers should adopt ‘pro-natal” policies designed to stimulate a rise in birthrates .
 Russia has begun a long-running effort to encourage marriage and child bearing . Russia has offered financial incentives to women who have multiple children .
 The resulting differences in demographic momentums are producing quite different population profiles in the developed and the developing worlds . The resulting population profiles are producing very different populations .
 The poor Global South is home to a surplus of youth, with rising birthrates and growing populations . The rich Global North is aging, with falling birthrate and declining populations . Global South's population is aging; the rich North's is aging .
 In the Global South, the working-age population will shoulder the burden of dependent children for years to come, while in the Global North it is the growing proportion of elderly adults that will pose a dependency burden .
 It is not difficult to see how this facet of globalization is not making people in the world more alike . It's not easy to see .
 Differentials in the geographical distribution of population are increasing differences in the quality of life experienced on the planet . Differentials are increasing in the size of the planet's population .
 When interpreting projections in demographics, consider also the geographic concentration of people within each country . Urbanization is a key factor in predicting population growth .
 Population density measures how close together people are living . Known as population density, this measures how closely people live together .
 In response to Russia’s demographic crisis, poiicy makers are offering married coupies incentives to procreate .
 The governor of the Ulyanovsk region coined it the “Day of Conception” and offered prizes to couples that give birth nine months later on June 12, Russia’s Independence Day .
 The Bench of Reconciliation is curved to promote physical contact and help coupies to work out their differences .
 The urbanization of the world is accelerating and spreading, says David Frum . This trend is producing another form of cultural globalization, he says . Frum: Urbanization is a form of globalization .
 Already three-fourths of the populations in the Global North live in big cities that are getting bigger . But cities are growing fastest in the developing Global South countries .
 Global urbanization is likely to aggravate health and environmental problems, straining supplies of clean water, shelter, and sanitation . The impact of global urbanization will likely be aggravating health and environment problems .
 If the urbanization throughout the global community continues at its current pace, which is almost certain, this trend will lead to still another kind of transformation in the world . The urbanization of the world will continue to lead to a new kind of change .
 We will consider another example next: the movement of people across borders through migration . We will look at another example of migration in the future .
 As this map shows, “more and more people are clustering in urban areas—the world’s demographic mountain ranges, so to speak.” The world is “spikey,” not flat, and more and more are clustered around urban areas .
 While people may be attracted by the better opportunities available in cities, it is nonetheless true that local services and amenities may come under severe strain .
 A severe problem stemming from the growing number of people moving from their home country to another country, straining the ability of the host countries to absorb the foreign emigrants . The global migration crisis is a severe problem .
 The movement of populations across frontiers has reached unprecedented proportions, producing a global migration crisis . Global migration is a global problem that has created a global crisis .
 As floods of people leave their homeland for another country each year, cross-national migration has become a norm . Leaving one’s native country has almost become an expectation in some places, leaving your native country almost an expectation .
 The governments of sovereign states are losing their grip on regulating the movement of foreigners inside their borders . No multilateral IGOs for meaningful global governance exist to deal with the consequences of the escalating migration of people around the globe .
 Porous borders create ambiguous ethics about mass migration movements . One consequence is clear: there are both winners and losers through the globalization of migration .
 Remittances or money that migrants earn while working abroad and then send to their families in their home countries provides one of the biggest sources of foreign currency . For the home countries, many of which are poor Global South countries, remittances are growing .
 There are worries that migration may reduce the job opportunities for natives and place a strain on public services . Yet there are also fears that migration will reduce the number of jobs in the country .
 Many countries have adopted measures intended to stem the flow of peoples across borders . These fears are all the more exacerbated by the weak global economy .
 In the U.S., construction continues to extend the line of fences along the border with Mexico .
 In 2009, the European Parliament implemented controversial immigration rules that provide for illegal immigrants to be detained up to eighteen months and then expelled . The rules were implemented in 2009 .
 Another trend in our ‘age of migration’ is the flight of people not in search of economic opportunity but out of fear of persecution . People are fleeing for economic opportunity, but fear persecution, rather than economic opportunity .
 Refugees are individuals whose race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinions make them targets of persecution in their homelands . They therefore, therefore, migrate from their country of origin, unable to return . Refugees are people who have been persecuted in their homeland
 At the start of 2009, the world’s refugee population was a staggering refugees people who flee for safety to another country because of a well-founded fear of political persecution, environmental degradation, or famine .
 Genocide is the attempt to eliminate, in whole or in part, an ethnic, racial, religious, or national minority group by a state . The extermination of an ethnic minority group is a form of genocide . Forty-four percent of refugees are children under eighteen years of age .
 UNHCR estimates only account for individuals who fell under the UNHCR’s mandate . These may be conservative estimates .
 There are about 12 million stateless people worldwide, and 827,000 asylum seekers . There are also about a million asylum seekers in the world .
 This does not include the additional millions of children and women kidnapped by crime rings in the huge sex-trafficking trade and smuggled across borders as captives .
 Refugees and displaced persons alike are often the victims of war and political violence . Refugees and refugees are often victims of the violence that has displaced people .
 Renewed fighting between government armed forces and militia groups has caused over a half million Congolese to flee their homes .
 In Somalia, the renewal of armed conflict led to roughly 1. million IDPs by the start of 2009 . The renewed conflict in Somalia has displaced roughly 1,000 people .
 A large proportion of the world’s refugees and displaced people flee their own homelands . Ethnic and religious conflicts erupt in failed states where governments fail to preserve law and order .
 Millions of refugees flee their homelands because when disaster strikes they are denied basic human rights such as police protection, access to fair trials in courts, and public assistance . In addition, millions of refugees are denied access to public assistance and police protection .
 Nationalism and Religion atrocities are brutal and savage acts against targeted citizen groups or prisoners of war, defined as illegal under international law . Nationalist and religion atrocities are atrocities that are committed under the law .
 Oppressive conditions cause many people to leave their homes in the interest of security and survival . Oppressive and violent conditions cause people to flee their homes .
 Evidence indicates that most refugees flee to neighhoring countries in the Global South . Western states admit the most refugees from conflict, but not the most .
 UNHCR estimates between 83 and 90 percent of refugees remain within their region of origin . UNHCR estimates that between 83-90 percent of refugee refugees remain in their region .
 At the start of 2009, there were roughly 2. million Afghan refugees, with 96 percent fleeing to Pakistan and Iran . 96 percent of them fled to Pakistan, Iran .
 Iraq was the second largest country of origin, responsible for 1.6 million refugees . Iraq is responsible for the majority of refugees, with 1.7 million .
 Afghanistan and Iraq accounted for 45 percent of the global refugee population . Together, the two countries made up the largest refugee population in the world . The U.S. has sent more than 100,000 refugees to the region .
 Somali and Sudanese refugees followed as third and fourth, respectively, with over 560,000 and 419,000 refugees . Sudanese and Somali refugees came in second and third .
 Migrants are pulled abroad by the promise of political freedom elsewhere, particularly in the democratically ruled Global North countries . Migrants also pull abroad by promise of freedom elsewhere in the democracy-run countries .
 Yet today’s refugees are not finding safe havens; shutting the door is increasingly viewed as a solution and xenophobia is on the rise . Shutting the door in the face of xenophobia and shutting it down is increasingly seen as a problem .
 Among both developed and developing countries, there is a growing unwillingness to provide refuge for those seeking a better life . The situation is particularly acute in developing countries .
 With a weakening global economy, people are ever more resistant to foreigners competing for domestic jobs or resources . People are increasingly resistant to foreign competition in the U.S.
 Security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide . The linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls .
 Countries in the Global North are increasingly unwilling to bear the burden of hosting refugees . The Global North has restricted the flow of people across borders, and the Global South is unwilling to host refugees .
 This places blame on the victims, rather than victims, for fleeing their homes . This is because individuals and communities do not abandon their homes unless they are confronted with serious threats to their lives .
 Efforts to stem the tide of migrants have not reversed the trend of people seeking sanctuary . That said, efforts to stem efforts to stop the flow of migrants are not reversed .
 This represented the second consecutive annual increase and constituted a 28 percent increase over the prior year . This represented a second consecutive year of annual increases .
 The ethical issue is whether in the future the wealthy countries will respond to the plight of the needy with indifference or compassion . The ethical question is whether the wealthy will respond with indifference, compassion .
 Globalization portends many prospects on which people are basing their hopes . Globalization is one of many prospects for people in the U.S. economy .
 globalization is breeding many demographic countertrends spelling doom and gloom that are provoking peoples’ fears about their future . But globalization breeds many counter trends that are causing people to fear for their own future .
 Threats such as the outbreak of a widespread and deadly disease could produce a population implosion . Threats, such as an outbreak of such a deadly disease, could produce an implosion of population .
 Next we will look at examples of life-threatening diseases that are sweeping a globe without borders . A rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward larger populations; a severe reduction in the world’s population .
 On average, over the last decade about 15 million refugees eacA year have become homeless people in search of sanctuary . Over the past decade, 15 million people have been refugees in the world .
 Angelina Jolie is pictured with refugee children in northeastern Congo . The actress and humanitarian aid worker has been in the country since 2003 .
 Infant and child mortality rates remain discouragingly high in much of the developing countries . Infant mortality rates are decreasing in many developing countries, but they are decreasing .
 The trend in rising longevity could reverse if globally transmittable diseases cut into the extension of life spans made possible by improvements in healthcare, nutrition, water quality, and public sanitation . However, this trend could reverse due to the rise of trans-transmittable disease .
 Drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis, which affects more than nine million people worldwide each year, know no borders . In our age of globalization, a disease such a disease knows no borders, experts say . The disease affects nine percent of the world's population .
 communicable diseases cause one-third of deaths worldwide . Global health is a concern and is a threat to human security .
 Globally one out of three people die from infectious disease . Globally, one of the world's most infectious diseases is infectious disease.
 Giobai North and South of the Gobai South are at odds . Yet a death divide is apparent between the two sides of the divide .
 Over half of deaths in Giobai South are caused by communicabie disease . HIV/AIDS is the most common culprits in the region .
 In the Global North, people tend to live longer and die from noncommunicable conditions such as cardiovascular disease and cancer . The Global North is the most populous region in the world, with people living longer .
 On the right, the radar graph shows regional differences in the cause of death . The radar graph is based on the national average death rate in the US .
 The circumstances are tragic, and stopping the tragedy is ‘a moral duty” says the UN . The UN estimates that the AIDS pandemic is beginning to lose momentum . The circumstances were tragic, but stopping them is a moral duty, she says .
 In 2008 about 33 million people worldwide were infected with HIV . The number of new infections peaked in 1998 at 3. million and the number of deaths peaked in 2005 . In 2008 there were 33 million new infections in the world .
 AIDS deaths are projected to overtake births and cause population decreases in the next few years . This does not mean that the epidemic is vanishing; in many of the most seriously seriously AIDS-affected countries, deaths will overtake births .
 This is tragic because the disease, transmitted by mosquitoes to humans, is largely preventable and treatable . The disease is transmitted to humans by mosquitoes and is transmitted by humans . It is also largely treatable and preventable .
 Efforts to combat the spread of the disease include the distribution of millions of insecticide-treated bed nets . Efforts are also aimed at distributing millions of bed nets to fight the disease .
 What makes influenza different from other global diseases is the frightening ease with which it spreads, says Dr. Frida Ghitis . She says influenza is a global disease that spreads with ease .
 Another deadly strain of influenza, HlNl or swine flu, has captured global attention . Policy makers and healthcare officials have raced to combat the infectious disease through public health measures .
 There is uncertainty as to whether this new strain of flu is more dangerous than normal seasonal flu . The new strain is thought to be the most dangerous of all flu season .
 A number of countries, particularly China and Russia, have taken vigorous quarantine measures against Mexicans, Americans, and people who have traveled to countries with high numbers of infected people .
 The spread and control of infectious diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, Lassa fever, Ebola, lymphatic filariasis. The spread of these diseases is a key part of the CDC's mission .
 Map shows the severity of the swine fiu giobai heaith crisis . Map shows most of the world's most severe swine-affected countries .
 The outbreak of swine fin was deciared a giobai pandemic in 2009 . First detected in Mexico eariier in the year, on June 11,2009, the outbreak .
 This was the first designation by the Worid Heaith Organization of a woridwide influenza pandemic in forty-one years . The severity of the pandemic was considered “moderate” at the time, there was the expectation that it wouid spread in the coming winter
 They will not vanish from sight anytime soon, and are a stark reminder of the transnational threats that are present in our borderless world . The threats require global cooperation and coordination and coordination .
 A relationship exists between the health of individuals within a state and that state’s national security . The health of people in a state can be linked to national security, the author says .
 Liberal theory anticipates a globalization of cultures that transcends geopolitical boundaries and erodes the meaning of national identity and sovereignty . In contrast, in a more optimistic scenario, liberal theory predicts a global citizen who assigns loyalty to common interests of all peoples .
 Trends in this cultural dimension of globalization are generating changes in how people construct their identities and encourage a more cosmopolitan perspective . Trends in cultural dimensions of globalization generate changes in people's identities .
 Global village is a metaphor used by many to portray a future in which borders will vanish and the world will become a single community . The major source of this global transformation is the growing speed and flow of communications, which is a hallmark of the global village .
 In the age of global communication, the meaning of ‘home’ and ‘abroad’ vanishes, promoting changes in people’s images of community and their own identity . The meaning of home and abroad vanishes in the modern age of communication .
 Will cellular phones, the Internet, blogs, and other means of transnational communication portend consensus, and. Will cellular phone, Internet and blogs portend . consensus? And will cellular phones and the Internet portend that?
 The revolution in telecommunications has contributed to “the death of distance,” as virtually instantaneous communications are possible nearly everywhere . The World at one’s FINGER TIPS is available at one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 "No area of the world and no arena of politics, economics, society, or culture is immune from the pervasive influence of communications technology," says author of the book .
 Communication between rural communities in the Global South and “wired” Global North countries is facilitated by personal computers and the “wireless world” of mobile or cellular phones . Personal computers and cellular phones are used to communicate between rural areas in rural areas and ‘wired�
 The result of the expanding worldwide use of the Internet is the creation of a cyberspace, a global information superhighway . People everywhere can communicate freely without constraints as they surf the Web, exchange e-mails, and join Internet chat rooms .
 The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to information for the first time . Internet users are promoting a culture revolution .
 Bloggers weave together an elaborate network with agenda-setting power on issues ranging from human rights in China to the U.S. occupation of Iraq to electoral fraud in Iran . Drawing on content of the international media and the Internet, bloggers weave together a network .
 podcasts allow people to create their own Web site channels and share audio and visual versions of new uploads with anyone throughout the world who signs on . Added to this is the enormous popularity of podcasts, which allow people in the world to share their own content .
 If one constant stands out, it is continuous change in technological innovation, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The rapid pace of information technology development drives globalization . Information technology development is a key part of globalization .
 In the process is transforming how people communicate as well as which countries lead and which follow . It can make today’s methods of communicating look ancient in a few years .
 To enthusiasts, the advantages of the global communications revolution are a blessing for humanity . To enthusiasts of the internet, the benefits of the digital revolution are an enormous boon for humanity.
 When people are connected worldwide through the revolution in digital communications, the shared information propels human development and productivity . The shared information is shared through the sharing of the world's shared information .
 Iranians were able “to document and disseminate to the world images of and information on repression in the wake of the recent election’s recent election. For example, in 2009, through the use of information technology such as Twitter and the online video-sharing site YouTube, Iranians
 Iran's anti-government protests were seen around the world, and served to sustain Iranian dissatisfaction with the ruling regime . Two-thirds of Iranians that are thirty years of age and younger are unhappy with the regime .
 On the other hand, there is a ‘dark side’ to the global communications revolution, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios .
 Critics complain that the growing electronic network has created a new global condition known as virtuality . Critics say virtuality is a form of virtuality that creates virtuality in the world .
 Governments are developing surveillance systems that discreetly monitor activities in public spaces . In the name of national security, governments are also developing extensive surveillance systems .
 China has a high-tech surveillance program to identify dissent before it turns into a mass movement . The program is known as “Golden Shield’s” and will identify dissent .
 Critics warn that the Internet is widening the gap between the rich and the poor . Internet use and commerce grow, leading to the globalization of poverty and the destruction of local culture .
 Critics fear that the advantages of the digital communication for small entrepreneurs in the Global South will not be shared . Digital divide in access to communications technology is not closing as rapidly as expected, they say .
 At present, the Global North (and particularly the United States, where the Internet was developed) remains predominant and the primary beneficiary of the IT revolution . The Global North is still predominant and remains predominant .
 Growing capacity of many U.S. rivals to excel in IT innovation has rapidly closed the gap . However, the growing capacity for many United States rivals has rapidly increased .
 This trend suggests that America’s domination in technology and information may not endure for long without a revival of U.S. public support for education and science .
 Presently, there are concerns that the United States decline in spending for education is already creating a United States “creativity crisis” . Digital divide the division between the internet-technoiogyrich Globai North and the Giobal South in the proportion of internet users and
 The Politics and Business of Global Communication . The more than $1 trillion global telecommunications industry is without question the major vehicle for the rapid spread of ideas, information, and images worldwide .
 World Trade Organization created the World Telecom Pact in 1997 . The pact was created after the World Trade Organisation created the pact in 1997.
 This regime ended government and private telecommunications monopolies in many states . The resulting cuts in phone costs were widely seen as a catalyst to the world economy’s expansion .
 This development has been augmented by advances in information technology, and the expansive scope of global media, it has been added to .
 The type of power the media wield over international affairs is arguably specific and limited . Yet, contrary to conventional wisdom that the media has the ability to drive a country’s foreign policy, the power is limited .
 Scholarship shows media influence what people think about more than what they think . Scholarship shows that the media influence people's opinions .
 In this way, the media primarily function to set the agenda of public discussion about public affairs instead of determining public opinion . The media's role in shaping public opinion is to be set by the public, not by the media, it says .
 Global broadcasts of the ruthless repression and illegitimate tactics associated with Mugabe’s bid for reelection in Zimbabwe in 2008 ignited a worldwide chain reaction to aid the refugees and pressure the government to reform .
 Reports by professional journalists and individual activists helped fan Iranian resistance and protest over the declared electoral victory of incumbent president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in 2009 .
 Some people caution that this kind of ‘virtual diplomacy’ has real limitations . “Virtual diplomacy” is a form of information technology that can be used in international politics .
 It can provide biased or incomplete information that may contribute to an inaccurate or limited understanding of global problems . Not only can it constrain the policy options available to global decision makers, but it can also provide biased information . It can also contribute to a limited or inaccurate understanding of issues such as
 Industry leaders are merging to combine their resources and expand their global reach . Headquartered mostly in the rich Global North, these industry leaders will merge to combine resources .
 "Always growing here and shriveling there, with certain of its members bulking up, while others slowly fall apart or get digested whole," he says . They keep “us fully entertained and perhaps half-informed,” he adds .
 The world’s population is a captive audience, and the information presented by these corporate giants shapes our values and our images of what the world is like . The world's population is an audience of corporate giants, says the author .
 The message of international events and ideas projected by the media is highly reflective of Western culture . Not surprisingly, Western culture is reflective of the world's view of events .
 The handful of news and information agencies operate like a giant circulatory system, pumping ideas, ideas, and ideals from the wealthy center to the remote periphery in the Global South .
 The Internet, CNN, and MTV are media channels with global reach centered in the Global North . MTV, The Internet and MTV have global reach .
 What Global South opponents of globalization complain about is not so much modernization and trade . They oppose ‘corporate globalization’ dictated by mass media multinational corporations .
 Most of the growth in the media industries is expected to occur in the Global South over the next five years . Nonetheless, most of the media industry growth will be in the global south .
 Advocates see global telecommunications as a vehicle for progress, liberating minds, expanding choices, penetrating societies closed to diplomatic communication . Advocates say it will create a single, more united, homogenized global culture .
 They say the airwaves can broadcast divisive messages as well as unifying ones . What is said is more important than how much is said, they say .
 Globalized communications and information may be used as tools for terrorism and revolution as well as for cartel a convergence of independent commercial enterprises or political groups that combine for collective action, such as limiting competition .
 Over 65 percent of citizens in Giobal North are Internet users, as are over 13 percent of people in the Giobal South . Internet usage is growing rapidly in the region .
 People from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from the same technology platform, but different cultures will flourish on it . Different cultures will thrive on it. People from across the globe will benefit from the technology platform .
 The next phase of globalization is going to be more glocalization—more and more local content made global . Rapid globalization is propelled by revolutions in technology .
 Globalization has narrowed the distance between the world’s people, some have gained and others have lost ground . Some of the world's people have gained some of the most of their lives .
 The global village is not proving to be an equally hospitable home for everyone . Global village is proving not to be a home for all, says CNN.com.com .
 Winners in the game downplay the cost of global integration, and critics deny globalization’s benefits . Critics deny globalization's benefits, but winners downplay its cost .
 The debate about globalization’s problematic impact is intensifying, but without resolution, as the debaters are hardening their positions without listening to the counter arguments . And the debate about the impact of globalization's problematic impact continues without resolution .
 You have now taken into account a number of dimensions of the trend toward globalization . This is in international economics, demography, global communication, and potential spread of universal values for the entire world .
 If the trends you have surveyed actually do culminate for the first time in a global consensus uniting all of humanity, these values and understandings might unify all people on Earth into a common global culture .
 This could conceivably prepare the way for the advent of a global civil society . Even with the eventual emergence of supranational institutions to govern all of humanity, it could help .
 This worldview and set of predictions strikes fear into the hearts of many people who experience cognitive dissonance when they confront a frightening vision that challenges their customary way of thinking about world affairs . Yet this worldview and predictions strike fear into many people's hearts .
 These people strenuously reject the idea that the traditional system of independent sovereign states can or should be replaced by a global community with strong supranational regulatory institutions .
 Many people recommend globalization for international public policy, because they believe that its consequences are basically good for humankind . Many people believe globalization is good for humanity .
 Critics argue that globalization’s costs far outweigh its benefits . However, critics argue that the benefits of globalization far outweigh the benefits .
 As the pace of globalization has become a recognized force in world politics, it also has been a heated topic of debate .
 Globalization has hit a political speed bump, provoking intense critical evaluation of globalization’s causes, characteristics, and consequences . Globalization is inspiring fresh ethical examination of the elevated interdependence of countries and humans . The U.S. has been in the throes of a political
 To many students of international relations, globalization displays two faces, one positive and the other negative . To students, globalization has a positive and negative face, but it also has a negative face .
 To those whose perceptions focus on globalization’s benefits, globalization is a blessing that should be promoted to deepen and widen its helpful effects . globalization is an opportunity to widen and deepen its beneficial effects .
 Globalization helps break down traditional divisions between races, nations, cultures, and cultures . The group believes that globalization helps to break down barriers to peace, prosperity and justice .
 To some, globalization is a harmful phenomenon, breeding such things as global disease and threats to local job security . To others, it is a force to be resisted, and therefore an attempt to stop it is futile .
 Globalization can and must change. Globalization's potential for good is to promote open societies, open economies, and freer exchange of goods, knowledge, and ideas . Globalization’s potential to good—promoting open societies and open economies .
 Commission finds deepseated imbalances in global economy that are ethically unacceptable and politically unsustainable . Commission also finds persistent imbalance in the current workings of the global economy . Commission: "Deepseated and persistent imbalanceances in the global economic system that are Ethically unacceptable
 More than one billion people are either unemployed, underemployed, or working poor . More than 1 billion people in the U.S. are either underemed, unemployed, or unemployed .
 Clearly, globalization’s benefits are out of reach for far too many people, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Clearly the benefits of globalization's benefits are far too much to reach"
 An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment of the morality or immorality of globalization . An ethical assessment would be an assessment of whether globalization is moral or immoral .
 In it, he applies as a criterion the utilitarian principle that it is a moral duty to maximize the happiness and welfare of all human beings and even animal welfare . In the book, he says it is necessary to maximize all human being's happiness, welfare .
 Singer sees great benefits to the retreat of the doctrine of state sovereignty . Singer sees the advance of the view that the entire world should be the unit of ethical analysis .
 Singer: globalization gives all of us great incentives to perform our utilitarian duty toward others . Singer: This is beneficial, to Singer, because globalization gives us all incentives to do our duty .
 Under globalization, altruism and concern for others pay dividends, whereas narrow selfish behavior causes the selfish competitor counterproductive harm . altruism pays dividends under globalization, while selfish behavior is counterproductive harm, says author .
 He concedes a few points to globalization's critics but, wielding logic and fact, demolishes most of the allegations made against it, he says . He concedes some points but demolishes many of the claims made against globalization .
 Bhagwati's response to the claim that globalization increases poverty is rubbish . Bhagwatati says the claim is rubbish, but it's not a myth .
 The age of globalization has far-reaching implications for humanity . Interdependence and Future International Politics is critical to the future of international politics .
 Refuguess, Asylum-Seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons. Stateless persons. Refugees, Stateless People. Refugees and Internally displaced persons.
 The only society that works today is also one founded on mutual respect . We have a responsibility collectively and individually, to help each other on the basis of each other’s equal worth .
 Women are protesting in Kabul, Afghanistan, in April 2009 to demand the repeal of a law that authorizes a range of extreme restrictions on human rights, including marital rape . The law authorizes the use of a wide range of restrictions on freedom of expression .
 You are stunned and sickened at the trials and tribulations that many of those less fortunate than you must endure . From living in conditions of squalor and poverty to being victimized by raping and pillaging by paramilitary forces, you are stunned .
 Like most people with a heart and interest in making the world a better place, you hope for a better future for all of humanity . You hope for the better future of humanity.
 The opportunities and choices that are most basic to freedom from fear and poverty are unavailable for most people in the Global South’s poorest countries . The opportunities are available for most of the world's poorest people but are often unavailable for them .
 The prospects of the ‘have-nots’ are not improving in the Global North . They experience much slower rates of development and less human security than in the global North .
 Given the serious deprivations facing so many people, there are many reasons for humanitarian concern . There are also reasons for concern for humanitarian concerns in Syria .
 The denial to most humans of the inalienable rights to which all humans are presumably entitled is not being met . The U.S. Declaration of Independence speaks of the “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness ” of which the United States. of which U.
 Human security is a measure popular in liberal theory of the degree to which the welfare of individuals is protected and promoted, in contrast to realist theory's emphasis on putting the state’s interests in military and national security ahead of all other goals . This problem prompted Mary Robinson, the
 Until relatively recently in the unfolding evolution of the theoretical study of world politics, the needs of the faceless billions of everyday people were neglected . The needs of people have been neglected in the world's political history .
 Past theoretical legacy, in this tradition, pictured the mass of humanity as marginalized victims or left them invisible by painting their fates as controlled by forces over which hapless people have little influence . That past theoretical legacy of the past has been criticized for being a victim of injustice .
 A consensus now supports the view that people are important, that they have worth, and that ethics and morality belong in the study of international relations . Ethics and morality should belong in international relations, the author says .
 These principles apply to interstate relations, and they are at the heart of analyses of human security in world politics . These principles are important to international relations and international relations, says David Cameron .
 Many observers embrace the traditional assumption that vast global forces make people powerless . That consensus notwithstanding, many observers say people are powerless in the world . Many observers say global forces are not powerless .
 Realists recognize that people participate politically but claim they have no real power because an invisible set of powerful forces gives most human beings only superficial involvement without real influence . Realists say the capacity of actors to harness power to achieve objectives can be harnessed by actors .
 Classic thinking about the world has long concentrated on people and on the essential character of human nature . This denial of the importance and influence of individual human agency seems increasingly strange, says the author .
 A humanistic interpretation is needed that gives people status and value . A humanist interpretation of people's status is needed to give people status, value .
 A normative consensus has grown about the inherent moral worth and status of humans and the concomitant obligation of states to recognize and protect that status . Human rights are the political rights and civil liberties recognized by the international community as inalienable .
 If you, as a student of international affairs, are to develop a more complete comprehension of the forces behind the prevailing trends in world politics, it is important to consider the conditions faced by humanity . If you want to know more about the situation in the Middle East, it's important to
 This chapter introduces information about the human condition to enable you to evaluate the unfolding debate about the role of humans as actors on the global stage and the prospect for human development .
 Together, these five countries are responsible for 93 percent of all executions carried out in 2008 . Together, they were responsible for more than 80 percent of executions in 2008.
 These countries provide the greatest challenge towards global abolition of the death penalty” (Amnesty International 2009). conception of human nature, it ignores the role of leaders and the nongovernmental organizations that people form .
 Liberals attach more importance to humans, following the ethical precept of German philosopher Immanuel Kant . Kant said people should be treated as ends and not means, and therefore human rights and human dignity should be safeguarded . Liberals are following Kant's ethical precept that people are ends not means .
 Rousseau: “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains” Rousseau bemoaned in his famous 1762 book . Rousseau was a political philosopher and philosopher of the French Revolution .
 Rousseau’s characterization of the human condition remains accurate, but in many respects Rousseau was accurate, he says . Rousseau's description of the condition of human life remains accurate .
 The inequalities and disparities evident in people’s standards of living cannot help but evoke sympathy for the difficult conditions faced by many people, especially for those in the less developed Global South countries .
 One American graduate student painfully learned about the plight of people in the Global South during his field research in South America . The plight of the South American people was exposed during his research .
 Brian Wallace found a reality far different from his own experience of growing up in the southern U.S. Wallace was born in Atlanta, Georgia . Wallace: "I'm not surprised by the reality of my life in the south" Wallace: It's a good life for Wallace, who
 When I left Bogota, I fully expected Bogota to be like any large U.S. city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish . Bogota is like a large United States city only with people who speak Spanish, I said .
 As a personal experience this shock was occasionally funny and sometimes sad, it was sometimes funny or sad .
 "After all the laughing and the crying were over, it forced me to reevaluate both my life and the society in which I live," she says .
 It has a per capita GNP of $550 and a very unequal distribution of income . The country has an unequal share of income, with a very low level of wealth .
 "To “know” these things intellectually is much different from experiencing firsthand how they affect people’s lives. But to ‘know’t know’ these things, intellectually, is much more important than to experience firsthand how these things affect people,’
 It is one thing to lecture in air-conditioned classrooms about the problems of world poverty . It is also something to lecture about world poverty in air conditioned classrooms .
 It is quite another to see four-year-old children begging or sleeping in the streets . It is one of the world's most dangerous places to walk alone, say experts .
 Children with dirty faces beg for bread money or turn into pickpockets . The principle of private property gets blurred by empty stomachs . What this means in human terms is children with dirty .
 It means other children whose minds and bodies will never develop fully because they were malnourished as infants . It means they will never be able to fully develop fully .
 Street vendors sell candy and cigarettes 14 hours a day in order to feed their families . It means street vendors sell candies and cigarettes to keep their families fed .
 Well-dressed businessmen and petty bureaucrats pass this poverty every day as they seek asylum in their fortified houses to the north of the city . The poverty is also seen in the city's fortified houses .
 It means rich people who prefer not to see the poor, except for maids and security guards . The poor are poor people who live in a stateless state of poverty .
 Foreigners spend more in one month than the average Colombian earns in a year . It means foreigners like me who come to Colombia and spend more than average Colombian in a month .
 Somewhere within the polemics of the politicians and the ‘objectivity’ of the social scientists, the human being has been lost . The human being is lost, says the social scientist .
 Income inequality is a serious global problem from which many other difficulties and disputes result . Income inequality has been a global problem for some of the world's nations .
 Consumption patterns show that the division between the rich and the poor is growing, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Consumption patterns suggest that the problem is entrenched, Sutter says .
 Only one-fifth of the globe’s wealthiest people consume anywhere from two-thirds to nine-tenths of its resources . Only about one- fifth of the world's richest people consume most of its natural resources .
 Another fifth of humanity survive on less than $1 a day and live in countries where children die for want of a simple anti-mosquito bed net, the U.N. says .
 The share of people living on less than $1.25 a day is less than half the world's poverty rate . People in a wide range of countries are struggling to exist under conditions of poverty .
 The most people living in extreme poverty are in Asia, hut Africa has the iargest number of high-poverty countries . Asia has the highest number of extreme poverty countries in the world .
 People in developing countries are healthier, better educated, and less impoverished . They are more likely to live in a multiparty democracy, according to the report .
 Since 1990 life expectancy in developing countries has increased by 4 years . Life expectancy has increased in developing nations since 1990 . Since 1990 there has been a 4-year increase in life expectancy .
 Much evidence captures the extreme suffering of people in many parts of the world, but especially in the low-income countries of the Global South . Life has changed little from that of their ancestors .
 Life expectancy in the Global South averages sixty-three years, compared to sixty-six years for the Global North . For example, life expectancy in North America is seventy-six .
 To make the promotion of human development a global priority, a precise measure of human welfare is needed . To promote human development, the world needs to know how to measure human welfare .
 This theory, advanced by Global South leaders, attributed persistent poverty to exploitation caused by dependent relationships of the less developed countries with the wealthy Global North . This theory has been advanced by the Global South .
 Advocates of a basic human needs perspective sought new ways to measure development beyond those focusing exclusively on economic indicators such as the average income for each person in each country . Advocates seek new ways of measuring development beyond economic indicators .
 In 1990, Mahbud ul Haq constructed for the U.N. Development Programme a Human Development Index to measure states’ comparative ability to provide for their citizens’ well-being .
 Successive Human Development Reports have provoked fresh debate about the meaning of human development in international forums such as World Summit for Social Development .
 The HDI, as the UNDP most recently defines it, seeks to capture as many aspects of human development as possible in one simple, composite index . Human needs are those basic physical, social, and political needs that are required for survival and security .
 Human Development Index is an index that uses life expectancy, literacy, average number of years of schooling, and income to assess a country's performance in providing for its people’s welfare and security .
 No multiple-indicator index can perfectly monitor progress in human development, the HDI comes close as an estimating procedure . The HDI is an estimated estimate of the human development of the world .
 Human welfare measures three dimensions of human welfare . It measures living a long and healthy life, being educated, and having a decent standard of living . It also measures living in a long, healthy life .
 The HDI is a more comprehensive measure than per capita income . HDI directs attention from material possessions toward human needs, says CNN.com editor .
 By focusing on aspects of human welfare beyond average income for each person, the HDI provides a more complete picture of human life than income does . The HDI is a proxy for a decent standard of living, rather than income .
 The evidence provides a basic profile of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding and failing . By this measure, the evidence provides an example of the failure of humanitarian aspirations .
 The HDI value for a country shows the distance that it has already traveled toward the maximum possible value of 1 . HDI values for countries show the distance they have already traveled . The value of a country's HDI is based on its position in the HDI index .
 The difference between the value achieved by a country and the maximum possible value shows how far it has to go . The challenge for every country is to find ways to reduce that discrepancy .
 These indicators show consumption is not the same as human welfare and that economic growth does not automatically produce human development . The indicators show that consumption does not mean human welfare, says David Cameron .
 The HDI can give a more complete picture of the state of a country’s development than can income alone . Income alone highlights the importance of policies that translate wealth into human development .
 HDI does not include measures of leisure, security, justice, freedom, human rights, and self respect . HDI is not only measures of the other aspects of human development such as leisure and security, but also security and security .
 It would be possible to register a high HDI in a zoo or even in a well-run prison . The HDI is a high-HDI for a prisoner or a zoo .
 The HDI has no independent indicator of morbidity, the absence of which is surely one of the most basic needs . And, although at low incomes illness often leads to death, the HDI does not indicate morbidity .
 Using the Human Development Index to measure the human welfare and development of people within various populations, notice how countries can rank somewhat differently than when using an aggregate measure such as gross domestic product per capita .
 At PPP exchange rates of human well-being across the globe, there are many important aspects of human security and human rights that it does not assess . The World Economic Forum assesses the cost of PPP at PPP rates .
 Critics of globalization say relative deprivation is caused by globalization, not cured by it . However, critics of globalization complain that it is the culprit of relative deprivation .
 They see globalization as a part of the problem of human suffering, not the solution . They say globalization is part of a problem, not a solution, not just a solution .
 Capital flows most slowly to the places and people where it is most scarce . Capital may flow more freely around the world, but it flows slowly to those where it's most needed . Capital flows more freely to the people and places where it needs to be, say experts .
 A more global economy increases inequality in some countries, particularly in the marginalized periphery of the Global South . To their constructed image of the consequences of cascading globalization, some say it is a result of globalization .
 Critics decry the ‘human harms’ wrought by globalization, arguing that “nothing is more certain than the inequality and exploitation generated by a totally free market’s free market .
 The twenty-first century appears to be both the best of times and the worst of times . Progress in human development has occurred and will likely persist, so will trends toward declining human welfare, says author .
 The future of world politics will be a struggle between the Global North and the Global South, writes David Frum . Frum says the future will be between those who expect continuing human poverty and those who envision further progress in human development .
 Where human development has expanded, one factor stands out -- the degree to which countries rule themselves democratically and protect citizens’ civil liberties . Yet, where human development . has expanded .
 Where democracy thrives, human development and human rights also tend to thrive . Democracy thrives in places where human development, human rights thrive . Human rights and human development also thrive in these countries, says CNN.com .
 The map measures the level of human development in the countries of the world, using the HDI scale . The map was created by the World Institute of Human Development and Human Development Research .
 The Global East and some Global South countries have made big gains in the past quarter-century . A gap in people’s quality of life and in their levels of human development is apparent . The gap parallels to some degree the gap between the Global North and the Global South .
 Map 15.2 shows the various levels of human development in countries across the globe . Map shows the different levels of development in different countries . Now compare the location where people benefit from such freedom with the location of such freedom .
 In autocratic governments not ruled by the will of the people, human development fails to occur and human rights are denied . Human development is not possible in autocratic countries, says Julian Zelizer .
 The exceptions demonstrate the general rule that how countries organize themselves for governance, and their protection of the civil rights and political liberties of their populations, makes a crucial difference in achieving levels of human development .
 Some question the “trickle-down” hypothesis (that if the rich first get richer eventually the benefits will trickle down to help the poor) while accepting the evidence that meeting basic human needs promotes long-term economic growth .
 Others maintain that redistributive policies to enhance human welfare and growth-oriented policies focusing on “trickle-down” benefits function at crosspurposes . The latter can only be attained at the expense of the former, they say .
 Many now recommend fostering human development through a ‘Third Way’ strategy . The strategy combines the efficiency of a free-enterprise capitalistic market with the compassion of governmental economic planning and regulation .
 Proponents agree that this mixed approach would enable a free market to generate rapid growth while providing a safety net for those most in need of assistance . This formula is the best solution for engineering economic growth with a moral human purpose, they say .
 The body of legal rules and norms designed to protect individual human beings is anchored in the ethical requirement that every person should be treated with equal concern and respect . In the idea that those who suffer ‘no grievance or injury’ have the obligation to speak up for those who have suffered
 The 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the most authoritative statement of these norms . It establishes a broad range of civil and political rights, including freedom of assembly, freedom of thought and expression .
 The declaration proclaims that social and economic rights are indispensable, including the right to education, the rights to work and participate in the cultural life of the community . The declaration also proclaims .
 Rights have since been codified and extended in a series of treaties, most notably in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . Rights have been extended to include economic, social and cultural rights .
 Multilateral treaties enumerating these rights are legally binding on the states ratifying them . Many have either not ratified them or done so with significant reservations .
 When states specify reservations, they are expressing agreement with the broad declarations of principle contained in these treaties . When states say they object to certain specific provisions and elect not to be bound by them, they say .
 The United States ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with reservations in 1992 . The U.S. has not ratified the international Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights .
 Countries who agree with the general principle that all human beings possess certain rights that cannot be withheld may disagree on the scope of these rights . As this example illustrates, countries who agree on this principle may still disagree .
 Some emphasize rights associated with the rule of law and political rights . Others stress the importance of economic and social rights .
 Not everyone enjoys the human rights recognized by international law . Unfortunately, not everyone has the right to live under international law.
 Three groups for whom respect for human rights remains particularly problematic are indigenous peoples, women, and children . The U.N. Human Rights Council says respect for women and indigenous peoples is particularly problematic .
 The UN Human Rights Commission holds annual sessions that deal with accusations that some UN members are violating human rights treaties . The Commission holds an annual session that deals with accusations of human rights violations .
 Stipulated in Islam’s holy book, the Quran, caning is practiced in some Islamic countries . Caning is a form of punishment in Islam's holy book and some countries practice it .
 indigenous peoples are representative of one type of ethnic and cultural group that were once native to a geographic location . As you learned in the Chapter 5 introduction to nonstate actors, indigenous peoples represent one of the most common types of ethnic groups .
 Indigenous peoples were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient . In most cases indigenous peoples were politically sovereign . In some cases, indigenous peoples have been politically sovereign.
 As many as 800,000 Tutsis died in a bloodbath in Rwanda . This photo depicts the resuits of one of the bloodiest massacres in Rwanda's history .
 Many indigenous peoples feel persecuted because their livelihoods, lands, and cultures are threatened . Many indigenous people feel persecuted for their livelihood, lands and cultures .
 The mass killing of Armenians by Turks, of Jews by Hitler, of Cambodians by the Khmer Rouge, and of the Tutsi of Rwanda by the Hutu exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century . Armenians were killed by Turks by Turks and Turks, Jews
 Polish jurist Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide from the Greek word genos and the Latin caedere . Lemkin called for it to be singled out as the gravest violation of human rights . The international community would be morally responsible for punishing genocide .
 The members of many nonstate nations are divided about objectives, and militants who are prepared to fight for independence are usually in a minority . Militants in nonstate countries are often divided about what they want to achieve .
 In fact, most indigenous movements only seek a greater voice in redirecting the policies and allocation of resources within existing states . They are eliciting the support of NGOs and IGOs .
 A substantial number of indigenous movements in the last decade have successfully negotiated settlements resulting in devolution . The granting of regional political power to increase local self-governance .
 Examples include the Miskitos in Nicaragua, the Gagauz in Moldova, and most regional separatists in Ethiopia and in India’s Assam region . Examples of regional separatists are in Ethiopia, in India and in Nicaragua .
 Conflict between aspiring peoples and established states can be extremely difficult . Yet, as suggested by the continuing hostilities between the Chechens and the Russian Eederation, resolving clashes between the two can be difficult .
 The goal expressed in the UN Charter of promoting “universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms” for everyone is a challenge for many nationally diverse countries .
 The division of these states along ethnic and cultural lines makes them inherently fragile, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Interethnic competition is a phenomenon that dates back to biblical times, it remains a contemporary plague . In the Bible, it was a form of conflict between religious and non-religious .
 Some analysts predict that conflict within and between ethnically divided states will become a major axis on which twenty-firstcentury world politics revolves . Some analysts say conflict within or between ethnic divisions will become an axis of politics .
 Efforts to toughen domestic refugee legislation and criteria for granting asylum raise ethical issues . Efforts for tougher legislation raise important ethical issues, says Julian Zelizer .
 The policy proposals crafted to address these questions may involve controversial trade-offs . They point to the difficulties in responding to the global refugee crisis, and human rights abuse .
 Some see it primarily in military terms, others in human welfare terms . Others see it as a good example of human welfare in the world .
 Underlying the disagreement is a different conception of what is most important on the global agenda . Underlying this is a disagreement over what is the most important in the world .
 One tradition gives states first priority and assumes that protecting their territorial integrity must be foremost in the minds of national leaders .
 Others argue that social and environmental protection must therefore be seen as a global priority . Others challenge this conception and give primacy to the security of individual people . Others say that social protection is a global issue .
 "National security is essentially the freedom from fear of attack by another country or nonstate terrorists," the author says . National security can be defined as freedom from the fear of a terrorist attack, he says .
 Realists maintain that armed aggression is a paramount security priority . Preparing for war to prevent war is each state’s supreme imperative, overriding any other security concerns .
 “Security” must be defined primarily in terms of each country’s capacity to resist armed threats to survival and national values by either foreign enemies or insurgents at home . Therefore “security” should be defined as ‘security’ and ‘national security�
 This definition puts the protection of entire states’ interests above those of individual people . This definition of protecting states' interests above individual people, it says . The definition of the definition of this definition is that of protecting entire states rather than protecting individuals .
 “human security” has risen as a recent concept that focuses on protecting individuals from a/rythreat . “Human security’s” concept has been developed as a way to protect individuals from the threat of a/y threats .
 The Human Security Centre elaborates this new conception that derives from liberal thought, explaining that “secure states do not automatically mean secure peoples.” It says that ‘secure states don’t automatically mean . secure peoples .
 Protecting citizens from foreign attack may be a necessary condition for the security of individuals, but it is not a sufficient one . Protecting individuals from foreign attacks may be necessary but it's not a necessary one .
 During the last one hundred years more people have been killed by their own governments than by foreign armies . Indeed, during the last 100 years far more people were killed by . governments than . foreign armies. More people have died by . their own government than any foreign army.
 All proponents of human security agree that its primary goal is the protection of individuals . The goal is to protect individuals from harm, not to harm others .
 Gender Empowerment Measure is an attempt to measure the extent of gender equality across the globe’s countries . It is based on estimates of women's relative economic income, high-paying positions, and access to professional and parliamentary positions .
 Global consensus emerged about the need to improve the status of women if human rights and development were to progress . A global consensus emerged on the need for women's rights to progress in the world .
 These conferences are signposts that increasingly depict gender equality and empowerment across political, social, and economic arenas as a fundamental right . The conference is a signpost that increasingly depicts gender equality as a right .
 Disparities between men and women persist in literacy rates, school and college enrollments, and targeted educational resources . Disparity persists, with literacy rates and school enrollments among other things .
 Women enjoy less access to advanced study and training in professional fields, such as science, engineering, law, and business . Moreover, women enjoy less opportunity to study and train in advanced study .
 Women are almost always in lessprestigious jobs, they face formidable barriers to political involvement, and they typically receive less pay than men .
 In most countries, gender inequalities in living standards between men and women remain widespread . Despite measurable improvement in the daily lot and future prospects of millions of women during the past several decades .
 In many developing countries women are a large part of agricultural employment, often as unpaid family workers . Women are often part of the workforce in developing countries, often in unpaid family work .
 Women are greatly underrepresented in policy-making positions within government, even in democracies and developed countries . Women are also vastly underrepresented .
 Angela Merkel is one of the most powerful women in the world . She is the first female Chancellor of Germany . Merkel is the leader of the country's largest economy .
 Spain’s Cabinet has more women than men . Defense Minister Carme Chacon is the first woman to hold a Cabinet post in Spain .
 There are signs that a transformation is under way in the world of politics . There is a trend of greater female participation in politics spreading across many countries . Yet there are signs of a transformation under way .
 Further gender differences continue at the most basic levels of human development . Women remain victims of human rights abuse and discrimination nearly everywhere, says Amnesty International .
 Gender myopia is pervasive, denying the existence of the barriers that prevent women equal freedoms and privileges enjoyed by men, is pervasive . Women are denied equal rights and privileges by gender myopia .
 It was not until 2001 that “sexual enslavement” was established at The Hague as a war crime, a fact that feminists point out as an example of the traditional disregard for women's human rights .
 And blatant disregard for the individual sexual and reproductive rights of women continues today, as reflected in current-day Afghanistan .
 Afghan President Hamid Karzai supported the law in April 2009 . The language of the law was toned down in the face of international opposition . In August later that year, a similar law was quietly passed that permitted men to deny their wives food and sustenance .
 Protecting women’s rights is difficult because the issues touch deeply entrenched, as well as widely divergent, religious and cultural beliefs . Protecting the rights of women is difficult as it touches deeply entrenched and deeply divergent beliefs .
 In many Islamic countries, women must hide their faces with veils in public . Women and men often separated in social and religious activities in Islamic countries .
 For many in liberal Western countries focused on social, political, and economic equality of the sexes, these traditions are difficult to understand . For many Westerners, this tradition of equality is hard to understand, especially in the US .
 Once this concept gained acceptance as a lens through which to construct a view of the core issues on the global agenda, gender issues became a central concern for the world's leaders .
 A human rights horror to which women, as well as children, are particularly vulnerable is human trafficking . Slavery and Human Trafficking is a human rights violation . Women and children are especially vulnerable .
 Trade in humans bought, sold, or forced into a miserable life of subjugation and servitude is huge . While many people assume that slavery is an obsolescent practice, the reality is that trade in human slaves is huge.
 It is likely that more people are being trafficked across borders against their will now than at any point in the past . Slavery and the global slave trade continue to thrive to this day .
 This human stain is not just a minor blot on the rich tapestry of international commerce . It's a human stain on a major global commerce, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Globalization is a product of the same political, technological, and economic forces that have fueled globalization . It is a result of the political, economic, and technological forces that fueled globalization. It is the result of globalization.
 Growing awareness of the modern slave trade must spark a recognition of the flaws in our contemporary economic and governmental arrangements . Just as the brutal facts of the Atlantic slave trade ultimately led to a reexamination of United States history .
 The current system offers too many incentives to criminals and outlaw states to market humans and promises too little in the way of sanctions . The system is too much of a free market for human trafficking and too little sanctions are possible .
 700,000 to 4 million people are bought and sold each year as sex slaves, prostitutes, child laborers, and child soldiers . The growing slave trade crisscrosses the entire globe .
 UN has found that the leading form of human trafficking, at 79 percent, is sexual exploitation . The UN has also found that sexual exploitation is the most common form of sexual exploitation in the world .
 Most of the victims are women and girls . In 30 percent of the countries that reported the gender of the perpetrators, the human traffickers were female .
 The second leading form of human trafficking is forced labor, and about one in five victims are children . About 1 in 5 victims of forced labor are children, according to CNN.com .
 While many victims of human trafficking are moved across continents, intraregional and domestic trafficking is far more common . Intrregional human trafficking is more common than international trafficking .
 Human trafficking generates between $12 and $17 billion annually, human trafficking generates $12 billion annually . Human trafficking is a lucrative criminal activity that generates millions of dollars annually .
 “More must be done to reduce the vulnerability of victims, increase the risks to traffickers,” says Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime .
 Shown on the left is a seventeen year old sex worker in Bangladesh after her service with a customer . Shown is a 17-year-old sex worker .
 She ran away from home to escape marriage at the age of 15, and sought work at a factory . She was deceived and sold to a brothel where she was sold to .
 Mira Sorvino was appointed by the United Nations as a Goodwill Ambassador to Combat Human Trafficking . She is in an effort to increase public awareness of human trafficking and generate greater commitment to combating the problem .
 They face horrific neglect and abuse, as evident in their suffering from unmitigated hunger and illness . Forced into slavery for labor or sexual exploitation, and conscription as child soldiers, they face .
 Children are tortured and mistreated by state officials in some countries . They are arbitrarily or lawfully detained, often in appalling conditions . In some countries they are subjected to the death penalty .
 Countless thousands are killed or maimed in armed conflicts, many more have fled their homes to become refugees . Countless many have fled the homes to be refugees .
 Children forced by poverty or abuse to live on the streets are sometimes detained, attacked and even killed in the name of social cleansing . Children forced to live in the street are often detained and attacked in a bid to clean the streets .
 Millions of children work at exploitative or hazardous jobs, or are the victims of child trafficking and forced prostitution . Many millions of children are victims of forced prostitution and child trafficking .
 They are often plagued by corruption, ineffectively police their territory, and are unable to provide basic services . They often lack basic services and often fail to police their territories .
 UNICEF contends that “improvements in public health services are essential, including safe water and better sanitation . To bring about a transformation in the human condition, the U.N.F. says .
 Education, especially for girls and mothers, will also save children’s lives . Education will save children's lives, especially those of mothers and children, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Child mortality has declined in every region of the world since 1960 . Almost 10 million children every year still do not live to see their fifth birthday .
 Poor human rights conditions are exacerbated in countries where there is armed conflict . Human rights conditions in countries with armed conflict are often exacerbated by conflict .
 Children are often orphaned or separated from their family and left without food or care, but many are direct participants in war . Not only are orphans or separated, they are also direct participants of war .
 In 2009, the United Nations identified fifty-six governments and armed groups from fourteen countries where children are being recruited and used as child soldiers in violation of international law . The U.N. has identified  fifty-six government and armed groups that recruited children in violation
 Because children are smaller than adults and more easily intimidated, they typically make obedient soldiers . Because of their size, children are more likely to be obedient soldiers than adults .
 Some are abducted from their homes, others fight under threat of death . Others join out of desperation or a desire to avenge the death of family members .
 In the past decade alone, an estimated 2 million children have been killed in armed conflict . In Afghanistan, more than 2 million people have died in armed conflicts .
 Three times as many people have been seriously injured or permanently disabled in the U.S. have been injured or seriously disabled .
 Countless others have been forced to witness or even to take part in horrifying acts of violence . Countless other people have been taken to the streets to witness the horrors of violence.
 Girls as young as eight in Yemen are given away in marriage by their families . The average marriage age in rural areas is twelve to thirteen years old . Girls are married at the age of 12 to 13 .
 Akhtar Mohammed traded his ten-year-old son Sher to a wealthy farmer in exchange for a monthly supply of wheat . On the right, a starving Afghan farmer in Afghanistan watches his son, Sher, whom he traded to the wealthy farmer .
 Today there are more slaves than at any time in human history’s history, but children are frequent victims . Yet, today there are . more slaves . than ever before .
 In order to confront the problem of child soldiers, “their legal protection is essential.” “Their legal protection was essential. It is essential,” says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The UN Security Council adopted a resolution that expands the Secretary-General’s annual report on grave violations of children by groups involved in armed conflict to include the names of groups that kill or maim children contrary to international law .
 The treatment of children has traditionally been seen as a ‘private’ issue of family life that is firmly rooted in cultural values and traditions . Treatment of children is traditionally seen as an issue of private family life .
 As innocents in our global society, many believe that security and sustenance are basic human rights to which children are entitled . The international community must assist in the protection of these human rights .
 The Convention on the Rights of the Child was adopted on November 20,1989 . The U.N. adopted the Convention on Child's Rights in 1989 . The Convention was embraced by the United Nations .
 The treaty is widely seen as a landmark victory for human rights . Emphasizes an entitlement to human dignity and harmonious development . ratified by all of the UN member states except United States and Somalia .
 Amnesty International says it is a violation of the right to freedom of expression in the U.S. As a result of this, it's a crime of human rights in the United States . Amnesty International has declared that it is an example of a democracy in America .
 There are at least three arguments that oppose the promotion and enforcement of human rights by the global community . There are three arguments against promoting human rights .
 Statists or legalists reject human rights promotion in target states because it represents an unwarranted intrusion into the domestic affairs of others . Human rights promotion is an infringement upon the principle of state sovereignty .
 The evolution of global values can have a powerful impact on international behavior, say constructivists . As constructivistists tell us, it can be a powerful influence on global behavior .
 The most common manifestation of this trend is the expansion in recent years of laws that regulate the practices that sovereign states may use . This includes the expansion of laws regulating the practices of sovereign states .
 International law has fundamentally revised the traditional realist protection of the state by redefining the relationship of states to humans . International law redefines the relationship between states and humans, argues the author .
 If you are neutral in a situation of injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor, says Archbishop Desmund Tutu . The global community has expanded its legal protection of human rights significantly over the past 60 years .
 Multilateral treaties have proliferated as part of a global effort to construct consensus on the rights of humanity and to put an end to human rights abuse . Multilateral agreements are part of an effort to build consensus on human rights .
 A large number of conventions have been enacted that have steadily endowed individuals with rights . They assert that people must be treated as worthy of the freedom and dignity traditionally granted by international law to states and rulers .
 A state is obligated to respect the human rights of its own citizens as well as those of another country, according to international law . The international community has the prerogative to challenge any state that does not do so, writes CNN.com .
 There are hundreds of legal instruments and political declarations across a wide array of human rights issues, many of which have been accepted by most states .
 Human Rights Act provides specific standards for human rights protection for vulnerable groups such as women, children, migrant workers, and disabled persons . It also provides protection for minorities and indigenous groups .
 The United Nations and its members have been a driving force behind the development of a global human rights legal system . The U.N. has been a leading force in developing a global legal system for human rights .
 The International Labor Organization and regional organizations such as the African Union, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and the European Court of Human Rights have established human rights protections .
 The content of human rights obligations was enumerated in multilateral treaties . International attention shifted to monitoring their implementation and addressing violations .
 There are some countries that endorse human rights treaties as merely a superficial symbolic commitment and continue to repress human rights . Some countries still refuse to comply with the human rights treaty, say Amnesty International .
 Full agreement has yet to be reached on the extent to . which the international community has a responsibility to intervene in order to enforce human rights . Moreover, full agreement has not yet been reached on . the extent of the international . community's responsibility to . intervene in enforcing human rights has yet
 International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty noted in its report . State sovereignty is a key part of the country's sovereignty .
 Global norms that elevate human security do much to advance the cause of human rights . But critical policy questions remain about what steps can and should be taken to safeguard these rights, experts say .
 The issue is not whether there exists a compelling need and moral obligation to express concerns about populations at risk of slaughter, starvation, or persecution, writes Peter Bergen . It's about humanitarian intervention the use of peacekeeping troops by foreign states or international organizations to protect endangered people from gross violations
 You find yourself unjustly imprisoned on accusations that you were transporting illegal drugs, spying for your government, trafficking in the practice and sale of children tor prostitution, you name it . You were accused of smuggling illegal drugs and spying for the government . You are accused of trafficking illegal drugs .
 Thousands of political prisoners held, and abused, by their guards, are held by the military dictatorship . Prisoners are held and abused by guards employed by a military dictatorship that claims the sovereign right to treat them .
 Never in the authorities’ explanation is mention made of human rights, such as trial by a jury of peers and prohibition against the cruel punishment of prisoners . Never mentions mention of the human rights such as the prohibition against cruel punishment .
 Power was monopolized by state governments, which could do anything and everything to protect and promote their self-interests . State governments preempted potential threats to their own self-preservation by preempting potential threats .
 The code of conduct was enshrined in the 1648 Westphalian treaties drafted by realists . The treaties proclaimed that state authority was sacrosanct and that people and their human rights were subservient .
 Anything goes toward subjects within a sovereign country’s territory . For the state and its rulers, anything goes . Anything goes with subjects within the sovereign country's territory .
 Protecting human rights in foreign states has become legal for the first time under international law . Now protecting human rights is legal for first time in international law, says Amnesty International .
 An ideology that helps to protect your human rights also undermines the national interests of sovereign states . An ideology helping to protect human rights undermines national interests, he says . The U.S. should not protect your rights, he adds .
 The United States initially claimed a right to indefinitely detain “enemy combatants" on the grounds of “necessity” in times of warfare . The U.S. Supreme Court later ruled in 2008 that detainees had a constitutional right to challenge their detention in federal court .
 As you contemplate this hypothetical controversy, keep in mind many countries’ entrenched defense of the traditional right of their state to be protected against foreign intervention . Even for humanitarian purposes, many countries have a strong right to protect themselves from foreign intervention, even for humanitarian reasons .
 Many states, especially the weak and relatively defenseless governments in the Global South, vigorously resist humanitarian interference within their borders . They maintain that their resistance to a norm of humanitarian intervention is legal . Many states in the global south say their resistance is legal and that it is a violation of
 Even China and the United States oppose the idea that other actors in the global community might claim the right to intervene to protect human rights within their sovereign territory . China and U.S. oppose the notion that others might claim to intervene .
 Humanitarian intervention is controversial because it pits the legal principle of territorial sovereignty against what some see as a moral duty to protect vulnerable populations from egregious violations of human rights . Some see the moral duty of protecting vulnerable populations as a duty .
 The construction of global human rights norms has made great strides over the past sixty years . However, enforcement of human rights laws has lagged. Human rights laws have lagged in recent years .
 The HRC is a relatively new intergovernmental organization, having been created by the UN General Assembly on March 15,2006 . The HRC was created for evaluating situations of human rights abuse .
 At that time, the United States, the Marshall Islands, and Palau voted against the resolution . Iran, Venezuela, and Belarus did not vote .
 There were concerns that the UNHCR did not have the ability to prevent states with poor human rights records from membership on the Council . Concerns that the agency's mission undermined the principle of nonintervention .
 In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the disappointment and concern of human rights advocates . Human rights advocates felt that this greatly diminished the role of the IGO .
 Despite significant efforts to monitor human rights and enforce norms and agreements, the effectiveness of the U.N. is constrained . The effectiveness of intergovernmental organizations is constrained, as they can exercise only the authority that member states delegate to them .
 In response to these limitations, nongovernmental organizations have assumed an important role in promoting human rights . Nongovernment organizations have taken on the challenge of human rights in the United States .
 These organizations investigate human rights abuses wherever they occur, including places enduring armed conflict . These organizations are often involved in human rights violations .
 Because of their reputation for accuracy, their findings are relied on by the news media, many governments . The findings are based on their accuracy, according to their reputation .
 NGOs hope their reports will bring about a change in the behavior of the government or other entity whose abuses are being spotlighted . Their main targets are the policymakers who are in a more powerful position to pressure human rights violators .
 With greater openness to institutional activism in the post-Cold War era, human rights activists have pressed to strengthen enforcement mechanisms . Human rights activists are pressing for stronger enforcement of the law .
 Their efforts account in part for the establishment of UN tribunals to review gross human rights abuse, as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda . The International Criminal Court was established in 2007 .
 Some individuals remain skeptical of claims that we all have transcendent moral obligations to humanity as a whole . Others believe that everyone, by virtue of being human, has certain inherent and inalienable rights .
 Human rights buttress political and economic freedom, “which in turn tends to bring international trade and prosperity.” The United States says it is committed to human rights in the United States .
 Promoting the rights of ordinary people around the world is a formidable challenge . Promoting rights and dignity of people is a challenge for the world's leaders .
 Shown here are inmates in Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison crying for freedom when dictator Saddam Hussein still ruled . Yet, as global PRINCIPLED SECURITY, they are still considered a security threat .
 Human rights have gained stature under international law and are being monitored more closely by IGOs and NGOs than ever before . We can expect human rights to receive continuing attention, as long as people are caught in emergency situations such as genocide or the threat of famine . Human rights will continue to
 Eleanor Roosevelt championed the cosmopolitan ideal, and her energetic leadership was largely responsible for global acceptance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
 In the next chapter of World Politics, you will have an opportunity to look at another major issue that entails rights and responsibility to humanity . The next chapter will be a chance to examine the role of humanity .
 As the cascading globalization of our world accelerates, human choices about our natural environment have consequences for the entire planet and affect the Earth’s capability to sustain human life and security . Human choices about the environment are responsible for the health and security of the planet .
 The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded that global warming was more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity . The Ecopolitics of the Atmosphere, Deforestation and Biodiversity, and Water Shortages are presented .
 As demographic environmentalist Bill McKibbin warns, “We are heating up the planet, substantially.” As a result, the planet is heating up, he says .
 On either side of the environmental debate you fall, there is at least one scholar and several politicians who share your opinion .
 These people claim that environmental deterioration and resource depletion have many people needlessly alarmed . They claim that many people are needlessly concerned about the environment .
 Other scientists are pessimistic and are now certain that the threats are real . Other scientists say they are pessimistic about the threats .
 They are themselves alarmed by optimists who fail to face the ‘clear and present danger’ of environmental threats and undertake reforms .
 A1 Gore’s famous movie and book on global warming, An Inconvenient Truth, won a 2007 Nobel Peace Prize . Gore won the award for his film and book about global warming in 2007 .
 Climate experts are advocating big changes by governments, and now —before it becomes too late to save the human race from certain doom . Those frightened climate experts are calling for big changes .
 In this chapter, you have the opportunity to sharpen your own thinking by weighing the available evidence about prevailing global trends . This chapter explores the social implications of the environment shared by all on Earth .
 Take a look at various dimensions of the planet’s ecology now in transformation . So take a look to various dimensions .
 Consider what responsibility humanity has to preserve our global environment . Then base your stand on this global issue on information that can better ground your existing opinions, and consider your stand .
 Prices are the key adjustment mechanism that in time produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people . For them, prices are the main adjustment mechanism for the best good for most people .
 Neo-Malthusians, on the other hand, share more common with economic mercantilism, which argues that free markets fail to prevent excessive exploitation of both renewable and nonrenewable resources . Neo Malthusianism argues that, accordingly, intervention by governing institutions
 This is the belief that the free market will always maximize social welfare . The free market is a balance between population, resources, and the environment . This is not the case of limits-to-growth .
 Cornucopians and neo-Malthusians paint very different pictures of our future, and how we frame our understanding of environmental challenges will affect our policy prescriptions .
 Whether the world community has the political will and capacity to cope with ecological problems and expand the possibilities for humanity will be critical for human security . The world community needs to be able to adapt to ecological problems .
 Neo-Malthusians are pessimists who warn of the global ecopolltical dangers of uncontrolled population growth . A paradigm, or popular way of organizing thought, is rising among scholars and policy makers .
 Environmental concerns are linked to other values that states prize, notably, security, economic prosperity, and social well-being . Environmental concerns can be linked to security, prosperity and social security .
 Security has been conventionally equated with national security . The struggle for state power is central to realist theory and its emphasis on armed aggression .
 Environmental security broadens the definition of national security by pushing visions beyond borders and their protection . Environmental security is broadened to include environmental protection and national security .
 It focuses on the transborder character of challenges to preserving the global environment . Global warming, ozone depletion, and loss of tropical forests and marine habitats can threaten the future of humanity as much as the threat of warfare using weapons of mass destruction .
 Environmental degradation undercuts states’ economic well-being and the quality of life of their citizens . liberalism informs current thinking about how states can cooperate with international organizations and nongovernmental organizations .
 The liberal epistemic community has redefined ‘security’ in order to move beyond realism’s conventional state-centric and militaristic portrayal of international politics . environmental security is a concept recognizing that environmental threats to global life systems are as dangerous as the threat of armed conflicts .
 This reconstruction is compatible with liberal theory, which emphasizes that security should be defined as the capacity to protect quality of life . The reconstruction of security in the U.S. will be compatible with the liberal theory of security .
 Out of conditions of global poverty and want emerge emerge the so-called politics of scarcity . Future conflict will likely be caused by resource scarcities, rather than by overt military challenges, the authors say .
 Ecologists use the term the global commons to highlight our growing interdependence . They see the Earth as a common environment made up of the totality of organisms . Ecologists study the interrelationships of living organisms and the Earth's physical environment .
 The fate of the global commons is the fate of humanity . In a world where everything affects everything else, it is crucial for humanity to have a global commons .
 The planet's carrying capacity — the Earth’s ability to support and sustain life — is at the center of discussion about the future of the global commons . The planet’S carrying capacity – the Earth's ability to sustain life – is the subject of discussion .
 Humans have lived on the Earth’s sustainable yield— the interest from its natural endowment . Throughout history, humans have lived in the interest of the Earth's sustainable yield . The interest from the endowment from the Earth continues to grow .
 In ecology, as in economics, we can consume principal along with interest in the short run, but, for the long term, that practice leads to bankruptcy . In the long run, the practice will lead to bankruptcy, says John Defterios .
 The pessimists sounding the alarm about the signs of ecological deterioration, and the optimists extolling the virtues of free markets and technological innovation in saving the planet, portray very different visions .
 Sustainable development is now popularly perceived as an alternative to the quest for unrestrained growth . Sustainable growth is now perceived as a alternative to unrestrained development . Sustainable development can be seen as a model for sustainable development .
 The movement began in earnest in 1972, when the UN General Assembly convened the first UN Conference of the Human Environment in Stockholm in Stockholm .
 Since then, conferences on a wide range of environmental topics have produced scores of treaties and new international agencies to promote cooperation and monitor environmental developments .
 You do not have to go to tar to learn about the impact of the global food crisis . You can learn more from tar tar to help you understand the impact .
 Increased food prices have created a wave of humanitarian crises in the developing world . Food prices have led to civil unrest and humanitarian crises across the world .
 Between 2007 and 2009, at least thirty countries had food riots . The “tortilla riots” in Mexico and the “pasta riots’ in Italy were among them .
 Examining some of the major factors that are pushing us into this “danger zone” provides insight into the interconnected nature of global threats, the trade-offs inherent in trying to provide for human needs, as well as the ways in which the policies of individual governments and international organizations
 One of the primary effects of climate change is an increase in ‘extreme weather’ events . Such events have had a key role in damaging agricultural production . Climate change has led to a rise in extreme weather events .
 Droughts in Australia cut its wheat production in half, while flooding in Ecuador played a key role in the recent rise of banana prices . Flooding in Ecuador also played a major role in recent banana prices rise .
 As noted in Chapter 13, governments have traditionally protected their agricultural markets through subsidies and tariffs . Subsidies and tariffs have served to increase the price of many agricultural goods .
 Recent food shortages have resulted in a proliferation of government intervention . Restrictions on the export of agricultural products such as wheat and rice are being imposed .
 These bans serve to decrease the world supply of these goods, which thus increases prices . These bans also increase the price of food and energy products .
 Government encouragement of biofuel production has had an impact upon food prices . Government encouragement has had a negative impact on food prices, according to experts .
 In emerging markets, people have changed their eating habits as their countries have developed . People in China, India, Russia, and Brazil have changed eating habits in recent years .
 In particular, these countries have greatly increased their consumption ot meat and dairy products . The countries have also greatly increased consumption of meat and milk .
 The food crisis is at the “crossroads"" of many international phenomena . Food crisis raises many fundamental issues about the international system, says David Frum .
 An immediate issue ot concern is whether the food crisis will continue into the future . Food crisis is an immediate concern for the country's future .
 Many of the causes of the food crisis are the result of structural changes that are quite averse to change in the short term . Unfortunately, many of these structural changes are not short-term solutions .
 Most every international organization has begun to articulate some type of response . But maintaining the political will to enact fundamental changes is always difficult .
 Developed countries, for example, are very resistant to reducing agricultural subsidies . Developed nations are resistant to cutting agricultural subsidies, experts say . The world's biggest agricultural subsidies are in the form of subsidies .
 Some of the suggested solutions, such as the increased use of genetic engineering and transgenetic crops and livestock, are quite controversial and not supported by a variety of countries and NGOs .
 The dominant cornucopian social paradigm stressing the right to conspicuous consumption is under global attack . But many challenges remain to achieving sustainable development worldwide, says author .
 The commission concluded that the world cannot sustain the growth required to meet the needs and aspirations of the world’s growing population unless it adopts radically different approaches to basic issues of economic expansion, equity, resource management, and the like .
 Another milestone in the challenge to the then-dominant cornucopian social paradigm occurred at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on the twentieth anniversary of the Stockholm conference .
 Genetic engineering research to discover seeds for new types of plant and human life for sale and use as substitutes for those produced naturally . transgenetic crops new crops with improved characteristics created artificially through genetic engineering that combine genes from species that would not naturally interbreed .
 When astronauts first viewed Earth from the Apollo spacecraft, they told millions of listeners about the “hig blue marble” planet they saw . The clouds and continents flowed into one another without regard to political boundaries humans had imposed on a pristine planet .
 The improvement in space technology since the 1990s also allows the world to see uncomfortable images . However, the world also allows to see images of atmospheric poisons that encircle the globe, storms pounding islands and continents .
 Taken from a NASA global satellite surveillance system, this photo shows how the integrated and globalized borderless planet shares a single interconnected ecology .
 In Rio, the concept of sustainability galvanized a simultaneous treatment of environmental and development issues . Sustainability galvanized the idea of sustainability in Rio, Brazil .
 International conferences have since punctuated the strong consensus behind the proposition that all politics—even global politics—are local, that what happens any place ultimately affects conditions every place . The protection of Earth’s environment is a primary international security issue .
 "To make a prediction, the next step is to characterize and estimate the nature and magnitude of environmental threats and challenges," the author says . The prediction is a prediction of the future of the planet .
 The clusters illustrate some of the obstacles to the sustainable development of common properties and renewable resources . The clusters were created to highlight the challenges to sustainable development .
 Scores of government negotiators and nongovernmental representatives converged on Rio de Janeiro in 1992 . They came in the wake of the hottest decade on record .
 Scientists have warned for years that global warming would cause destructive changes in world climatological patterns . Rising sea levels, melting glaciers, and freak storms would provoke widespread changes in the globe’s political and economic systems and relationships .
 negotiators agreed at Rio to a Framework Convention on Climate Change . Negotiators had been burned by the chronic heat wave throughout the 1980s . negotiators agreed to the convention at Rio .
 Since then, fears have increased in conjunction with the continuing rise of planetary temperatures .
 In response to the series of record-setting global temperatures in the twenty-first century, attention to the pollutants blamed for global warming has risen .
 The molecules form the equivalent of a greenhouse roof by trapping heat remitted from Earth that would otherwise escape into outer space . The molecules, primarily carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons, form the same kind of greenhouse roof .
 Since 1950, emissions of carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels have climbed steadily and risen fourfold . Carbon dioxide emissions have risen steadily since 1950, according to the EPA .
 As these gases are released into the atmosphere, they have created a greenhouse effect, which has caused global temperatures to rise . The greenhouse effect is caused by the release of these gases into the air .
 The greenhouse effect is producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a blanket in the atmosphere . That rate of increase would be much larger than most past rates of increase, meaning that the warming trend is accelerating .
 The World Meteorological Organization monitors average global surface temperatures at thousands of sites around the world . Average global surface temperature has been monitored since 1867 .
 The 1996-2009 period has been the warmest since reliable measurements began . However, since the mid-1970s the mercury has been rising . The mid-90s period was warmest period since reliable measurement began .
 The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that global temperature will probably rise about 2 to 12 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100 . The panel predicts that, depending on greenhouse-gas emissions, global temperature .
 NASA makes a similar forecast, anticipating that temperature may increase by 2 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit within that time span . NASA predicts that temperature will rise by 2-10 degrees Fahrenheit in 10 days .
 Although CO^ is the principal greenhouse gas, concentrations of methane in the atmosphere are growing more rapidly . Methane is the main greenhouse gas in the world .
 Methane gas emissions arise from livestock populations, rice cultivation, and the production and transportation of natural gas . Methane gases are caused by livestock populations and rice cultivation .
 The largest concentrations of methane are not in the atmosphere but locked in ice, permafrost, and coastal marine sediments . To the alarm of many scientists, many scientists say methane is not in Earth's atmosphere .
 This raises the probability that warming will cause more methane to be released into the atmosphere . This would then increase global temperatures because of methane’s strong warming potential .
 Some scientists insist that the rise in global temperature is only part of a cyclical change the world has experienced for thousands of years . Some scientists say that the world is experiencing cyclical changes in temperature .
 Global warming skeptics say the climate changes we’re seeing today reflect these natural variations . They cite evidence of “sudden and dramatic temperature swings over the past 400,000 years,” from warm climates to ice ages .
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change first conclusively stated in 1995 its belief that global climate trends are “unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes” that humans are to blame for at least part of the problem, and that the consequences are likely to be very harmful and costly
 Even at the lower end of the panel’s estimates, the rise would be faster than any experienced in recorded human history . The rise is expected to be the fastest in recorded history .
 According to the IPCC, global warming is not coming, it’s here, and it has led to a rising number of natural disasters . The IPCC says global warming has caused a rise in natural disasters in recent years .
 The IPCC warns that the effects of continued rising temperatures will be both dramatic and devastating . Sea levels will rise, mostly because of melting glaciers and the expansion of water as it warms up .
 This will produce massive floods of vast areas of low-lying coastal lands, especially in Asia and the U.S. Atlantic coast . Floods will be produced in Asia, the United States .
 Millions of people are likely to be displaced by major floods each year . Millions are displaced each year by major flooding .
 The Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters predicts that approximately 5,150 natural disasters will occur in the period between 2000 and 2010 .
 In 2008 alone more than 240,000 people lost their lives due to natural and man-made catastrophes . A total cost of damages at $269 billion was caused by natural disasters .
 Flooding in the Philippines followed a deadly tropical storm in September 2009 . The Philippines was hit by a tropical storm that followed the deadly storm .
 Also shown is the damage caused in April 2009 by a massive earthquake in L’Aquila, Italy .
 As ocean temperatures continue to rise, hurricanes will become increasingly stronger and more frequent . As the oceans' energy from warm oceans, they will become more powerful and frequent .
 A hotter Earth will drive some plant life to higher latitudes and altitudes, requiring farmers to change their crops and agricultural practices . The Earth is expected to be hotter than any other planet .
 The high-income Global North states contribute more than half of global carbon emissions . Their big buildings, millions of cars, and relatively inefficient industries are to blame for their emissions .
 Global East dynamos China and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil fuel energy . However, the Global East has rapidly increased its emissions .
 Some scientists believe that China has already surpassed the United States as the world’s top emitter of greenhouse gases . The U.S. is the world's top greenhouse gas emitter .
 The International Energy Agency forecasts that the increase of greenhousegas emissions from 2000 to 2030 from China alone will nearly equal the increase from the entire industrialized world . The rise in emissions from the world's industrialized nations is expected to nearly equal that of the entire industrial world .
 Compare existing and new industrial giants’ consumption of energy and production of greenhouse gases with the low-income Global South countries . Low-income global South countries are among the worst polluters in the world .
 China's appetite for fossil fuel energy sources is growing along with their economic development . They, too, are growing rapidly . They are also looking at fossil fuel sources .
 Countries in all regions are contributing, at different rates, to the global trend in the growing level of carbon added to the atmosphere . Thus, countries in . all regions contribute, at . different rates of . adding carbon to the environment .
 An article published in July 2009 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences suggests that “it is rich people, rather than rich countries, who need to change the most”
 The proposal highlights how the lower level of carbon emissions in the Global South masks the variation within states where the wealthy contribute at a far higher rate to environmental degradation than the poor . The proposal is far too difficult to implement, the proposal highlights .
 The figure on the left charts the sources of greenhouse-gas emissions by each major sector . The figure is based on the emissions of each major industry .
 The figure on the right identifies the distribution of carbon-equivalent greenhouse-gas emissions by region from 2001 and projected through the year 2025 .
 The politics of global warming is dramatically illustrated by the tensions between countries over carving up the Arctic in order to reap economic payoffs from exploitation of the resources .
 The disappearing ice also offers the possibility of new sea routes, at least for part of the year, which would significantly reduce the time it takes for ships to travel from Europe to Asia .
 As you see, the Arctic icecap is melting fast and it is “only half the size that it was 50 years ago’s size . The Arctic icecaps are melting fast .
 All five countries agreed to allow the United Nations to rule on competing claims for resources in 2008 . In an effort to prevent global conflict, in 2008 all five agreed to let the U.N. to rule .
 The ozone layer is the protective layer of the upper atmosphere over the Earth’s surface . It is the layer that shields the planet from the sun's harmful impact on living organisms . None of this friction would have materialized had global warming not made competition for control of this geost
 The story of climate change is similar to states’ efforts to cope with the depletion of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer . An international regime has emerged, progressively strengthened by mounting scientific evidence that environmental damage is directly caused by human activity .
 Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth with a critical layer of protection against the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation . Ozone protects the Earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays .
 Scientists have discovered a marked depletion of the ozone layer . An “ozone hole” over Antarctica has grown larger than the continental United States . The hole is larger than Antarctica .
 CFCs are a related family of compounds known as halons, hydrochlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals . They have conclusively linked the thinning of the layer to the family compounds . The thinning layer of layer has been linked to a family of CFC
 Depletion of the ozone layer exposes humans to health hazards, particularly skin cancer, and threatens other forms of marine and terrestrial life . Depletions of ozone layer expose humans to skin cancer .
 The expansion of the ozone regime was made possible by growing scientific evidence and by having an active NGO epistemic community to actively promote the treaty . The expansion is made possible because of the growing evidence of the treaty's expansion .
 In spite of reductions in CFCs over the past twenty years, the ozone hole over Antarctica continues to expand . depletion of the protective ozone shield is expected to continue before it begins to regenerate itself .
 Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products prepared for their complete phase-out . Production declined sharply as the biggest producers prepared for the phase out .
 Production in the Global South surged, and increased demand for refrigerators, air conditioners, and other products using CFCs offset the gains realized by stopping production in the global North .
 Developed countries agreed to provide aid to help developing countries adopt CFC alternatives . But they have failed to provide all of the resources promised by the developed countries .
 Many in the Global South may not be able to keep their end of the global bargain . Without this support, many in the global south may not keep their own end of global bargain.
 A significant illegal trade in virgin and recycled CFCs has emerged, threatening to further undermine the positive effects of the ozone regime .
 The Ecopolitics of Biodiversity, Deforestation, and Water Shortages . Success at containing ozone depletion has raised hopes that other environmental threats also can be given higher priority .
 Forests are critical in preserving the Earth’s biodiversity and protecting the atmosphere and land resources . Forests also protect the atmosphere, land resources and the environment from pollution .
 For these reasons, they have been a rising ecological issue on the global agenda . They have been rising ecological issues on the planet's agenda .
 Some rules have emerged to guide international behavior in the preservation of biodiversity, but issues concerning forests have proven much more difficult to address . biodiversity is the variety of plant and animal species living in the Earth’s diverse ecosystems .
 Biodiversity, or biological diversity, is an umbrella term that refers to the Earth’s variety of life . It is a term that means diversity of life in the world .
 Until recently, public attention has been focused almost exclusively on preserving species diversity, including old forests, tall grass prairies, wetlands, coastal habitats .
 Forests, especially tropical forests, are important to preserving biodiversity . Forests are home to countless species of animals and plants, many of them still unknown . Many species of plants and animals are still unknown in tropical forests .
 Scientists believe that the global habitat contains between eight and ten million species . Scientists believe there are between 8 and 10 million species species in the world .
 Only about 1. million have been named and most of them are in temperate regions of North America, Europe, Russia, and Australia .
 Destruction of tropical forests threatens the destruction of much of the world’s undiscovered biological diversity and genetic heritage . Two-thirds to three-fourths of all species are believed to live in tropical forests, where two-thirds of the species are thought to live .
 Many experts worry that the globe is relentlessly heading toward major species extinction . Many experts say that the world is on the verge of major extinction .
 Of the 242,000 plant species surveyed by the World Conservation Union, some 33,000, or 14 percent, are threatened with extinction . 14 percent of plant species are threatened as a result of clearing land for housing, roads and industries .
 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that global warming increases the risk of extinction for almost 70 percent of species . Arctic animals such as the polar bear most likely to die out first .
 Others doubt the imminence of a massive die-out, estimating that only a small fraction of the Earth’s species have actually disappeared over the past several centuries . Others say only a fraction of species have disappeared over several centuries.
 The Global South has a growing concern about protecting its interests in the face of MNCs’ efforts to reap profits from the sale of biologically based products . Because so much of the Earth’s biological heritage is concentrated in the tropics, the Global South also has concerns about
 MNCs in the Global North are major players in the socalled enclosure movement . The enclosure movement is geared to privatize and merchandize the products derived from plant and animal genes .
 Pharmaceutical companies have laid claim to Global South resources . Pharmaceutical companies in particular have claimed to have resources in the region .
 Scientists are exploring plants, microbes, and other living organisms in tropical forests for possible use in prescription drugs . They actively explore plants and microbes, including microbes, to try and develop new drugs .
 Concern in the Global South is centered on the claim that the genetic character of the many species of plants and animals should be considered a part of the global commons and therefore available for commercial use by all .
 Biogenetic engineering threatens to escalate the loss of global diversity . Biogenetics engineering could be a step further in the future of diversity .
 Biological resources—animal and plant species -- are distributed unevenly in the world . Biological resources are distributed in unevenly distributed across the globe .
 Map 16. shows the major “biodiversity bastions” where more than half the Earth’s species are found in tropical wilderness territories . More than half of the Earth's species are located in primarily tropical wilderness areas .
 UN: About fifty thousand plant and animal species become extinct each year . UN: Biodiversity preservation and management policies need to be changed .
 Trends since the 1980s point toward considerable deforestation throughout much of the world . Shrinking Forests, Dust Bowls, and Water Shortages are among reasons for deforestation .
 Destruction of tropical rain forests in such places as Brazil, Indonesia, and Malaysia is a matter of special concern because much of the world’s genetic heritage is found there . The destruction of rain forests is a major concern because of its genetic heritage .
 The developing countries feared that legally accepting this view would enable the Global North to interfere with the local management of their tropical forest resources . Developed nations feared that this would enable them to . The Global North would interfere with their .
 As Ogar Assam Effa, a tree plantation director in Nigeria, observes, “The developed countries want us to keep the forests, since the air we breathe is for all of us, rich countries and poor countries.”
 Desertification is the creation of deserts due to soil erosion, overfarming, and deforestation, which converts cropland to nonproductive, arid sand . It would be easy to convince people to stop clearing the forest if there was an alternative .
 High population growth rates, industrialization, and urbanization increase pressure to farm forests and marginal land poorly suited to cultivation . Meanwhile, high population .
 This has led to deforestation and desertification, which turns an increasing portion of the Earth’s landmass into deserts useless for agricultural productivity or wildlife habitats . Desertification is leading to deforestation, desertification and desertization .
 There’s water everywhere, but less than three percent of it is fresh . Most of that is locked up in polar ice caps and glaciers, unrecoverable for practical purposes . Less than 3 percent of the water is fresh, but most of it has been frozen .
 Takes, rivers, marshes, aquifers, and atmospheric vapor make up less than one percent of the Earth’s total water . People are already using more than half of the accessible runoff .
 Eurthermore, as countries across the world become more prosperous, their populations tend to shift from vegetarian diets to meaty ones that require more water to produce .
 With rising population and consumption, water availability will become an ever-growing resource issue . In the absence of serious water-conservation measures, cooperation among water users for watershed preservation will be needed .
 Soil erosion and pollution are problems both in densely populated developing countries and in the more developed regions of mechanized industrial agriculture .
 Map 16. shows the trends across regions where desertification is occurring most rapidly . Map 16 shows trends across the regions where deserts are most likely to be occurring rapidly .
 Many cash-starved Global South countries are suffering rapid destruction . This is not the case in many countries, however, where the reasons for rapid destruction vary . The situation is different in the Global South .
 South American forests, most notably the Amazon, are generally burned for industrial-scale soybean farming or cattle grazing . The Amazon is considered a natural resource in South America .
 In Southeast Asia, forests are burned or cut for large-scale planting of palm to obtain oil . The oil is used in a wide array of products, including cosmetics and food processing .
 Deforestation is being spurred by the global demand for biofuels . And most recently, deforestation has been spurred by global biofuel demand .
 In Brazil, deforestation roughly doubled in 2008 alone . In part to the dramatic expansion in agriculture aimed at producing farm-grown fuels, deforestation doubled .
 As John Carter, founder of a nonprofit that promotes sustainable ranching in the Amazonian region, lamented “You can’t protect it.” ‘You can't protect it,’ he said .
 Critics point out that ethanol destroys forests, contributes to global warming, inflates food prices . Biofuels such as ethanol are often touted as being eco-friendly, but critics point out they destroy forests and contribute to climate change .
 The natural processes that remove greenhouse gases are destroyed when forests are cut down . The amount of CO 2 released into the atmosphere increases as forests decay or burn .
 The Amazon rain forest is “an incomparable storehouse of carbon’s carbon, the very carbon that heats up the planet when it is released into the atmosphere.’ It is ‘a storehouse’ of carbon, ‘the very carbon . that heats
 Map displays extent to which certain regions are experiencing desertification or lost, degraded, dry lands . Climate change, exploitative agricultural overgrazing, and the lack of conservation efforts are contributing to desertification .
 An abundant supply of oil at low prices facilitated the recovery of Western Europe and Japan from World War II . It encouraged consumers to use energy-intensive technologies, such as the private automobile .
 An enormous growth in the worldwide demand for and consumption of energy followed . The world's energy consumption has increased in recent years .
 The International Energy Agency predicts that the world will be using 50 percent more oil by 2030 . The U.S. has doubled its energy efficiency since the 1970s, the agency says .
 Oil companies such as Chevron and ExxonMobil continue to be “supermajors” within the oil industry . Others such as Amoco have disappeared .
 Traditional MNCs no longer maintain overriding control of the oil industry . But traditional oil companies are no longer dominant in the world's largest oil companies .
 State-owned companies control more than 80 percent of the world’s oil reserves, the author says . The author says governments, along with governments, now control 80 percent .
 Oil has moved from being just a physical commodity to now also being a financial asset . There has been a massive growth in the number of oil investors and traders, according to analysts . Oil has also moved from just being a physical commodities to now being an asset, they say .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries remain key players in the world's oil markets . Saudi Arabia is the only major oil producer in the Middle East .
 OPEC emerged as an important intergovernmental organization to maximize profits . To maximize profits, OPEC emerged in order to make sure profits were maximally profitable .
 OPEC controls the resources it controls cannot be easily replaced . It has monopoly power because it controls resources that cannot be replaced . The resources OPEC controls are not easily replaced by other nations .
 OPEC began to flex its economic muscles by cutting production to limit supplies in March 1999 . In March 1999, OPEC began cutting production in response to a demand for oil from Russia .
 Oil prices tripled within a year, showing that OPEC could still make oil a critical global political issue . OPEC could use oil prices as an instrument of coercive diplomacy to influence, by the use of threats, the course of the unfolding war on terrorism .
 Oil supplies assume great importance in world politics because oil supplies are not being discovered at the same rate it is being used . Oil supplies are important for world politics, especially in the Middle East .
 Eor every two barrels pumped out of the ground, the giant oil companies discover only one new barrel . The oil companies discovered only one barrel per barrel of oil pumped into the ground .
 Production in the U.S. peaked thirty years ago, and that Russia peaked in 1987 . Production in Russia peaked 30 years ago .
 About 70 percent of the oil consumed today was found twenty-five years ago or longer . About 70 per cent of oil consumption today is found to be found in the form of 25 years ago .
 The price of oil as a commodity is extremely volatile, experts say . This may still be the case, but what we have now witnessed is that the price of crude oil as an oil commodity is very volatile, they say .
 In December 2008, the price of oil had fallen to $32.40 per barrel; on July 11,2009, exactly a year after the peak oil price, the oil price was as low as $59.87 per barrel . In July 2009, oil prices dropped to $59
 In October 2009, OPEC announced projections that global demand for oil would increase by almost 1 percent in 2010 due to anticipated improvements in the global economy . OPEC said in October 2009 that global oil demand would increase 1 percent .
 What strikes fear in the minds of those who study oil supplies against rising demand is the widespread “illusion” of petroleum plenty . The fear of the ‘illusion’ is that oil supplies are not enough, experts say .
 This alarming predicament suggests that a ‘new geopolitics of oil’ has arisen over how oil producers will use their supplies in international bargaining with those oil-importing countries that are dependent and vulnerable to supply disruptions .
 The world does not face the immediate threat of running out of oil, it faces instead the problem that over half of the proven oil reserves are now concentrated in a small number of OPEC countries . OPEC countries that are drawing down their reserves at half the average global rate .
 OPEC’s share of the world oil market will grow . OPEC's share of global oil market is expected to grow . It seems almost inevitable that OPEC's oil market share will grow.
 OPEC is critical to global oil supply, and countries that depend on oil imports from this volatile, unstable source are highly vulnerable to disruptions . This means that OPEC is key to global supply, the Middle East is also critical to OPEC .
 There are three very different projections regarding world oil prices between now and 2030 . Three very different scenarios are projected for the future of oil prices .
 Most analysts expect that oil demand will grow quickly as the world economy recovers . Most analysts say we will see another oil spike, perhaps as soon as 2012 .
 The Global North may be on the verge of a potentially historic juncture that would overturn the pivotal place of oil in the global political economy . In response to the threat of future shortages, the Global North will respond to future shortages .
 In 2008, China and Japan ended a long-time dispute by agreeing to jointly develop two natural gas fields in the East China Sea . In August 2009, Russia reached an agreement with Turkey to build a gas pipeline from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean via the Anatolian Peninsula .
 There is also an array of efforts under way to develop alternative clean-energy fuel sources, such as wind and solar power, to break our dependence on fossil fuels .
 Across the globe, people desire to live in a clean and green environment . People want to avoid ones that are polluted, dangerous to health, and prone to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and typhoons . People also want a clean environment that is not polluted and dangerous .
 Humanity faces enormous challenges of unprecedented scope and danger . Arrest global climate change, preserving biodiversity, providing clean water, and restoring forests, fisheries, and other overly exploited renewable resources . —Mohandas Gandhi, Indian peace activist .
 No single cause is responsible for the trends in the global environment, experts say . "No single cause" responsible for global climate change, they say . Climate change is not a single cause, scientists say .
 Many causes interact with each other to produce the dreaded dangers undermining the preservation of the world’s life systems on which human existence depends . Rather, many causes interact .
 Environmentalists are often seen as a product of the individual pursuit of private gain . But one explanation has become very popular among them: the pursuit of personal gain .
 The tragedy of the commons is a popular term constructed to capture the human roots of the growing threats to the planet’s resources and its delicately balanced ecological system . It is a term that captures the human root of the problem .
 Lloyd, and later Hardin, asked observers to consider what happened in medieval English villages . The village green was typically common property on which all villagers could graze their cattle . Lloyd: "Villagers in medieval villages graze cattle"
 Sharing the common grazing area worked well as long as usage by individuals didn’t reduce the land’s usefulness to everyone else . Sharing shared grazing areas worked well in the past .
 The villagers were driven by the profit motive and that no laws existed to restrain their greed, herders had maximum incentive .
 If pushed, herders might concede that the collective interest of all would be served if each contained the size of their herd rather than increasing it, so that the commons could be preserved .
 Self-restraint, voluntary reduction of the number of one’s own cattle to relieve the pressure on the common village green, was not popular in the 1930s . Self restraint was voluntary, but not popular among villagers .
 The addition of one more animal to the village green would produce a personal gain whose costs would be borne by everyone . By contrast, the addition of an animal would produce personal gain, not a profit .
 The economic rational choice to pursue wealth encouraged all to increase indiscriminately the size of the herds, and it discouraged self-sacrifice for the common welfare . Therefore, economic rational . choice to . pursue wealth discouraged self sacrifice for the . common welfare, he said .
 Ultimately, the collective impact of each effort to maximize individual gain was to place more cattle on the village green than it could sustain . The village green was filled with cattle in the 1970s .
 The tragedy of the commons has become a standard concept in ecological analysis . It illuminates so well the sources of environmental degradation and many other global problems and predicaments . It has been used as a model for ecological analysis in the past .
 English common green is comparable to planetary “common property,” such as oceans and atmosphere . Individual profit is maximized on the basis of a first-come, first-served principle . It is particularly applicable to the debate today about pressures on the global environment .
 Overuse of common property is also highlighted, as when oceans and atmosphere are used by a few as sinks for environmental pollutants whose costs are borne by many .
 Experts disagree about the moral and ethical implications of Hardin’s interpretation . Hardin's interpretation of the Bible is controversial and controversial .
 The logical conclusion is that reforms are required to save planet Earth . Note that the logical conclusion would be that reforms were needed .
 The needed changes will require self-restraint on people’s freedom of choice as well as a modicum of regulation in order to control the ruinous consequence of an unmanaged global commons .
 Theorists adhering to realism and free-market mercantilism go very far in defending freedom of economic choice without regulation as the best path to realizing the greatest good for the greatest number .
 Theorists from these traditions believe that the pursuit of self-interest and personal profit will in the long run benefit all, producing more income and technological innovation than would occur by supervisory regulation .
 They also feel that minimal interference in the pursuit of personal gain is helpful to the preservation of the Earth’s ecological health .
 To their way of reasoning, the pursuit of private gain with little restraint is a virtue, not a vice . To the way of thinking, it's a virtue not to be a vice, says the author .
 Almost all religious moral traditions highly question this realist and mercantilist conclusion . Almost all religions question this conclusion .
 Christianity follows ancient Hebrew ethics in defining greed as one of the seven deadly sins . Christianity, for example, defines greed as a sin .
 The predictable outcome of selfishness and blind dedication to personal financial gain over other values such as altruistic love and compassion for the community of humankind is a certain path to ruin and sin .
 Only if community interests are protected can individuals realize their most precious personal interest in advancing such common values . These streams of thoughts argue that concern for the welfare of all provides happiness and benefits for all .
 Ecopolitics forces you to weigh rival perspectives and evaluate competing values . It's not just about politics, it's also about politics and social justice .
 A 2008 report by the International Union for Conservation of Nature found that nearly one in four mammals are at risk for extinction . Overfishing and acidification of the oceans are threatening marine life, the report said .
 Madagascar has lost over 80 percent of its forest due mostly to slash-and-burn rice farming that also exhausts the soil and destroys the habitats of countless species . Shown here is a “dead forest” in Madagascar, which has lost more than 80 percent .
 These and other ethical questions are directly in the crossfire of the debate about what is causing the threats to the planetary commons and what should be undertaken to contain them, and at what costs .
 Environmental decay seems to recognize few borders; it is a worldwide problem, for both poor and rich countries . Environmental decay is a global problem, with both rich and poor countries contributing to it .
 People put their personal advantage ahead of those of all humanity . That transformation makes protection of the planetary environment a necessity . But solutions are hard to find when many people put their own advantage .
 Recommended changes to protect and preserve the planet Earth’s ecology may be expensive . Recommended changes may be costly, but they could save Earth's life .
 Government and nonstate actors’ acceptance of the concept continues to inspire creative, environmentally sensitive responses . The goal of sustainable development remains distant and frustrations about lost opportunities are high .
 There are also movements to save planet Earth at the state level of analysis and individual levels of analysis . Taking their point of departure from the adage ‘think globally, act locally,’ they say .
 In a political world in which growing population means growing demand for energy, food, and other resources, the politics of scarcity becomes central . In a world of growing population, scarcity is central to the politics .
 How countries meet their growing demand for energy directly influences the evolution and preservation of the global commons . The global commons is a global resource resource that can be found in the form of renewable energy .
 Left unchecked, threats to environmental security will compromise human security . "Left unchecked, environmental security is a problem for human security," experts say . "It's a problem that we have to deal with today's climate change," says scientist .
 Some of the initiatives to counter environmental degradation are carried out at a global level . The initiatives are being carried out in a bid to combat environmental degradation .
 A new and less destructive source of energy could emerge because of the advent of new technologies that derive energy from the sun, wind, and other abundant and renewable sources of energy such as hydrogen .
 Rising oil prices and public alarm about global warming are pushing the world toward cleaner and cheaper energy systems . Acid rain is made acidic through contact with sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides .
 The supply of fossil fuels will not run out anytime soon, but the externalities or consequences of environmental and health threats make the burning of fossil fuel excessively dangerous . The demand for fossil fuels is not going away anytime soon .
 The combustion of oil and coal is traced to lung cancer and many other health hazards . It is linked to many health hazards, including lung cancer .
 Air pollution leads to air pollution, urban smog, and acid rain that damage forests, water quality, and soil . And what is more is more, it leads to pollution, acid rain, and smog pollution .
 There are powerful incentives to harness technology to shift to renewable sources of energy . There are also powerful incentives for harnessing technology to harness renewable sources .
 Among known technologies, nuclear energy has often been championed as an alternative to fossil fuel dependence . Nuclear energy is often championed as the leading alternative to Fossil Fuel dependence .
 Safety and financial costs may reduce this scheduled surge toward nuclear power . These problems have led some countries to reduce (or, like Germany, Sweden, and Spain) their nuclear programs .
 Well-publicized nuclear accidents in the United States at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania in 1979 and at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986 and no less in 1986 .
 The global economy’s need for energy continues to rise, requiring more energy than is needed from nonrenewabie resources . The world's need to supply the world's energy needs by the year 2100 will continue to rise .
 Rising demand is likely to change the current distribution of resources on which the world relies to meet its energy needs . 82 percent of the world’s energy supply presently comes from fossil fuels and that share cannot continue .
 As a fossil-free energy supply becomes increasingly probable, it might become possible to tap renewable sources to meet the world’s entire energy needs by the end of the twenty-first century .
 The demand for nuclear power has risen despite continuing safety fears . Since then, fears have decreased, and the demand has risen .
 There are no safe procedures for handling the fifty-two thousand tons of toxic radioactive nuclear waste . Some of the waste will remain dangerous for hundreds of thousands of years .
 A related fear is that countries that currently do not possess nuclear knowhow might develop nuclear weapons . The fear of developing nuclear weapons is also a concern for countries that do not have nuclear know how .
 This dilemma is highlighted as a significant concern with regard to North Korea’s nuclear development program . North Korea's nuclear program is a major concern, experts say .
 Other efforts to develop alternative potential fuel sources have also begun in hopes of breaking our dependence on fossil fuels . Other efforts have begun to develop alternatives to fossil fuel sources .
 Countries that cling to fossil fuels will see security and prosperity decline as compared to those that pioneer renewable-energy technologies . Thomas L Friedman echoed this sentiment, arguing that countries that rely on fossil fuel technology will see their security .
 This emphasis reflects a shift over the past decade or two from a focus on conventional pollution issues to one on clean-energy opportunities . The emphasis has been on clean energy opportunities in the past two decades .
 Algal oil can be processed into biodiesel or nonpetroleum gasoline, carbohydrates into ethanol, and the protein into animal feed or human nutritional supplements . Seaweed fields of algae are touted as a potential wave of the future, as “algal oil”
 Indonesia and the Philippines, located within the “Pacific Ring of Fire,’ are looking to harness volcanic power in developing geothermal power . Indonesia and Philippines are located in the ‘Ring of Fire’
 Honda Motor has begun production of the world’s first hydrogen-powered fuel-cell car . While presently too expensive for most people, it is currently too expensive to buy .
 A major energy transformation is under way, forced by supply scarcities and demand increases . Technological, economic, cultural, and environmental changes suggest that the early stage of the energy revolution is underway . The U.S. is in the early stages of an energy transformation .
 Conversion to renewable sources of energy represents a possible avenue away from global environmental degradation . Conversion of renewable energy could be a way away from environmental degradation, experts say . Conversion to renewables is a step away from climate change, scientists say .
 The 1992 Earth Summit in Stockholm was precedent-setting . International Treaties for Environmental Protection were set up in 1992 .
 From it, a separate treaty set forth a comprehensive agreement for the preservation of biodiversity throughout the world . The treaty also set out a comprehensive deal to protect biodiversity in the world from extinction .
 It committed state governments to devise national strategies for conserving habitats, protecting endangered species, expanding protected areas, and repairing damaged ones .
 Since then, the world has attempted to cooperate through increasingly concerted efforts to reach agreements and to back them with ratified treaties to protect the sustained global commons . The world is now attempting to cooperate with each other through efforts to protect its global commons.
 The Biodiversity Treaty was followed by other international efforts to deal with environmental problems by agreements globally . The treaty was followed with other efforts to address environmental problems .
 President Obama pledged to work with the international community to “roll back the spector of a warming planet” One of his first presidential policy pronouncements was to call for a federal “cap-and-trade” system to greatly reduce United States greenhouse emissions .
 UN climate-change summit convened in Copenhagen in December 2009 . In anticipation of the impending 2012 deadline for negotiating a successor to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, the summit was held in Copenhagen .
 Governments from around the world met to discuss a new global climate agreement . Hopes that leadership from the United States president could propel greater concensus and commitment to efforts to address environmental degradation .
 Given the growing threats to environmental protection that are now recognized, this collective response is encouraging . The collective response to environmental threats is encouraging, says the author .
 The question facing the world is whether the response to the crisis has been adequate . The world's response to this crisis has not been adequate, says CNN.com .
 Many skeptics fear that these efforts are too little, too late, and that not enough is being done to save the global commons for future generations . However, many skeptics say that many efforts are not enough .
 Many question the ability of today’s existing treaties to manage the environmental dangers they are meant to address . Many question whether existing treaties can be managed to address environmental dangers .
 Some are weak and introduce expressions of concern without commanding necessary policy changes to remedy the various problems they identify . Some of these are weak statements of concern that need to be taken seriously .
 Of particular concern is the reluctant backing of the globe’s superpower, the U.S. of particular concern .
 Of the UN’s thirty-one major global environmental agreements, the U.S. has only ratified ten . The United States has ratified ten of the UN's major environmental agreements .
 Environmental protection activists worry that if the U.S. hegemon refuses to lead, the prospects for strengthening the rules of the environmental preservation regime are dim . The U.N. should lead the way, they say .
 Multinational corporations are key players in the ecopolitics game that has the potential to determine the Earth’s fate . Multinational corporation is a key player in the world's ecopolitical game .
 Corporations are strong advocates with powerful lobbyists of free trade . Corporations rule globally, and they're strong advocates for free trade, says CNN.com .
 The question is especially pertinent in a rapidly globalizing world in which trade increasingly links politics, economics, ecology, ecology and societies and cultures in webs of ever-tightening interdependencies .
 Russia opened its borders to become the largest international repository for radioactive nuclear wastes . Russia hopes to earn billions of dollars over the next two decades in the hope of earning billions from trade trade .
 Some countries, particularly in the Global South, view the use of trade mechanisms to protect the environment as yet another way the rich states block entry into lucrative Global North markets . The Global South says trade mechanisms are a way to keep the Global North disadvantaged .
 Trade-offs must sometimes be made between goals that, in principle, all seem designed to increase human well-being and security . "Trade-offs" must be made, says the author of the book .
 Another interpretation maintains that trade encourages states to live beyond their means . However, another interpretation maintains the trade is harmful to other nations .
 The “pond” in which they are playing was originally a sludge pit containing chemical by products from the former pesticide plant . The actual color of the “water” was closer to black .
 The chemical leakage at Bhopal, which resulted in over three thousand deaths, occurred in 1984, but the area still contains over four hundred tons of toxic waste .
 The picture is a stark reminder of how environmental crises can long outlive the political will necessary to resolve them . beyond state borders . The picture shows a stark contrast to how the environmental crisis can outlive political will beyond the borders .
 Countries that have depleted their resource bases or passed strict laws to protect them can easily look overseas for desired products . This can shift the environmental stress of high consumption to other states’ backyards .
 A trend is under way in the culture of corporate global finance that bodes well for the potential for global corporations to begin to recognize that their profits will improve if they invest in and develop products for which there is rising consumer demand worldwide .
 This mega-corporation recently shifted its marketing strategy by seeking to attract still new customers, promising to cut energy consumption and to sell products that are environmentally friendly .
 Newly “green’s” corporations are beginning to realize financial payoffs . What these and other changes suggest is that newly ‘green,’� corporations are realizing financial benefits, experts say .
 The possibility that the international political economy will provide economic incentives for producing products that can contribute to global environment sustainability has inspired hope that the dangers to environmental preservation may be contained .
 Hope is rising because some governments are seeking local solutions to environmental sustainability . That hope is rising as some governments and individuals seek local solutions for sustainability .
 A huge concern is that some very powerful states, advantageously positioned in the global hierarchy, are selfishly resisting making painful and costly adjustments now . Some of the world's most powerful states are selfish and resistant to making painful adjustments now, says David Cameron .
 They are resisting reforms of their own existing environmental protection policies . They say they are resisting reform of existing existing environmental laws .
 There are exceptions to this response to environmental degradation . Yet there are exceptions, such as environmental degradation, the government says .
 Measures of environmental protection performance suggest that some countries are doing much more than many others to assure that their environments are protected . Measures of national commitment to environmental protection show that many countries are not doing enough to protect their environments .
 The Environmental Performance Index gauges the relative performance of countries across the categories of environmental health, air pollution, water resources, hiodiversity and habitat, and climate change . The index is based on the relative health and environment of countries .
 It charts the rankings of countries according to the Environmental Performance Index . The index is based on the environmental performance of each country .
 The score measures their investments in efforts to protect their future environments . The score is based on their efforts to save the environment .
 Some countries see environmental sustainability as a priority that protects their interest . Others fail to do so, which fail to protect their interests .
 Many people worldwide are dissatisfied with the tardy reaction of national governments to the appalling dangers to the global ecology . Many people are unhappy with the response of governments .
 In the United States, many of the fifty states have joined the lead pushed by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger of California .
 In September 2006, the respected “Governator” signed the Global Warming Solutions Act requiring California to reduce its greenhouse-gas emissions 25 percent by 2020 . In 2008 he stood firm in support for the moratorium against new off-shore drilling .
 "I am here to make businesses boom, but let’s also protect our environment," she said . "Let's also protect the environment. I am here ... to make business boom, let's also protection our environment"
 Governor Schwarzenegger: "Let’s fight global warming because we know now that this is a major danger" Governor Schwarzenegger explained. “This is not a debate anymore,” Schwarzenegger said .
 Since then, three-fifths of American states have taken initiatives to also make rules in their home states to protect their local environments . The initiative was launched in 2003 .
 It is hard to determine whether this reaction was a result of pressure from private citizens who believe that it is crucial to set limits on climate-changing emissions because they feel this is the right thing to do .
 Pressure from citizens and even corporations for better laws to protect the global environment is growing . Whatever the incentives, the pressure from citizens is growing.
 In March 2007, thirteen corporations joined with fifty-two institutional investors to lobby the U.S. government for limits on carbon emissions that come from burning fossil fuels . Thirty-six institutional investors lobbied for limits .
 Ecologists tell you you can make a difference, all by yourself, or by joining an NGO that shares your concerns and is pressuring governments to take urgent steps for change .
 Environmentalists recommend many alternative steps that you might take . Environmentalists say there are many ways to get rid of pollution .
 You can save 2,400 pounds of carbon dioxide per year by recycling just half of your household waste . Recycling just half the household waste can help you reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
 Use less hot water by installing a low-flow showerhead and washing your clothes in cold or warm water . Use a low flow showerhead or use a cold- or warm showerhead .
 You’ll save one pound of carbon dioxide for every mile you don’t drive . You will save 1 pound of CO2 per mile .
 Simply turning off your TV, DVD player, stereo, and computer when you're not using them will save thousands of pounds of carbon dioxide a year .
 There are, of course, many other actions that individuals can undertake that might affect the future of the planet . There are many other things individuals can do to help the planet's future .
 There is such a long list of things that could be done and that should be done that the options are about as unlimited as are the multiple threats to the planetary ecological predicament . The options are unlimited, says author .
 Efforts to develop alternative fuels, reduce greenhouse gases are high on everybody’s list . The auto industry is trying to resurrect itself by producing environmentally friendly, energy-efficient vehicles .
 The path humanity takes will affect human security far into the future, says the U.S. president . It will affect the future of humanity, says President Obama .
 Evidence of serious ecological problems is getting harder and harder to ignore . The U.S. has been hit by a series of ecological problems since the 1970s .
 The stakes are so high, all the pieces in the puzzle must be addressed simultaneously . Population growth, natural resources, technology, and changing preferences in lifestyles are key to solving the problem .
 The planet must be saved, or all other opportunities will be closed, the global environment will face certain doom, and human history will end . The world must save, or the planet must end, says the author .
 The stakes are so high that perhaps solutions will be found, perhaps solutions are found . Therefore, the stakes are high, and perhaps solutions can be found .
 Photo captures the dramatic inequalities that exist in many, if not all, cities across the globe . Some enjoy rising prosperity, some living in squalor .
 M ost conjectures about the global future are based on some extrapolation from earlier events and experiences . M ost conjecture is based on extrapolations from earlier experiences .
 People usually speculate about future prospects based on their understanding of prevailing trends, such as the current trends . People often speculate about their future prospects .
 Some trends move forward seemingly in the same direction, while others change direction . Some trends intersect, whereas others diverge over time; and some trends increase the speed of other trends, while still different global trends reduce the impact of the others . What makes prediction so difficult is the sheer complexity
 When thinking about the issues raised by these questions, ask yourself how they might be addressed to create a more peaceful and just future .
 In front of a crowd of an estimated two hundred thousand Germans at the Victory Column at Tiergarten Park in Berlin, Barack Obama caiied for giobai cooperation and purpose .
 World looks like it's coming together and at the same time it is coming apart . Some point toward integration, and others to fragmentation . The world is coming together but coming apart, some point toward fragmentation .
 A new global system is on the horizon, but it's yet to develop definition . A new system is not yet defined, but its characteristics have yet to be defined .
 Understandably, uncertainty and unpredictability are today’s prevailing mood . Understandable and unpredictable are today's prevailing mood. The world is in a state of uncertainty .
 seismic shifts under way are challenging the wisdom of old beliefs and orthodox visions . But one thing is certain, seismic shifts are under way in the world .
 Both turmoil and turbulence describe contemporary international affairs, they require asking unconventional questions about conventional ideas . "Trouble and turbulence" are key to understanding contemporary world affairs .
 They push us to think flve-dimensionally in order to understand the political, military, market, demographic, and demographic pressures that are increasingly being brought to bear on the countries of the world .
 Facing the future, you confront an awesome investigative challenge; anticipating and interpreting the probable future contours of world affairs and constructing compelling theoretical explanations of their causes . Facing a challenge, anticipate and interpret the probable world contours, world affairs, and construct compelling theories .
 Unusual and controversial questions are rising to the top of the global agenda for public debate throughout the world . To do so, you must consider a number of unusual and controversial topics that are on the agenda for debate .
 Experts whose profession it is to help you may be somewhat informative . Expert advice on how to get around the world may be helpful .
 The rival conclusions boldly advanced by would-be prophets are not likely to be very definitive, and they diverge wildly . However, the rival conclusions are likely not very definitive and diverge widely .
 Those caught up in revolutionary change rarely understand its ultimate significance . A bewildering array of problems and challenges are expected to confront humanity in the future .
 As recognized by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan , “We face a world of extraordinary challenges—and of extraordinary interconnectedness.”
 To construct your own images of the future of world affairs, begin by thinking about what key questions likely to dominate international relations in the coming decades .
 The questions you identify will determine which scenarios and theories better inform your understanding of your global future . The questions will help you understand the future of the world .
 World Politics concludes this chapter with some additional questions to consider . Those questions will require you to weigh plausible contending interpretations to further prepare you intellectually to interpret world politics .
 So proceed cautiously and with an open mind, open mind to views that may be different from those you now hold . Be careful and open your mind .
 Your entire grade, your instructor tells you, will be determined by an essay exam with only one question . Only one question will determine your grade, the instructor says .
 It has been used to sort out candidates on exams for entry into the foreign service of several countries . It has also been used for candidates for entry to several countries.
 There really are no right or wrong questions about international relations, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There are no 'right or wrong' questions about how to deal with international relations."
 There is little agreement about the trends and issues that are the most important in international affairs . No scholarly consensus among experts and policy makers exists about the questions most deserving of attention today .
 World Politics: What you believe will be the crucial questions to ask when you make predictions about the future of the world . To stimulate your thinking, make a preliminary list of what you now know about the world's future .
 It concludes now by identifying a series of questions about the global future that are high on the agenda for debate .
 How they are answered is widely expected to give shape to world politics throughout the remainder of the twenty-first century . As a further catalyst to framing your own thinking, look critically at them .
 World Politics has argued that international relations are subject to recurring patterns and regularities . World Politics asks World Politics questions about a 'turbing' world . The world is a "turbulent world"
 Despite changes and chaos, behavior by transnational actors is not random, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Despite changes, behavior not random .
 It is governed by patterned propensities, and this makes it possible to uncover ‘laws’ or generalized action-and-reaction patterns . It is possible to unravel “laws” or ‘generalized action and reaction patterns .
 As realist theoretician Hans J Morganthau argued in his classic text Politics Among Nations, the past historical record speaks with sufficient continuity to make the scientific study of international politics a meaningful intellectual endeavor .
 There are lessons about how countries interact that are constant across time and place . There are some lessons about the relationship between countries that are always constant .
 Under certain conditions, it can be assumed that certain types of transnational actors respond the same way to the same kinds of stimuli . Under certain . conditions, the . situation can be described as 'under certain conditions'
 Sometimes similar actors in similar situations make different decisions . Sometimes similar actor's actions make different choices .
 Social scientists cannot draw on a body of uniform, deterministic laws to predict the global future precisely . Thus despite the existence of regularities in world politics, social scientists can't predict the future precisely, say social scientists .
 It's difficult to predict what will come to pass is the role of happenstance in world politics . Another factor that makes it hard to predict is the fact that happenstances in politics are unpredictable .
 History is replete with what Greek philosopher Aristotle called accidental conjunctions . Aristotle called this accidental conjunction: "situations in which things come together by chance"
 Recall from Chapter 3 that one of the proximate causes of the war was Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914 .
 Ferdinand’s motorcade made a wrong turn en route to visit patients in a city hospital . The motorcade stopped briefly in front of a cafe where Gavrilo Pincip had gone to get something to eat .
 Princip fired two shots at the archduke's open-air car just five feet away, killing the couple . Princip was shocked to find the car in his garden, five feet from his open air car .
 If Franz Ferdinand had not been assassinated, something else might have precipitated the war . Given the political climate in Europe at the time, it was possible that the assassination might precipitate the conflict .
 We cannot predict with certainty which one will materialize, but we can narrow the range of possibilities by forecasting how current trends will probably develop and how steps might be taken to channel the course of events toward a global future .
 Six questions to help you think about the future of world politics . What follows are six questions designed to help answer key questions about the world's future .
 When pondering the long-term implications of these questions, you are encouraged to imagine what conceivable global futures are possible, estimate which are the most probable . Consider what policies would be of the most help to bring about the global future .
 The glorious thing about the human race is that it does change the world — constantly . The human race has changed the world constantly, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Globalization is creating sweeping governance crises in a new age of increasing interdependent complexity . One answer is ascribed to ‘globalization,’ a widely accepted socially constructed code word .
 Globalization captures the idea that everything on the planet is now more closely connected than ever before . But on an institutional foundation that is shaky and unprepared for managing the massive adjustments brought on by accelerating worldwide changes .
 From an optimistic perspective, an awareness of the common destiny of all, alongside the declining ability of many sovereign states to cope with global problems through unilateral self-help approaches, will help the world .
 According to this reasoning, conflict will recede as humanity begins to better recognize that national borders and oceans provide little protection against the multiple challenges arising from the global revolution in travel, communications, and trade . This reasoning is according to the author of the book, "The Future of the World
 Globalization is creating a strong web of constraints on foreign policy behavior of those who are plugged into the network of global transactions . Globalization creates strong constraints on how foreign policy decisions should be made .
 Globalization makes it imperative that states cooperate, this tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed . Consequently, this continued tightening of international linkages is welcomed, says David Cameron .
 What is especially favorable about globalization is that when everyone depends on everyone else, all must work together, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says globalization is a good thing for everyone .
 Global interdependence makes it imperative for states to renounce their competition . States increasingly have a shared interest in cooperation and fewer and fewer incentives to fight . States must renounce competition because they increasingly have shared an interest in cooperating .
 Globalization may not lead to greater transnational cooperation, but instead to cut-throat competition . Globalization is not a panacea for global cooperation, it's an opportunity for competition, says John Defterios .
 Increased contact and the trend toward an integrated single society of states may breed enmity, not amity . Regardless of how compelling the need or how rewarding the benefits, increased contact may not be enough .
 Globalization will likely generate conflict between winners and losers . Because its benefits will not be distributed equally, globalization will likely have conflict, says John Defterios .
 Under conditions of fierce competition, scarcity, and resurgent nationalism, the temptation to seek isolation from the assault of globalization on national autonomy by creating barriers to trade is irresistible .
 The temptation to achieve political benefits by military force will continue . The temptation will also continue to continue, says President Obama .
 The tightening web of globalization could lead to either danger or opportunity . Thus, the tightening web could lead either to danger or to opportunity .
 Adding to growing concerns about escalating levels of globalization is the recognition that it is reducing states’ control over their national futures and fates . Addressing the growing concerns that globalization is reducing state’s control of their national future .
 As states lose their grip on coping with pressures and problems originating outside their borders, they fret about the loss of influence and identity . As states fail to cope with pressures, they worry they will lose influence .
 The question for the future is whether humanity can count on nongovernmental organizations at the grassroots level to engineering human progress through global public policy networks . Nongovernment organizations at grassroots level seeking to assume responsibility for human progress .
 This arguably is one of the most important issues facing twenty-first-century world politics . This is a serious question of the future of the world's politics .
 The surge in globalization followed on the heels of late-twentieth-century discoveries in microelectronics and information processing has unleashed revolutionary changes .
 The consequences of the technological revolution, however, are not certain . The consequences for the technology revolution are still uncertain .
 It can increase productivity and economic output, but it can also displace workers and trigger social unrest and environmental damage . It can also increase productivity, but can also trigger social upheaval and social unrest .
 Most optimistic members of this group believe that because of promising developments in such fields of biotechnology and digital software, humanity is entering the most innovative period in history . The most optimistic members believe that .
 From their perspective, sufficient resources exist to fuel continued progress . The U.S. government says it will continue to push for progress in the region .
 With patience, technological solutions eventually will be found to ease the most serious problems facing the world today, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Technology will eventually find solutions to the world's biggest problems .
 Many people are alive today who might have perished in previous centuries . Malnutrition and disease, they say, may still exist, but, as a result of technological advances in agriculture and medicine, many people are still alive today .
 Some are concerned that some proposed technological solutions will compound current problems . Others are concerned about the impact of technological innovation on social welfare issues .
 Genetically modified crops are seen by some as a way to reduce famine . Others worry about the public health consequences of public health .
 Fertilizer, pesticides, and herbicides initially increased crop yields in various Global South countries . They eventually spawned new problems such as contaminated water supplies .
 Without wise management, technological advances can have detrimental side effects . Technology advances can be detrimental to society, experts say .
 At first, larger ships and improvements in maritime technology resulted in increases in the amount of fish harvested from the world’s oceans . The increase in fish harvest is due to increase in the number of ships and technology .
 Applying more technology could not increase catches once the ecosystem had collapsed . Applying technology to increase catches would not be enough to do so, experts say .
 When you look at new technologies, think counterfactually and imagine how things might turn out if new technologies had not been invented or how new ones might influence life on planet Earth for better or worse .
 Prevalent practices tend to wither away when they cease to serve their intended purpose, as the examples of slavery, dueling, and colonialism illustrate . The practice of slavery and dueling are examples of examples of colonialism .
 Trends point toward the possibility that this may happen as well for wars between states, which have declined nearly to the vanishing point .
 Since 1945, the period since 1945 has been the longest span of great power peace since the sixteenth century . Even more impressively, this is the longest period of peace in the world since the mid-nineties .
 This achievement is raising expectations that large-scale warfare between countries will disappear . Armed aggression between nations will become obsolete, says the author of the book .
 Use of traditional weapons of warfare against emergent threats is of questionable usefulness . That said, the use of traditional . weapons of . warfare against the emergent . threats that now . haunt the globe is of . questionable usefulness.
 The old forms of military power still used by states today may be becoming impotent . No level of military might can guarantee a state’s invulnerability, says author .
 The conduct of war has undergone several ‘generational’ changes since the Thirty Years’ War drew to a close and gave birth to the modern state system . The Conduct of War has undergone a number of “generational changes’ since that war .
 The threat of being attacked by the military forces of another country has receded, particularly in the Global North . “Third-generation” military thinking has influenced most countries since World War II .
 irregular forces using unconventional tactics focus on their adversary’s will . They use patience, ingenuity, and gruesome acts of violence to compel their opponent to weigh the mounting costs of continuing a long, drawn-out struggle .
 Many civilians are targets of overt oppression and violence by governments created to preserve law and order in courts and through ballots . Civilians are often targeted by governments presumably created to protect law, order through elections .
 Of concern is whether the moral outrage of the globe’s major powers will be sufficient for them to make concerted peacekeeping and peacemaking interventions to end human rights abuses in those countries where standards of conduct have been blatantly disregarded .
 Atrocities in many failed states each year force a mass exodus of tens of millions of refugees and displaced people from their homes to seek safety . The world's most recent refugee crisis is in the form of civil war in Syria .
 The global community is being put to a test of its true ideals and its capacity to defend them, at potentially high costs . Global community being tested to defend its ideals at a potentially high cost, says David Cameron .
 Human rights law provides "unprecedented protection for people everywhere to live in freedom without fear," says Human Rights Watch .
 The challenge is to transcend traditional notions of sovereignty and to construct a global consensus for intervention, Dr. Dr. Martin says .
 Sudanese refugee after she and her family reached sanctuary on the Chad border after hiding for a year in a cave in Sudan’s Darfur region .
 Called the worst genocide since the World War II Holocaust, this slaughter raises concerns that the world’s great powers will intervene only when vital security interests or needed resources such as oil are threatened . The slaughter raises questions about the world's great powers .
 Leaders have long been loath to fall prey to the single-mindedness of preparing to compete with other states . Leaders say they're not afraid of falling prey to singlemindedness .
 As France’s former President Francois Mitterand once urged, “together we must urgently find the solutions to the real problems at hand—especially unemployment and underdevelopment,” he said .
 India’s former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi warned that “either nuclear war will annihilate the human race and destroy the Earth, thus disposing of any future, or men and women all over must raise their voices for peace .
 These rhetorical positions reflect the problems and self-interests these leaders faced at home and abroad, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A large percentage of humanity faces famine, poverty, and a denial of basic human rights . The world is facing famine and poverty, according to experts .
 Millions are threatened by genocide and terrorism sponsored by their own governments . Millions of people in the world are at risk of genocide or terrorism .
 Humankind may self-destruct, not because it lacks opportunities, but because of its collective inability to see and to seize them . Humankind's collective inability is to seize opportunities, the author says . "Humankind may consequently self destruct," he writes .
 To many observers, the history of world affairs is the struggle between tyranny and liberty . The struggle between liberty and tyranny is a key part of the struggle .
 It is an ideological contest for the allegiance of humanity to a particular form of political, social, and economic organization . It is a contest for humanity to be loyal to a specific form of organization, says the author .
 The twentieth century saw the developed world descend into a paroxysm of ideological violence . Liberalism contended with the remnants of absolutism, bolshevism and fascism, and finally an updated Marxism that threatened to lead to the ultimate apocalypse .
 The abrupt repudiation of communism raised expectations that history had indeed “ended,” in the sense that liberal democratic capitalism had triumphed throughout most of the world . The sudden repudiation raised expectations of the end of communism in the West .
 Liberals are heartened by the doubling since the mid-1980s of the number of countries practicing multi-party elections and capitalism at home and abroad . Liberals are inspired by the belief that “liberal democracy and a market-oriented economic order are the only viable options for modern societies�
 World order can best be created by free governments practicing free trade, they say . World order, they believe, is best created by the practice of free trade .
 As Woodrow Wilson argued, making the world “safe for democracy” would make the world itself safe . Making the world safe for democracy would make it safer for democracy, Wilson argued .
 From this liberal perspective, the diffusion of democratic capitalism bodes well for the future of world politics . From this perspective, it's a good thing for the world's future, says Julian Zelizer .
 There are signals that the march of democracy’s spread is stalling, and many democracies remain ruled by one-party despots . One-party leaders disregard constitutional limits on their power and deny citizens basic political freedoms .
 This persistence of leaders unaccountable to the electorate suggests that we may not be witnessing history’s end, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The persistence of these unaccountable leaders suggests that history may not end .
 The global economic crisis has also led to renewed speculation about the merits and shortcomings of global capitalism . The world's economic crisis is also being debated over the merits of capitalism .
 Though many countries are starting to regain their financial footing, the consensus on the virtues of commercial liberalism has been shattered . The consensus on commercial liberalism is shattered, says David Cameron .
 The free market economies most exposed to the global economy bore the brunt of the financial damage . Countries that were relatively less open—ranging from India and China to Moldova—were less affected by the downturn .
 Global, overarching forces such as modernization and widespread interconnectivity are converging to reshape our lives . Modernization and inter-connectivity will reshape the lives of people around the world .
 World no longer haunted by paralyzing fear of all-out war between great powers now faces a series of challenges every bit as threatening and as potentially unmanageable . The paradox of contemporary world politics is that the world no longer is haunted by the paralyzed fear of a looming all-
 Bill Clinton found it necessary to warn that “profound and powerful forces are shaking and remaking our world’s borders . Clinton was in office when confidence in peace and economic growth was high, and his administration still in office .
 The changes in recent years have spawned transnational threats to world order . The resurgence of nationalism, ethnic conflict, failed states, and separatist revolts are some of the threats .
 Acid rain, AIDS, HlNl, drug trafficking, international organized crime, ozone depletion, climate change, gender equality, energy and food scarcities, desertification and deforestation, financial crises and collapsing economies .
 Emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions and terrorism almost any place and at any time in the world . The potential impact of these additional threats is formidable .
 The distinction between geostrategic issues of security that pertain to matters of war and peace and global issues related to economic, social, demographic, and environmental aspects of relations between governments and people may disappear . The distinction may disappear.
 Previously established patterns and relationships have been obliterated by the loss of these relationships . The loss of relationships has left many of the most important relationships destroyed .
 It has identified the most important changes underway that are potentially leading to transformations in world politics . The changes could lead to a world of political upheaval .
 History reminds us that the evolutionary direction of global change is uncertain . It moves constantly, but at its own pace; and history reminds us of the evolution of change .
 Many trends are unfolding at the same time, and their impact in combination can move the world along an unexpected trajectory . The world is changing at the moment, and its future can be unpredictable .
 Each trend that moves forward advances at its own rate, experts say . Trends can reverse themselves, and each trend advances at own rate . In addition, trends can reverse itself, they can also be reversed .
 Some trends move incredibly slowly in an evolutionary process that can only result in dramatic transformations over many centuries . Others exhibit short bursts of rapid change, interrupted by long periods without much change, say experts .
 Many examples of reversible, interrupted, and constant trends exist, as you have learned in this book . In this book, you will learn how to deal with these trends .
 NASA Looking ahead at Global Trends and Transformations . Photo taken of eastern Mediterranean from the Earth-orbiting space shuttle Columbia .
 It pictures an integrated world community, which humanity shares a common destiny, it says . It pictures a united world community .
 It captures the kinds of environmental threats confronting humanity in a globalized world, where problems do not stop at borders . It also captures the kind of environmental problems confronting humanity .
 Scientists believe pollution is the result of pollution contaminating the atmosphere over the Black Sea . Note the difference in visibility in this panorama .
 To appreciate the diverse ways trends may combine to affect each other, it is helpful for you to construct your images by both using memories of the past and by being inspired by visions of the future .
 Patrick Henry said he had “but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of experience.” Henry said in 1775 that he had a ‘one lamp’ by which his feet were guided .
 All of us need both perspectives, constructed with keen awareness of history and of the future . We must avoid temptation to see ourselves and our own country as we wish to be seen without taking into account how differently others might view us and our state .
 It now appears that the collective impact of the divergent trends underway is signaling a major transformation in world politics . The collective impact appears to be that the world is changing .
 Persistence and change coexist uneasily, and it is this mixture that makes the future so uncertain . The future is uncertain, and the future is so uncertain, it is not easy to predict .
 The outcomes of two races will determine the difference between the world that is and that will be . The outcome of the races will be crucial to the future of the world .
 Advances in science and technology far outpace the resolution of the social and political problems they generate . Advances far outpaced resolution of social problems they create .
 Building the knowledge to confront these problems may present the ultimate challenge . Building the . knowledge to . confront these . problems may therefore present the . ultimate challenge. Building . knowledge .
 If the world is to forge a promising future, it must develop more sophisticated knowledge . The world needs to develop more advanced knowledge, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Sophistication demands that we see the world as a whole, as well as in terms of its individual parts . It does not permit picturing others according to our self-images or projecting onto others our own aims and values .
 We must discard belief in a simple formula for a better tomorrow and resist singleissue approaches to reform . We must reject single-issue approaches, reform. We must abandon belief in belief in the simple formula .
 The future of world politics also rests on the outcome of states’ ability to cooperatively act together and their historic tendency to compete and fight, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Only concerted international cooperation stands in the way of slipping back into military conflicts and ruthless competition . International cooperation is the key to preventing military conflict and ruthless conflict, writes Peter Bergen .
 Vision is required to make wise decisions to implement needed changes for bringing about a world that is more secure and just, vision is required . To meet the global challenges of the future, and to meet wise decisions, the world needs vision .
 If our image of the future were different, the decisions of today would be different. will impel us to action. The future will be different if our image was different, says Simon Tisdall .
 If there is no commonly held image of what is worth striving for, society will lack motivation and direction . The future is not fixed, and headlines are not trend lines, says Willis Harman .
 So we can overcome threatening present dangers by making wise and ethical choices . We need to make wise ethical choices to overcome the present dangers of terrorism .
 Rather than fear the global future, we should welcome its opportunities as we strive to build a more peaceful and just world . We should welcome the opportunities, rather than fear its opportunities, says the author .
 Former U.S. President John F Kennedy said: “Let no man of peace and freedom despair despair”
 Together we shall save our planet or together we shall perish in its flames . Together we will save our world, or we will perish in the flames of the flames .
 The Rise of the New Muslim Middle Class and What It Will Mean for Our World . The rise of the new Muslim middle class and what it will mean for our world .
 The European Commission is the body of the European Union . It is the EU's most powerful and most influential body in the EU .
 G game theory is a mathematical model of strafegic interaction where outcomes are determined not only by a single actor's preferences, but also by fhe choices of all actors involved .
 The UN Development Programme’s attempt to measure the extent of gender equality across the globe's countries . Gender Empowerment Measure is based on estimates of women's relative economic income, highpaying positions, and access to professional and parliamentary positions .
 The physical and organic characteristics and resources of the entire planet are on which human life depends and which is the common heritage of all humanity . The air in the atmosphere and conditions on land and sea are the key to sustaining human life .
 A severe problem stemming from the growing number of people moving from their home country to another country, straining the ability of the host countries to absorb the foreign emigrants . The rapidly growing economies of East and South Asia have made those countries competitors with the traditionally dominant countries of the Global North
 Global North A term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries located primarily in the Northern Hemisphere . Global North is a term used in the United States and Canada .
 GNI measures production by a state’s citizens or companies, regardless of where the production occurs . GNI is based on production by citizens and companies in the United States . It is the first time GNI has measured production in the U.S.
 Group of 77 The coalition of Third World countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Deveioping Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade . gunboat diplomacy A show of milifary force, historically naval force, to intimidate an adversary .
 J jus ad bellum is a component of just war doctrine that establishes criteria under which a just war may be initiated . jus in bello is a part of the doctrine that sets limits on the acceptable use offeree . just war theory is the theoretical criteria for a state to
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawed war as a method for settling interstate conflicts . The treaty was a multilateral treaty negotiated in 1928 that outlawed war .
 The sfudy of aggregate economic indicators such as GDP, the money supply, and the balance of trade that governments monitor to measure changes in national and global economies such as the rates of economic growth and inflation or unemployment .
 1974 UN policy resolution opened the way for the less-developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy . Newly industrialized countries have become important exporters of manufactured goods and important markets for the major industrialized countries that export capital goods .
 North American Free Trade Agreement brings Mexico into the free-trade zone linking Canada and the U.S. It is the largest trade agreement in the world .
 Nth country problem The expansion of additional new nuclear weapon states . Nuclear deterrence Dissuading an adversary from attacking by threatening retaliation with nuclear weapons .
 Two sets of agreements were reached during the 1970s between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The agreements established limits on strategic nuclear delivery systems .
 The U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and, with the 1997 START-Ill agreement ratified by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of bofh sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks . The treaty aims to lower the risk of
 Reagan administration sought to deploy an antiballistic missile system using space-based lasers that would destroy enemy nuclear missiles before they could reenter the Earth’s atmosphere .
 Theocracy is a country whose government is organized around a religious dogma . T tariffs are a tax assessed on goods as they are imported into a country .
 European leaders seek to soften the cruel social impact of free-markef individualism by allowing government intervention to preserve social justice and the rights of individuals . The Third Way is an approach to governance advocated primarily by many European leaders .
 Global South countries can best achieve sustained economic growth through democratic governance, fiscal discipline, free markets, and reliance on private enterprise, and trade liberalization . Washington consensus: Sustained economic growth best for the Global South .
 World Bank is the globe’s major IGO for financing economic growth and reducing poverty through long-term loans . Study of how global actors’ activities entail the exercise of influence to achieve and defend their goals .
 World Trade Organization is a multilateral agency that monitors the implementation of frade agreements and settles disputes among trade partners . World-system theory treats the capitalistic world economy as an interconnected unit of analysis encompassing the entire globe .
 The suspicious dislike,disrespect, and disregard for members of a foreign nationalify, ethnic, orlinguistic group . X xenophobia is the suspicious dislike of people who live in the country .
 Y Yalta Conference was the 1945 summit meeting of the Allied victors to resolve postwar territorial issues and establish voting procedures in the United Nations to collectively manage world order . The conference was held in 1945 and 1945 .
 Japan’s traditional security policy of avoiding disputes with rivals, preventing foreign wars by low milifary spending, and promofing economic growth through foreign frade . Youth bulge thought to make countries more prone to civil conflicts .
 International Herald Tribune: "Time to Renew Faith in the Nonproliferation Treaty" "Time for Renew Faith" is 8.8.5 .
 A Study of the Relationship of Military Power in Nations to Their Economic and Social Advantage is published on the basis of a study of the relationship of military power in nations to their economic and social advantage .
 Petersen Institute for International Economics: The United States and the world economy. Petersen Institute of International Economics. The U.S. and the World Economy. The United Nations. The World Economy .
 " United States to Revive Dormant Nuclear-Power Industry," Columbia, S.C., The State, The State .
 The NFL is the world's most famous football team . The NFL has won four Super Bowls and one of the best teams in the world .
 A15. “Global Forces May Change Balance between States and Federal Government,” Columbia, S.C., The State, The State : A9.1 .
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James D Morrow, Randolph M Siverson, and Alastair Smith.
 Canetti-Nisim, Daphna, Eran Halperin, Keren Sharvit, and Stevan E Hobfoll are among those behind the scenes for the project .
 Central Intelligence Agency. Handbook of International Economic Statistics 2000 . Central Intelligence. Agency. C.I.A. Central Intelligence . Agency.
 America Unbound: The Bush Revolution in Foreign Policy . B. McGraw-Hill/Dushkin. “An Alliance of Democracies.” Washington Post .
 Daniel W. Drezner, Daniel W “Backdoor Protectionism” The National Interest Online.
 The World Does Seem to Have Changed,” International Herald Tribune : 6.6.5.5 . The World does seem to have changed .
 The Environmentla Performance Index is based on the Environmentla performance index . The index measures the environment's performance in the U.S. environment .
 Commission of the European Communities, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions . Commission of European Communities .
 McGraw-Hill Contemporary Learning Series . The Flight of the Creative Class: The New Global Competition for Talent . The flight of the creative class is the new global competition for talent .
 “Arms Sales Begin at Home,” Columbia, S.C, The State : A9. “Disarmed in the Science Race” “The Revolution Will Be Podcast” The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century .
 “Dreadful Irresponsibility after 9/11,” Columbia, S.C, The State : D3. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux: “The Third Great Era of Globalization” International Herald Tribune: 9. “
 Global Political Economy: Understanding the International Economic Order . Understanding the international economic order is a key to understanding the world's political system .
 Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 1999-2006, is published by Nova Science Publishers. Conventional arms transfers to develop nations are common .
 Congressional Research Service. Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations to Developed Nations, 1998-2005 .
 David Goldblatt, Anthony McGrew and Jonathan Perraton are featured in this week's iReporters' weekly TV special .
 Comparative Foreign Policy Analysis: Theories and Methods. Prentice Hall. Comparative foreign policy analysis: Theory and Methods . Theories of Comparative Policy Analysis .
 The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century. The Third wave: Democratizing in the late Twentight Century. Simon &c Schuster. The book is published by John Sutter, a former New York Times editor .
 The Democratic Peace and Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century is published by the U.S. State Department of Peace and Security in the United States .
 Derrick Z. Jackson, Derrick Z “Spreading Fear, Selling Weapons,” Columbia, S.C., The State ; A9.9. Jackson .
 Manics, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 4th ed. John Wiley and Sons. The author has written a history of financial crises in the past .
 Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict. Henry Holt . Henry Holt: Resource Wars. The War of the Cold War. The U.S. has been a major source of conflict in the Middle East for decades .
 The Great Unraveling: Losing Our Way in the New Century . A19. “An Oil-Driven Recession Is Possible,” International Herald Tribune .
 U.S. Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the Twenty-First Century. United States Foreign Policy . The Geopolitical of the United States is published by Edward Snowden .
 The Ideas That Conquered the World: Peace, Democracy, and Free Markets in the Twenty-First Century . Public Affairs. Public Affairs . The ideas that conquered the world .
 "When Ballots Bring Bullets,” International Herald Tribune : 6.6.5 . MIT Press. MIT Press .
 Back to the Future: Instability in Europe after the Cold War . International Security 15 : 5-56. Norton .
 Curbing U.S. dependence on foreign oil,” The Washington Times. The Washington Post.com.com .
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . World Investment Report. World Investment Reports. World Economic Council of Development.
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development . Distribution of Aid by Development Assistance Committee Members . Organisation for EECOED members .
 “Soft Balancing Against the United States,” International Security 30 : 7—45. Random House.
 Blackwell. Blackwell. “World Economic Growth, Systemic Leadership and Southern Debt Crises.” Journal of Peace Research 41 : 5-24. Blackwell .
 Europe’s Vision of the Future is Quietly Eclipsing the American Dream . How Europe's vision of the future is quietly eclipsing America's American Dream is quiet and quiet .
 All of the World Is Entitled to Democracy,” International Herald Tribune : 8.8.9.9 . “All of the world is entitled to Democracy," says the paper .
 The Secret of the Persian Chessboard,” Parade : 14. ‘The Common Enemy,’ Parade : 4-7 . ‘Common Enemy’: ‘Iranian Chessboard’.
 Washington's Bid for World Supremacy and the Betrayal of the American Promise . Washington's bid for world supremacy is a betrayal of America's promise to the world .
 The ‘lost decade’ in multilateral trade talks, 1948-1958,” Review of International Political Economy 2 : 1-26. “The lost decade” is the result of a decade of failed multilateral negotiations .
 Kenneth W. Thompson: Political Realism and the Crisis of World Politics . Thompson: The Crisis of the World Politics is a Crisis of Realism . Thompson's book, "The Crisis of Global Politics," is published in New York, New York .
 Refugees, Asylum-seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons. Stateless persons. Refugees, as well as stateless persons . Refugees, asylum-seekers and returnees .
 U.N. World Investment Report 2008; Transnational Corporations and the Infrastructure Challenge . Transnational corporations and the infrastructure challenge challenge .
 United Nations. “Global FDl Decline Bottoms Out in 2003,” press release. United Nations .
 The Power of Power Politics: From Classical Realism to Neotraditionalism . Rowman 8c Littlefield. Rowman . Littlefield: From classical realism to neotraditionallyism.
 See also Global North Great Depression , 77, 455^57 Great Patriotic War, 12.5 years before the Great War . See also see the Great Depression .