 The CIA was tipped off by Soviet spy Colonel Oleg Penkovsky . He passed on war plans, secret documents, and other human intelligence to the CIA .
 For 13 days, October 16 – 28, 1962, the U.S. and Soviet Union faced each other down in a confrontation that would be the closest the world came to nuclear annihilation during the Cold War . The United States and the Soviet Union fought for 13 days .
 The President was notified of the presence and confirmation of Soviet missiles in Cuba and received a full intelligence briefing . President Kennedy is informed about the photographic evidence .
 The President kept to his official schedule to raising concerns from the public . The President raised concerns about the safety of the country .
 U-2 reconnaissance flights showed continued development of missile sites in Cuba . U.S. troops begin buildup in the Southeast United States .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met the President at the White House . He assuring Kennedy the weapons were defensive .
 Kennedy gave Gromyko a warning of “gravest consequences” if offensive nuclear weapons were on Cuba . Kennedy knew otherwise but didn’t press the issue, instead giving the president a warning . Kennedy didn't press the matter .
 The President stuck to his scheduled travel in the midwestern U.S. The President was traveling in the Midwest .
 The White House called the blockade a “quarantine” because a blockade is technically an act of war . Kennedy orders a "quarantine" of Cuba . A blockade of Cuba is technically a war-infested territory .
 President faked a cold as an excuse to end his trip early without alarming Americans and returned to Washington . The President faked it as a sick excuse for ending his trip to the White House .
 The President attended Sunday Mass then met with General Walter Sweeney of the USAF’s Tactical Air Command . The President met with Sweeney to discuss the missile program .
 President Kennedy informs former Presidents Hoover, Truman, and Eisenhower as well as the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on the Cuban Missile situation . Kennedy informs the public about the blockade and puts United States troops on alert .
 He then assembles and Executive Committee of the National Security Council to work out coordinating further action . President Obama then meets with the Executive Committee to discuss further action.
 After a week of waiting, Kennedy addressed the nation to inform them about the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba . Kennedy told the nation that the missiles were on Cuba and that they were Soviet missiles .
 The United States will not end the quarantine until the USSR removes the missiles . The U.S. will also quarantine the island .
 The EXCOMM assembled by President Kennedy recommended a military invasion of Cuba to end the stalemate . It would have led to massive retaliation from the Soviet Union, and the destruction of all forces on the island .
 Organization of American States Supports Quarantine . OAS support for the blockade gave the American move international legitimacy .
 Soviet freighters bound for Cuba with military supplies stopped for the most part . But the oil tanker Bucharest continued to Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Ambassador Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy in Moscow . Attorney General Kennedy met the ambassador at the embassy in Moscow, Russia .
 Khrushchev denounces the United States quarantine of the island as an act of aggression . Soviet Premier denounced the U.S. quarantine as a 'act of aggression'
 Adlai Stevenson presented evidence of missiles in Cuba to UN Security Council . Soviet ambassador denied the presence of missile missiles in the country . The United States requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security council .
 UN Secretary General U Thant called for a ‘cooling off’ period, rejected by President Kennedy because it left the missiles in Cuba . President Kennedy rejected the idea because of the missiles left in the country .
 The United States military moved to DEFCON 2. The U.S. Armed Forces prepare for all out war . The United Nations is preparing for war with Russia .
 Once the blockade was in place, all Soviet ships bound for Cuba either held their positions or reversed course . The blockade was the first Soviet ship to leave Cuba in Cuba .
 Cuban leader Fidel Castro suggested to Khrushchev the USSR should attack first . Fearing an imminent U.S. attack from the United States, Castro suggested the USSR first attacked . Castro suggested an attack on the US was first, but the USSR attacked first .
 The removal of the missiles was in exchange for a promise not to invade Cuba . The removal was part of a deal with the U.S. to remove the missiles .
 The Soviet Premier sent a letter with a similar message to President Kennedy stating his willingness to remove the missiles from the island if the U.S. would pledge never to invade Cuba .
 Jupiter missiles from Turkey, contradicting Kennedy's personal letter to Kennedy . Jupiter missiles were sent to Turkey from Turkey .
 Major Rudolph Anderson was killed when his U-2 spy plane was shot down over Cuba . The pilot was checking the progress of the missiles in the U.2 plane .
 The United States ignored Khrushchev’s public offer and took him up on the first offer, adding they would voluntarily remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey a few months later, voluntarily . The U.S. did not take up the offer .
 A United States Navy ship dropped depth charges at a Soviet submarine under the blockade line . The U.S. Navy sent depth charges to the Soviet submarine .
 The submarine was armed with nuclear torpedoes, but chose not to fire them in retaliation . The submarine chose to stay out of the firing range .
 In the evening the USSR and USA, through Robert Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, reached an agreement to de-escalate the conflict . Robert Kennedy: "In the evening, the US and USSR reached a deal to end the conflict"
 The USSR agreed to remove missiles in exchange for the promise not to invade Cuba . The Soviets agreed publicly to remove the missiles in order to avoid invasion . The USSR announced it will remove missiles .
 They do not mention the agreement to remove United States missiles from Turkey . The agreement does not mention that U.S. missiles were removed .
 Radio Moscow announced that the Soviet Union accepted the proposed solution . Khrushchev letter affirming that the missiles would be removed .
 The missiles were loaded and shipped back to the Soviet Union in early November 1962 . They were loaded back to Russia and shipped to Russia .
 The Jupiter missiles were removed form Turkey by the end of April, 1963 . Soviet bombers left the country before the start of the year and the Jupiter missiles removed from Turkey .
 A ‘hotline’ was set up between the USSR and the U.S. to ensure direct communication between the two superpowers in the future . A “Hotline” was established between the Soviet Union and the United States .