 This is the 41st autumn since the defining moment that ended the first phase of the Cold War . This year marks the anniversary of the end of the first Cold War, which ended in 1968 .
 The memory of the missile crisis is, we believe, particularly apropos. In 2003, the memory of that crisis is particularly poignant, we say, particularly .
 Americans tend to think that everything the country is facing at a particular moment is unprecedented, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says it's not unprecedented, but it's unprecedented for the U.S. to be faced with unprecedented challenges .
 Leaders are more corrupt, more perfect, more brilliant or more stupid than they have ever been . Leaders are corrupt, perfect, brilliant or brilliant than ever been, says Julian Zelizer . "Leaders are corrupt or perfect or stupid," he says .
 Historian Barbara Tuchman called the situation in the U.S. a distant mirror to compare the situation with circumstances the United States faced in the past . It is therefore interesting to look at what historian Barbara called the current situation .
 This is not intended to either praise or condemn the current administration or the Kennedy administration . It's intended to neither praise or criticize the current president or praise the current or former president .
 It is meant simply to gain some perspective on the current state of affairs . It is not meant to be critical of the government .
 The Cuban missile crisis started in a series of intelligence blunders that began under one administration and continued into the next . The crisis began in the 1960s and '90s .
 Dwight Eisenhower miscalculated the likelihood of Fidel Castro's victory in Cuba . U.S. intelligence under Eisenhower misjudged the nature of the Cuban insurgency .
 Eisenhower responded by initiating a covert war against Castro that suffered from Eisenhower's desire that it not only work, but that the war be completely deniable . Eisenhower wanted the war to work, and that it be deniable, as well as work .
 The Bay of Pigs plan had little chance of working in the first place . President John F Kennedy tinkered with the plan to try and get it to work . The result was the Bay of Pigeas plan, which was never worked .
 "The entire plan was based on a misreading of the mood of the Cuban people," Cuban president says . "It's a misread, the entire plan is based on the mood," he says .
 It was based on the assumption that Cubans would welcome an invasion and that, in addition, they would be in a position to rise up against Castro, it was said .
 Intelligence under Kennedy also miscalculated the Soviet Union's intentions toward Cuba . Kennedy administration miscalculated the Soviet intentions .
 That was an intelligence failure, but it was also a failure on Kennedy's part to appreciate how Soviet leaders viewed him . Kennedy's failure to appreciate Soviet leaders' view of him was also part of a failure, he says .
 Kennedy came to power in part over his claim that the Soviets were ahead of the U.S. in strategic nuclear capability . The missile gap was called the missile gap .
 In fact, the strategic balance heavily favored the United States, Kennedy knew it . Kennedy knew that the U.S. was winning the war, and he knew it, he says .
 He hammered the issue because it was a strong plank in his electoral platform . He hammered it out because of it because of its strong platform .
 From Soviet leader Khrushchev's point of view, the victory of a man who did not seem to grasp the realities of the nuclear balance opened up interesting possibilities . From Khrushche's point, however, it was a victory for the Soviet leader, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Khrushchev's meeting with Kennedy in Vienna left him with the conclusion that Kennedy was inexperienced, poorly informed and timid and timid .
 The Bay of Pigs fiasco confirmed to Khrushchev that Kennedy was out of his league . Kennedy was embarrassed by what he was doing in Cuba .
 Kennedy had little grasp of the international reality when he took office or in the following year . Indeed, years of hagiography notwithstanding, Kennedy had no grasp of international reality .
 Khrushchev understood what he thought Kennedy did not, which was that the U.S. could devastate the Soviet Union . The United States had missiles in Germany and Turkey and a large intercontinental bomber fleet, he says .
 Khrushchev's decision to put missiles into Cuba was a desperate attempt to rectify the balance of power . Khrushchev's decision was an attempt to 'rectify' the power of the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy assumed intelligence might miss the missiles until after they were operational . Even if they were detected, Kennedy would not have the nerve to take decisive action . He assumed, based on Kennedy's abysmal performance to date, that the missiles would not be detected .
 A prior administration that failed to react to the threat in a timely fashion and in essence passed on the Cuban problem to its successor . The Cuban threat was passed on by the Obama administration .
 A new administration struck his adversaries -and allies -as a deer frozen in the headlights . A new president struck his enemies and allies as a deer . In the new administration, the president struck allies and adversaries .
 We will allow our readers to draw the obvious parallels to the current situation in the U.S.
 Kennedy recognized that the Soviet move represented a fundamental challenge to U.S. security . In spite of these defects, Kennedy said, "It was a challenge to United States security"
 He understood that it was much preferable, from the United States point of view, for American nuclear weapons to be menacing the Soviet Union rather than have Soviet missiles threatening the U.S. He said .
 While ethically shaky -if we assume that the basis of ethics is equal treatment -the view was practically sound for an American president . The view was nearly sound for a president .
 President Kennedy understood that geopolitically he had no choice . Kennedy understood he had 'no choice' in threatening nuclear war .
 Kennedy chose a compromise path in which the U.S. announced its commitment through a quarantine policy, without unleashing an invasion . Kennedy was caught between those who wanted an invasion of Cuba .
 There was a tremendous global uproar over Kennedy's actions . It is also interesting to note that there was also an uproar over his actions .
 Many allied governments, while publicly supportive, were privately appalled by what they saw as an overreaction . The U.S. government has been criticized for its actions .
 Crowds in European cities -not the communist world -demonstrated against U.S. aggression . Crowds portrayed Kennedy as a simplistic cowboy, playing with the lives of millions .
 Khrushchev realized too late that however unsophisticated Kennedy might have appeared in Vienna and Berlin and during the Cuban missile crisis, there was no escaping the physical threat that Soviet missiles in Cuba posed to the United States .
 The physical danger to the United States, more than any other factor, focused Kennedy's mind, he says . Kennedy: "The physical danger" to the U.S. was the most important factor in Kennedy's decision .
 Kennedy knew that there was room for error on everything but the physical security of the country . Kennedy knew there was no room for errors on everything .
 Khrushchev understood that he had crossed a threshold when he introduced the threat, and crossing that threshold changed the entire equation . He understood that, geopolitics aside, the threat was a threat to his country .
 That Europeans thought him a cowboy was immaterial once the direct security of the United States was at stake . The U.S. national security was at risk .
 Kennedy's actions were seen as extreme and disproportionate to the threat . Kennedy's action was seen as an example of extreme violence against the U.S.
 Countries worldwide pointed at the nuclear threat the U.S. posed to the Soviet Union . Countries worldwide argued that the Soviets were simply balancing things .
 The United States threatened overwhelming force but actually used very little . The U.S. used little force in the fight against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 In the end, Kennedy negotiated a settlement with Khrushchev and then lied about it . Kennedy negotiated the settlement with the Soviet Union, then lied . "In the end of the deal, Kennedy lied," he said .
 In a private deal with the Soviets, the U.S. agreed to exchange its missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba . In the deal, the United States agreed to swap its missiles with the Soviet missile in Cuba for those in Turkey and Cuba .
 He understood that -given his record of weakness in foreign affairs -he needed to appear to win even if he only tied . However, he also understood that he needed to . appear to have won even if it only tied in the race .
 The withdrawal of the Turkish missiles was a secret part of the agreement, which would be void if it were publicly revealed . Therefore, holding open the possibility of invasion and even nuclear war as the threat, he extracted a concession from the Soviets that made the withdrawal a secret .
 In other words, Kennedy lied about the letter and nature of the agreement . Kennedy lied to the public about the terms of the deal, according to the letter .
 He lied explicitly when he asserted that there had been no quid pro quo over the missiles, CNN's John Sutter says .
 He then lied in spirit when he made it appear that the Soviets had capitulated in the face of his resolute courage, he said . He then made it look as if he had won the battle .
 There had been a quid pro quo: Washington had to give up its own missiles and guarantee that it would not support attempts to overthrow Castro . The United States certainly came out ahead in the immediate deal .
 Both Kennedy and Bush were widely perceived as inexperienced in foreign affairs . Kennedy and George W Bush were seen as inexperienced .
 Both focused on anything that physically threatened the United States. Both focused intensely on anything physically threatened by the U.S. Both were focused on the United Nations.
 The rest of the world regarded both presidents as overreacting and as cowboys, risking world security on minor provocation . President Obama and President Obama were both seen as cowmen .
 Both were casual with the truth when it suited the national -or their political -interests . Both of them were casual about the truth .
 It triggered a massive Soviet commitment to increase its strategic nuclear capabilities . It led to the construction of a massive ICBM force able to threaten the U.S. from within the Soviet Union .
 By the end of the decade, the Soviets had achieved the strategic nuclear parity they had sought in Cuba . The Soviets achieved strategic parity in Cuba in the 1960s .
 In that sense, Kennedy simply bought a few years - which was not trivial, but not decisive . Kennedy's victory was not decisive, but it was just a purchase of time .
 Kennedy's next decision -to increase the U.S. commitment to Vietnam while supporting the overthrow of the Diem government - proved disastrous .
 Kennedy's foreign policy team engineered the Vietnam War under former President Lyndon Johnson . No withdrawal took place while he was alive and, more important, it was more important to Kennedy .
 Kennedy could have fired them all and built a new team, but we suspect he also would have retained them and followed their advice . We suspect he would have kept them, following their advice.
 At the decisive moment, Kennedy set the stage for the decline in the second phase of the Cold War . Kennedy's actions set stage for decline in Cold War, author says .
 The U.S. would not return until the end of the Cold War . It was an intermediate peak to which the United States wouldn't return until end of Cold War. On the contrary, it was a peak .
 He is facing an adversary that is committed to avoiding any decisive moment, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The danger that a Cuban missile crisis poses is that of an illusory solution . However, the danger is that it is that a solution is a solution to the problem .
 Americans tend to think of each moment as extraordinarily unique and the present leaders as particularly incompetent . Americans think that each moment is extraordinarily unique, and that each leader is incompetent .
 Those who opposed President Bill Clinton thought he was particularly venal . Those who oppose President Bush think him uniquely incompetent .
 It is useful to look back on moments like the Cuban missile crisis, which we tend to see through the prism of time as a particular moment of U.S. courage and decisiveness . The Cuban crisis was a time of courage for the United States, writes CNN.com's
 Like the current circumstance, it was a moment born of failure, ineptitude and dishonesty . It ultimately gave rise to the things it was intended to prevent . The current circumstance is a moment of failure and ineptitude .
 Kennedy would have been remembered for his strategic acumen in September 1962 . Kennedy would be remembered for the strategic genius of his strategic thinking .
 Historians still wonder what the shouting was about at the start of the war . And there are many historians who still wonder if it was all about .
 Bush should remember that the kind of victory he gains - if he gains one - is as important as the victory itself . Bush should be careful to remember that, even if he loses, it's important to have a victory .