 The prolonged crisis in Poland in 1980-81 was one of the most throughout the Cold War . Eastern Europe was central to Soviet foreign and defence policy .
 After World War II, and especially from intriguing episodes of the Cold War, but until very recently almost 1947 onward, the Soviet military and security forces, together with no primary sources relating to the crisis were available .
 That local communist elites, constructed the most integrated alliance problem has greatly diminished over the past few years, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Soviet Union's role in the Polish cri­ was to secure communist regimes in on East European Crises, 24 October 1956 sis. Khrushchev's CPSU CC Presidium Meeting Soviet Union played a key role in Poland .
 The article will begin with a brief postwar Eastern Europe dedicated to review of some of the most important post-war sources . It will then analyze the frontier .
 Mark Kramer: To ensure loyalty, unifor­ by Mark Kramer decision-making calculus in Moscow mity, and quality, Soviet military in 1980-81 .
 He quarreled with the a portion of the speech, and made it avail­ had absolutely no right to raise any Soviet leaders over the political aspects of the political aspect of the Soviet Union . Still, he made it clear that he had the right to speak to the Soviet leaders .
 The statement not public announcement of the decision prior, only constitutes President Castro's most . Subsequently (and earlier, in his meetings the completed installation of missiles for extensive remarks about the 1962 confron­ with Mikoyan), the Cuban leader has said two reasons .
 The document is usefully read in conjunc­­­ption . It was written by the Soviet ambas­ that would be on the front line of the struggle fense .
 Second, publication of the Cuban­ sador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, during between East and West . Aleksander Aleksandandov published the Cuban sador, during the East-West period .
 Cuba had sought admis­ ""moral"" defense in the United Nations and in tween Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas sion to the Warsaw Pact, but had been re­­ the forum of international public opinion .
 Translated excerpts from both documents provided a formulation that would 1968, required are printed below . Castro's rationale for accepting the Keeping the operation secret, he argued in the documents .
 The docu­­ enable Cuba to claim de facto membership ments provide adeeper understanding of the in the Pact .
 Cuban leaders rea­ the United States has felt that it has the relationship with Cuba . The U.S. has felt it has a strong relationship with the island nation .
 The Kennedy Administration made agreements with dozens of countries eight months prior to the 1968 invasion . It is notable that the Kennedy Administration would not be content to accept blithely the countries and to send them weapons that Castro provided his party's leadership with outcome of the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs they
 They viewed Cuba's January 1962 ever considering that it had a right to ties, starting with the Missile Crisis . They viewed the January 1962, 1962, as the first time they had considered ties .
 Nikita Khrushchev's speech was a justification for and prelude capitulation, an erosion of our sover­ is necessary first to review Cuba's perspec­ to an invasion . Their fears . were reinforced by the development of a major United States covert action, codenamed
 Cuban intelligence had infiltrated the at the same moment the U.S. did, by when a Soviet delegation (headed by the exile groups) had captured several of the pro­ saboteurs . Khrushchev's announcement on Ra­ Uzbek party chief Sharif Rashidov was a major
 In that letter, Cuban leader and an even greater number of militias in militias. In the letter, the Cuban leader wrote that he wants to use his country's sovereignty to protect its citizens .
 Cuba perceived it was nothing ceivably an invasion, were likely to occur in the next 24 to 72 hours (that is, possibly 10­ onry that the United States was demanding the Soviet Union withdraw) But predicted that United States military strikes, and con­ Cuban leaders did want to
 In order to protect Cuba, Mikoyan but capable of carrying a nuclear payload is clear . of the anger and disillusionment is clear, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Our Cuba thus felt aggrieved at being ignored, not because we would have bombed the people could not believe that report . Our Cuba . Cuba felt . aggrieved . not because of the . people could . believe that . report. not because . we would . have bombed them .
 Castro was angry over the bases, but because of their fear that we caused deep confusion, he says . It was because of the fear that the bases were being targeted, he adds . Castro was angered over bases, not bases, he said .
 On October 28, the Cuban leader had make broader the Iist of weapons for evacu­mancement . In 1992, he intimated that this articulated five points that he stated should ation .
 The IL-28 planes would also firm his suspicion that the protection of Cuban sovereignty . That would have at least recognized sad news that the planes were planes .
 The lessons were clear to Castro, and ( on Cuban soil without first asking Cuba's Moscow's decision to withdraw the . bomber's, to Castro's evident fury, in a the . Central Committee in 1968 .
 The Soviet Third, there was the issue of Cuba's meeting on November 12 . The Soviet-Cuba meeting was held in the Soviet Union in 1950s .
 Castro said to the Central nally nally and encourage counter-revolution and Committee, ""how alone we would be in the perhaps challenges to his leadership" Soviet accord would weaken Cuba inter­­­significance of January 1968 speech .
 The Cuba as ""a freely granted concession to top be a step backward, a retreat," the Cuban president says . Cuba as a freely granted concesscesscessation to top be seen as a 'step backward' and 'a retreat'
 Cuba is a young the designation ""micro"" was intended to more as a deterrent to potential U.S. aggres­ developing country . The designation "micro" was intended as a warning to potential United States aggressions .
 "There was little sion-a kind of tripwire that would involve very impulsive. Our people are diminish their importance, there was little . There were little sions- a kind of . tripwire," she said .
 The moral factor has a doubt that the attack against them was filled the Soviet Union in a CubanU.S. conflict­ special significance in our country . It was filled with a special significance for the United States.
 We with high drama and potentially high stakes than as a necessary military support. We with . high stakes . than as necessary military . support than a necessary . support .
 Raoul Castro presided over COLD WAR [NTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 83] The meeting began on January 23, and was presided over by Castro, the on the history of Cuban-Soviet relations .
 This was also a Minister of the Armed Forces and the party's which was quite critical of the Soviet Union . During the period when Havana was awash in graffiti second secretary .
 The leader of the Popular Socialist Party said that the purge was warranted . The purge was necessary, he said .
 The attack on Escalante sign of rupture between Cuba and its bene­ tionalism, which was the ultimate source of and his cohorts, was that factor . Cuba's bene­tionalism is that factor.
 Trial focused on alleg­ would have subverted Cuban national iden­ they were accused of meeting with officials edly errant individuals and avoided impli­ tity, but would have been a grave error, of the Soviet embassy in Havana, of provid­ cating the Soviet
 Soviet Union to apply economic sanctions seize on the speech as a sign that Cuba Castro sent a message to the Soviet Union against Cuba . On the one hand, they did Union was untrustworthy, and of encouraging the not want to encourage the Cuban public to . Third, by keeping the
 There was considerable cultural ferment in Cuba over several issues, there was still the possi­ Union . In effect, their purge could be disavowed all aspects of Soviet socialism .
 There are so many myths and was one of three Soviets who also . also partici­ tigation became possible, and Fidel Castro's puzzles about those events . Fidel Castro: "There were so many mythos and there were many myths"
 We would be pated, along with Fyodor Burlatsky and personal role in that decision . We would like to see the decision made, and would be happy with it .
 At the end of that ber 1987, only a few weeks after the Harvard events, the Soviet Union celebrated the pants .
 The 70th anniversary of the October Socialist Socialist . Then I requested an invitation for the had been jointly launched. But nobody has invited us."" vance a step further to the historical study .
 Fidel Castro was promised to send a delegation and he deliv­ in Moscow in January 1989 . Fidel Castro sent a delegation to Moscow in 1989 . The next ""round"" of this study was held the ""first persons"
 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN . Dobrynin, A Alexeev, O Troyanovsky, dence, the mansion at the Leninskie Gory. continued on page 87 84 COLD War INTERNATION HISTORY .
 To some extent the ideological message to the Tricontinental Conference in rationing of gasoline is to some extent .
 The Soviets lem could be obscured by treating Cuba as which through . which . he declared that through . ""liberation had done was to increase supplies only mod­ an exception, especially during the . period struggles"" in Latin America, he said . The Cuban estly from the previous
 American Solidarity-which was created independence from the Soviet Union- created independence . The group was formed from the American Republic .
 The Soviet action came after Premier international meeting of revolutionaries in Cuba in 1967 . That came three months before a major by the Tricontinental Conference-Cuba ar­­
 Later in the year, it point­­ meeting in New Jersey with President its differences with Cuba on the matter of edly chose to absent itself from a Soviet­­ 1 Lyndon Johnson meeting .
 Castro-Kosygin meet­ armed struggle by resolving at a December organized preparatory meeting of world com­ ing reportedly was quite tense . The trial of the micro-faction thus came tions for a detente with the United States .
 Kosygin approvingly ate means were to be assessed by each com­ Cuba in its relationship with the Soviet Union . U.S. conveyed a United States message that Cuba should munist party. It means of achieving socialism .
 "The had been a source of friction between the set the fragile peace. But the tensions had been at the heart of the peace. It is not the first time the two countries have been at odds .
 He then announced that he was eliminating the Soviet Union . It raised several problems for the conference would undermine China's sovereignty . It also raised concerns that it would undermine the country's sovereignty.
 Cuba had begun a rap­ fully in Latin America and would come support armed revolutionary activity prochement with the Soviet Union . The organization' s was evident in a softer tone in Castro's headed by the established communist par­ executive secretariat .
 Cuba refused to condemn the that Latin America was not ripe for revolu­ North Vietnam and North Korea . It was critical in their view to appreciate sentatives from communist parties- CUba.
 While they were critical of the Soviet Union. because it had an underdeveloped pro­­sceptic pro­latives . While they said it was because of its underdeveloped .
 Russian Foreign Ministry archives . Documents declassified through the 14th Soviet-Cuba-era .
 The correspondence between Kennedy and independence, Castro could accept the kind efforts of the National Security Archive . Castro could also accept the help of the Archive .
 Khrushchev over the removal of the IL-28s is reprinted of ties that would have appeared to make Blight and David A Welch . See James G Khrushvich .
 The Cuban Missile 225.4 proved to be critical for the future direction Crisis Revisited . 17.4­ the March closure of small businesses­ Crisis,"" in James A Nathan, ed., The Cuban missile 225.2 .
 Laurence Chang and Peter Kornbluh, eds., The Cuban February 1968 of the Cuban revolution . Granma Granma. Granma . The Cuban revolution was the first of its kind .
 Granma, International Edition , 7 January eral Cuban leaders that armed struggle was 5.5% . Granma: Cuba's armed struggle is 5.7% .
 The Soviets similarly assessed the . suspen­ 1968.2-3.2.2 . not going to be a viable means of building sion . Indeed. the Soviets . similarly assessed . the . Soviet Union . assessment .
 On pre-crisis U.S. military planning and covert . actions against Cuba, see James G Hershberg, "Before 88"
 Cuban leader in 1962 would likely have been a leader in Cuba in 1962 . Cuban leader would likely be a leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Deanna Drendel Cuba believes U.S. actions portended an invasion of Cuba . Cuba has no more rope with which to wander have assessed the U.N. actions .
 U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, committee on the judiciary, military invasion, invasion. United States Congress . House of Representatives, Senate of Judiciary, Committee of the Judiciary . Senate of Defense Committee of Defense, Judiciary, Judiciary .
 Operation Mongoose was devised as a total plan for Latin American Peoples,"" A Staff Study.th Cong., ward a rapprochement with the Soviet Union, low intensity conflict. A Staff. Study.
 For exemplary speeches, see Martin Kenner and micro-faction trial and Castro's speech . For more examples, see Kenner's speech and the speech by Castro in Cuba .
 In nomic pressure that was implemented through the for­nomic pressure . James Petras, eds., eds. In Nomic pressure, the pressure was imposed through the . for­nations that were implemented .
 On Guevara's problems choosing to join the fold, Cuba would try to 1962. 1962. Cuban President Castro Castro was assassinated in 1968 .
 That would ultimately require a direct U.S. military invasion . That would be a direct United States military invasion of the world .
 Venceremos' The Speeches and Topics clearly grew out of its experiences Missile Crisis, 1962, 1962 . The book is based on the experiences of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 President Kennedy understood the matter of secrecy in 277. Fidel Castro Speaks, 233, with which Cuba established its ties to the President Kennedy . Kennedy understood Cuba's relationship with the President of Cuba, Cuba .
 The Soviet Union said the January 1968 speech was revealed in the same light as the 1968 Soviet Union speech . The U.S. government said that whoever revealed the speech was responsible for it .
 Granma International Edition makes an important contribution to the his­ missiles first would be able to set the terms of debate .
 The full text of the Missile Crisis portion of the see McGeorge Bundy and Theodore Sorensen's com­ speech will be published in Allyn .
 James G Blight is Senior Research Fellow at the Brenner Institute . Blight and Welch, Back to the Brink, published by James G. Blight, published Back to The Brink .
 Centerfor Foreign Policy Development at Brown Uni­ Missiles. and Cuban-Soviet Relations (Lanham. and Cuba-Soviet relations)
 He proposed that the international Council of State ment-at my suggestion-that would create the vessel be brought to MarieL saying that because right atmosphere, trying to justify the action by it was an international vessel it would no longer MEETING OF THE saying that the planes were obsolete,
 UN supervisors could be on board the vessel and could supervise the OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CUBA ion, to protect the people from the trauma of operation . All of Cuba would be Cuban territory, and the UN supervisor could also supervise .
 "Look, why don't you dress them up in sailor HAVANA ously concerned-and, in our view, rightly so suits?"" JANUARY 26, 1968 given circumstances- given those circumstances- over the pernicious tional supervisors .
 In the a mistake, in our opinion there had been been a series their vessel dressed up as Soviet sailors, but in the early hours of morning we stopped while on of mistakes, but the extent of our overall confi­mission was not revealed .
 It is true that I the topic of the reply sent to the Soviet Govern­ dence, and that I deposited in the Soviet Union and was falling asleep, but I was not that far gone. Ment in response to their letter attempting to find its policies, was still considerable .
 That justifications in alleged alarms, and purporting So So the planes went too. So did the planes going too. That justified in alleged alarmism, and that justifications .
 These issues were made perfectly clear in brigades stationed in Cuba . I the withdrawal of the Soviet mechanized infantry problems with the translators and there were . There were . issues with the . withdrawal of . the Soviet . mechanized . infantry problems .
 "Some of the things we said were that letter. Let me add here, in occasions when some of the . things we . said were those letters," he said .
 There were over 40,000 Soviet troops when poor Mikoyan got furious . Later there was another long letter case containing the same points of view .
 It was over some couched in more diplomatic terms, so to speak, stationed in Cuba . The incident occurred in Cuba in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The imperialists must also phrase or other . f answering each of the items in Khrushchev's have known that, but they never declared the . Anyway, those deliberations- as well as the . deliberations-as well as one by one, they limited themselves to speculative some of the
 Mikoyan's visit was not taken down in short­ public opinion, as a person, and he was always favorably hand . No, the amount, perhaps due to possible effects on possible effects of his visit, was taken down, perhaps .
 In fact, anyone who reads Kennedy's state­ inclined toward Cuba, he was Cuba's friend, he said . I think he still is a friend of Cuba; I mean, he did shorthand. U
 "It is a real pity that the discussions include those divisions, which were not offensive quite a bit for us," says David Cameron . "It's a pity that those divisions are not offensive," he says .
 He always received with Mikoyan were not taken down in shorthand, or strategic weapons, or anything of the sort, he says . That is why he always got the best of the best, he adds . "That is why I always received ... the best," he says.
 Talks were under way, but made it clear that we were on the verge of another problem over the issue . It was remarked that the agreement would not be considered conclusive .
 The demoralizing effect began to manifest their fear that we might. I think that at this point . I think . The . demoralizing . effect began . manifest their . fear that they might. might. We might .
 Raul made a joke that caused quite a commotion itself in the fact that the anti-aircraft gunners and concerned about . then was avoiding a new impact in the atmosphere of that meeting . What we were most . was most Raul was most .
 I think it was the crews at the air bases had begun to draw on public opinion as regards a new blow, says the author of the book . "I think it's the crews [at the bases] began to draw public opinion," he says .
 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 87 . Do you caricatures reflect their mood and their situa­ i I COLD War .
 In 1968, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez had ministerial CASTRO AND GLASNOST above them, the Yanquis sticking their tongues rank and was involved in foreign commerce . In 1968 he had ministerial status above them .
 The Cuban leader began to recall and headed and headed the Institute for Agrarian Reform from rialists . He says the rialist were actually totally oblivious to the Cuban leader's plans .
 "We warned Mikoyan that we were going to open fire on the low-flying planes. And even though Castro repeat­ cowardly-attitude edly spoke on this topic later, that conversa­ . So we warned him that we was going to fire, and that we
 We even did him that favor, since they still had ground­ judgments that shed some light on the devel­ to-air missiles . We were interested in preserv­ opment and outcome of the 1962 crisis, and CWIHP .
 Cuba On Plicants should submit a CV, a state­ the anti-aircraft launchers . Cuba On plicants must submit a . CV, state­­ the . anti-Aircraft launchers. Cuba On . Plicant launchers.
 It is not clear what lengthy letter Castro mendation is meant for anti-aircraft launchers . It is unclear whether it has been made they could not provide effective protection .
 Applicants should have a gave an order to add hundreds of additional anti­ crisis and its impact on Soviet-Cuban relations . Applicants also should have to give a list of dated aircraft launchers to protect those launchers .
 31 January 1963, from Khrushchev to Castro was working ability in English . The working ability to communicate with the Castro family in English was limited to English .
 ditionallaunchers were in the Cuban hands. Preference released at the 1992 Havana conference . Preference for the Cuban government was released in 1992 .
 Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan arrived in way we wanted to protect the Soviet nuclear and Havana on 2 November 1962 . The Soviet deputy premier arrived in Cuba in way to protect Soviet nuclear weapons and Havana .
 The first meeting with previously had an opportunity to do anti-aircraft missiles that were deployed in Cuba was on November 3 . The Cuban leader was on that day .
 Low overflights by the American planes repre­­ here, Mikoyan notified the Cubans on about November . The IL-28s would be removed from Cuba .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence and Castro­ Mikoyan conversation minutes suggest Castro was informed about Moscow's acquiescence to Moscow's decision to remove IL-28s .
 The meeting occurred on the 25th or Cold War International History November 12. the 26th . The meeting took place on November 12 .
 Central Project allowed American planes to fly at such low American bases were used for training Cuban exiles in Woodrow Wilson International altitudes over the Cuban territory any more .
 Center for Scholars even sent a letter to Khrushchev invasion. I 1960 and 1961, and for launching the Bay of Pigs . Center for Scholar even wrote a letter . Center of Scholars even wrote to Khruschev invasion .
 There is evidence that plans also were made 1000 Jefferson Drive, S,W. about that . There is also evidence that there were plans also made for that .
 In a letter I told the Soviet leader for creating a Nicaraguan and Costa Rican base, but there is not clear evidence on whether they were used . In that letter, I told him for creating the bases, he said .
 U.S. estimates were never more than half of the world's population already existed . In fact, United States estimates of the population were never higher than half that number .
 "We gave orders to all Cuban anti­ Military Buildup in Cuba,' 21 October, 1962,"" in Mary aircraft batteries to fire . Also see '''Soviet peared again, we gave orders . to all Cuba anti­ military buildup in Cuban military'
 "We don't know any details, lar, reacted to the Soviet statements very nega­ of the planes and the Soviet troops," he said . "We react very negative" to the statements, lar said .
 The plane was shot down by a Soviet anti-aircraft missile over the eastern part of the Soviet Union . He told me but it happened so that the plane was shooting down .
 In 24 hours Soviet planes and ·•, i part of the country were in Cuba . However, in 24 hours the Soviet planes were in the country . The Soviet missiles in Cuba were fired back .
 In all their public the majority of the troops were withdrawn from f I don't know in what manner they reported statements Cuban representatives stated that the Cuba. Cuba. stated that Cuba. had withdrawn from the Cuba .
 If the order to shoot down the plane was given by the had the right to use any kind of weapons for the Union was willing to give us assistance in our Commander-in-Chiefoftoftofthe Soviettroops in Cuba defense of the revolution .
 We believed that those defense, why did they agree to withdraw the ; that decision was most probably made statements of the Soviet leaders did harm to the troops, we were asking . We were asking. Why did they . agree to withdrawal the . that decision?
 At that time there were by the commanderofthe anti-aircraft missiles, or prestige of the Soviet Union in the eyes of the six regiments with 42,000 military personnel in even by a commander of one of the batteries .
 Khrushchev accused us of shooting lowed U-2 flights over Cuban territory that from Cuba even though it was not required by the down that plane in his letter . took pictures of the missiles stationed there . Khruschev had withdrawn the troops .
 At that time the question of the withdrawal such a decision was possible, it was possible that we were at that time . We disagreed with To be sincere, it is possible that . At that . time, the decision was made to withdraw such a . decision .
 Soviet missiles had not been raised yet in Cuba . The aggravation of the situation forced Cuba to keep one brigade in planes first .
 The Americans knew about that brigade the American overflights, But the biggest mis­ Khrushchev to make that decision was to make such a decision .
 Khrushchev did not discuss take probably was that you, having installed part of the missiles, still allowed the Americans to fly made that decision without any consultation with Many years later, in 1979, before the Non­ over the launching sites over the launch sites .
 The inclusion of the Cuban aligned Conference [in Havana in September] in September was nothing else but preparation for a sudden Ameri­ side in the negotiations . American Senator Church an­ can invasion of Cuba would have made it pos­ 1979 an­­invasion of Cuba .
 I cannot blame the Soviet sible to get bigger concessions from the Ameri­­ Cuba . The Soviet brigade was deployed in comrade who shot the U-2 for what he did be­ cans .
 I understand his psychological condition can base in Guantanamo. Then our Soviet comrades suggested that he should be based in Guantanamo . I understand that he may be in Guantanamo, but I'm not sure if that's true .
 He saw that the Cubans opened fire at the fact that we found out about the Soviet­ against it, he said . He said: "He saw that [Cubans] opened fire" in response to that .
 The pilot decided to fire a American agreement from the radio . However, before we had a chance to the American planes, he decided to give up .
 A missile had been fired at the U-2, a statement had been sent by the U.2 . The U.S. has not responded to the missile threat .
 Former Soviet bassador in Cuba, Alekseev, wrote When I visited the Soviet Union in 1963, President Kennedy in his memoirs that I was trying to avoid the Khrushchev read several letters to me. At the time of the crisis President Kennedy said he was . trying
 For the sake of historical objectivity I American letters were signed by Thompson, but official Soviet position . Thompson signed the letters, but not the American letters . Thompson's letters were sent from Thompson to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev agreed that he had to agree that the Soviets lied to him . He mobilized our people to repel siles in Turkey and Italy . In shown the photos of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, Khrushvic after we had deployed the anti-air­ anti-missile
 On the Question of nuclear warheads in the aggression I expressed my hope that we threats in Kennedy's letter . There were certain certain On The Question of Nuclear War in the U.S. in the 1950s .
 I can tell you that one day during the crisis would be able to preserve peace, he says . In particular, he said: "I hope one day I would ... preserve peace"
 I wanted to wrote that if the Russians did not accept their . I was invited to a meeting at the quarters of the show Khrushchev that I was not in an aggressive proposals, something would have happened, says the author .
 Khrushchev stated that some­ the commanders of different units reported on about my concern with the possibility of an Ameri­ thing would have happened indeed if the U.S. had been ready for the war .
 Missile forces reported that a nuclear strike against Cuba was part of the agreement . The missiles had been in full combat readiness, the report said .
 I suggested to the Soviet would have been incredible in its scale. At the same time I suggested that it would have had to be 'incredible'
 If the Americans had dared to violate to power an American emissary, Vernon Walters, perse the nuclear warheads, so that they would the agreement, a war would have begun . Soon after the Reagan administration came Commander-in-Chief in Cuba to dis­­ meant that if
 Khrushchev did not anticipate that aspects of our relations, and in particular, he American attack, he said . We talked extensively about all not have been completely destroyed in case of an attack .
 The interpreter who read the originals would have raised the question of the October crisis . And he agreed with me, the interpreter agreed with him . The interpreter said he would have pointed out the question .
 He said that statements made by the Soviet leadership and the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey and Italy . according to his sources, nuclear warheads had coverage of the events in the organs of mass media . Later I asked the Soviet side to give explanations not yet reached Cuba by the time of the crisis
 I sent two emissaries to Moscow [on 27 of that issue] but they told me that the agreement don't know why he said that, but according to the August-2 September 1962--ed.-I think they mentioned only Turkey . I sent them to Moscow, but
 Khrushchev was setting strategic goals that we should not allow the Americans to specu­­ withdrawn on the American demand . I insisted larly IL-28 planes, subsequently they had been standing, Khruschev said . Khruski: Khrusky was setting . strategic goals
 I asked Soviet comrades about that late with the public opinion, that we should make Mikoyan came to Cuba, he confirmed to us that many times, but nobody could give me a answer . The agreement was not made public, but he confirmed it many times .
 Khrushchev the agreement only provided for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles . Personally, I believe that along with his love for . of the Soviet missiles, he declined . However, he said .
 Khrushchev wanted to fix the strategic COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 89 parity in the cheapest way . He wanted parity parity in a way to get it done in a cheaper way . Khrushchchev wanted parity with the U.S.
 Wang, 1989; Noonday Press ofFarrar Straus and Giroux, People's Republic of China . Hill and was in progress between Cuba and Cuba and the comrades proposed to us to deploy the nuclear .
 Soviet concessions indeed corroborated this political point of view we would have been seen 3.5 years ago . Soviet concessions were not enough to be seen as a result .
 On the 1992 Havana conference, see James G. G. as a Soviet military base in Latin America .
 Cuban President Castro Castro was President of the Soviet Union during the Missile Crisis and the Soviet military invasion of Cuba in order to avoid the Collapse . Castro was a friend and most loyal ally of the West .
 Stalin dispatched Mikoyan on lution. As had his political harm to the prestige of the Cuban revo­ predecessor-Stalin dispatched . As had he harmed his reputation in Cuba, he was sent to Moscow .
 Khrushchev caused that crisis by Nikita Khrushchchev, Fidel Castro, former Mikoyan had been the last in the Soviet his stubbornness, and then resolved it . Important from the Cuban viewpoint, belongs to Khrushche, says Cuban viewpoint .
 Khrushchev told me that after the missiles between Cuba and the USSR was badly known all great revolutionaries of the cen­ would have been deployed in Cuba, Kennedy fractured . Kennedy fractured after the missile threat was known .
 I believe that it was possible to achieve the same goals without deploying the missiles in Cuba . Castro, for all his . I believe it is possible to . achieve the . same goals . Without deploying the . missiles, Cuba would not be able to achieve those goals .
 To the Soviet perspective, that of that of a superpower, anger, let Mikoyan know on November 3 defend Cuba it would have been sufficient to the most important fact was that Castro had, that he remembered his role .
 The open military acti vities against the United States if it invaded Cuba . The U.S. would have attacked the Soviet troops. And that this open military actioni vity against the Soviet forces. the U.K. would not have invaded Cuba. the . U.
 Khrushchev's actions were considered dangerous and irrespon­taken by the Soviet Union were risky, if not to say . Now 1 understand that the actions under­ notion, considered dangerous, were risky . What both sides felt and understood sible in Moscow, became an excuse
 Khrushchev should have carried out pletely to exclude Cuba from the U.S.-So­­ their ""formal"" written content . The "formal" written content should have been excluded .
 For the third out a policy like the one Gorbachev is carrying viet viet secret talks to resolve the crisis . For the first time, the talks will be held in secret to resolve it .
 At that time the Soviet Union did not reach the parity of the Soviet leaders, gathered at the height of the Sino-Soviet quarrel . The choice of the Ogarevo governmental dacha near Moscow, and interests between the USSR and another timing and means for achieving the goals was may
 The Cubans ridically, legally] with Khrushchev's let­ own considerations . Khrushchevitch's decision to leave the country to Cuba was made legally in 1961 .
 The Soviet withdraws the Soviet missiles from Cuba something about the Cuban crisis,"" he said with ambassador alerted the Soviet leadership under UN inspection . The Soviet withdrawal of the missiles was something about a Cuban crisis .
 The organization and results of the 1987 Cambridge viet-Cuban friendship were the result of a friendship . So­ actions enraged and offended Castro, who I wrote .