 In 1962, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived a plan for a strategic base in Cuba that the U.S.R. could use to deter or threaten the United States and, at the same time, protect an ally from attack .
 After an American spy plane discovered Soviet missiles capable of striking the U.S. in mid-October 1962, the world got as close as it ever did to a nuclear war . The world got closer to war than ever before in 1962 .
 The confrontation was eventually resolved peacefully, with the Soviet Union agreeing to remove the missiles . The Soviet Union agreed to remove missiles from the site .
 The showdown grew out of several elements of the Cold War, including a clear understanding on the part of the Soviet leadership of their nation's strategic weakness .
 America's economic power, its technology, and its geographic advantages sat in the forefront of Soviet thinking throughout the 1950s . America's economy, technology and its early leads in nuclear weapons and launchers were key to the Soviet thinking .
 American U-2 reconnaissance flights over Soviet territory flaunted this strength even as they uncovered Soviet weaknesses . American U.2 flights found Soviet weaknesses even though they uncovered weaknesses .
 Khrushchev believed that the Soviet Union could gain strength by currying allies in the developing world . At the same time, he believed that many nations were emerging from colonial rule . The Soviet Union wanted to gain strength in the emerging world, but also wanted allies .
 The U.S. regarded Latin America as its sphere of influence . For its part, the United States considered Latin America to be part of the world's most powerful .
 The Soviets did not create Fidel Castro's revolution, but they were willing to embrace it . The Soviets didn't create the revolution but embraced it, and they embraced it .
 The U.S. refused to tolerate a Soviet client state in the Western Hemisphere . The United States, however, refused to accept a client state .
 Before 1962, two U.S. administrations had unleashed diplomats, economic sanctions, spies, propagandists, assassins, agents, agents and even a miniature army to destabilize or remove the Castro regime .
 The failure of the American-sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 encouraged the Kennedy administration to go after Castro again, including the use of force . The disastrous failure of that invasion in 1961 actually encouraged the administration to pursue Castro again .
 Kennedy had attacked Eisenhower's dealings with Cuba during the 1960 campaign . Kennedy had, after all, attacked Eisenhower for his handling of the situation .
 He wanted to make sure that Khrushchev and the U.S. electorate both understood that he was a tough and resolute leader . Now, he wanted to . make sure they both understood he was tough . Now he wants to .
 Soviet leaders, for their part, had to confront their substantially weaker strategic position . Soviet leaders faced a very difficult task to come up with .
 Their rockets could devastate Western Europe; but they had a strike force capable of hitting the United States only one-tenth the size of the force with which the U.S. could hit them . Their strike force is one of only a few tenths the size that the United
 The Americans had, through NATO, placed Jupiter missiles in Turkey that could strike the Soviet Union in ten minutes . Meanwhile, the U.S. had placed Jupiter missile launchers in Turkey . The missiles were placed in Turkey and could strike Russia in 10 minutes .
 As early as 1959, Eisenhower had compared such a NATO base with the possibility of Soviet missiles in Mexico or Cuba . Eisenhower had said such a base might warrant anything from serious concern to direct military action .
 The Soviets saw in Castro's revolution an opportunity to redress the strategic imbalance and to protect an ally faced with trouble . Now, the Soviets saw the revolution as a chance to redress that imbalance .
 Khrushchev's plan was a bold and imaginative stroke, but it was not a prudent one, writes David Frum . The plan was bold but imaginative, but not prudent, he says .
 Khrushchev moved, in the spring of 1962, to establish a Soviet base in Cuba . He was wary of the destructive power of thermonuclear explosions .
 The Americans would eventually discover about 40 mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles with one-megaton warheads . They would also find a squadron of obsolete, but nuclear-capable, bombers, surface-to-air missiles .
 Soviet weapons included short-range cruise missiles tipped with tactical nuclear weapons . Most significantly, Soviet weapons were tipped with nuclear warheads .
 Khrushchev also sent a powerful military force of 42,000 that could maintain and launch missiles, support patrols in U.S. waters by Soviet missile-launching submarines .
 Kremlin leaders had warned Khrushchev of the risks he was running . American reconnaissance would most likely discover the installation before it was operational, as it did on October 15 .
 The failure of Khrushchev's gamble brought the two nations close to war . The failure led the two countries to the brink of war in 1956 .
 One wrong move could begin a global thermonuclear war . Neither government wanted to back down; each realized that both of them had to back . Both were painfully aware that one wrong move .
 Kennedy initially intended to bomb the missiles where they lay . After gathering his senior advisors, Kennedy initially planned to attack the missiles . Kennedy initially wanted to bomb them where they were located .
 ExComm began to talk about a full-scale invasion of Cuba, projected to result in more than 18,000 casualties . Gradually, the American leadership realized that bombing alone could not guarantee complete destruction .
 The actual number would probably have been far higher than that, however, because the U-2s never discovered the tactical nuclear weapons . Intelligence had substantially underestimated the conventional ground forces that would have opposed a landing .
 Kennedy feared that opening with a diplomatic move would make him look weak . Diplomacy was never a first option, for Kennedy feared it would be a mistake .
 ExComm discussed diplomatic solutions, including removing American missiles in Turkey in exchange for removing Soviet missiles in Cuba, throughout the first week of the crisis . ExComm also discussed proposals to remove the American missile in Turkey from Turkey .
 Only as Kennedy and his aides realized that a direct assault was unworkable did they allow themselves to accept the less immediately violent course of a naval blockade . The blockade was a less violent course than a direct military assault, they say .
 The “quarantine” provided a show of military force sufficient to impress both the Soviets and U.S. politicians, while also providing some room to think . The "quarantine" provided a . show of force .
 The Soviets first realized on October 22 that the Americans had found them out . The U.S. found out about the Soviets' involvement in the war in Afghanistan .
 It was the morning before Kennedy announced the discovery of the missiles and the blockade intended to force their removal . Kennedy was the president when the missiles were discovered .
 Some of their Cuban weapons were already operational, but they had no plans for how to use them if the U.S. actually attacked . The Soviets had, surprisingly, made no plans .
 The Soviet Presidium debated its course of action as heatedly as ExComm had for the previous week . Led by Khrushchev, the Presidium then backed down .
 Defying Kennedy's blockade might start a war, but even if it did not, the Americans might well capture some of the U.S.R.'s most advanced military technology . Even if the Americans did not capture, they might be able to seize some of America's most advanced
 The U.S. presented photographic proof to the U.N. Security Council . In public, they continued to deny that there were offensive missiles in Cuba . But the Americans had photographic proof .
 To defend Cuba against an American attack, the Soviets and the Cubans could have made do with what they had already had there, but they chose not to . The Soviets and Cubans were able to defend Cuba from an American invasion .
 Kennedy's flat-out refusal to tolerate the missiles had exactly, and immediately, the impact he wanted . Kennedy did not know it, but he did know it .
 The idea of a Soviet strategic base was instantly dead, and Khrushchev was not willing to use nuclear missiles to defend Cuba . The Soviet Union did not want to use nukes in Cuba .
 Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy offering to remove missiles in return for a pledge that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . Kennedy offered to remove the missiles in exchange for a promise that the United States would not invasion Cuba .
 Khrushchev sent a second letter adding a demand that the American missiles in Turkey be removed . Before Kennedy had a chance to respond, the letter was sent to the president . Kennedy had to respond to the letter .
 ExComm and the president wondered whether the Soviets were double-crossing them, or whether hard-liners had deposed Khrushchev . A Soviet antiaircraft commander, without authorization, shot down a U-2 spy plane with a surface-to-air missile .
 With the possibility of a peaceful solution receding, the U.S. military began to implement more of its contingency plans for an invasion of Cuba . The American military plans for a Cuban invasion are now underway .
 Soviet forces prepared to repel them, although without authority to use their nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union was prepared to use its nuclear weapons against the Nazis in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev interpreted article by U.S. columnist Walter Lippmann proposing a Turkey-Cuba missile swap as a signal that he was willing to make such a trade . Kennedy had sent his first letter to the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev chose to accept Kennedy's deal before things got out of hand . Kennedy was shaken by the unauthorized missile firing . The deal was eventually accepted by the Soviets .
 Kennedy, equally disturbed, sent his brother, Attorney Gen. Gen. Robert Kennedy, to the White House . At the same time, Kennedy sent Gen. John Kennedy's brother, Gen. Edward Kennedy, also disturbed .
 Robert Kennedy, to the Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to accept the missile swap, provided that the swap agreement was kept secret . Robert Kennedy offered the deal to keep the deal secret . The deal was eventually agreed to be kept secret by the Soviets .
 The two countries had to clean up some details over the next month, but the crisis was over . The crisis was not over until the end of the month .
 The global brush with death brought no respite to the Cold War . But a turning point in the conflict had passed . The Cold War was still a Cold War, but the conflict was not over .
 Negotiations for nuclear arms control began and became institutionalized . Thereafter, the U.S. and the Soviet Union could sign some agreements never before in reach .
 In the United States, President Kennedy's apparent victory, without war, earned him a reputation for Cold War management . In the U.S., Kennedy's reputation was overshadowed by failures of his early months in power and the disaster of the Bay of Pigs .
 The resolution to the confrontation contributed to the success of Kennedy's last year in office . It remains a central element of his historical reputation . The resolution of the confrontation helped Kennedy's success in his last year .
 In Moscow, Khrushchev's retreat from the confrontation was a principal reason the Presidium unseated him as its leader . The Presidium's decision to unseat him was a major reason for his ouster as leader .