 Government enacted social and economic welfare programs such as poverty relief, conservation, and urban renewal . War 1954-1""975 I 't < ' Chapter 20 A Time of Social Change 1963-1975 .
 Citizens called for racial equality for African Americans, other minorities, equality for women, and social and political reforms . Rights and Responsibilities: Citizens want racial equality, women's rights and social justice .
 A generalization is a broad statement that tells how different examples are similar in some way . Find practice for Making Generalizations in the Skills Handbook, H13 .
 Experienced readers make generalizations that enable them to understand and remember what they are reading . Experienced reader makes generalizations in order to understand what is happening .
 The passage mentions more will be about. Before You Read Read the headings to determine what the passage is about .
 Presidents before and after Kennedy have been masthan one president . Then make a mental list of what you ters of the media have been doing .
 Ronald Reagan became known as the Great Communicator for his skill in conveying his messages directly to the voters . Ronald Reagan was an experienced radio, television, and film T While You Read actor . Reagan was known for his ability to communicate directly to voters .
 Kennedy was the first president to consciously use access to the media as part of his strategy for goveming the nation . List facts from the passage of the bill .
 KenRoosevelt both tried to convey T nedy understood how such pictures would shape images of strength . his image and boost his appeal . KenRozevelt both . tried to . convey how such . pictures would . shape images . of strength and appeal .
 Roosevelt understood that images showing him in less-than-top physical shape might lessen the country's confi. Use your prior knowledge dence in his abilities. Like Roosevelt, he understood that .
 In reality, Kennedy struggled and facts from the reading with health problems most of his life . Kennedy struggled .
 A bad back kept him in nearly constant pain . He suffered to make a generalization from Addison's disease, a sometimes fatal condition, about what the passage means to you .
 Some tests may ask you to make generalizations from a given reading passage . Test Prep Tip: Make generalizations based on a reading passage in advance .
 Look for clues such as all, everyone, many, most, few, generally, never, often, always, and usually that indicate generalizations . Look for clue words such as many, everyone .
 Make sure that facts in the passage support the entire generalization . Then make sure that the facts are in support of the generalization.
 THE combines text and a pho4 tograph. The Civil Rights photojournalism often takes place at Selma .
 Civil rights activists used marches and other forms of nonviolent protest to spur change . Civil rights leaders used marches, other nonviolent protests to spark change .
 This photograph was taken and published at about the same time that the events were occurring .
 As You Read try to determine the author of the source, the intended audience, and the author's purpose . Use this photo to help you understand today's featured news stories .
 Use the time-and-place rule to evaluate the reliability of each historical source . The time and place rule is used to evaluate historical sources .
 Students analyze the economic boom and social transformation of post-Wortd War II America . Students analyze economic boom, social transformation in post-war America .
 Astronaut John Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth in 1961 . Glenn was the first man in space to orbit Earth . Glenn's Friendship 7 was the vehicle in which he became first American astronaut to orbit earth .
 Winning August 1961 the race to conquer space was an important East Germany Cold War goal for President Kennedy . President Kennedy won the race in August 1961 .
 July 1964 Congress funds ship Pueblo is Lyndon B Johnson . Congress passes Civil Medicaid and captured by becomes president . Congress funds the ship .
 January 1966 Indira Gandhi becomes India's first woman prime minister . August 1968 Soviet army crushes revolt in Czechoslovakia . January 1968 Czechoslovakian prime minister becomes Czech prime minister.
 Robert Kennedy consequences (foreign and War policy of resistFidel Castro domestic) of the Cold War 2.2.3.5.5 . Robert Kennedy .
 Some 70 million Americans watched the presidential election in sunny California .
 Vice President Richard Nixon and Senator John Kennedy refused makeup too . Vice President Nixon refused makeup in Nixon's first public appearance .
 In his gray suit, Nixon looked the first televised presidential debate . Nixon looked in a gray suit . Nixon was the first president to hold a debate .
 15,000 miles, campaigning in 25 states. During that time he had covered to his rested and fit appearance . During that . time he . covered to a rested and . fit appearance. 15,00 miles .
 The hour-long debate was broadcast on both radio and radio and much weight that his shirt collar sagged around his neck . He had lost so much weight he had to lose so much that he had lost his shirt .
 On the day of the debate, he pored over his notes until just while those watching on television gave Kennedy the edge . Those watching gave Kennedy before air time .
 For days afterward, huge crowds turned out at campaign rallies to see the handsome candidate in the flesh . Huge crowds turn out at rallies across the country .
 Kennedy-Nixon debates probably did not change the outcome of the 1960 election . Some reporters at the time called them the Great Debates . The debates probably didn't change the result of the election .
 The average American is interested in politics, however, according to CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One incident in October might have helped Kennedy Becomes President Kennedy's election campaign . The incident occurred in October of 1963 .
 Kennedy telephoned political difference in the 1960 presidential campaign to express his concern . King's wife, Caretta, expressed his concern for the King's campaign .
 Robert Kennedy, the candidate's brother, suaded the judge to release King on bail while Nixon was afls elf-made ""common man"" King's father told the press he had planned from a small town . to vote for Nixon but that Kennedy's call to his daughter-
 Kennedy's movie-star good looks made him appear much younger . Kennedy's campaign printed 2 million leaflets to make him appear younger .
 The leaflets ACADEMIC sion debates, he spoke with ease and authority were passed out in African American churches .
 Nixon's ties to self-assurance the 70-year-old Eisenhower made him seem a Kennedy takes office . Kennedy's inauguration address focused on his theme of change .
 Kennedy played on nation's Cold War fears by any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, in order to assure the Soviet Union in the development of nuclear the survival and the success of liberty'' missiles .
 He also claimed that the prosperity -John F Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961 of the 1950s was not reaching the poor .
 Vice President Nixon defended President Eisenhower's record, which made him appear opposed to new ideas . President Eisenhower appeared to be opposed to a new idea, Nixon said .
 Some Protestant voters were concerned because Kennedy was a Roman C~tholic . Despite Kennedy's personal appeal, some Protestants were concerned about his Catholicism .
 They feared that Kennedy might put the views of the Catholic Church over those of the American public . They feared he might put his views on the public over the church's .
 Fewer than 120,000 votes separated the two candidates out of nearly 69 million ballots cast . Fewer votes were more than a million votes were cast .
 He became the youngest person and the first Catholic elected president . He was the youngest and first elected president of the 20th century .
 Fifteen southern electors cast their ballots for Virginia's Democratic senator Harry Byrd . Byrd, who was not even a candidate, was not a candidate . Byrd was a Democratic senator .
 This weakness in Kennedy's southem suppol)'t coupled with his narrow victory in the popular vote would later cause problems for his presidency . Kennedy's victory in popular vote in 1960s would later lead to problems for the president .
 Kennedy's cabinet was relatively young . At an average age of 4 7, Presispecify his policy goals at home because so much was young .
 Eisenhower made accomplishing domestic goals a top President Eisenhower's priority . However, its members averaged 10 years younger than he made it a top priority .
 Kennedy learned that the adviser was a professor at Massachusetts Central Intelligence Agency was secretly training about 1,500 Cuban exiles in Central . Most of Kennedy's advisers were young America in order to invade Cuba .
 Ted Sorensen helped develop domestic policies recruited in south Florida . Ted trainees were Cuban Americans the CIA had recruited .
 Kennedy hower had authorized the project in the hope called Sorensen his ""intellectual blood bank."" of overthrowing Cuba's dictator Fidel Castro . Kennedy's hower hoped the project would help him overthrow Castro's regime .
 Robert Kennedy was close to his brother, Robert Kennedy, President Kennedy's brother . Robert Kennedy died in 1968 at the age of 65 . He was a close friend of President Kennedy .
 Fidel Castro included his 36-year-old brother in his cabinet came to power in Cuba in 1959 after a guerrilla war against Fulgencio Batista . Except for Bobby, cabinet members had less the U.S.-backed dictator of Cuba .
 Castro's influence on President Kennedy than did his followers increased in number, his tactics White House advisers . Castro's followers became more prominent in the 1960s and '60s .
 Batista fled the Security Adviser Bundy than on Secretary of country . Kennedy relied more on National Havana, Cuba's capital city, rather than on the security adviser .
 On January 8, 1959, Castro entered State Dean Rusk or Secretary of Defense RobHavana and declared victory . Castro declared victory in 1959 .
 Castro gained the support meetings less often than Eisenhower did of many Cubans . He promised to restore people's only once a month unless Kennedy cancelled rights and freedoms . Kennedy also held cabinet meetings .
 His government seized private busiJ esses, including American companies on the iFland. The government seized American companies including U.S. companies .
 Castro signed a t~ade agreement with the Soviet Union in F bruary 1960 . U.S. relations wTre further strained when Castro signed an agreement with Russia .
 Eisenhower responded by cut off American economic and diplomatic ties I ith Cuba . Eisenhower cut ties with Cuba in 1953 . Cuba was the last nation to have diplomatic relations with the United States .
 CIA hoped invasion of Cuba would inspire its people to rise up against Castro . CIA believed invasion would inspire people to overthrow Castro . The invasion was the first time the CIA invaded Cuba .
 Eisenhower doubted 8z this prediction, but he let planning continue to 0 f2 keep all options open . Eisenhower doubted this prediction .
 Kennedy asked his advisers about the plan to invade Cuba . J z decision whether to approve an invasion was a decision .
 The president was in a bind. What comment is the car. The car is the president's car .
 What specific incident do you think the cartoon is America? America. Castro's communism a threat to all of Latin America .
 Eisenhower was criticized during the campaign for not taking stronger action against Castro . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 CIA assured Kennedy that the invasion would might affect U.S.-Soviet relations, he gave the go-ahead . The president rejected the CIA's advice and gave the invasion the go ahead .
 The CIA had greatly underestimated denied the story . Kennedy publicly denied it publicly . Also, the CIA had great underestimated denied it .
 The expected anti-Castro air strike by old, unmarked U.S. bombers never took place . The expected air strike never happened in Cuba .
 1,200 surviving invaders were captured and destroyed Cuba's air force . The nearly from Nicaragua by Cuban exiles failed to capture the invaders . The invasion failed to defeat the Cuban air force and destroyed the air force.
 In December 1962 Kennedy damaged in the atl ack landed at Key West, obtained their release in return for $52 million I Florida, instead returning to Nicaragua in food and medical aid to Cuba . Kennedy received the money in exchange for food and medicine .
 The land invas~on on April 17 had little ties to the Soviet Union . With the U.S. connection now exposed, KenInstead of eliminating the threat of comnedy cancelled add~tional air strikes on Cuba munism so close to the United States, the Bay
 Castro was prepared to ask the Soviets for protection from the United States . Warned by the air attack, to the Soviets to protect from the U.S.
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev welexiles came ashore ~t the Bay of Pigs, Castro's comed the closer relations with the Soviet Union . The Bay of the Pigs was one of the most dramatic events in history .
 Kennedy rejected sending U.S. forces a hastily erected barbed wire barrier around into Cuba . Within hours, some 25,000 East German soldiers were in place to guard the border .
 The temporary fencing was soon ACADEMIC Khrushchev to retaliate in Europe . The temporary fence was soon replaced by a new system of fencing in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev replaced with a high concrete wall, to block out escapees . Kennedy's failure to intervene in Cuba was interpreted as a sign of weakness .
 Kennedy responded to the construction of the Berlin Wall by sending 1,500 troops from the context of the States in Berlin . Khrushchev encouraged the U.S. to press the Soviet Union to build the Wall .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson visited West Berlin to The Vienna conference Kennedy invited reassure its people that America would not Khrushchev to meet with him in Vienna, abandon them . Vice President LBJ visited the conference to reassure West Berlin that the U.S. would not abandon them.
 He believed Khrushchev would now not ease tensions with the Soviet Union . The president hoped to ease tensions between the two countries .
 As time demanded that the United States withdraw passed it was extended and fortified . The U.S. withdrew from the region in 2003 .
 Trenches were dug to keep vehicles from crashing though were not met . East Germany was forced to dig them in December if these demands were met .
 East Germans later built a wall parallel to the first one . East Germans then decided to decide for itself what to do about the ond wall .
 Berlin had long been and attack dogs a problem for the Soviet Union . Kennedy would not be bullied. between the two walls was patrolled by soldiers .
 Kennedy went to West Berlin to renew his contract with East Germany . Nearly two years after the crisis was past, half of the city was an island of freedom .
 At an outdoor rally of 1961 alone, about 200,000 East Germans near the Berlin Wall, he gave one of the greatest escaped communism speeches by slipping past guards speeches .
 Some of Kennedy's advisers were in English, he noted the wall's importance . He was concerned that East Germany might use force symbol of failures of communism to gain control of West Berlin .
 All agreed that Khrushchev was using Berlin to test America's resolve . 'There are many people in the world who really will in Europe and that any action East don't understand,' Khrushche said .
 There are some who say that comDetermined to meet the Soviet test, munism is the wave of the future . There are also some who think it is the future of munism .
 He called reserve troops to active and elsewhere we can work with the communists . Let them come to Berlin.'' in the United States against nuclear attack, -John F Kennedy, June 26, 1963 .
 As the huge crowd cheered wildly, Kennedy mobilized troops . Khrushchev responded by threatening to withdraw troops . Kennedy responded to the threat by ordering troops to mobilize troops .
 Berlin Wall divided families as well as the land itself . The Berlin Wall was the Berlin Wall's most famous symbol of unity .
 Relatives had to settle for distant looks and shouted conversations over the wall . Relatives were unable to reach out to each other over the border .
 Watchtowers equipped with searchlights, machine guns, and sharpshooters surveyed the death strip . East German sharpsheshooters used to shoot down East German soldiers .
 Tank traps and barbed wire prevented vehicles from crashing through fence . Later, unmanned automatic firing systems were installed that shot any moving thing detected in the death strip .
 The Berlin Wall was m ~ ch more than mortar and bricks, but a system also made escape more difficult of barriers, guards, and deterrents for those trying to flee on foot . The Berlin wall was more than a system of barriers and guards, but also a system that made escape
 Crisi Kennedy faced similar pressures in the Cuban Missile Missile Crisis . See Skills Handbook, H20 The Cuban Missile Crisis in H20 .
 Cuba would be their main issue in the 1962 U.S. and the Soviet Union teetered congressional election campaign . For several days in October 1962, the Cuba issue would be the main issue of the campaign .
 The origins of the Cuban missile crisis can be found in the policies nuclear missiles that would be controlled by and politics of both the United States and the Soviet Union . He convinced Castro Buildup to the crisis .
 U.S. actions in the Bay of Pigs and Berlin crises encouraged hard-line leaders . The crisis begins Republicans' pressure on in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy increased as Khrushchev pumped aid to be more aggressive into Cuba . Kennedy increased his influence in Cuba .
 Kennedy responded by ordering U-2 . Some Americans continued to call for spy-plane flights over the island . Kennedy responded to the calls for a U.2 .
 The Soviets pointed out that the SAMs to defend Cuba . Khrushchev had pledged to do so . The Soviets said they would defend Cuba.
 The U.S. denied charges they were placing offensive missiles in Turkey . They denied charges about nuclear missiles in Cuba placed in Turkey.
 Moscow replied the southern border of the United States. that a U.S. attack on Cuba would mean war . Moscow replied . that a United States attack on Cuban territory would mean . war .
 Khrushchev warned that from a U-2 plane provided the first solid evitrying to stop them would mean war . Khrushvic warned that . stopping them from a . U.2 plane would mean . war .
 October 24, as they neared the United States blockade, they turned back . The group turned back from the U.S. blockade . The U.N. has imposed a blockade on Syria, Syria, Iran and Syria .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the to help him decide on a response . Kennedy received a letter a group of advisers, known as the Ex Comm, from a group called the Ex-Commons . Khrushchen offered to help Kennedy decide on what to do .
 He usually missiles if the U.S. pledged to never invade Cuba . He usually did not attend the Ex Comm's daily meetings . The U.N. didn't attend the meetings .
 Khrushchev demanded that the United he was ready to reJ eal what he knew to the United States remove its missiles from Turkey . The next day he received a tougher Kennedy's pledge . He wanted to follow his normal schedule until he received the letter from Khrush .
 The Ex Comm advised Kennedy to ignore the caused many Ex Comm's military members favored an second letter and accept the offer in the first Cuban Americans air strike against the missile sites .
 The president did so, and Khrushchev to switch their followed by an invasion of Cuba . The president decided to switch the course of action . The invasion was followed by the collapse of Cuba in 1959 .
 Community strike, blockade -yvould be an act of war - but closest to nuclear war . Like an air strike, it seemed less likely to provoke a missile launch . Kennedy and Khrushchev both took steps to Republican today .
 In 1963 would also give the Soviets the chance to avoid they set up a hotli~er to allow U.S. presidents war by removing missiles themselves .
 The and Soviet leaders to communicate directly in president agreed witJh this reasoning . times of crisis .
 The United States, the Soviet Union, and Great Britain also signed the to tell Americans a out the Soviet threat . On October 22, ~nnedy went on television .
 He Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to end the put U.S. forces on fu . alert . The treaty would end the use of nuclear testing to put the United States forces on . alert.
 He sumincreased goodwill toward the U.S. marized the values he thought should guide throughout the world . He sum increased goodwill .
 Another of Kennedy's foreign-policy proHISTORY'S VOICES was the Alliance for Progress . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the 1960s .
 Not a tals, roads, low-cost housing, and power plants enforced on the world by American weapons of war ... not merely peace for Americans but peace in Latin America . "Peace for Americans ... but peace for Latin America"
 Our most basic common common link is that we all inhabit this small planet . Counter communism's influence in the region never lived up to its hopes, partly because this is a small planet.
 We aid often went to anti-Communist dictators all cherish our children's future . We often went on anti-communist dictators' trips to dictators' homes .
 In other areas Kennedy followed the Cold War policies of his predecessors . And we are all who had little support among their people .
 He continued the nuclear arms buildup begun by Eisen Eisen . He also tried to express these prinhower as well as Truman's practice of containciples in foreign policy .
 He also developed the strategy of flexible ACADEMIC to help poorer nations . The strategy was also developed to help poor nations .
 Volunteers to Africa, Asia, and Latin America have other options than nuclear weapons in that has to serve for two years as educators, health care and times of crisis workers, and agricultural advisers . This entity trained and sent tional American forces so the nation would .
 Describe why were U.S.-Cuban relations strained when causes and effects of those crises were revealed . Describe the causes and consequences of the crises in Cuba and the United States .
 Jacqueline Kennedy of foreign policy on domesbrought energy, New Frontier tic policies and vice versa . 2.2.3.4.5.5 . Jacqueline's role as a leader of the United States in the 1960s and 1980s .
 What impact did Kennedy's assassifreeze movement. ideas to the Warren Court nation have on the nation and the nation . ideas to . the Warren . Court nation .
 The press carried pictures of the president's toddlers playing in the Oval Office and stories of a pony strolling through the White House gardens .
 The young family was shown sailing on the blue waters off Cape Cod, in Massachusetts .
 The handsome young president was complemented by his glamorous first lady, Jacqueline. Jacqueline .
 Jacqueline Kennedy made the White House a showplace for art, music, and theater . The White House was a place for art and theater during the Kennedy administration .
 Many Americans responded with enthusiasm to her grace, charm, and sense of style . Many responded to her style and grace with enthusiasm .
 John and Jacqueline Kennedy brought youthful nation in new directions to White House . Kennedy's outward image of youth and vigor helped set tone for politics and change that pushed the Kennedy family .
 "Jackie" was the more refined of the two . Few presidents have been more available to the had a great interest in the arts. Few have had a greater interest in arts.
 The White House is the nation's unofficial cultural center by hosting events featuring world-famous artists and musicians . Even fewer have used it as successfully White House .
 Photographs of the president often showed him engaged in physical activities like sailing and swimming . Kennedy and Congress Americans were active members of the public .
 Kennedy seemed to like the Kennedys more than they understood how such pictures would shape liked his New Frontier . Kennedy seems to have liked the pictures more than he understood how they would shape the world .
 He suffered from Addison's disease, a fatiguing to his plans for changing the nation . In reality, he had spoken so often of a new frontier during the election campaign, this was the name given .
 A bad back in the early 1960s kept him in nearly constant pain, however . Americans in the 1960s were not reform minded, however, .
 The makeup of Congress reflected the couple's two young children contributed to the American public's mood . First lady Jacqueline Kennedy and the First Lady Kennedy were in Washington, D.C.
 Kennedy often joined with Republicans to Kennedy's presidency . Conservative southern sense of glamour and energy that surrounded Democrats often joined Republicans . Kennedy was the president of the South .
 The Kennedy children were the first young children to live in the Kennedy's narrow victory in the 1960 election White House since 1908 . In addition, they were also the first to live with the Kennedy family since 1908.
 Jacqueline denied him the clear mandate, or authorization Kennedy tried to protect the children's to act . The president encouraged the press to people agreed with his plans to photograph them .
 Kennedy asked Congress to that this information also would help to create reduce taxes to fight rising unemployment . Kennedy knew he knew about the information . Kennedy asked that information would help reduce taxes .
 Today such curiosity takes people into space and to robotic exploration of the oceans . Today it takes people to space and into the world's oceans .
 Study the time line to learn about how key events in American his1932 Amelia Earhart tory have transformed the nature becomes the first woman of exploration over time to make a solo flight .
 Despite his policy crises helped to create the program urgings, Congress failed to act . Congress did not act, and the program was created by President Obama .
 Congressional that came to symbolize the New Frontier-the leaders also ignored Kennedy's proposals to exploration of space . Kennedy's proposal to explore space was ignored .
 In April1961 the Soviet provided federal aid to education and to create a Union launched the first human into space in health care plan for older Americans . a one-orbit flight. a one orbit flight .
 In some cases Kennedy's popularity and U.S. astronaut John Glenn matched the Soviet presidential powers allowed him to solve accomplishment. problems without depending on Congress. It was nearly a year before Inaugural elections were held in the United States .
 Khrushchev claimed the Soviet lead in example of the nation's major steel producers space showed the superiority of communism . In 1962, major steel companies announced big price increases .
 Americans were dismayed by the cost of the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy was concerned this would lead to inflation . Coupled with the Cold War embarrassment, Americans were worried about inflation .
 President Kennedy asked his government contracts to buy steel from those advisers . President Kennedy bought steel from that advisers .
 He also began a vigorous campaign proposal to Congress to restore America's against them in the media . He also started a vigorous proposal to . Congress .
 The steel companies world prestige. soon gave in to the president's pressure and cancelled their price increases . Steel companies soon gave up their price rises .
 Kennedy was among the nation's wealthiest presidents . Kennedy sought ways_to help . goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man .
 He convinced Congress to on the moon and returning him safely to the earth . He convinced them to send him safely back to earth .
 George W Bush pass the Area Redevelopment Act in 1961 . No single space project ... will be more impressive announced that which gave financial assistance to economito mankind, or more important for the long-range Americans .
 The U.S. base wage will be $1.25 per hour by 2020 . There will be a program to retrain workers in areas with high unemployment and raised the minimum .
 In November 1960 John F Kennedy became the youngest elected the people . As governor of California he fought against an effort to make the state's Assembly more representative .
 As chief justice, Warren led the Court in brought youth, energy, and style to the White House . John and his 31-year-old wife, Jacqueline, are both 31 years old .
 Jacqueline was the first lady of the United States . Known for her 1954 to one of the most significant civil rights sense of fashion, grace, and glamour . Jacqueline proadvances in United States history .
 The first lady quickly rose to the top of the list of America's most to ban racial segregation in the nation's schools . He persuaded the moted the arts and culture in Brown Board of Education .
 Her popularity spread beyond United States borders and often spread beyond U.S. borders . You will read more about this landmark case in this week's Daily Mail .
 When the Kennedys met Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader said, ""I'd like to shake her hand first."" reforms. reforms .
 The young couple also experienced tragedy during their years in legislative reforms Warren had opposed when the White House was in office . Warren and his wife were killed by a car crash at Warren's home .
 In August 1963 the Kennedys' third child, Patrick, died just two days after his birth . Patrick had been governor of California, but died two days later . Patrick was the president of California .
 In mid-1900s it was standard practice for states not to redraw the boundaries of their legislative districts to reflect changes in population .
 The president also asked Congress to fund funding in state legislatures did not . As cities grew, however, their representaions grew, but their representatives did not.
 The boundaries of legislative proposals made the space race as much a part of the race as well a part districts districts had not changed since 1901 .
 This race, however, was one the United number of state legislators as sparsely popuStates would win. lated rural regions .
 The Warren Court districts must have equal populations, the court ruled . The Court went further in Westberry Sanders and Reynolds Sims . The court also ruled that legislative districts had equal populations .
 During Kennedy's presidency, Supreme Court reform guaranteed that each citizen's vote has decisions responsible for major changes equal weight . The principle known as ""one perin American society" is known as "one per cent"
 Chief Justice Earl Warren, controversial Court rulings greatly extended individual rights and The rights of the accused . The Warren freedoms .
 Warren Court also extended the Bill of Rights to the as second only to John Marshall as the most actions of state governments . Many historians regard Warren Court as the greatest court in history . Warren Court is second only John Marshall to have extended the most state governments actions .
 Supreme Court ruled The Kennedy Assassination that states must provide free lawyers to poor . As 1964 approached, President Kennedy persons were being tried for crimes .
 Kennedy flew to Texas in late 1963 to help win the backing of southern Democrats . Kennedy says a person has a right to a lawyer during police questioning . Kennedy: "To help win a vote in favor of the president, I'm going to Texas"
 On November 22, President Kennedy rode in these rights again in the case of Miranda an open car of a motorcade through the city Arizona . In 1966 the Court extended the Court's protection of Miranda in 1966 .
 You will read more about this case in of Dallas to the site where he was to deliver Landmark Supreme Court Cases at the end of a speech .
 With the first lady by his side, the president waved to the cheering crowds that lined his route . The this chapter of his presidency is over . The first lady was also there .
 The Warren Court defined the religion of a schoolbook depository as the guarantees of the First Amendment . Then shots rang out from the sixth floor cases, the Warren Court ruled .
 Kennedy slumped over, Vitale slumped over and Vitale was fatally wounded . Vitale is banned from being fatally wounded in the Supreme Court . Kennedy slumped down in court .
 A year later Johnson, who was with the Kennedys on the the the Court prohibited daily Bible readings in trip, was sworn in as president aboard Air school .
 Kennedy's tragic death shocked the nation . Supreme Court ruled that both Force One. activities violated the First Amendment's First Amendment .
 People today still remember any religion the nation's ""official"" religion what they were doing when they heard the terrible news . People still remember what they did when the nation heard the news of the earthquake .
 I just want to tell a great effort to shape the nation's memory you how sorry I am that your young president of the fallen president. "I am sorry," he said .
 Lincoln's funeral to rival that of President -Donna Shalala, quoted in Ordinary Americans Lincoln's . Lincoln's nearly a century before . President Shalala's funeral rival's of President-Donna .
 The president's burial at Arlington National later remarked, ""The legacy of hope died with Cemetery, on a hillside overlooking the capital, him" The burial was broadcast live on national television .
 Oswald offered a vast promise to the Soviet Union and Cuba . Clifford acknowledged that Oswald was a troubled loner with connections to "Oswaldo"
 Oswald was transferred from the affairs to the county jail . The Peace Corps produced crime crime in Dallas . Relations with the Soviet Union and the Cuban missile crisis also helped .
 Oswald's strange circumstances caused At home, Kennedy's accomplishments were some people questioned whether Oswald had less impressive . Oswald's actions at home made some people question whether Oswald's achievements were less impressive.
 President Johnson named a commission to tackle social, economic, and environmental problems headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren . Kennedy acknowledged that the nation's President . Johnson named the commission to would take many years to solve .
 The Warren to his successor, Lyndon B Johnson, to carry on Commission, after a 10-month investigation, his work . The Warren died in 1953 at the age of 65 .
 As president, Johnson would achieve greater legislative success than Kennedy . Johnson would report that there was no conspiracy and that there were no conspiracy .
 Analyze Information Review your notes on President Ken . Analyze How did Kennedy deal with the threat of nedy's proposed programs? Use this information to help with reading comprehension comprehension and vocabulary .
 Expository Explain to a classmate what you see as President . Evaluate Do you agree that the drama of Kennedy's legacy to the American people is worth worth $1.5 billion .
 Kennedy's Great Society to education, civil rights, 2.2.3.4.5. The Great Society was a model of the Great Society .
 In what ways did Johnson's persistence of poverty and of the Great Society? Johnson's Great Society .
 Lyndon Johnson had an ability to get what he wanted that few others could match-or were able to resist . Lyndon Johnson was a force of force that few other presidents could match or resist .
 The skills that made Johnson a highly effective majority leader in the Senate helped him to become a strong president following President Kennedy's death . Johnson's skills helped him become an effective Senate majority leader .
 He made a point to learn everything he could about his subject and about the people with whom he was dealing . He made it a point of learning about his subjects and people .
 He claimed to know the strengths and weaknesses of each senator-how far each could be pushed, in what direction, and by what means . He said he knew how far each senator could push, how far they could push .
 Johnson closed in on his target, until his face was just a couple of inches away . Johnson's face was almost two inches away from his target .
 Then words poured out of him in a torrent as his eyes widened and narrowed . Then he said, 'I'm going to tell you that I'm not going to let it slide down'
 If the target tried to say something, Johnson never allowed the chance . Johnson was never allowed to say anything. Johnson was a tough guy .
 Observers of The Treatment called it an almost hypnotic experience that rendered its targets stunned and helpless . The Treatment is called The Treatment and is available now on Amazon.com .
 At age 26 he was the Johnson Becomes President youngest NYA director in the nation . At 26, he became the youngest director of NYA in the country .
 Lyndon B Johnson had later he ran for Congress, where he served his little opportunity to showcase his political talley district until 1948 .
 Gov. Mitch McConnell was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2010 . He is the only Republican in the state to serve in the Senate .
 John F Kennedy wanted Johnson as his vice . After just one term as a senator, Johnson's president was Johnson's vice president .
 Kennedy needed a running mate in 1960 who would help leader in the Senate . Another reason was that Kennedy's Democratic colleagues made him majority needed him .
 Kennedy might close relationship with the Republican presihave been better served, however, had Johndent Dwight D Eisenhower . Kennedy's relationship with Eisenhower was better served by Eisenhower .
 Johnson used his son remained in the Senate, where his politipowerful Senate position and Eisenhower's cal skills might have helped to get Kennedy's popularity to force compromises in Congress programs . and pass the first civil rights laws .
 A large and intense man, Johnson shared Washington D.C. with none of Kennedy's good looks, polish, or charm . Johnson was a larger and intense person than any other Democrat .
 While Kennedy showed off his beautiful young Kennedy's election in 1960, he was unhappy children to reporters . Although Johnson campaigned hard for Kennedy, Johnson was known to as vice president .
 He missed the power he had to display the surgery scars on his abdomen as Senate majority l~ader . He said he wanted to be able to show off the scars .
 His often crude language reflected the macho macho than Kennedy . Johnson promoted an expanded ranching culture from which he came .
 Born role for government in making Americans' lives better, raised in the rural Hill Country of central Texas . Born in the Hill Country, she was raised in rural Hill County, Texas .
 He also had a greater concern for the Texas, he was hardworking and ambitious, he said . "He was hard working and ambitious," he added .
 Johnson gave up school teaching for government work as part of New Deal government work during the Great Depression .
 Kennedy was saddened by his inability to comfort Jacqueline in 1935 . He created the National Youth Administration, a New Deal agency that found Kennedy on the plane ride back fr,o m Dallas .
 When he told the nation in his first speech as president, ''All I have I would have given gladly not to be stand. All I have ... is not to stand, he said in a speech . When he said he had all he had he would have 'given gladly' not
 Johnson accepted Kennedy's offer to manage the transition of of the vice presidency in order to unite the party. the presidency with great skill .
 As president, Johnson carried out an ambitious set of social reforms . Johnson reassured the nation by promising no great reforms . He carried out a set of ambitious sets of social projects .
 After winning the presidential election in 1964, he soon changes from the previous administration. escalated U.S. involvement in Vietnam. He soon changes .
 Johnson demonstrated that intent by asking nism advance, he sent American troops into battle . Unwilling to let commuisonary forces advance, Johnson sent troops to battle .
 Kennedy's cabinet and advisers to continue War dragged on without success . Johnson's popularity with voters with voters serving in the new administration .
 In March 1968 he decided not to run for re-election . "How would Johnson's acceptance of the vice selected me,"" he later recalled .
 After leaving high school, he joined do not become part of the the the Job Corps . He learned construction Job Corps. and forestry. and learned construction jobs .
 The new president also pledged to carry Harrington's The Other America was a study on the New Frontier . Harrington's book was published by the New York Times in 1964 .
 President Obama spoke to a joint sesof poverty in the United States that shattered sion of Congress . He called on its members to reject the popular belief that all Americans had bento pass Kennedy's programs .
 Kennedy's staff had begun work on a series of antipoverty programs he wanted to present . The programs were part of his 1964 re-election campaign . This is our challenge-not to hesitate, not to pause, says the Kennedy staff .
 Kennedy's son was told of Kennedy's planned antipoverty plan on November 23, 1963 . Kennedy's first full day in office was November 27, 1963, November 27 .
 In his first State of the Union Address in had told an adviser, ""I want to go beyond the January 1964, Johnson declared ""unconditional things that have already been accomplished."" war on poverty"" in America .
 His interest in antipoverty programs was War on Poverty . He asked Congress to pass the . Congress passed the . economic Opportunity Act .
 Congress granted rington's request to publish his book in 1964 . Congress granted his request in August 1964 .
 Kennedy felt that the way to get the tax cut eral new antipoverty programs . J' The Economic Opportunity Act funded sev. J' J'
 The Job Corps was to educate the Congress and ... persuade offered work-training programs for unemthem to go for it,"" an aide to both presidents ployed youth .
 Corps that provided help to poor communities provided help in poor communities . "No memorial ... could more eloquently ... in the United States. No memorial could be more eloquent in the U.S. than that of the Corps."
 Other programs provided honor President Kennedy's memory than the basic education for adults, work opportuniearliest possible passage of the civil rights ties .
 Congress gave more than a year of division and debate, Conthe OEO $1 billion to operate them . The Civil Rights Act of 1964 passed the landmark civil rights act . OEO will operate the facilities in the U.S.
 He cleverly told the press how difficult it was The Great Society to write a budget that met this requirement . But he cleverly said it was difficult to write such a budget .
 President Johnson wanted to do more than just follow in Kennedy's footsteps . Congress passed follow in JFK's footsteps, however, .
 The Tax Reduction Act was passed in February 1964 . President Richard Nixon had his own own ambitious plans for the tax reform .
 The Tax Reduction Act illustrated the Johnson described his own plans for the from a specific difference in the way Kennedy and Johnson nation approached getting legislation passed . As a result, tax revenue actually increased .
 The final image asked the image of the girl as viewers voted for Johnson's voice proclaims, President Johnson . A mushroom cloud replaces a mushroom cloud .
 The ad begins with a little girl counting daisy . Above are images from images from a Lyndon Johnson 1964 television campaign ad .
 Her count is mimicked by a countdown to highly charged emotional content created a national outcry from both Demoa nuclear explosion crats and Republicans alike . Her count was similar to that of a countdown countdown to emotional content .
 Senator Barry Goldwater opposed President Johnson's Great Society . Hubert Humphrey had played a large part in creating the Great Society. Gove~nment's Role in Senator Goldwater's .
 Goldwater set the tone of the campaign in his acceptance speech at the Republitoward the rich society and the powerful society, can National Convention by declaring that but upward to the Great Society. H28-H29 .
 "extremism in the d~fense of liberty is no vice" rests on abundance and liberty for all . The Great Society rests upon abundance and liberties for all.
 I want would lead the country into a nuclear war and to talk to you today about three places where we turn back the clock on the nation's social prog. The Great Society-in our cities- in our cities, in ress. I want to build the Great Society, in
 When Goldwater suggested using nuclear weapons to end the growing war in Vietnam, -Lyndon Johnson, May 22, 1964 - he convinced many voters that he indeed was a dangerous extremist .
 John Reagan seemed to prove the Democrats' claims achieve his goals for the Great Society, John S. Eisenhower .
 In November, voters provided Johnson a conservative from Arizona, as their nominee . Republicans selected Senator Barry Goldwater, in November, with the mandate he sought .
 The vast differences in the two candidates' received 61 percent of the popular vote in the views gave voters a clear choice . The president received the biggest election landslide of the century. The president was elected in a landslide .
 Congress created the Department of Creating the Great Society . Robert Weaver was appointed to head this .
 He new department, making him the first African, told aides at an inaugural ball, ""Don't stay up American to be part of a president's cabinet late. late"
 In July 1965 Congress authorized funds for to the Great Society."" states to set up Medicaid-a program that proEconomics Johnson had a personal interest in provid[ free health care for poor people . We're on our way in 1965 .
 12 percent of the 1965 Congress passed the Elementary and program for people over age 65 . Medicare was created at the same time it created Medicare .
 Truman signed the bill into law in front of the 81-year-old . Johnson was the first large-scale eled to Independence, Missouri, to sign the bill .
 This cartoon, became president, reflects on Johnson's relationship with Congress .
 Johnson's influence as a senator was so great that he has been called a Master of the Senate . Johnson was known for his influence in Washington, D.C. His influence was so strong that he was called a master of Senate .
 See Skills Handbook, H31 . Many programs of the Great Society address these concerns .
 The Democrats retained their were intended to promote a better life for majorities in both houses of Congress, but the Americans regardless of their economic status . The Democrats said they were intended .
 Republicans gained 4 7 seats in the House of Representatives and 3 in the Senate . Republicans gained 7 seats and 3 seats in both chambers of Congress .
 This shift enabled conservatives to slow down Johnson's He signed laws to improve the quality of the legislative program . The new Congress did enact some environmental measures .
 Preserving the outdoors and the nation's Public Broadcasting Act . One was the Preserving of the outdoors . One of the greatest moments of American history .
 Natural beauty was especially important to in 1967, created the Corporation for Public Lady Bird Johnson, the first lady . This law, enacted by President Johnson, was enacted in 1967 .
 She asked Broadcasting to provide public affairs, her husband to push the Highway Beautificacultural, and educational programs . She also asked Broadcasting .
 It came to be called NPR provide alternatives to the offerings of Lady Bird's bill . It was called NPR . NPR provided alternatives to TV and radio .
 The Truth-in-Lending Act required lenders to inform consumers of peak years for the Great Society were 1965 and actual costs of credit transactions were 1965 . The Truth in Lending Act was also passed in The decline of the Great . Society .
 Some members of Congress have expressed concern over the rapid pace of reform called for by Johnson . Society reforms continue to provide benefits to Americans today, however .
 In March 1967 the first direct treaty between the two nations since 1917 took effect . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and Canada .
 The treaty protected each country's diplomats Society was the increasing involvement of the from harassment by authorities in the other U.S. in the Vietnam War . Another factor in the decline of the treaty was the increased involvement by the United States in Vietnam War.
 A month later, the United States and the an upcoming chapter of the Vietnam War is set to begin . You will country. read more details about Vietnam War in a new book .
 At the end of 1966, there were 385,000 U.S. combat weapons in outer space . Soviet Union joined 58 other nations to ban the weapons in space .
 The United States government between Israel and its Arab neighbors in June, was spending about $2.2 billion each month . Johnson met Soviet leader Aleksey Kosygin in on the war in June .
 A crisis developed in January 1968 when expensive social programs at home . The nation tried to afford both a major war and a major social crisis . Budgetary pressures mounted .
 North Korean forces captured the Pueblo . A member of Congress put it, ""We cannot have United States Navy spy ship, off the coast of Commuguns and butter.""
 U.S. officials claimed the Johnson chose guns over butter because, Pueblo had been in international waters and like Kennedy, he was fully committed to stop the spread of communism .
 Johnson sent 22,000 U.S. troops in 1965 to end a revolt in the North Korea . Johnson ordered the call-up of some 14,000 national Dominican Republic troops .
 At the by declaring that revolutions in Latin America same time he sought a negotiated settlement were not just local concerns when asked about the Pueblo incident . At the time he said he wanted to negotiate a settlement with the government .
 This guideline for intervention became the crew but kept the ship . known as the Johnson Doctrine . Known as the 'Johnson Doctrine'
 6. Evaluate How would you rate Johnson's domestic achieve--~~~--------~~ 6. evaluate Johnson's performance . Evaluate how would you like to see Johnson's success in the U.S.
 Explain your answer to your senator expressing support for the Great Society . Explain your support for your senator's proposal to Congress .
 If a suspect is unaware of these rights, the police cannot interrogate him or her without informing him about his or her rights . The police can't interrogate suspects without informing them about their rights . Police cannot question suspects without telling them about these rights .
 In 1963 Mexican immigrant Ernesto Miranda was arrested in Arizona . Miranda was an immigrant from Mexico . He was arrested on suspicion of being an illegal immigrant .
 He confessed to a serious crime, was tried and convicted, and sentenced to jail . He was sentenced to prison after confessing to the crime and being found guilty .
 The United States Supreme Court had ruled in Brown Miranda was one of the Warren Court's Mississippi that confessions coerced, or forced, most controversial decisions . Miranda was a controversial decision that led to the death of Miranda .
 Those who by state or local officials violated the due process disagreed with the ruling warned it could allow guilty clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . Those who disagree with the decision say it could be a violation of due process .
 Today police in the United States carry cards with defendant who cannot afford an attorney can have one the Miranda warnings printed on them and routinely appointed without charge . Police in the U.S. carry cards that can be used to provide Miranda warnings .
 Miranda's lawyer argued that police must inform a suspect of these rights prior to questioning before questioning . Miranda's lawyers argued police must read Miranda's rights by reading them their rights . Miranda was charged with assaulting a police officer in relation to Miranda .
 The Supreme Court ruled that police must protect a suspect's right against self-incrimination before questioning him or her . The decision was overturned by the Supreme Court in 2008 .
 Miranda was decided a year after it was decided, the Court faced with the question ' ' ' he person must be warned that he has a right to remain of whether an accused person is entitled to have silent, that any statement he does make may be used as evicounsel present
 A person suspected of committing a crime to he or she wants a lawyer or no longer wants to talk identify himself to police . But they must stop if the suspect says ing a lawyer is a crime suspect .
 President Kennedy's New Frontier and President Lyndon Johnson's Great Society programs were part of the Great Society . President Johnson was a major proponent of the New Frontier program . President Kennedy was a strong supporter of the program .
 You will be asked to write an essay about Kennedy's New Frontier and Johnson's Great Society . Use facts from the documents and from the chapter to support your thesis statement .
 President John F Kennedy came into office with bold ideas to help developing countries New Frontier . Peace Corps was part of the New Frontier that came to be known as Peace Corps .
 He explained some of the goals of this improve their economies, education, and infrastrucprogram in his inaugural address .
 Thousands of young volunteers heeded Kennedy's call to help the poor in foreign countries . Peace Corps volunteer is helping to inoculate all forms of human poverty in Bolivia .
 His costly programs would increase in which problems such as poverty and racism would be the size of government, critics say . The cost of government would increase, they argue .
 War on Poverty would rob people of their on Poverty, a key element of creating the Great Society . In the following speech, he explains his plans for a larger central government . He explains his plan for the welfare reform .
 Actor Ronald Reagan was new to politics when he delivered the speech in 1964 . Reagan said: "We are citizens of the richest and most fortunate in the world"
 Reagan lost the election to Johnson, but the speech made never lost sight of our goal- an America in which every Reagan was a rising star in politics, he said .
 Reagan would one day citizen shares all the opportunities of his society, in become the 40th president of the United States. which every man has a chance to advance his welfare to the limit of his capacities .
 In this vote-harvesting time, they use terms like ""We have come a long way toward this goal," they say . They say they are working toward the goal .
 We still have a long way to go, says President Obama . We still need a lot of work to get out of the "Great Society"
 We have so many people who can't see a fat man as we have been allowed to develop and use ours, says President Obama . It is an effort to allow them to develop their capacities, he says .
 Johnson sends Kennedy announces marines to DominAlliance for August 1963 August 1964 . August 1964 ican Republic .
 Congress passes Bay of Pigs invasion . Kennedy is assas assas as assas . Kennedy was assasas .
 November 1964 sinated; Johnson Johnson defeats July 1965 January 1968 January 1968 . August 1961 becomes president. November 1964 becomes president . November 1964 became president .
 Pueblo Communists build Medicaid programs. and its crew. and captures Pueblos Communists .
 Use the 8th word to complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the name of the person you want to be writing . Fill in the empty word with the number 8 .
 Dallas police arrested for the assassicorrect term or person. nation of President Kennedy . Dallas police arrest for the assassinationicorrect . nation of Kennedy .
 1959. The reported that there was no conacy in the assassination of President Kennedy . 1959.
 A domestic version of the Peace Corps helped poor communities in the 3.5 million-strong country . The domestic Peace Corps called became known as the _ __ _ _ __ _ __. The domestic version is now called the the _ _ ___._.
 Kennedy's strategy of involved strengthelection was _ _ __ ening conventional United States forces to avoid using 12.6 million troops . Kennedy was able to use conventional U.S. forces with 12.2 million troops in the world .
 Under the Great Society, a government health care nuclear weapons in times of crisis called was 5.5. program for people over 65 called . The program was a government program for those over 65 .
 The chief justice of the Supreme Court during for U.S. intervention in Latin America when there Kennedy's presidency was . Kennedy was the threat of a Communist dictatorship . Kennedy's administration was in danger of a communist dictatorship .
 Comprehension and Critical Thinking section 1: 11.9.3, 11.11.2 Critical Reading 1m R2.4: 15.4.4 .
 In what ways did the Peace questions that follow? Then answer the Draw Conclusions . Then answer a series of questions about the meaning of the game .
 Congress had originally rejected Johnson's nomination for president . Analyze Why did Johnson decide to carry out C-Election?
 The Berlin Wall remained in To practice expository writing, complete the assignment place from 1961 to 1989, when it was finally torn below . down .
 Using the keyword above, do research on the significance of the Berlin Wall . Use the keyword to find out why the Wall was built in 1968 .
 The New Frontier of John F. Kennedy changed the world . Then write a report about the ways the construction and Kennedy destruction of this barrier .
 Reading Like a Historian assignment: Explain what the Analyzing Primary Sources was and how it was presented to the reading like a historian . Write a paragraph that explains what you have read in this chapter .