 The U.S. and the Soviet Union stood periously on the brink of nuclear war in October of 1962 . A small island some 90 miles off the coast of Florida became the focal point of intense foreign policy scrutiny .
 Photographic evidence provided by a high altitude United States spy plane exposed the until-then secret construction of medium and intermediate ballistic nuclear missile silos . The silos were deliberately placed so as to be close enough to reach the continental United States .
 The United States unsuccessfully attempted a CIA-led forceful invasion and overthrow of the Cuban regime at the Bay of Pigs . The U.S. was alarmed by this unprecedented move by the Soviets and already uneasy relations with communist Cuba .
 A nightmare scenario ensued as the Soviets responded with threats of its own to defend its ally at any cost . The Soviets declared the American’s actions as unprovoked and unacceptable and unacceptable .
 During an incredibly tense standoff, the United States mulled over plans to again attack Cuba both by air and sea to ensure the disarmament of the weapons that posed a dire threat to the country . The U.S. mulled the option of attacking Cuba by air or sea .
 A naval blockade was designed to prevent the shipment of supplies necessary for the completion and activation of launchable missiles . President Kennedy elected to pursue a less direct military action .
 Using this as a lever, the U.S. continued to demand that Russia dismantle and remove all nuclear weapons as they prevented any and all naval traffic to and from Cuba . The United States continued to insist that Russia remove nuclear weapons .
 Soviet premier Krustchev protested such acts of “direct aggression” and communicated to president Kennedy that his tactics were plunging the world into the depths of potential nuclear war . President Kennedy said his tactics plunged the world .
 Both countries publicly traded threats of war . The bravado was actually a cover for secret backchannel negotiations involving the United Nations .
 The Soviets promised they would dismantle and remove nuclear weapons, support infrastructure and transports from Cuba . The U.S. promised not to invade Cuba while also removing nuclear weapons from Turkey and Italy .
 The United States complied and removed from service the weapons abroad . Eleven months after the agreement, the U.S. complied . The weapons were taken from service abroad .
 The Cold War ultimately ended and the Soviet Union fell, but the political, economic and social impact remains even today . 40 years later we have uneasy relations with Russia and the U.S. still enforces ridiculous social and economic sanctions on Cuba .
 There exists an uneasy standoff — a cold war — between the so-called “super powers” staking a claim in Cloud . I hear Gary Busey and Aston Kutcher are free… As John Furrier .
 The posturing and threats currently in process don't quite have the world-ending outcomes that nuclear war would bring . But it could have devastating technology outcomes nonetheless .
 The characters of the Americans, Soviets, Cubans and the United Nations are played by networking vendors, SDN vendors, virtualization/abstraction vendors . The rest of the world stands by as their fate is determined on the world’s stage .
 If we squint hard enough at Cloud, we might find out very own version of the “Bay of Pigs,” with what’s going on with OpenStack . OpenStack is a cloud-based cloud computing platform that uses cloud computing .
 The “community” effort behind OpenStack is one largely based on “industry” and if we think of OpenStack as Cuba, it’s being played as a pawn in the much larger battle for global domination .
 The munitions being stocked in this tiny little enclave threatens to disrupt relations of epic proportions . The munitions are being stocked on the island .
 Many people in the U.S. haven't really paid much attention to the initiative and technology . That’s why we now see so much strategic movement around an initiative .
 Intel is natively bundling more and more networking and virtualization capabilities into their CPU/Chipsets and a $7B investment in security company McAfee makes them a serious player there . Then there are players like Amazon Web Services who, like China of today, quietly amass
 VMware is de-emphasizing the ‘hypervisor’ and is instead positioning they are focused on end-to-end solutions . This includes secure mobility, orchestration/provisioning and networking .
 Networking companies like Cisco and Juniper continue to move up-stack to deeper integrate networking and security along with service overlays . OpenStack’s threat of disrupting all of those plays makes it important enough to pay attention to .
 It's a little island of technology that is causing huge behemoths to collide . It’s the island of tech that is caused by huge behemoth technology .
 I'm going to make some Lechon Asado, enjoy a mojito and a La Gloria Cubana . I’m going to go to the beach with some of the world's best friends .
 The Good, The Bad And The Ugly . The Good and The Bad and the Ugly. The Good
 If any of the corporate interests have wrong intentions in the project, they will come back to regret the Apache licensing . As I wrote during the “initial OpenStack crisis”, if any . of the . corporate interests in the . project, if . any of them have wrong
 Oracle is facing even more difficulty with OpenStack . The corporates of OpenStack will face even more difficulties with the software .
 I will bet on just Apache license alone as the savior of the project in the long run than any governance problems . #my2cents David Fishman .
 The ability for these vendors to control the project is probably in the same range of likelihood as Castro pulling a Gorbachev . There’s a debate point for Krish.
 OpenStack is empowering those who run their infra on OpenStack . Not in terms of empowering the vendors, as Krish describes . Krish describes the benefits of using OpenStack to run infra systems .
 With this transparent and frictionless license model, there will always be a gold-standard of compatibility, free of prejudice . With this frictionless model, the license model will be transparent, frictionless and free .
 Smart buyers who recognize black-box packaging as stealth lock-in will use it to keep the vendors honest . Smart buyers will use black box packaging as a way to keep them honest .
 Cloud Cold War – No Nukes Please – Weapons of Mass Abstraction . Weapons of mass abstraction are weapons of mass destruction .