 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it .
 "It was the height of the Cold War, and many people feared nuclear war would annihilate human civilization" "Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's . quarantine zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line .
 Historians say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of backdoor diplomacy . Kennedy resisted pressure from aides advising that he cede nothing to Moscow and even consider a preemptive strike .
 "The Jupiter missiles are sometimes described as nearly obsolete, but they had come online just months earlier and were fully capable of striking into the Soviet Union . Washington won, and Moscow lost .
 Pastor said domestic politics made it tough for both Kennedy and successive presidents to heed that lesson . President Barack Obama faces considerable pressure to maintain a tough line on Cuba, Pastor said .
 "Look at U.S.-Cuban relations right now," Pastor says . Among the issues are the United States embargo, demands for political change, an alleged spy .
 "It's true the missile crisis was full of tense moments. It was a high-seas showdown," she says .
 Get local business listings and events and join forum discussions at PennLive.com . Get local businesses interested in the area .
 Find the latest national, world and local news from the Associated Press . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for the latest updates .
 AP News Wire is a weekly feature on CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Follow us on Twitter @CNN_News .
 Get the Current Weather in Pennsylvania, Weather Forecast, Radar and the latest weather news in Pennsylvania . Get the current weather in Pennsylvania. Get the latest Weather in the state .
 Find ideas on prom dresses and hairstyles, upload your prom photos and videos to PennLive.com . Find ideas for prom dresses, hairstyles and more .