 The Story of Major RUDY ANDERSON by Major C GEOFFREY CAMERON was presented to the School of ADVANCED AIR AND SPACE STUDIES for the completion of the course of a major degree .
 The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master’s-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression . APPROVAL: This thesis is a master's-level thesis .
 The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author . The author of this document is not a member of the editorial board .
 Major Cameron entered Air Foree serviee as a graduate of the United States Air Force Academy in 2003 where he majored in civil engineering .
 He served a tour as a T-38 First Assignment Instructor Pilot at Laughlin AFB, TX before entering the U-2 program in 2008 . Upon completing Undergraduate Pilot Training he served as a first assignment Instructor Pilot .
 He flew the U-2 operationally for five years including tours supporting five Combatant Commands . He was deployed to support U.S. forces in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Major Cameron served as the Executive Officer to the Chief of Staff at U.S. Central Command . Major Cameron then served on staff at United States Central Command in the 1990s . He then served at Central Command as Executive Officer .
 Writing this thesis has been one of the most ehallenging and rewarding experienees of my eareer . IV ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .
 1 would like to thank the members of Class XXVI for their support and friendship through the year . First of all, 1 would say: "I am happy to have the opportunity to be part of the class XXVI"
 The shared diseussions in and out of the elassroom have made me a better offieer and 1 am honored to have had the opportunity to serve with them . Want to thank Brigadier General Gerald Mcllmoyle for his patienee and time .
 His first-hand aeeount of the events that transpired almost 55 years ago were invaluable . He was able to provide a firsthand account of events that occurred in the event .
 Mr James Long, Chairman of the Laughlin Heritage Foundation. provided insight into areas that were heretofore unexplored and clarified many issues that various experts disagreed upon. also want to thank Mr Long for his insight .
 He provided valuable information about the U-2 and facilitated important connections with the U.S. Navy .
 Both of their patience and understanding were unmatched in this effort . Both of them were unmatched by this effort. Both the patience and the patience of this effort were unmatched .
 Dr Rich Muller for sparking my interest in this topic . Michael Dobbs provided a wealth of knowledge in his book One Minute to Midnight .
 "Without his thought provoking questions, clear guidance, and outstanding feedback this project would not be what it is today," says the author .
 Dr. would also like to thank Dr. Dr. Paul, who helped shape the study and have been invaluable in helping to improve the quality of his work .
 Jim Tucci for his support as my writing advisor and for reviewing the draft of this paper . Jim Tucci for support as his writing advisor for this article .
 His comments and suggestions helped me improve my writing through the academic year . His suggestions and suggestions help me improve writing through this year .
 "Most importantly, 1 want to express my sincere appreciation to my family for their love, patience, and understanding during those times when 1 was absent in spirit, off struggling with this paper"
 "Their presence was very important to me and made all the difference in ensuring my success in completing this work. Their presence made the difference to me," he said. "They were very important"
 This thesis provides a biographical sketch of the life of Major Rudolf A Anderson, Junior . Major Anderson was a member of the Anderson family .
 In the process of reviewing these two questions the thesis explores Rudolf Anderson’s childhood and early life . The thesis explores the origins of Rudolf's early life and his childhood .
 The thesis focuses on the first dedicated reconnaissance aircraft, the Lockheed U-2 Dragon Lady . The thesis also examines the development of strategic reconnaissance in the Cold War .
 Tensions were extremely high and it appeared that even the slightest provoeation would foree the erisis down a path of esealation leading to thermonuelear world war . Tensions appeared to be extremely high in the 1930s .
 The day prior was full of politieal highs and lows, with an end to tensions seemingly imminent . Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushehehev proposed a eourse of aetion intended to deesealate hostilities .
 President Kennedy ordered an inerease in flights over Cuba and aeeelerated planning for an invasion of the island . 26 Oetober did not end with resolution but rather with the U.S. President John F Kennedy ordering a halt to flights over the island of Cuba .
 Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro ordered his military forees to fire on any U.S. aircraft or vessel approaching Cuba . Castro ordered the attack on any United States aircraft or . vessel approaching . Castro also ordered the Cuban military to shoot down any United . States aircraft, vessels approaching Cuba,
 Major Anderson’s flight remained on the schedule . For reasons that will be explained later, three other missions were cancelled . Major Anderson's flight was cancelled for three reasons .
 Major Anderson completed his briefing, was integrated into his partial pressure suit, and began the long process of pre-breathing one-hundred percent oxygen for two hours before takeoff .
 Captain Roger Herman, Anderson’s mobile pilot, escorted him to the U-2, followed him up the steps to the plane . Herman ran through a series of checklists with Anderson prior to takeoff .
 At 9:09 AM Anderson rolled down the runway of McCoy Air Force Base, Florida in his U-2 . At 9.09 AM, Anderson rolled . Anderson rolled on the runway at 9:10 AM .
 The aircraft leapt into the sky and climbed like a rocket as he headed toward Cuba . It was the first time the aircraft had been seen in Cuba .
 He was flying at over 72,000 feet, 14 miles above the state of Florida . The plane was flying over the Florida coastline . It was flying 14 miles over the state .
 Families below were stockpiling groceries and watching the seemingly endless influx of military personnel that had descended upon the state in preparation for an invasion of Cuba .
 Unbeknownst to Anderson, and the rest of the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, it would be the most dangerous mission of the Crisis .
 Until that day, Soviet surface-to-air missiles were not fully operational . The men running the sites were not given permission to use them .
 Castro issued an order for the Cuban soldiers to fight and the air defense system was finally complete and integrated . This had all changed late on the evening of the 26* of October when Castro issued a . order for Cuban soldiers .
 Because of the lack of information regarding the status of the SAM sites and the order by the president to prepare for an invasion which would include the use of United States 2 Ted Shelton, “The Major Flew Into the Page of History,” Greenville News, 17 October
 SAMs posed the only threat to the high-flying U-2, but two weeks into the crisis there had been no reported attempts to engage any aircraft .
 Anderson’s pre-flight intelligence brief indicated no change in the Cuban air defense posture . Despite significant signals intelligence activity on the morning of 27 October, no change was reported .
 His intelligence briefing was wrong and the Soviet forces were waiting for the first of what they expected to be multiple U-2 flights that day . Tragically, his intelligence briefing had been wrong .
 He immediately appeared on radar scopes of the Soviet forces operating throughout the island . He was seen on the radar of Soviet forces in Cuba .
 Two and a half years earlier Francis Gary Powers, flying a similarly configured U-2, was shot down over Soviet territory by the same type of missile . Powers was killed by a similar missile in the Soviet Union in 1986 .
 Taiwanese pilot Huai Chen, who had trained with Anderson at Laughlin Air Force Base, was shot down by a People’s Republic of China SA-2 over Nanchang .
 The Soviet officers tracking Anderson’s U-2 that day grew more and more concerned as they watched his track and anticipated the 3 Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle claims to have been fired upon by an SA-2 the day prior .
 Department of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency reports state that this never occurred and that the missiles were not operational until the evening of 26 October . However, the reports say that this did not occur .
 Anderson’s flight had taken him directly over the locations of short-range nuclear cruise missiles that had just been positioned for an attack on the U.S. Navy base at Guantanamo Bay .
 Grechko was in the command post monitoring Major Anderson’s U-2 as it flew over the island . Major Anderson was in command post at the time .
 Anderson overflew Guantanamo Bay and began a turn toward the North . Shortly after his attempts to call, Anderson began a flight to the U.S.
 The Soviets feared he had completed his mission and was returning to Florida . While he still had a large portion of his route to fly, the Soviets feared that he was returning home .
 Grechko felt strongly that the aircraft had collected vital information and that the Americans could not be allowed to learn about the tactical nuclear missiles . The aircraft was used to collect information from the Soviet Union .
 The men of the 1st Battalion of the 507th Anti-aircraft Rocket Regiment at the Banes SA-2 site complied with the general’s order . They fired two missiles .
 At least one SA-2 exploded near Anderson’s U-2 . Details of the next minutes will probably never be known .
 Shrapnel from the exploding warhead piereed the eoekpit, tore a hole in Major Anderson’s partial pressure suit, and shattered the faee-plate on his helmet . Major Anderson was killed by the blast .
 Anderson's aircraft spiraled over 72,000 feet to the island below, landing close to the missile site that brought it down . Anderson was still in the cockpit when the plane crashed . Anderson's plane crashed to the ground, with Anderson still in its cockpit .
 Anderson’s fellow U-2 pilots awaited his return at McCoy AFB, McCoy AFB . Anderson was the first U.2 pilot to return to U.S.
 Word of Anderson's death reached the White House Cabinet Room within hours of his death . When he did not return, the men of the 4080th SRW notified Strategic Air Command .
 He recalled the tension as Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze declared, ‘they’ve fired the first shot,” and urged the necessity of a strong response .
 Kennedy felt a responsibility to respond and avenge the death of an American pilot but also questioned whether Khrushchev had aetually ordered the destruetion of an Ameriean reeonnaissanee aireraft .
 Kennedy was angry and saw the shoot-down as an esealation in the eonfliet . Kennedy was angered by the shoot down and saw it as a symbol of the war .
 Khrushehev was eonflieted about ordering retaliation when less than 24 hours prior all indieations from the Soviet Premier indieated that he was seeking a diplomatie solution . However, he was not ordered to retaliate .
 President Kennedy was not alone in his fear that the next step might lead to the destruction of the world’s two great super powers . President Kennedy sent his brother Robert to meet with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin at the Justice Department .
 Major Anderson’s death shook Premier Khrushchev and caused him to fear that if a resolution were not achieved immediately, total war would be inevitable . Major Anderson's death shook the Soviet Union and shook the world .
 The Soviets agreed to remove their offensive weapons from Cuba, and Kennedy . Kennedy publiely promised not to invade Cuba while privately agreeing to remove Ameriean Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 A erisis that eould have brought about the death of millions throughout the world ended with a lone easualty . It was an act of self-defence that would have killed millions .
 In the days that followed, all operations over Cuba ceased until assurances were made that no further hostile acts would occur . Operation over Cuba stopped until assurances that no more hostile acts were made .
 Major Anderson’s body was recovered by the Cuban forces and later returned to the United States for burial in his home town of Greenville South Carolina . Major Anderson was buried in Greenville, South Carolina.
 President Kennedy and Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay awarded Anderson the Air Force Cross . Anderson was posthumously awarded the award after his funeral .
 This was the first time the newly created medal was bestowed upon anyone . The medal was given to the first person to receive it .
 Major Richard Heyser was invited to the White House to meet with President Kennedy and receive personal thanks for his piloting of the first mission that discovered missiles on the island of Cuba . Major Richard Hyser is credited with saving the lives of Americans .
 Major Heyser described his meeting with the President and more often with General LeMay on the way to the White House . Major LeMay met with President Obama and President Obama at the Pentagon on the day of the war .
 Official SAC history and USAF accounts of the crisis gave Heyser and Anderson equal credit for taking the first photos of the incident . SAC historian: "Heyser simply responded with a "yes sir," 12 .
 Major Heyser and the nine other USAF U-2 pilots who flew missions over Cuba have received even less recognition for their work in discovering missiles on Cuba and helping to resolve the crisis peacefully . Major Heyster and the other pilots have received less recognition .
 Major Rudy Anderson’s death “was a jolt to Kennedy and Khrushchev that pushed the crisis to a point where they had to take one of two paths, both of which had clear consequences . What follows is the story of Major Rudy .
 This is the story of a young boy who grew up in a small town in South Carolina building model airplanes and dreaming of one day being able to fly the real thing . The story of the young boy grew up with model airplanes .
 Rudolf Anderson would fly missions alone, unarmed, and unafraid over Cuba at the height of the Cold War . Anderson's story tells of the events that forged him into a man who flew missions alone and unarmed .
 "In a period of great international stress, he performed his duty of great responsibility with honor," says President Obama .
 He was awarded the distinguished service medal, and gave his life that America could proceed on a course toward peace without the threat of tyrants .
 During his brief thirtyfive years, he touched the lives of those around him everywhere he went . He touched many of the world with his touching touch, touching everyone .
 In death, he touched millions, giving his life in service to the U.S. and highlighting the true cost of conflict to Washington, DC and Moscow . He touched millions . "He touched millions"
 He built model airplanes as a child, participated in Boy Scouts, softball, and football throughout primary and high school . He excelled at both sports and academics .
 He entered the aviation cadet program in 1950 and piloted RF-86A and RF-87F Sabres in and around Korea in the years following the Korean War . He piloted the planes in the 1950s and '60s .
 RF-86F sorties included missions over Chinese and Soviet territory . Some of these sorties were sorties over China and Soviet territories . Some sorties took place over Soviet and Chinese territory .
 He was twice awarded the Distinguished Fl 5 dng Cross . For his work in Korea, he was awarded the D.D. Cross .
 Throughout his brief, but influential life, he was described as quiet, dedicated, and serious .
 He was known for his compassion, love of the military and love of his parents, and family . He was also known for compassion and compassion .
 From childhood, he wanted nothing more than to fly airplanes and ultimately lost his life doing just that . He wanted to be able to fly planes and fly planes .
 Anderson’s life was full, and many stories will go untold here . Anderson's stories are not eomplete; many will be told here . The stories that follow will not be published .
 This chapter focuses on the key events that forged Rudy into a man that would lay down his life for his friends and country . Rudy would lay his life on the line for the sake of his country .
 Rudolf Anderson Junior was born on 15 September 1927 in Spartanburg, South Carolina . He was born in the town of Spartanburg .
 Rudolf Anderson Jr. and Mary Barksdale Anderson were proud of their baby boy, their second child . Anderson's parents Rudolf and Mary were proud to give birth to their second son .
 Rudy had an older sister, Mary Elizabeth, who was two when Rudy was born . Mary Elizabeth was two years old at the time of her birth .
 Rudolf Rudolf served in England and France as an artilleryman in the 75th Coastal Artillery Regiment . Rudolf was an accomplished businessman before his service .
 He drove the e citizens of Greenville to expand outside of the textile industry and grow the Chamber of Commeree . He drove e citizens to expand .
 She grew up in a family of four, as the sole daughter and oldest ehild . She was the sole girl and oldest girl in her family .
 Mary worked hard both at sehool and in the rearing of her three younger brothers . As the oldest ehild in a well-to-do family, she worked hard .
 The Greenville Daily News contains numerous reports of Mary's attendance at weddings, banquets, and galas . Mary was described as being both beautiful and elegant .
 She was a dedicated mother and always put the needs of her family before herself . She was dedicated mother to her family, her husband says .
 Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was raised in a prominent home, guided by two hardworking, influential and loving parents . Rudolf was raised by two influential and influential men .
 The boy flourished, and certain traits became immediately apparent, foremost was his fascination with flight . The boy thrived, and the boy was always fascinated by flight .
 The three-month-old Rudolf lifted his head and followed the passing aircraft with his eyes as it soared by . Rudolf was three months old when he was born in March .
 That night his mother recorded the incident in his baby book and noted that his love of airplanes was evident from that point on . The incident was recorded in the baby book .
 11 severe weather foreed a passing aireraft to make an emergeney landing near the Andersens’ home . The Andersens were killed in 1962 .
 The next morning, the pilot, took Rudy, then a toddler, to see the aireraft . The pilot's next day, Rudy, was taken to a museum in New York City .
 Further demonstrations of his love of flight are evident throughout his early ehildhood .
 On 27 February 1931, Rudy decided to imitate an airplane and achieve flight on his own by jumping out of a window . Rudy jumped out of the window to achieve flight .
 The three-and-a-half-year-old lacked the ability to do so and fell hard . However, he was unable to pull himself out of the frame and fell .
 Throughout his early childhood, he built model planes and flew them around his yard, imagining a day when he could take to the skies himself . Throughout his childhood he was fascinated with planes .
 Rudy Anderson held a Model Plane in 1931 . Anderson was a member of the Society Club .
 When he was just four years old, he wandered away from home and walked to his sister’s elementary sehool . He was just 4 years old when he wandered off from home .
 Sara Earle remembered that the young toddler walked right into the elassroom and told her that he was there just to “see how my sister’s getting along.” She said he was just looking to see how she was getting along with her sister . Sara Ear
 He was not worried at all about being away from home but was eoneerned for his sister and took it upon himself to eheek up on her . He said he did not want to be away from his sister but was concerned about her .
 Rudy found a stray cat while in his first year at school . Rudy found the cat on the way to school on his way home to school .
 Worried for the cat’s health he snuck it into school and kept it inside of his desk . Worried about the health of the cat, he kept it in his desk at school .
 He would stop by Campbell’s Pharmacy in Greenville and ask for milk to feed the cat on his way home from school .
 The compassion he showed for this stray animal was indicative of the way the people of Greenville remember him throughout his childhood, concerned for others well-being . Greenville, South Carolina, residents remember him as a good man .
 Rudy was a good student throughout his time at Augusta Circle Elementary . Rudy was also good student during his time as a teacher . Rudy will be remembered for his work in the classroom .
 Rudy “was an outstanding boy...a very likable person and a good student," says Gault . Gault remembered Rudy as a likable, good student and a "very likable" person .
 Rudy grew up during elementary school to be interested in two other things . Rudy says he was inspired by his interest in childhood events . Rudy: "It was during elementary ... that Rudy developed an interest in two things that would shape his life"
 Wait for Word in the Serenity of the Mountains,” Greenville News, 31 October 1962, 11.31 October 1962 .
 Rudy was a member of Troop 19 in Greenville, having joined at the age of seven . Roy Guliek, Anderson's Seout Master, remembered how mueh Rudy loved Seouting .
 Being a Boy Seout, Anderson learned about teamwork, loyalty, and bravery . Anderson learned to be a "Boy Seout" Anderson learned teamwork and loyalty in the classroom .
 Anderson also learned about the reality of war through his participation in the Boy Scouts . Anderson says he learned about war through the Boy Scout .
 Troop conducted food drives, sold war bonds, and served food at shelters . Troop served food in shelters and conducted war bonds .
 Greenville scouts were recruited to serve as laborers on local farms . Scouts were recruited as part of a broader national effort to recruit scouts for farm labor .
 These “soldiers of the soil” diligently worked while their fathers, uncles, and older brothers were away on foreign lands . They diligently worked during their fathers and uncles' time away from home .
 Such projects instilled a sense of belonging and an understanding of service to Rudy and his fellow Scouts . Rudy's Scouts were inspired by his desire to help others in the community .
 In February 1943, President Roosevelt addressed the over 1.1 million scouts across the Country through a radio address and printed message in national and local papers . President Franklin D Roosevelt addressed Scouts in 1943 on the occasion of Scouting in America .
 The President said, “The leaders of our armed forces in training camps and on the battle fronts have emphasized the value of scout training in developing knowledge and skill, as well as courage, self-reliance, resourcefulness and initiative”
 A number of individuals that were deeorated for heroism or bravery were given the opportunity to be trained for heroism .
 Rudolf Anderson would not be surprised when he spoke to Rudolf almost twenty years later . Rudolf and Rudolf would be able to continue their careers together in Germany .
 This first area of interest, scouting, tied directly into Rudy’s second, church attendance . Rudy says scouting, scouting and church attendance are important topics for Rudy .
 He participated in church activities and played on church sports teams . He also played on a church sports team . He was a member of a church team .
 He regularly attended services and was active as a volunteer to help those in need . He was active in the community as well as a member of the public .
 Rudy showed compassion that he showed as a child to a stray cat named Frisky . Rudy's compassion extended to those around him and his family . Rudy says he is proud of his compassion for others .
 Anderson would discuss the Scriptures with his pastor leader Dr. Dr. Paul Anderson . Anderson would often discuss the Bible with the young pastor leader .
 Between sehool, Seouting, ehureh, and sports his elementary years kept him busy . He is proud to be a member of the world's largest sports ensemble .
 In 1939, at the age of 12, he finished up his time at Augusta Cirele Elementary . He returned from summer vaeation as a freshman student at Greenville High .
 Anderson exeelled at sports and studies in elementary sehool . Anderson is now studying in college and high school .
 When he arrived at Greenville High School in the summer of 1939, he planned to do the same . He planned to stay at the same high school as he did at his high school in 1939 .
 Rudy did not make the cut for the Greenville High football team . Rudy is a junior in Greenville, South Carolina . Rudy's high school football team was cut from the team .
 Rudy still practiced with the team but focused his efforts on ensuring that they had everything they needed . Rudy still worked his way to ensure the team had the best food and water for the day . Rudy is still working his way around the world .
 Anderson was part of the Greenville High football team that won the 1943 South Carolina State Championship . Anderson did not play on the field, but he was a member of the team .
 Anderson was involved in multiple other sports and activities while in high school . In addition to being part of the football team, Anderson was also involved in several other sports .
 He also played on the Buncombe Street Methodist Church’s softball team . He was also a member of the church's youth softball squad .
 Rudy was excellent, especially when pla 5 dng outfield . His friend Dan Foster remembered him as a great outfielder .
 Anderson eontinued his love of flying in addition to sports . Foster recalled, “he was so fast that we sometimes asked the middle outfielder just to stay out of his way”
 In high sehool, he found time to learn to fly while eontinuing to build model aireraft .
 He joined the Model Aireraft Club and rented aireraft to praetiee fl 5 dng on his own when money allowed . He joined a model aircraft club and rented it out to his own .
 He participated in intermural football, basketball, swimming, and softball . He also played basketball, football and basketball . He was a member of the U.S. Olympic swimming team .
 He also was involved in several ROTC organizations and leadership roles . He also served in several leadership roles in the Army, Navy and Air Force .
 Rudolf Anderson’s senior year at Clemson was his senior year . Anderson was a member of the Clemson football team . Anderson played for the Tigers during his senior season at Clemson . Anderson is a former NFL star .
 Clemson senior narrowly escaped serious injury when he fell out of a third-story window of his barracks . Just three months before graduation, he narrowly avoided serious injury in the fall .
 On the night of 3 March 1948, Rudy was trying to catch a pigeon that had flown into the barracks and chased it right out the window . Rudy chased the bird right out of the window. Rudy was chasing the pigeon right out .
 The student was chasing a pigeon down the hall of the third floor of the second barracks . He was unable to stop at the bird flew out of the window .
 Witnesses say he hit the eaves that protrude over the door of second barracks, breaking his fall, saving him from more serious injuries . Several witnesses said that the man hit the roof of the barracks, hitting the eaves .
 He was conscious when arriving at the college hospital, and was able to identify himself . The victim was taken to a hospital in a stable condition . He was taken into custody at the hospital .
 Lee Milford said that it was a miracle Anderson escaped with the injuries he obtained . Lee . Milford: Anderson's injuries were so severe that it is a miracle he survived .
 The gangplank that he finally came to rest on is constructed of iron and concrete . It is not the first time that he has landed on the deck of the Titanic .
 The college physician said Anderson had a good chance to recover provided nothing unforeseen turned up . Anderson was admitted to the hospital with serious injuries to his abdomen .
 Anderson survived the fall . Milford reported that he was very pleased with Anderson’s condition .
 Rudy was initially feared that he would not be able to graduate on time, but he pulled through . Rudy pulled through and recovered much more quickly than doctors expected . Rudy is now in remission from his injuries .
 Clemson Tiger Anderson is in a critical but stable condition in hospital . Anderson was taken to a critical condition on 11 March . Anderson is now in a stable condition .
 One of your distinguished senior students fell out of a third-story window while chasing a pigeon down the hall . Gentlemen: 1 read in the paper that a distinguished senior student fell out . 1 read that one of your senior students .
 This has me worried because 1 have often wondered whether a Clemson man is capable of catching a pigeon or not . This has been a problem for many of us, including myself, who have wondered whether Clemson man can catch a pigeon .
 Rudy fully recovered from the incident and graduated in 1948 with a degree in Textile Engineering . Yours truly, A Cute Pigeon26, is Rudy .
 Despite finishing his ROTC training at Clemson, the military was drawing down in size, and not all cadets were able to become commissioned officers . Despite finishing ROTCs, he was not able to be commissioned officers.
 On 7 June 1948, Anderson received a commission as an aircraft maintenance officer . Anderson was awarded a commission in June 1948 .
 At the time, Greenville was eonsidered the textile eapitol of the world . Greenville, South Carolina, was considered the textile industry's textile capital .
 Anderson’s degree and family eonneetions made it easy for him to find a job in the busy textile industry . Anderson: "I’m not afraid to go to work. I’ve got a lot of respect for my family and friends."
 Upon graduation, he was immediately hired by the Hudson Mill and worked there for two years in a high paying job . Upon graduation he worked at Hudson Mill . He graduated from high school to college .
 While at Hudson Mill, he was fast moving up the eorporate ladder in the textile world as one of the preeminent textile engineers in the town .
 He became an important part of the textile industry in Greenville . He was becoming an influential member of the city council .
 His comfortable life in Greenville, South Carolina, changed in November of 1951 .
 Greenville News later reported that “He could have in good conscience remained in civilian life where he could have a comfortable and rewarding career was his for the taking.”
 Rudolf Anderson, Jr.” in “Town Talk Column” Greenville News, 22 November 1951, 2.2 November 1951 . Anderson was born in Greenville .
 Rudy was transferred from Florida to San Marcos, Texas for pilot training in August 1952 . Rudy was a pilot pilot in Texas .
 Rudy stopped by Greenville, South Carolina, for a brief visit with his parents . Rudy is headed to Texas to spend time with his family .
 He told them he was excited and not to worry about him, then departed to fulfill his dream . He said: "I'm going to fulfill my dream. I'm excited to fulfill it"
 Rudy made the trip to San Marcos for brief introductory training and then traveled ninety miles south to the small town of Hondo, Texas . Rudy traveled to Hondo for brief training .
 Flying the Piper Cub was similar to the flying he had done as a boy, and he picked it up quickly . Flying the plane is similar to flying the aircraft he had been flying as a child, he said .
 Anderson was seleeted for the single-engine jet traek and stayed Texas to eomplete basie training at Webb AFB in Big Spring, Texas . Anderson was the first to be selected by the Air Force to fly in the U.S.
 The T-33, or “T-Bird” as its pilots knew it, was a variant of the F-80, the USAF’s first operational jet fighter . It was the first operational fighter jet fighter from the USAF .
 Rudolf Anderson was selected to fly tactical reconnaissance in the North American RF-86 Sabre . Anderson flew tactical reconnaissance missions during his time in the USAF .
 Rudy Anderson received his pilot wings in February of 1953 . After only six months of training, in four different aircraft, he received his wings . Rudy Anderson was a World War II pilot .
 Rudolf Anderson Jr. was a pilot . He finally achieved his childhood dream . He was finally able to fly in a plane .
 Anderson arrived at Nellis AFB in March of 1953 for F-86 training followed by introductory fighter training . Anderson arrived on the base in March 1953 .
 On 15 September 1953, Anderson’s twenty-sixth birthday, he completed the last course at Nellis, aerial gunnery . Anderson was a member of the Air Force Air Force . He died at age 26 .
 The course was the only time he fired weapons from an aircraft, for the remainder of his life his weapon was a camera . The only weapon he used was a film camera .
 Anderson graduated from Nellis Air Force Base in San Francisco to undergo a familiarization check-out in the RF-86 before departing for his first duty assignment as a pilot in the Republic of Korea .
 A great need existed for shortrange overflights of the USSR, China, and North Korea . The USSR, North Korea, and China had a great need .
 These missions were very sensitive in nature, and eaeh one went through an arduous approval proeess . The mission was very sensitive and went through a lengthy approval process .
 Eaeh request was submitted through the Commander of the Far East Air Forees . The request was then forwarded to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for review .
 If military ehannels reeommended an overflight mission, it was referred to President Eisenhower for approval . President Eisenhower approved the mission in 1953 .
 The process kept the number of flights low to prevent a reaction from one of the communist nations . The process was kept in place to prevent any reaction from a reaction .
 Anderson was assigned to the 15* Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron at Kunsan AB, South Korea . Anderson was deployed as part of a special unit . He was deployed to South Korea as a member of an elite unit .
 The unit was tasked to conduct the missions above and deployed to Komaki AB in Japan .
 The guns were removed from the RF-86 to make the aircraft lighter . Anderson would become very familiar later with the U2 concept .
 The nose of the aircraft was painted where the guns were normally housed to make it look like a normal F-86 . The nose was painted to make the nose look like the nose of a normal aircraft .
 These cameras gave the aircraft panoramic vision and allowed it to cover a broad swath of territory . These cameras were used by the Air Force to fly over the United States .
 Anderson quickly upgraded to flight lead and was chosen to lead one of the first missions of the special unit . Anderson was selected to lead a mission for the first time as a flight leader .
 On 1 May 1954 1st Lt Rudy Anderson led a two-ship with his wingman 2nd Lt Robert Depew . Anderson led the two ships in a single mission . Anderson and Depew were both involved in the sinking of two ships .
 The 1 May sortie was tasked to overfly both Chinese and Soviet territory . Because of the difficulty in gaining clearance for such missions, the 1 May mission was tasked with overflying both China and the Soviet Union territory .
 Even with full drop tanks, such a sortie was too far for the little RF-86 to make round trip so it was decided the men would take-off from Japan and fly directly to the unit’s home base at Kunsan, South Korea .
 The RF-86F 22 was not allowed to operate out of Kunsan, Japan . This plan was challenging for some reasons, the most pressing of which was the fact that the aircraft would not be able to operate in Kunsan .
 The 1953 armistiee eontained a elause stating that only the military equipment that was present in either North or South Korea at the time of signing eould operate out of those two eountries .
 The RF-86F did not meet this requirement, and the erew risked severe repereussions for the United States if they were diseovered . The erew had to be able to fly the RF86F .
 They landed in the aircraft while maintenance crews refueled the drop tanks and checked the camera equipment . They landed and stayed in the plane while the crew refueled and checked equipment .
 Anderson and Depew were airborne en route to the ports at Dairen, China . Less than an hour later, they were flying to China .
 The men fueled the aircraft from the drop tanks first and, when they were emptied, jettisoned them to maximize their altitude . When they emptied the tanks, the men jettined them to minimize their altitude.
 As they approached the coast of China, the formation was fl 5 dng at nearly 54,000 feet . The formation was over 12,000 ft above the operational ceiling of the aircraft .
 Anderson led his wingman through this difficult process, and they overflew Dairen uneventfully . Anderson led the team through the difficult process and they flew uneventful .
 Anderson directed the flight west over Port Arthur in the Soviet Union . The flight was the first time the plane had flown over to China .
 They met no resistance nor any sign that they were detected and turned for home . Once again, they met no . They turned for . home .
 Anderson was able to see the fruits of his pilots' labor . Anderson captured the moment he was captured by the camera on a flight over the Alps .
 The intelligence branch of FEAF headquarters wanted to debrief the pilots on the Chinese and Soviet reactions and asked them to report to the headquarters . The pilots were asked to report on the situation to FEAF HQ .
 Anderson and Depew flew to Tokyo on the morning of 2 May and saw the processed film . Anderson flew to Japan to see the finished film . Depew and Anderson saw the film at the end of the day .
 Depew recalls being amazed by the number of submarines docked at Port Arthur . Depew says he was amazed at the amount of submarines he had docked there .
 Anderson was all business and just wanted to get back to Komaki to do their job . Anderson was on the road with the team when the plane landed in Japan .
 He was twice awarded the Distinguished Fl 5 dng Cross for missions like the one described above .
 In April of 1955, Rudy packed up his gear and returned to the U.S. Rudy returned to his native New York .
 He was given leave before reporting to his new squadron at Larson AFB, Washington . He used that time to go back to the East Coast and report back to Washington .
 This time was used to visit his family in South Carolina and start the beginning of a new family . This time he visited his South Carolina family in order to start the family .
 While on leave before reporting to Larson AFB, Rudy proposed to Miss Frances "Jane "Jane" Corbett . Rudy proposed during his leave to report at Larson AFB .
 Rudy and Rudy met when Rudy was on duty in Georgia before leaving for Texas in 1952 . Rudy was a member of the Air Force in Texas . Rudy died at the age of 92 on December 31, 1981 .
 Peebles, Shadow Flights, 57. 24, kept in touch over the course of the next three years . Rudy returned from Korea to Georgia to ask for her hand in marriage .
 Rudy and Jane married on 20 November 1955 at the First Methodist Church in Parson, OR, near where Rudy was stationed . Jane accepted Rudy's offer of marriage to Jane .
 Rudy excelled in RF-84 and was even recognized as Strategic Air Command’s Pilot of the Month for April 1956 . Such recognition was no easy feat for a tactical reconnaissance pilot in a Command dominated by bombers focused on nuclear war .
 The fact that Rudy was chosen for such recognition is a testament to his abilities as a pilot and an officer . Rudy was selected for the award for the best pilot pilot and officer .
 In May 1956, Rudy’s childhood friend and Air Force Reserve pilot, Dan Foster, flew into Larson on his way to Alaska .
 The two decided that they should take advantage of the opportunity and go on a fishing trip . The two took the opportunity to go fishing .
 Rudy told Dan and another friend from the squadron to take his car and go fishing without him . Rudy told them to take the car without him and take the fishing trip without him. Dan and a friend went fishing without Rudy .
 After a weekend enjo 5 dng fishing while Rudy sat alert, Dan asked him if he was tired of it and when he was going to get out of it . Dan asked Rudy if he is tired of fishing and said he was not tired .
 I’d 37 Lutie McGee, “Interesting Betrothals are Revealed this Morning,” Greenville News, 6 November 1955, 2B 38 “City Air Officer Awarded DFC.” City Air Officer awarded DFC,’
 In the Spring of 1957 Rudy Anderson, along with some of his fellow pilots at Larson, were reeruited to a speeial program . Rudy Anderson was one of the first pilots to be trained to fly in the U.S.
 There is no indication whether or not Rudy was party to one of these early recruitment trips . Rudy Giuliani is a former New York City mayor .
 It's doubtful he would have resigned his commission if they had tried to recruit him . However, given his previously mentioned statement to longtime friend Dan Foster .
 The USAF picked up a significant portion of the U-2 mission and recruiting changed in 1956 .
 Many of SAC’s Tac-Recce pilots had to move to a new command dominated by the fighter aces of the Korean War . With the shift came a change for many of the pilots .
 USAF used this opportunity to recruit RF-86 and RF-84 pilots from SAC bases . The USAF used it to recruit pilots from the SAC .
 Anderson’s performance in SAC and experience involving overflight missions while assigned to the 15* Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron made Rudy a prime candidate . Rudy is a former Air Force pilot who served in the Air Force .
 He accepted the offer and prepared to make a series of major transitions . He accepted it and accepted the job as president of the United States .
 In the Spring of 1957, the Andersons departed for an unknown adventure . The Andersons spent their time at Larson, Larson, before leaving for unknown adventures .
 Rudy was given vague orders to Laughlin AFB, TX but with intermediary temporary duty assignments in between . Rudy was sent to the base in Laughlin, Texas, with intermediary duty assignments .
 The Air Force had other plans for Rudy, and he was not able to stay with his new family . Rudy was a member of the U.S. Air Force in the early 1980s .
 He departed for Squadron Officer School a day after the birth of his son, where he would remain for the next month and a half . He would remain in the RAF for a month to a half before returning home .
 His orders called for him to attend training at March AFB, CA, but he knew this was not the full story . He was sent to the U.S. Air Force base in California .
 Rudy arrived at March AFB in May and found an empty squadron with no aircraft . Rudy arrived in May to find the empty squadron empty with no planes .
 He quickly learned that his training would take place elsewhere and that he would have to board a C-123 to get there . He was soon told he would need to board the plane to get his training .
 For the first class of USAF U-2 pilot trainees there were no instructor pilots, no trainer aircraft, and no base to speak of from which to conduct their training . The first class had no base from which they were trained .
 When Rudy arrived in the summer of 1957, he found a desolate, dry lakebed in the Nevada desert . Rudy found the lakebed, which he called a desolate lakebed .
 The site was officially called Groom Lake, but those who operated out of the remote facility called it ""The Ranch" Those who operated there called it "Groom Lake" and "The Ranch".
 USAF pilots operated without the assistance of their Agency brethren . The USAF pilots operate without assistance from their Agency counterparts .
 Lutie McGee, “The Breakfast Hour” “Parents of a Son,” Greenville News, 28 March 1957, 22. They taught themselves to be a parent .
 The new aireraft is designed to fly in a new way to fly . The project includes learning eapabilities and handling eharaeteristies while developing eheeklists .
 The partial-pressure suit is a key part of learning to fly the U-2 . The U.2 was the first plane to fly in the U.S.
 The U2 program was very seeretive in nature, but getting one’s pressure suit took seereey to the extreme .
 Anderson and his fellow pilots were met by another individual who would pick them up in a car and drive them to the David Clark Company, maker of women’s brassieres . After arriving in Worcester, Anderson was met by someone who would take him to the company .
 Once inside the factory, the men had to navigate through the factory floor to a special room at the back where they were fitted for their suits .
 The team put together their suits overnight and then took it back to March . They returned the following morning to try on their suits that had been put together overnight .
 The process seemed normal for the agency pilots who were accustomed to such clandestine lifestyles, but for the USAF pilots, it was uncomfortable and unfamiliar . The process was normal for agency pilots but it was unfamiliar and unfamiliar for USAF pilots .
 The USAF aircraft were flown from the Lockheed plant in California in the back of a mobility aircraft . They were assembled, assembled, and then flown once by a Lockheed test pilot to ensure it was put together correctly .
 A strange powered powered glider that could outclimb an 5 rthing in the sky . The pilots were on their own to figure out how to fly the glider . The glider is powered by a parachute .
 Remembering the Dragon Lady, Retired Colonel Tony Bevacqua recalled the challenges at Groom Lake and how he and the 44 other men of the first elass were foeused eompletely on training .
 They were thrust right into training for the first time in their careers . They were then thrust into training .
 The training began with a series of low-altitude flights and focused on the strange landing characteristics of the U-2 . The training was part of a training program for the U.2 .
 After about a week of lowaltitude flights, the men donned their partial pressure suits and took the Dragon Lady to altitude . The Dragon Lady is now at an altitude altitude .
 The pilots learned how to operate the jet at altitude and manage its various sensors . For the next two weeks, the pilots learn how to use the jet's altitude sensors .
 The first class of USAF pilots arrived at Groom Lake and completed their entire training in less than three weeks .
 Rudy became the 83rd pilot to solo the Dragon Lady on 3 September 1957, just twelve days before his thirtieth birthday . Rudy's solo solo solo was the first solo solo by a man in the history of aviation history .
 He completed training by the end of the month and departed for Laughlin AFB, TX . He would join his family and begin the life of a Dragon Lady pilot .
 Rudy Anderson amassed over one-thousand flight hours in the U-2 . Between September 1957 and October 1962 Rudy Anderson had over one,000 flight hours .
 He flew operational missions around the world and was always one of the first pilots to test a new upgrade to the aircraft or receive an additional qualification . He was always always the first pilot to receive a new qualification .
 When work permitted, he would 45 Mcllmoyle, 45, would 45 . Remembering the Dragon Lady, 23, was Remembering The Dragon Lady .
 At the squadron, his fellow pilots reeognized his talent and dedieation . The pilot's fellow pilots also recognized his talent .
 Anderson used his attention to detail to organize checklist and write procedures manuals for his fellow pilots . Anderson used to organize checklists and procedures manuals to help fellow pilots learn more .
 No records show that President Kennedy remembered meeting Rudy Anderson when the Crisis occurred in October of 1962 . Anderson who first introduced the President to the U-2 .
 In May of 1962, Major Rudolf Anderson was the special briefing officer for the President when he received his first read-in on the capabilities of the Dragon Lady . In May 1962, the President was briefed by Major Anderson .
 Anderson presented the President with a briefing of the status and capabilities of the USAF version of the U-2 program . Anderson also gave a briefing on the status of the program .
 Anderson provided Kennedy an aerial demonstration of the high-performance climb of the aircraft . Anderson also provided Kennedy a brief of brief .
 We own him and them and them a debt no less that that that we owe to those who died or were permanently injured in other wars . We owe them no less than that those who were killed or injured in those other wars, he says .
 All who knew him were impressed by his singular character, his absolute manliness, his outgoing personality and spirit and his devotion to the right . He was an outstanding leader of the British House of Representatives .
 To avoid political involvements, such as flying in friendly airspace, or a decision on this permitting from vehicles whose performance is such that they can operate in Soviet airspace with greatly reduced chances of detection .
 The political obstacles to performing reconnaissance of the latter type are often mentioned as justifying a lack of effort on equipment and systems for pre-D-Day reconnaissance involving penetration of Soviet airspace .
 The use of lighter-than-air vessels was a part of warfare in the 19* eentury . However this form of reeonnaissanee was limited in range due to the statie nature of the eraft used .
 With the advent of the airplane in the early 20* eentury, visionaries reeognized the military value of sueh eraft. The airplane was the first airplane to fly in the U.S.
 The earliest uses of military aireraft were for reeonnaissanee and artillery spotting . It was used for re-evincing and spotting of artillery .
 Air Force One was the first plane to fly in the U.S. to fly over Washington, D.C. It was the second plane to carry out the first flight of its kind .
 By the end of the Seeond World War, military aviation had progressed tremendously to inelude a myriad of missions, and in the United States was poised to beeome its own separate braneh .
 Through the erueible of two world wars, reeonnaissanee developed from binoeulars peering over the side of the aireraft into something more technical .
 From these developments came strategic reconnaissance, the idea that the airplane could provide intelligence on an adversary or potential adversary in order to facilitate strategic decisions, even outside of wartime .
 This became very important as World War 11 ended and the Cold War between the U.S. and USSR began . This was very important in the wake of World War 10 and the Soviet Union .
 These photographs were eaptured by the Allies after the German surrender in May 1945 . They were taken by the Allied forces in 1945 .
 As victory in WWll appeared imminent, the USAAF under General Hap Arnold commissioned studies to assess the impact of strategic bombing .
 The United States should have an intelligence organization capable of knowing the strategic vulnerabilities of any potential enemy, the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey concluded .
 Strategic bomber forces needed a list of verified targets in case conflict with the USSR broke out . Additionally, the strategic bomber forces also needed a target list .
 The United States ereated its initial aerial reeonnaissanee foree from a few eonverted bombers and fighters with the goal of developing a robust and eapable foree .
 Within 5 years of the end of WWll, USAF RF-80As were flying along the borders of Soviet airspaee . Within 5 . years of end of the . end of WWIIll, the USAF RF . 80As were flown along the . borders of the Soviet air
 The USAF and Central Intelligence Agency conducted highly classified reconnaissance operations against the Soviet Union and its proxy states during the Cold War .
 They did so while operating within very tight constraints imposed by national leadership, due to a fear of a Soviet response . They operated under tight constraints, including tight constraints .
 This chapter addresses the development of strategic reconnaissance in the Cold War . This chapter includes a chapter on strategic reconnaissance . The Cold War was dominated by the Soviet Union .
 The 4028* Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron flew the U-2 over Cuba during the Missile Crisis . It is the first time the U2 has been flown over Cuba since the 1960s .
 Major Rudolf Anderson flew highly dangerous and covert missions into unfriendly skies . Throughout this development, men like Major Anderson flew dangerous missions . Anderson was a major in the development of the Soviet Union .
 They were often alone, unarmed, and unafraid; relying on their aircraft and skill to take them deep into the heart of enemy territory . The Peebles, Shadow Flights, 9.1, was the first of its kind .
 Despite their allianee during World War 11, tensions grew between the two emerging superpowers . In the waning moments of the war tensions grew . The two nations were allies during the war .
 The United States saw the Soviet Union’s ability to mobilize massive amounts of men and maehines, and the manner in which it erushed the seemingly invincible Wehrmacht, as a direct threat to a stabilized world order .
 The USSR was threatened by the United States due to numerous factors, including its own insecurity and concern over another great war on the continent . On the other side of the U.S., the USSR was also threatened by numerous factors .
 They felt that the Germans should be made to pay for the atrocities of both World Wars . They wanted to exact revenge in the form of both monetary and physical reparations .
 The USSR also saw its annexation of eastern Germany as part of the necessary creation of a buffer zone between itself and potential adversaries . The USSR annexed eastern Germany in 1961 .
 The USSR saw the growing alliance between the United States and United Kingdom as a threat . The USSR believed the alliance was a threat to the U.S.
 Stalin felt the allies were rebuilding and strengthening Germany and Japan too quiely . Stalin also felt these allies were building and strengthening Japan and Germany and Germany too .
 The USSR had fought both of these nations multiple times in the past and wanted to see them erushed rather than restored . The USSR fought both countries multiple times and wanted them removed .
 In addition to diplomatie aetions, the Soviet Union warily watehed as the U.S. eontinued to develop and test new and more powerful atomie weapons . The Soviet Union was ealling for international eontrols over other nations’ development
 The Soviets feared the U.S.’ growing monopoly on nuelear weapons . The development of longer-range strategie bombers from . whieh atomie weapons eould be delivered as a major threat .
 The growing tensions in the seeond half of the 1940s also led to an end of U.S. loans and aid to the USSR, 35 . The United States greatly inereased aid to other world nations under the Marshall Plan .
 In the early years of the Cold War, the Soviet Union did not have nearly enough resourees or the teehnology required to monitor the vast borders of its 8. million square mile territory .
 These radar sets were focused to the west and were very limited in range and capability . They were focused on the west of the U.S.
 Flow of supplies needed to maintain the sites has been cut off . They also relied on parts provided by the United States and UK, and as relationships deteriorated the flow of supplies was cut .
 Even if the Soviets could detect an incoming aircraft, their Air Force was designed to combat German fighters on the Eastern Front at medium-to-low altitudes . Additionally, even if the Soviet Air Force could detect incoming aircraft .
 While their pilots were proficient, they did not have an interceptor aircraft that was capable of intercepting a World War Il-style bomber, like the B-29, until 1948 . They did not intercept the World War I-style bombers until 1948.
 This was the environment in which the U.S. Cold War reconnaissance operations began . The environment was the focus of Cold War operations in the United States .
 The United States had a perceived need to fill a vast void of information, and the USSR had little means of stopping them . The U.S. wanted to fill the void and fill it with information, but the USSR was unable to do so .
 Immediately after the end of World War II, the U.S. began flying intelligence and reconnaissance missions along the Soviet borders .
 This was primarily conducted along the coastal region in the east and along Soviet occupied Germany in the west . This was mainly conducted in the eastern part of Germany .
 When they detected these flights, the Soviets tried to intercept any intruding aircraft that they could . The Soviets were trying to intercept planes that were flying in the Soviet Union .
 For the most part these intercept attempts were unsuccessful due to the higher altitudes and faster speeds of United States and UK aircraft . The most part of these intercepts were unsuccessful .
 As time went by, intereepts beeame more aggressive, and eventually, they tried to ehase flights away rather than simply follow them .
 The first U.S. reeonnaissanee flight was shot down by Soviet air defense fighters in April 1950 .
 The Soviet Ambassador to the United States delivered a formal demarche to United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson on 11 April 1950 . Three days after the aircraft had been shot down, the Soviet ambassador to the U.S. delivered the message . The Soviet Embassy in Washington,
 The USSR described the manner in which their defense force shot down a U.S. reconnaissance aircraft that had flown over 21 kilometers into Soviet territory . The USSR describes the shooting down a United States reconnaissance aircraft as 'unprovoked'
 The Soviets claimed that their interceptor aircraft discovered the violating aircraft and signaled for it to depart Soviet airspace or land . The Soviets claim that the aircraft violated their airspace .
 The Soviets stated that the aircraft fired on the Soviet interceptors, which of course required them to fire back in selfdefense . Rather than comply with the request, the Soviets said they fired on aircraft .
 The letter went on to describe how the Soviets shot at the U.S. aircraft and how it flew out over the water trailing smoke and eventually crashed into the sea . The letter also described how the Soviet aircraft flew out of the water over the ocean .
 Shortly after the formal demarche, the U.S. released a statement that refuted Soviet claims and portrayed them as the aggressor . The United States portrayed the Soviet Union as aggressor in a statement .
 The United States aircraft was unarmed, flying over international waters, and not spying but rather on a routine training mission . The report detailed the United States account of the incident .
 In 1975 the United States Navy admitted that this flight was indeed a reconnaissance mission . The U.S. Navy admitted in 1975 that the mission was a reconnaissance flight .
 The April 1950 incident marked a major shift in Soviet policy regarding U.S. and UK reconnaissance flights . The aircraft was a Consolidated PB4Y-2 37 .
 Rather than simply intercepting aircraft and escorting them out of Soviet territory, the USSR took a more aggressive stance . The USSR was more aggressive than simply escorting aircraft from Soviet territory .
 A new intercept policy was released in which the Soviet Union asserted the right and necessity to intercept any aircraft flying near or over their airspace . The Soviet Union asserts the right to intercept aircraft flying in or over its airspace .
 Included in this new doctrine was the right to force violators to land and subject them to search and seizure .
 If the reconnaissance aircraft attempted to flee rather than land, they claimed the right to shoot them down before they returned to international airspace . If the aircraft tried to flee, they said they would be shot down if they landed .
 This new Soviet policy meant that the U.S. and UK had to rethink their own policies towards gathering intelligence on the Soviet Union . The U.K. and the UK were forced to re-evaluate their own intelligence policies .
 Winston Churchill gave a speech entitled “Sinews of Peace” at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri . Churchill gave the speech in 1946 . Churchill was British Prime Minister of the UK .
 In the speech, he described the Soviets as hiding behind an Iron Curtain, which prevented other nations of the world from peering in and knowing what was happening inside their vast empire .
 By the middle of 1950, the Iron Curtain had extended higher into the heavens and was threatening the ability of the United States and UK to gather information and understand what the Soviets were doing .
 Both nations knew that reconnaissance operations would demand a higher price as Soviet air defenses increased and Soviet pilots became better equipped and trained . Both sides knew that .
 The first Soviet atomic bomb was the August 1949 test of the first atomic bomb . On the contrary, after August 1949, the Soviet Union tested its own atomic bomb in August 1949 .
 Privateer is a modified version of the B-24 bomber that was outfitted with special electronic equipment designed to collect signals intelligence . Privateer was the first of its kind to be fitted with electronic equipment to collect intelligence .
 The PB4Y-2 was heavily armed including twelve .50 caliber machine guns, so the story that it fired first is highly likely .
 This need for intelligence foreed the U.S. to aeeept an even greater priee in lost airerews and aireraft .
 U.S. poliey makers feared that eontinuing esealation eould led to an inerease in tensions preeipitating another World War . Meanwhile United States poliesies feared that it would lead to a World War.
 If the U.S. was to regain the reeonnaissanissanee advantage it enjoyed from 1946 to 1950 it had to find a new solution to eireumvent the inereasingly impenetrable Iron Curtain .
 As reconnaissance flights continued into the early 1950s, a new solution was not adopted . A new solution to the problem was never adopted .
 U.S. and UK continued fl 5 dng modified fighters and bombers over and around the periphery of the USSR in increasing numbers .
 Through late 1953 the significant increase in military, especially atomic, development in the USSR led the United States to dramatically increase reconnaissance operations . The U.S. increased reconnaissance operations in response to the increase in Soviet military development .
 This surge coupled with improvements in Soviet air defenses resulted in increased losses in reconnaissance aircraft and aircrew . This surge led to increased losses of reconnaissance aircraft .
 After over three years of discussing the need for a new aircraft or new techniques, the U.S. finally received the catalyst it needed to bring about change . The United States finally received a catalyst for change .
 The 1952 presidential election occurred during a time of political upheaval and rapid technological change . President Dwight D Eisenhower and the Technology Capabilities Panel discussed the technology capabilities of the Eisenhower administration .
 The U.S. was mired in a stalemate in Korea that showed no promise of ending soon and polarized the nation .
 McCarthyism was rampant, driving a strong fear of communist conspiracy and aggression . McCarthyism also drove a fear of aggression, aggression .
 In the background, the U.S. military was expanding its nuclear arsenal in preparation for an allout war with the USSR and newly-Red China . The United States military expanded its nuclear arsenals in the 1950s .
 The first United States hydrogen bomb was tested just 3 days before the 1952 election, on 1 November . The first U.S. hydrogen bomb tested in 1952 .
 The lack of quality intelligence led to the creation of the President’s Technology Capabilities Panel in 1954 . The panel outlined the various programs that were currently under development and proposed new ideas .
 National Archives: 12 missiles, 12. 40 missiles, and finally the seareh for a new high-altitude reeonnaissanee aireraft that eould operate above threats .
 Many of the ideas proposed by the TCP were simultaneously explored or developed under the direetion of President Eisenhower . President Eisenhower led the development of the TCP .
 The TCP believed Project GENETRIX would not escalate the Cold War . Because they were not manned and not carrying weapons, the TCP believed that Project GENetriX would be not .
 The balloons proved very unreliable in both quality of collection and more so in the unpredictable nature of their flight path . Unfortunately, the project was abandoned after the balloons proved unreliable .
 President Eisenhower proposed another, more diplomatic idea . Eisenhower proposed a diplomatic solution to solve the problem .
 President suggested that the RB-36, which the U.S. was then fl 5 dng on the periphery of the Soviet Union in a reconnaissance role, could be used in a new way .
 Eisenhower envisioned an idea that would allow both the U.S. and USSR to use the aircraft as a tool to verify arms levels and push for a reduction with open, predictable, reconnaissance flights .
 The proposal was predieated on the idea that the Soviets would provide reeiproeal support to the United States, ensuring both sides knew what the other was doing in order to reduee the ehanee of misealeulation .
 The idea rested on the United States pereeption of parity between the two nations . While the idea eould have reduered tensions, it rested on a parity of parity .
 In reality, the USSR knew that its forees were signifieantfy weaker than they elaimed, and therefore such a program would reveal this weakness to the world . The USSR knew it was weaker than the world, and would reveal it to them .
 Secretary Khrushchev believed that the US, with its new war hero president, was attempting to identify targets for strategic attack on the Soviet Union weakened by the recent death of Joseph Stalin . Secretary of State Khrushche believed the US was trying to identify strategic targets .
 Eisenhower hoped for a diplomatic solution, by the time he proposed OPEN SKIES in 1955 Eisenhower had already approved and developed a fallback plan, the Lockheed U-2 . Eisenhower had also developed and developed the U.2 .
 President Obama said he would give it 'one shot' to open skies initiative .
 Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 96. CIA, CIA, CIIA, CIA .
 The intensifleation in Soviet response to overflight operations eame at the same time as growing Soviet rhetorie about the strength of its bomber foree and the development of more powerful atomie weapons .
 The U.S. is in a position requiring the USAF to innovate or aeept a major gap in intelligenee . The USAF must innovate or it will be forced to do otherwise .
 President Eisenhower pushed for a better answer to a gap in intelligence . Eisenhower was unwilling to do so and pushed to find a better solution .
 The TCP pursued many options, the one that seemed the most capable also appeared to be the most technologically difficult . High-altitude reconnaissance was the most difficult option .
 Eisenhower administration pursued high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft . The major driving factor was an early-1954 RAND study regarding Soviet capabilities .
 A surprise attack could destroy 85 percent of SAC's bomber fleet in a single day . The Soviets were now capable of conducting a surprise attack on the U.S. which could destroy as much of the bomber fleet .
 At the same time that RAND study was being conducted, the United Kingdom made its first attempt at developing a high-altitude reconnaissance capability in the form of the English Electric Canberra .
 Canberra attempted a dangerous overflight of the Soviet missile test range at Kapustin Yar in 1953 . In early 1953 a Canberra attempted to overflight the range . The Canberra was the first aircraft to fly over Soviet missile range .
 American Strategy in the Air-Atomic Age and the Rise of Mutually Assured Destruction . American strategy in the air-atomic age and the rise of mutually assured destruction .
 RAF intelligence offieials estimated the failure was due to the USSR’s ability to traek the aireraft and the inability of the Canberra to outelimb or outrun Soviet intereeptors .
 Gardener was told about the RAND study by Dr. James Baker, the same month that Gardener learned about the study . Gardener says Baker is a good example of a good Samaritan . Baker is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Eisenhower was briefed to President Eisenhower in early 1954 and solidified his determination to pursue a true high-altitude option . Eisenhower's decision to pursue the project was made in 1954 .
 The memories of the surprise attack at Pearl Harbor heavily influenced the members of the TCP, the National Security Council, and the President . The President. President. George W. Bush .
 The idea that the Soviets could launch a surprise attack that could destroy a majority of the U.S. strategic forces, was not acceptable . The Soviets were not capable of continuing to monitor their strategic forces . The United States and UK were not . capable of . continuing to . monitor their
 President Eisenhower knew that manned-aerial reconnaissance was rapidly becoming the only means available to get answers to national security concerns . President Eisenhower wanted to use the U.S. to find out what was needed for national security .
 The United States Air Force began seriously pursuing the idea of highaltitude reconnaissance a year earlier, in January 1952 . The U.S. Air Force first seriously pursued the idea in 1952 .
 Wright Air Development Center was established at Wright Patterson Air Force Base . Two men recognized the need to address high altitude flight, specifically for reconnaissance uses .
 The two men were an Air Force civilian engineer, Mr Bill Lamar, and an active duty engine specialist, Maj. Maj. Bill Lamar .
 Their team submitted a request to industry for design proposals for a low-production run of aircraft . The aircraft could perform high-altitude reconnaissance missions . The team submitted the request .
 The major eompanies like Loekheed and Boeing would not be interested in designing an aireraft that would be produeed in small numbers . They believed that these smaller eompansies would eare more about the projeet and that they believed that the major
 The three eompanies were asked to submit design proposals by January 1954 for eonsideration . The three design proposals were submitted to the government in January 1954 .
 Project BALD EAGLE had clear requirements but called for capabilities that had not yet been achieved in aviation . The proposal, which would become known as Project Bald eAGLE, had very clear requirements .
 The aircraft was to be developed using available production engines in order to reduce cost and have as low a gross weight as possible, enabling it to be transported via existing cargo air craft . Additionally, the aircraft would be able to be built using available engines .
 As requested, the three eompanies submitted their respeetive studies by January 1954 .
 The front runner, Martin’s modified B-57, featured a longer wingspan, a modifieation of the bomb bay to aeeommodate a eamera or other sensors, and modified engines .
 The M195 was a long-winged, single engine aireraft featuring a unique engine intake on top of the fuselage, over the wings . Their proposal was the M195, a single engine, with a unique intake over the wing . It was designed to be a long
 Bell Corporation submitted a twin-engine aireraft with very long thin wings that they ealled Model 67.2 . Bell Corporation ealled the Model 67 .2.2.
 All three proposals used the existing Pratt St Whitney J57-P19 engines, modified for high-altitude flight . The proposals would use the existing engines modified to meet requirements for the jet .
 Loekheed engineer Clarenee "Kelly" Johnson heard of the Air Foree request for designs and began work on his own unsolieited 26 .
 His work on the design and development of the USAF’s first jet fighter, the P-80, made his Lockheed “Skunk Works” team a name known for designing seemingly impossible developments quickly and affordably .
 Johnson began work in early 1954 and, by March of that year, had completed a design proposal which Lockheed called the CL-282 . Lockheed called it a prototype of the aircraft .
 Johnson sent the proposal for the design to Air Force Colonel Bernard “Bennie” Schriever, who was also working on secret Air Force projects in Southern California at the time . The proposal was rejected by the Air Force .
 Three months after starting design for the project, Johnson briefed a CL282 proposal to the Commander of Strategic Air Command . General Curtis LeMay and other Air Force general officers .
 Both LeMay and Putt cut the briefing short, and categorically rejected the glider-type design and the idea of a single-engine aircraft .
 LeMay stated that the thought of fl 5 dng an aircraft with only one engine over the Soviet Union was ridiculous and had been a primary reason for rejecting Fairchild's M-195 .
 To the USAF it seemed that the problems were solved and that 27 Criekmore, Lockheed Blackbird, 20.5, was the first to fly the plane .
 CIA officials learned of the work being done by the USAF and were furious . Air Force study of high altitude reconnaissance aircraft was a top secret .
 The CIA argued that clandestine reconnaissance was its jurisdiction . It argued that flight over denied territory should be a function of a civilian intelligence agency .
 The Air Force argued that reconnaissance was a military function and therefore under their purview . Their argument gained little traction with the Air Force, which argued that it was under their jurisdiction .
 The CIA decided to begin a parallel effort in hopes of gaining further support once they had a completed aircraft . The CIA hopes to gain further support when they have the aircraft completed .
 Johnson’s design was rejected by LeMay and AFRDC, but he was not deterred . Johnson's design has been rejected by the LeMay, but Johnson is determined to continue his dream .
 Lockheed design for the CL-282 was based on an existing aircraft, the XF-104 fighter interceptor . Much like Martin’s redesign of the existing B-57, the design was also based on the B-56 .
 The XF-104 was designed to be a highaltitude, high-speed interceptor . Johnson believed by shedding weight and increasing the wings’ surface area he could create an even higher fl 3 dng aircraft .
 Johnson foresaw the CL-282 as being a short-lived, almost disposable, aircraft . He decided to eliminate most of the structural supports that allowed the F-104 to maneuver under heavy gravity loads .
 Johnson’s tenacity paid off and by November of 1954 his ‘Skunk Works’ team was making their second presentation on the East Coast, this time at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia .
 The First Fifty Years (Arlington, TX: Aerofax, 1993), 213. 48 secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development. The First 50 Years (arrested)
 Air Force generals were not impressed with the presentation, but Gardner believed it showed the most potential for success . Gardner said the presentation showed potential for the most success .
 Gardener briefed the CIA’s lead intelligence analyst, Philip Strong, on the CL-282 . Gardener knew the CIA was looking for an aircraft of their own so he briefed the analyst .
 CIA invited Johnson to Langley to brief the CL-282 . Strong recommended that the CIA listen to Johnson’s proposal .
 The CIA liked the Lockheed design, but being impressed with a design did not generate funds for further development . The CIA was impressed with the design but did not want to develop it .
 Gardner requested a meeting with CIA Director Allen Dulles to discuss the future of CIA aircraft operations . Gardner requested to meet with Dulles for a meeting .
 Dulles accepted the meeting, but was skeptical that the CIA should involve itself with the design and production of aircraft . He believed the aircraft design should be the purview of the military .
 Former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Research and Development insisted that the CIA had not only the right but the obligation to pursue aircraft for intelligence collection .
 The CIA was better suited to conduct covert operations, says Dulles . Dulles said he believed that as a civilian agency, the CIA was best suited to conducting covert operations .
 The briefing concluded with a caution that time was of the essence . Rapid developments in Soviet technology might soon make any overflight impossible .
 USAF and CIA were each pursuing their own highaltitude reconnaissance projects . Gardner told Dulles that it was imperative to get the CL-282 funded .
 In November 1954, President Eisenhower’s advisors briefed him on the CIA and USAF projects . President Eisenhower was briefed on the projects .
 Eisenhower listened to the briefing and asked both sides many hard questions . Eisenhower listened and asked questions about the war .
 Eisenhower knew that military procurement was often plagued with delays and inter-service rivalries . Additionally, he knew that after 38 years of military service, military procurement is often plagued by delays and rivals .
 The CIA had the lead on the project, but could not handle the influx of $35 million required for Project AQUATONE without drawing attention . The CIA was the lead in the project .
 The U-2’s development, which now involved Lockheed, the CIA, and the USAF, was conducted in the tightest seereey . Funds were sent personally to Kelly Johnson to avoid someone at Loekheed or in the Government diseovering the projeet .
 Just one month after the eontraet was signed the Skunk Works team began producing . The projeet progressed quiekly; just one month later the eonraet began production .
 While the U-2 was under development and produetion in the first half of 1955, worldwide aerial aerial missions eontinued using the existing fighter and bomber aireraft upgraded with reeonnaissanee equipment . The missions continued using existing fighter planes and bombers as well as
 During the summer of 1955 two events further shaped the United States perception of a bomber gap and reinforced the urgent need to field the U-2 . The U.2 was the first U.S. bomber to be fielded by the U.N. forces .
 In May, 1955 the USSR showcased its newest long-range bomber, the Tu-95 BEAR, at the Moscow May Day parade . The USSR showcased the new bomber at the May Day Parade .
 The aircraft was seen by Western reporters, and intelligence officials believed that the USSR had surpassed U.S. and UK bomber capabilities .
 USSR conducted multiple fly-bys of Mya-4 bombers at a demonstration in July 1955 . In July 1955, the USSR conducted several fly-by of the bombers .
 This convinced Western observers that they had numerous aircraft when in reality it was a much smaller formation of aircraft fl 5 dng a circuit pattern .
 The 1954 RAND study overestimated Soviet capabilities . This overestimate, in turn, led to increased concern over Soviet capabilities, the study's implications . The study was published in 1954 .
 If the Soviets were capable of destroying 85 percent of the U.S. bomber force before the recent surge in bomber production, analysts were even more concerned with what they could do after they increased production .
 The 1954 RAND study and the summer 1955 bomber demonstrations dramatically highlighted the threat to national security . The study highlighted the importance of overflight reconnaissance of Soviet bomber bases .
 After the May and July bomber demonstrations the estimates were doubled, projecting over 1200 long-range bombers in the near future . After the demonstrations, the estimates have doubled .
 After lagging in atomic weapons development, the Soviets finally closed the gap . The Soviet Union had lagged behind the Soviet Union in the atomic weapons race .
 In November 1955 the USSR air-dropped its first megaton thermonuclear device at the Semipalatinsk test site . The device was the first to be used by the USSR .
 This Soviet weapon, dropped from a Tu-16 bomber, reinforced concerns over a bomber gap . It further fueled fear of a Soviet first strike . The weapon is believed to have been dropped by a Soviet-era bomber .
 While the U-2 was completing flight tests and sensor development, the USAF continued collecting intelligence on Soviet bomber forces and nuclear weapons testing . The Air Force continued to collect intelligence on bomber forces, nuclear weapons tests .
 Aircraft including RB-47s and RAF Canberras conducted flights along the borders of the Soviet Union, but were continually harassed and unable to complete their missions . Air Force RB 47s were unable to fly over the border .
 Concerns grew over a lack of ability to collect intelligence coupled with strong Soviet rhetoric backed up by rapid advancements in capabilities . Concerns were growing over the lack of intelligence and strong rhetoric .
 The missile was a weapon that the U.S. could not defend against and one that gave the 36 Paul Lashmar, Spy Flights of the Cold War . Lashmar: The missile is a weapon the United States couldn't defend against . He says the missile was the weapon that
 In early April 1956, the first round of U-2 aircraft was delivered to the CIA and the first crews completed their training . The first crews of the U.2 aircraft were trained in the CIA's new aircraft .
 Between May and mid-June of 1956 training flights were conducted from RAF Lakenheath . Training flights were held between May and June of 1956 .
 On 15 June, the unit moved to Wiesbaden, West Germany, and began fl 3 dng operational missions over East Germany and Poland . The unit was deployed to the U.S. in June .
 June flights were but a prequel to the real purpose of the U-2’s deployment to Wiesbaden . The June flights in June were a prelude to the deployment to the U.2 .
 Eisenhower was anxious about ordering OVERFLIGHT and was afraid of provoking a Soviet response . Eisenhower was afraid to order overflights because he feared provoking a response .
 The need to gather intelligence outweighed his anxiety, he said . However, given the events of the previous months, he was anxious to gather information .
 One of the President’s biggest concerns was the likely Soviet response if a U-2 was detected over their territory .
 Eisenhower was bothered by the myriad possible responses that could occur, both tactically and strategically . Eisenhower was worried about the myriad possibilities of what could happen .
 He was required to undergo surgery and while reeovering at the hospital took his final briefs and made the deeision regarding OVERFLlGHT . He asked his team about the eapabilities of Soviet radar, aireraft, and expeeted responses .
 Hervey Stockman piloted the first flight over Poland, Belorussia, and the primary target area of Leningrad’s shipyards as well as Bison bomber airfields .
 The next day Carmine Vito flew over Moscow and numerous bomber bases and missile plants at Kaliningrad and Khimki . Vito also flew over several Russian missile plants .
 Over the next seven days, three other missions were flown against numerous Soviet airfields and production facilities .
 The CIA’s belief that the U-2 would be invisible proved false, and the USSR was able to track the flights sporadically throughout their time in Soviet airspace . The U.2 were able to fly in and out of Soviet airspace in the U.S.
 Soviets began to make official protests a week after Stockman’s first flight over their territory . Due to their ability to track the U-2, the Soviets began making official protests .
 On 10 July, the Soviets delivered their first demarche, in the form of a note to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, Russia . The Soviets delivered the first note in July to the United States .
 The CIA saw this as an indieator that Soviet radar eould traek the U-2’s eourse but not provide any other information regarding its altitude . The CIA said this was an attempt to keep the U.2 from being classified as an aircraft .
 Photo analysts in Langley diseovered images of Soviet MiGs attempting to attaek the U-2 . The interceptors stalled and fell well below the U.2 .
 Photos show that while the Soviets were able to track the U-2, they could not bring it down at operational altitudes . The photos were taken in the early days of the U.2 .
 They believed that they could resume missions immediately without fear of Soviet reactions . They were able to resume missions without fearing Soviet reaction . They believed they could continue missions without fear from Soviet reactions.
 Eisenhower did not further respond, relieving him of the concern over further escalation . However, the U.S. military did not respond to the threat . Eisenhower said he did not think further escalation would be possible .
 The President was discouraged by the evident Soviet abilities to track the U2 . He was encouraged by their inability to do an 5 hhing about the intrusions and their unwillingness to escalate beyond a demarche .
 The value of information gathered from these first eight flights was immense . Additionally, the value of the information gathered was immense.
 After overfl 5 dng most of the potential BISON bomber bases in the USSR and Eastern Europe, no BISON were photographed . No BISON bombers were photographed in the Soviet Union or Eastern Europe .
 The Soviets assured Eisenhower and the National Security Council that the bomber gap was a fabrication . This did not mean that the Soviets had no bombers, but did assure Eisenhower that they had no .
 Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2 Program, 108. The CIA was involved in the U.2 program . This information allowed the President to use U.S. secrets .
 The possibility of an aireraft being shot down or erashing over Soviet territory was too dangerous to be worth the potential information gained . The potential was low, but the potential was too low to be worthwhile .
 CIA and military leaders continually asked for more overflight operations . The CIA, military leaders constantly asked for overflight missions .
 During almost four years of Soviet U-2 overflights, President Eisenhower only approved 24 total missions . President Eisenhower approved only 24 missions during that period .
 Khrushchev was worried about the rapidly developing Soviet missile program . The program was the same program that would produce the missiles that would be deployed to Cuba in 1962 .
 From 9 July 1959 through 9 April 1960 missions were flown under Operation TOUCHDOWN with very limited political response from the Soviets . Operation TouCHDOWN was launched in July 1959 and April 1960 .
 Air defense systems traeked the aireraft and fighter intereepts were attempted, but none eame elose to the U-2 . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to fly over the Atlantic Ocean .
 For almost a year, the limited flights of Operation TOUCHDOWN had produeed exeellent results . The limited flights had been limited to just a few flights .
 Francis Gary Powers, the most experienced pilot in the U-2 program, was chosen for the mission . The pilot chosen for this mission was chosen by Powers, who is most experienced in the program . Powers was chosen to fly the first U.2 mission in the history of the U
 After a series of cancelled flights due to aircraft malfunctions and weather, flights have been delayed for the past week .
 Powers’ mission was planned to take him over the T 5 airatam Missile Test Range, the missile fields at Chelyabinsk, northwest to more missile facilities at Kirov, and continue north to a landing at Bodo, Norway . Powers' mission was to take
 Powers was shot down by a barrage of missiles from an undetected SA-2 site at Sverdlovsk . Powers was just over four hours into his flight when he was hit .
 Powers was unable to eject but was able to successfully get out of the aircraft . Powers said in official debriefs he did not remember how he did it . Powers was not able to eject from the aircraft but said he did .
 Despite not knowing how he successfully bailed out, the CIA believes no one could survive a high altitude shoot down . The CIA believed no one would survive such a shoot-down .
 CIA did not think it was possible for man or aircraft to survive such an event . CIA released a cover story that a NASA aircraft was missing over Turkey and that the pilot had reported oxygen problems .
 Agency felt that this story would allow them to justify how an American aircraft ended up so far inside Soviet territory . Agency felt this would help them justify how they ended up in Soviet territory. Agency felt it would help justify how the aircraft got there .
 They did not announce the fact that they were successful in shooting down the U-2, nor the fact they captured the pilot . The pilot was captured by the crew .
 After the NASA eover story was released and made worldwide news, Khrushehehev took the opportunity to announee the truth . The Soviets made a very publie display of the ineident and attempted to humiliate the United States and President Eisenhower .
 Eisenhower took full responsibility for the ineident and the loss of the U-2 . Eisenhower was president of the United States during the war .
 A U.S. reconnaissance aircraft was shot down by the Soviet Union in May . The aircraft had been flying over the USSR many times over the past four years . In a press conference he said reconnaissance flights over the Soviet borders were critical to U.N. defense .
 This, the first U-2 shoot down, had important consequences that shaped U.2 operations, Soviet defense systems, and most importantly US-Soviet relations . The first shoot-down of the U.S. Navy's first U.-2 was in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 A scheduled peace summit in Paris was cancelled, as was Presidents Eisenhower’s June visit to the USSR to discuss future peace talks . A scheduled Paris peace summit was also cancelled, along with a visit to Moscow .
 The USAF began standing up a robust U-2 unit at Laughlin AFB that would include Major Rudolf Anderson . CIA units were moved to Edwards AFB, California, while Laughlin was moved to Laughlin .
 Gary Powers’ shoot down spelled the end of U-2 operations over the USSR and the beginning of the . end of the U.2 operations . Although the strategic impact of the shoot-down did not herald the end, it did not mean the end . of the CIA U
 The events of May 1960 did not eliminate the need for the U.S. to eonduet aerial reeonnaissanee . Nor did the events of that day's events of the 1960s .
 Two years later, aerial reeonnaissanee would warn a new President of a great Soviet threat in Cuba and provide him with the tools to reaeh a sueeessful and peaeeful eonelusion . Conversely, just two years later a similar warning would be given
 Their story has received brief mention in chronicles of the Crisis, but for the most part exists only in forgotten unit histories and in the minds of the ever-shrinking group of individuals who flew and supported missions .
 Major Rudy Anderson and the members of the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing . Operations over Cuba began much earlier than expected, but operations began earlier .
 This chapter will tell their story chronologically, starting with the missions flown over Cuba following the “Bay of Pigs” disaster . The decision to concentrate U-2 operations in search of Soviet missiles was made to concentrate operations in Cuba . This chapter tells the story of the U-
 It will then examine the deplo 5 mient of Majors Anderson and Heyser to learn to fly the CIA's U-2 .
 Next, the chapter will detail the flight flown by Major Heyser on 14 October, the first flight that discovered Soviet ballistic missiles on Cuba . The first flight was the first to discover Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Rudy Anderson’s final flight on 27 October . Ensuing sections will focus on the remainder of the Crisis through the perspective of the U-2 missions .
 This chapter presents the unique challenges faced by the men who gathered the 59 critical intelligence that informed President Kennedy and the ExCom . This chapter will present the challenges faced to the men gathered the crucial intelligence .
 CIA and USAF battled for primaey in the realm of airborne intelligenee eolleetion . It will also show internal struggles between the CIA and the USAF .
 Finally, the ehapter will explore the importanee of the information gathered in resolving the Crisis . The ehapter also explores the importance of information gathered from the crisis .
 In reality, U-2s flew numerous missions over Cuba before the ill-fated “Bay of Pigs” invasion in April of 1961 .
 Even after the failed attempt to overthrow Castro’s regime, Cuba remained a high-priority reconnaissance requirement . Cuba was a high priority reconnaissance requirement for U.S. forces in Cuba .
 Shortly after Cuban forces defeated the invasion, the 4080 SRW stood up Detachment G to address the growing concern over Cuba . Shortly after the defeat, the SRW began to stand-up for the country .
 Project NIMBUS focused on acquiring photographic intelligence on airfields and military installations throughout the island . This program, known as Project Nimbus, was focused on obtaining photographic intelligence .
 Missions progressed routinely throughout 1961 but begin to collect images of massive build-ups of military equipment on the island in the spring of 1962 .
 The USAF and CIA requested missions inerease from one per month to two . This upsurge in aetivity led the USAF to request missions to be inereased .
 Aireraft began flying over the island twiee a month in May 1962 with planned missions seheduled every two weeks . The seeond monthly mission was approved .
 The extra week between missions led to an intelligenee windfall . However, the extra week meant an extra week was wasted by the mission .
 The seeond August mission diseovered eight surfaee-to-air missile sites that were not present just twenty-four days prior . However, the mission also found eight sites that had not been found before .
 The photos appeared in the President’s daily brief on 31 August 1962 . As soon as the photos were interpreted, they appeared .
 President Kennedy’s 31 August brief contained two other disturbing reports . August 1962 U-2 missions over Cuba were among the missions .
 SAC U-2 inadvertently overflew Sakhalin Island, a part of the USSR just north of Japan .
 This incursion received significant Soviet 61 attention on the day of the overflight . SAC offleials assumed it would result in diplomatie aetion .
 The Soviets protested at the United Nations and delivered a formal demarehe to the U.S. Days later the Soviets protested . The U.N. protested at U.K. to the United States .
 A report from 30 August detailed the events surrounding a U.S. Navy S2F anti-submarine aireraft on a training flight .
 The S2F was operating fifteen miles off the coast of Cuba when it was fired upon by Cuban patrol boats . It was operating 15 miles from Cuba when the incident occurred .
 Alarm over the safety of further NIMBUS missions escalated on 8 September . Alarm was raised over safety of the NIMBOats .
 Huai-Sheng Chen, a Taiwanese U-2 pilot, was shot down by an SA-2 over the People's Republic of China . Chen was the first Taiwanese pilot to have been shot down .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy called an informal meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Marshall Carter . Bundy called the meeting on 10 September 1962 .
 Bundy, Rusk, and Carter decided that overflights would no longer traverse the whole island as depicted in figure 4 . Instead, they would use standoff cameras and only perform quick overflights of the main target areas .
 They also directed planners to avoid the weapons engagement zone of the newly discovered SAM sites .
 The changes were effective in reducing the danger to the U-2, but they also reduced the aircraft’s ability to collect intelligence in the major areas .
 The U-2 was not fully effective in its mission to monitor Soviet activity on the island . Given the likelihood that SA-2 sites were placed to defend critical areas, by avoiding these sites the U.2 was less effective .
 These September missions revealed more SAM sites and a buildup of Soviet aircraft . But not the reason that they were there were there .
 The Director of Central Intelligence suspected that the Soviets installed these weapons to defend ballistic missiles on the island, but thus far had no proof of the existence .
 The mounting evidence that something was happening in western Cuba drove McCone to call for a meeting of the National Security Council on 4 October 1962 . McCone called for the meeting on October 4, 1962 .
 McCone outlined the problem with the Council’s current policy regarding U-2 flights . McCone told them that he believed the Soviets were installing medium-range ballistic missiles in western Cuba .
 McCone: “The absence of coverage of the western end since August 29, coupled with the rate of construction we have observed, means that there may well be many more sites now being built of which we are unaware.”
 Ground observers have in several recent instances reported a sighting of what they believe to be the SS-4 MRBM in Cuba . Ground observers believe they have seen what they think to be a Soviet-built Soviet-era submarine .
 Two additional missions were flown between the 4 Oetober and 9 Oestober meetings . Two more missions were also flown during the meetings . The missions took place during the 4-Oestober meeting .
 D.Cl McCone flew over western Cuba as soon as weather allowed . They collected relatively little information and provided little information .
 The first mission should overfly the SA-2 sites thought to be closest to operational status, he said . He also recommended that the first mission overflew the sites closest to . operational status .
 He told the Special Group that if there was no reaction from those sites, there should be immediate saturation of U-2 flights over the area .
 Bundy was still concerned about the loss of a U-2, so McCone brought in an intelligence expert to address the possibility of losing an aircraft . Bundy was concerned that the aircraft could be lost .
 Air Force Colonel Jack Ledford, head of the CIA Office of Special Activities, briefed that the odds of losing a U-2 were l-in-6 . The odds were acceptable to the Special Group .
 Previous Project NIMBUS flights were a joint effort between CIA and USAF U-2s . Previous NIMbus flights were joint effort by CIA and U.S. Air Force .
 Given the heightened risks of the flights over known SA-2 sites some of the Special Group questioned the CIA's role .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric believed that the use of CIA pilots created a greater risk of escalation if they were shot down or crash over Cuba . Deputy secretary of defense said that the CIA pilots create a greater . risk .
 The Group decided that USAF should fly the missions, but that, on Colonel Ledford’s advice, they should fly Agency U-2s . Air Force will fly the Agency missions .
 After two days of constant struggle, McGeorge Bundy sent Carter an official memorandum . Bundy sent the president a memorandum of sorts . Bundy: "It was a two-and-a-half years of frustration"
 Memo ordered CIA to train pilots on the Agency aircraft and transfer control of U-2 operations to SAC immediately . SAC ordered the CIA to take control of the aircraft .
 The date was 12 October 1962 and SAC needed to get pilots trained up in the CIA aircraft to meet a planned 14 October mission . The mission was a mission to get the CIA pilots trained for a planned mission .
 Aircraft Majors Rudy Anderson and Steve Heyser received a knock on their door on the afternoon of 10 October . Learning to Employ the Agency Aircraft Major Major Rudy Anderson was the subject of an investigation .
 They were told that they needed to be ready to depart immediately for Edwards AFB and to be in place no later than that night . They were also told to be prepared to leave immediately for the base base .
 The two pilots were also informed that they would be gone for an indeterminate amount of time . They were told they were going to be in the air for an unknown time .
 This type of short notice deployment was nothing new for the members of the 4080 SRW . All members kept a “go bag” by the front door for such short notice trips .
 Heyser and Anderson were familiar with some of the CIA's aircraft and procedures . Both had spent a considerable amount of time at Edwards .
 Rudy Anderson was SACs lead inflight refueling pilot and had just spent 12 days at Edwards working with his Agency counterparts on procedures . Rudy Anderson had spent the previous 12 days working with SAC counterparts at Edwards .
 His trip was focused on preparing the Interview with Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle .
 Anderson was the lead on establishing “taeties, proeedures, and handbook ehanges” for the aireraft . The “E” model U-2 was modified for IFR and Anderson led the lead in establishing ‘taeties and proeed
 Heyser and Anderson were both quiekly eheeked out in the Ageney aircraft . Anderson: "It's a good thing to be able to get out"
 Heyser flew a flight on both 12 and 13 October, which emphasized landings in the slightly different CIA aircraft . The flight was the first of two of the CIA flights .
 Anderson completed a checkout flight on 13 October but did so while in extreme pain . Anderson completed one checkout flight but did not fly for the longest time .
 Anderson reported to the squadron flight surgeon and was diagnosed with bursitis . According to his medical records, Anderson reported the illness to the flight surgeon . Anderson reported it to the surgeon and said he was diagnosed .
 He slipped and fell on the ice while on assignment in Alaska just a few days earlier, and severely bruised his shoulder . He had slipped and fallen on ice in Alaska, and had a bruised shoulder .
 Flight surgeon placed him on duty not involving fl 5 dng status and ordered him not to fly for at least three days . Despite his desire to fly again as soon as possible, he was placed on duty with no fl 5ng status .
 McCone thought it best to send one aircraft over SAM sites first to ensure they did not react . Initially, there was a discussion of two flights departing on 14 October, but McCone opted for one .
 McCone’s suggestion, coupled with Anderson being grounded until 15 October, meant that Steve Heyser was the only one able to fly the scheduled 14 October mission .
 Steve Heyser began preparing for the Special Group’s planned mission over Western Cuba on the afternoon of 13 October, only hours after he landed from his second training flight in the Agency U-2A .
 The plan was timed so that he would arrive at his target over the SA-2 batteries hidden along the eoast of Cuba, west of Havana, at just the right sun angle to provide the best image .
 Timing was eritieal; if he arrived too early, it would be too dark; too late, and the sun would not cast shadows needed by the analysts to detect the missiles . If he arrived early, he would arrive too late or too late . Timing would be
 Heyser received a brief from CIA and USAF intelligence officers . In addition to his navigation planning, he was briefed by the CIA and the USAF .
 Men briefed him on the threat from the SA-2s and suspicions they were intended to protect Soviet nuclear missile sites . These men briefed him about the threat .
 After completing his pre-flight requirements, Heyser took a sleeping pill and tried to get some sleep before a mission across the country that night .
 Maintenance crews immediately got to work appli 5 dng USAF insignia onto the fuselage of the Agency U-2 .
 Life Support personnel from the Physiological Support Division prepared Heyser’s partial-pressure suit . There was adequate oxygen in the aircraft and ground equipment that would support him .
 SAC planners reviewed the mission and prepared Heyser’s inflight charts and navigational information . The mission was scheduled to take off from a base base in Alaska .
 Heyser’s aircraft was recovered by members of the 4080 SRW at both Edwards and McCoy . While all of this was happening, the newly arrived SRW members prepared to launch the aircraft .
 Following slightly less than eight hours of sleep, Heyser awoke around 8 PM Pacific Time . Following slightly under eight hours, he slept for eight hours .
 The exam eonsisted of an overall eheek of health, examination of ears, nose, and throat, and test of temperature and blood pressure . The exam also included a test of blood pressure and temperature .
 He was served the traditional “high-flight breakfast,” a high-protein, low-residue meal, ineluding steak, eggs, toast and eoffee . The meal was ineluded steak and eggs, but not steak or eggs .
 The meal was designed to earry him through the next eight to ten hours of flight, while not generating excess waste in the body that would require him to relieve himself, something that he could not do in the partial pressure suit .
 Following his meal, Heyser donned his partial pressure suit with the help of PSD technicians .
 Heyser began the U-2 preflight ritual of “pre-breathing” one-hundred percent oxygen . They then connected his suit to an oxygen tank, and he began the pre-flight ritual . The mission was the first of its kind .
 This pre-breathing period was designed to facilitate the removal of as much nitrogen as possible from the pilot’s body . The pilot was able to breathe for the first time in a pilot's first time .
 The presence of nitrogen in the blood of pilots at the U-2’s operational altitudes was dangerous . It was found to be dangerous for pilots to have nitrogen in their blood at altitudes .
 By breathing one-hundred percent oxygen, the pilot removed most of the nitrogen, thus alleviating some of the potential dangers . The pilot's oxygen was removed from the pilot's body .
 While Heyser was pre-breathing, others were hard at work preparing his aircraft for takeoff .
 A mix of CIA, Lockheed, and USAF maintenance crews ensured that the U-2 had the correct fuel loading, contained enough oxygen for the pilot, and that there were no structural problems .
 Heyser’s mobile offieer, Rudy Anderson, prepared the U-2 for him to arrive . Rudy Anderson was prepared for the U.2 to arrive at the airport. Rudy Anderson is also prepared to arrive in the air .
 Heyser was transported to his plane in an air-eonditioned van . Approximately thirty minutes before his seheduled takeoff, the plane took off .
 Even at nighttime in Oetober, it eould be stifling inside of his pressure suit . Even in the dark, the pressure suit is stifling .
 To keep the pilots eool, they remained indoors as long as possible and were brought to the aireraft in an air-eonditioned vehiele .
 PSD technicians helped him into the cockpit and ensured that he was fully connected to the ejection seat . The PSD technician also helped him to the cockpit .
 Rudy Anderson conducted a final check to make sure that both Heyser and the aircraft were ready for this mission . Rudy Anderson then climbed up to the cockpit to check that the plane was ready for the mission .
 Heyser gave Anderson a thumbs up as he was ready to take off from the plane . Anderson and the crew closed and locked the cockpit, securing Heysers in the small enclosed space that would be his home .
 For this mission, Heyser elected not to carry all of the normal CIA issued equipment .
 For operational missions, the Agency provided its pilots with suicide devices . The Agency provided pilots with suicidal devices .
 The mobile officer is another U-2 pilot who is responsible for ensuring the safety of the mission . Mobile officer is a pilot responsible for the mission's safety . The U2 pilot is a U.2 pilot .
 They are typically the back-up pilot for that day and fill the role of a wingman and co-pilot wrapped up in one . They fill the roles of wingman/co-pilpilot and wingman in one plane .
 Mobile officer conducts pre-flight duties that most pilots would take care of for themselves in another aircraft . While the pilot is pre-breathing, the mobile officer conducts the duties that would be handled by the pilot in another plane .
 The pilot's duties include a review of aircraft’s paperwork, a preflight inspection of the aircraft, and setting up the cockpit for the mission .
 Mobile officer performs the pilot's duties in the pressure suit . The mobile officer performs them for the pilot . These duties are very cumbersome in pressure suits .
 The name “mobile” comes from the primary action performed by the officer . The name "mobile" comes from primary action carried out by an officer .
 They drive a chase-car, typically a high-performance sedan, and follow the aircraft out to the runway through take-off and upon landing . The chase car follows the aircraft on the runway .
 In the landing phase of flight, it is very difficult for a U-2 pilot to see the runway . The U.2 is a very low-tech aircraft that can't land on a runway .
 Mobile officer calls out the aircraft’s altitude above the runway over a radio . Mobile officer acts as an extra pair of eyes, calling out the plane's altitude . The mobile officer is an extra-pair of eyes .
 This action aids the pilot flying the aircraft and talks them down to the runway . This action is often used by the pilot to talk down the runway.
 The mobile officer monitors and aids the pilot throughout the flight . Mobile officer monitors, aids and assists the pilot during flight .
 The pilots were highly eneouraged to use them if they were shot down or foreed to depart the aireraft over enemy territory . This can include coordination with outside agencies or simply helping the pilot flying with checklists, which can be difficult to review .
 In an interview later in life, Heyser said he had no use for the pills . In the late 1980s, he said he did not use the pills.
 He told everyone ""there was no bullet out there with my name on it"" and “1 will eome home safely.” He said everyone was safe .
 Once lined up on the runway he looked over at Anderson and received the thumbs-up sign meaning he was ready to take-off . Anderson was the first person to take off in a high-performance dress .
 Heyser pushed the throttle forward, and the U-2 roared down the runway, seemingly leaping into the air . After rolling just a few hundred feet, the plane rolled down a runway .
 The aircraft soared into the pitch-black night sky over southern California and turned to the east . It would bring the U-2 over the Western end of Cuba and, in doing so, would change the lives of millions of Americans .
 It was midnight over the deserts of the southwest of the United States . Heyser was alone with his thoughts and the hum of the aircraft engine . After all of the excitement of a full day of work, he was alone .
 Heyser would later recall that piloting the U-2 was a little like returning to the early days of aviation . The U.2 was one of the first U.S. Air Force missions to carry out in the early years of aviation.
 It was nothing like the fighters he had learned to fly before transitioning to the U-2 . It was the first time he had flown in the U.2 .
 He remembered that when you were fl 5 dng dng the U-2, you were physically doing ever 3 rthing. He said he was physically doing anything when he was flying the plane .
 It was all pulleys and cables, pure flying, in a fragile aircraft designed to reduce weight, and therefore gain altitude . The plane was designed to cut weight and gain altitude to reduce altitude .
 Heyser was at operational altitude flying east along the USMexico border . Now that he was flying the U-2, he was required to exercise one of the most challenging aspects of flying the plane .
 Richard S. Heyser, a U-2 pilot, was killed in the U.S. Air Force crash in 1975 . General Jerry Mellmoyle was the pilot of a U.2 that crashed in the crash .
 The pilot was required to sit still in a small and eramped spaee, inside of a pressure suit that separated their body from ever 3 things . The pilot sat still in the small spaee and was separated from the rest of his body .
 While flying long missions, pilots had to relax their bodies and minimize movement . They had to reduee their food, water, and oxygen intake by relaxing their bodies .
 At the same time, their brains had to be very aetive, ealeulating fuel burns, plotting their position on the land and through celestial navigation, and operating sophisticated intelligence equipment .
 As he entered international airspace over the Gulf of Mexico, Heyser turned south . He turned south.
 His planned route of flight took him south of Cuba and turned north to minimize time over the island, and more importantly over the SA-2 sites clustered in that area . His planned flight route took him north of Cuba, and south of the island .
 Around 70 miles south of the isle he turned to a northwesterly heading and prepared to overfly the island . Approximately 70 miles north of the island he turned towards the island's capital .
 His mission planning contained specific points to look for as indicators for when to activate his B camera . For this mission it was the small Isle of Pines on the southern coast of Cuba . The mission planning included specific points .
 He noted the time; it was just before 0731 Eastern Standard Time, less than one minute off on his planned arrival of 0730.22 . He turned on the camera and felt the mechanical rh 5 hhm as the fourhundred and twenty-pound camera began clicking away on
 His first target route took him over the swampy coastline of the Pinar del Rio province . The first target was over a swampy stretch of coastline .
 From there he turned to fly over the hills of the Sierra de los Organos and exited over the rocky coasts west of Havana . From there, he flew over the mountains and over the coasts of Cuba .
 His time over Cuba was brief, less than thirty minutes of a seven-hour flight, but would prove to be of great strategic importance in the coming days .
 SAC deeided to operate future missions from MeCoy Air Foree Base near Orlando, Florida . Rather than returning to California, SAC operated missions from Florida .
 Shortly before Heyser took-off, most of the members of the 4080 who had deployed there for his mission departed en route to McCoy .
 The 4080 SRW Commander, Colonel John DesPortes, led by the 4080SRW Commander . They were accompanied by Generals Don Wilson, Deputy Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency .
 A total of 30 USAF personnel were on the flight bound for McCoy, along with CIA and Lockheed maintenance representatives . The mission is scheduled to take off from McCoy, California .
 Team arrived just before Heyser entered Cuban airspace and began the process of preparing the airfield for his arrival and the BRASS KNOB missions that would follow .
 After landing, Heyser and his aircraft were met by Brigadier General Robert W Smith, SAC Director of Intelligence . After landing he was greeted by Brig. General Smith .
 He asked about his brief time over the island and enquired about any resistance from the defense forces located on the island . He said he was surprised by the reaction he received .
 General Smith personally eseorted the film direetly to the NPIC faeilities where it was proeessed . Analysts got to work reviewing the film immediately . The film was reviewed by a team of analysts .
 Major Anderson and the remaining maintenanee erew members were preparing for a seeond mission seheduled out of Edwards that night . Meanwhile, baek at Edwards, Major Anderson was preparing for the mission .
 Anderson was expeeted to fly a route similar to Heyser’s, departing from Edwards on the evening of 14 October, and landing at McCoy, Cuba the following morning . Anderson was due to fly the route from Edwards to Cuba .
 Maintenance discovered tailwheel strut was defective . Tailwheel strut had been defective .
 The part was not on hand at Edwards, and the CIA and SAC had to coordinate with Lockheed for a replacement . The replacement was not available at the time .
 By the time that the part was flown up from the Skunk Works factory in Burbank and installed, it was too late for Anderson to make the mission with the requisite crew rest needed to fly through the night . Anderson: "It's a good thing that you can't fly through
 CIA ferried Anderson’s aircraft to McCoy while he departed on a KC135 . In a Herculean logistics effort and a true example of interagency cooperation, Anderson's plane was ferried to McCoy .
 Rudy gave Rudy an extra five hours of rest while he slept on the flight from Edwards to McCoy . Rudy's plan gave Rudy five hours extra time to sleep during flight .
 SAC planners worked to design a new route out of McCoy . After working through the night, everything came together for pre-dawn departure on the morning of 15 October .
 It would take over a day to review the film that Heyser gathered on 14 October . The film will be released on October 14 .
 Heyser's aircraft collected images of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba on President Eisenhower’s seventy-second birthday . While it would not be discovered for another twenty-four hours, in an interesting twist of fate, the images were collected on Eisenhower's birthday .
 Eisenhower sponsored the U-2 program and used the intelligence it produced to disprove the missile gap . Eisenhower used the program to prove the gap in missile technology .
 The U-2 would discover that fears of Soviet missiles were now valid . Now, on his birthday, the U.2 would find that fears had been valid .
 Two more missions were flown out of McCoy . Analysts were busy reviewing thousands of feet of imagery . The mission was the first of its kind .
 Anderson and Heyser were rewarded for their hard work with more than 74 work . After a whirlwind three days of work, the pair were rewarded with more work .
 They would each fly a mission on 15 October, initially scheduled to cover the remaining areas of interest over the western tip of Cuba . The mission was initially scheduled for 15 October . It was intended to cover areas of Cuba, including the west tip of the island .
 Majors Heyser and Anderson flew two more missions over the San Cristobal region . Anderson’s First Flight Over Cuba was his first flight over Cuba .
 Anderson had just landed in the back of a KC-135 and was awakened to begin mission planning . Anderson had landed on a mission with the U.S. Air Force . Anderson was awakened at the time to begin preparing for his flight .
 Heyser was on the ground at McCoy for less than twenty-four hours and spent much of the time working with planners to determine the routing that he would fly on 15 October .
 SAC decided to spend more time over the island on the 15 October missions . Based on Heyser’s report of no response from the Cuban defenses, SAC .
 His “milk run” comment encouraged Major General Compton, who decided to push for greater collection .
 Aiding in this decision was the fact that the weather was forecast to be cloud free, a rare occurrence during Cuba’s rainy season . The weather was expected to be cloudy, which is rare in Cuba's rainy season, so the decision was made .
 The 15 October missions will photograph nearly the entire length of the island . The Special Projects Group agreed, and it was decided that the 15 October flights would photograph the island's length .
 In the predawn hours, the roar of the two J-75 engines pierced the Monday morning silence . It signified the start of a week that would bring the world to the brink of nuclear war . The two planes were the first to carry out a nuclear attack on the U.
 Their time on the island was short, and soon they were over the island with cameras on and film clicking away . Their time was short and they were flying over to the island .
 The two spent almost four hours over the island collecting imagery on areas of interest related to the buildup of Soviet weapons on Cuba .
 NPIC team only devoted half of a normal erew to examine the island . The relatively short time of flight over the island produeed a limited amount of film .
 The team was oriented to the route of flight, given a list of known terrain and manmade features, and told to look for a build up of military equipment .
 Members of the analysis team discovered six large canvas-covered objects . Just before noon, members of the team discovered the objects .
 The members of this team were unsure exactly what they were looking at but believed it to be missile-related equipment . The team believed the equipment was missile related equipment .
 A special, "back-up" team was called in to review the unusual equipment . The equipment was used by a special team .
 DiRenzo was an expert on Soviet air defense systems and recognized that these six objects were not an 5 hhing he had ever seen before . DiRenzos was an ex-Soviet air defense expert and expert on air defense .
 He had the team measure the objects multiple times, all resulting in a size in the sixty-five to seventy-five-foot by nine-foot range . The objects are in the range of 65 to 70 feet by nine feet .
 This was far too large for any known Soviet air defense system . DiRenzo called senior analyst Dino Brugioni for support . The Italian was able to find out the size of the Soviet system .
 Brugioni’s team consisted of experts on both Soviet surface-to-air and surface-tosurface missiles . The team included experts on Soviet surface to-air missiles and Soviet missiles .
 When the team saw the images, Heyser collected the day prior they recognized the size of the canvas-covered objects . The team collected the images the day before .
 The group collectively agreed that it was either the SS-3 or SS-4 nuclear missiles . The group also agreed that the missiles were either SS-2 or SS3 .
 Around this time, Anderson and Heyser were landing from their 15 October missions . Anderson was landing from his 15 October mission when he was killed .
 The missions proved to be uneventful from the standpoint of Cuban or Soviet reactions . Like the day prior, the missions proved the day before .
 The skies were over ninety percent cloud free, and the equipment had worked as advertised . The skies had been over ninety per cent cloud free .
 76 place to debrief the two pilots and eolleet their film upon landing . The two pilots debriefed each other, then eolte their film on landing .
 When Brugioni and DiRenzo determined what they were viewing were probably Soviet surfaee-to-surfaee nuelear weapons on Cuba, they immediately elevated the finding .
 The men reported the discovery to their team leads who reviewed the photos and informed their leadership . The men were shocked to discover the photos .
 Lundahl proceeded to the analysts’ workstation and reviewed the images . Lundahl: “I’m not surprised that the images were taken of the U.S. military’s most important image of the day. Lundahl then went back to his workstation
 Through a series of unsecure phone calls and in-person messages word of the missiles reached National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy . The missiles are believed to have been sent to the White House .
 Bundy elected to stop the news at his level and told the teams to prepare briefs for the Seeretary of Defense and the President to take plaee the following morning . Bundy then stopped the news and told them to prepare the next day's briefs . Bundy said the news was not
 NPIC was busy preparing briefing boards from Anderson and Heyser’s 14 Oetober flight . Others began reviewing Anderson's flight from that morning . NPIC is reviewing Anderson and Andyser's flight . Anderson was the first passenger to die in a U.S.
 77 flights provided the President with eonelusive evidenee of the existenee of strategie missiles in Cuba . The President of the Cuban Republic in Cuba was killed by a missile strike .
 Aeeording to offieial SAC history, these diseoveries direetly preeipitated the Presidential aetion that led to the quarantine of Cuba on 22 Oetober . The disease-causing disease was the result of the President's decision to quarantine Cuba .
 The men worked through the night examining the film from the three missions . The film was shot from three missions over the years .
 Lundahl deeided that the briefs for 16 Oetober would only inelude material from Heyser’s 14-Oetober mission sinee the other two missions were still being analyzed . Lundahl said the briefs would only be ineluded material from
 Lundahl also asked Brugioni to develop a map that showed the ranges of the missiles indicating their ability to hit key points in the United States, to include Washington DC . These boards were finished around 0430, almost twenty hours after the team began work on analyzing the film from
 No U-2 missions were scheduled for 16 October . President Kennedy is Briefed by President Kennedy on October 16 .
 After five days of day and night operations, the men were exhausted . The men were sleeping in the back of transport aircraft and fl 5 dng missions . They were exhausted.
 Two pilots used the morning of 16 October to rest before mission planning for the next day . The two pilots used this morning's morning to rest and plan their next mission .
 The rest of the 4080 SRW used the break in flying to stand up an operations headquarters and to build the secure communication lines needed to talk to SAC Headquarters . SAC used the time to build secure communications lines .
 Tensions between erews began to simmer on this, the seeond day of operations at MeCoy .
 Ageney personnel were not happy that their aireraft were being flown and worked on by USAF men . USAF men worked on the airecraft at Ageneys' request to fly and work on it .
 Brigadier General Mellmoyle reealled that when the mission depended on it, everyone worked together as a team . When there was down time between flights tensions were very high between USAF and Agency members .
 NPIC and the CIA prepared to brief the American leadership on their findings . The CIA and NPIC will brief the U.S. on the findings .
 Director Lundahl arrived at NPIC early on the morning of 16 October to prepare for what he knew was a long day of briefings .
 He reviewed the products that his team had put together the night before, asked many questions, and jotted down notes on multiple 3-by-5-inch cards . He then took notes of the products he reviewed the day before .
 Lundahl met with Ray Cline, head of the CIA’s Intelligence Directorate, at the CIA . Lundahl says he met with Cline to discuss the CIA's intelligence directorate .
 Lundahl briefed Cline on the details, and then the two men departed for the White House where they would spend most of the rest of the day . Lundahl and Cline spent most of their day with the president .
 The men went directly to McGeorge Bundy’s office for what would be the first of many briefs . Upon arrival at the White House, the men went straight to the office .
 Bundy was still the only one at the White House that knew about the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Bundy was the only White House member that knew of the news .
 After seeing the presentation, Bundy went to the President’s bedroom and told Kennedy the news . Bundy then went to his bedroom and said Kennedy had been killed .
 The President’s morning sehedule was full, so he direeted Bundy to eall a prineipals meeting at 1145, the first time he had a break . Bundy said the meeting was the first he'd have a break since his morning schedule was full
 Although the President’s sehedule was full, his brother Bobby had free time . The President had a full schedule of work .
 Lundahl and Cline would brief many of the principals who would attend the 1145 meeting . Over the course of the next two hours, the principals would meet .
 Brugioni provided Hughes with the same material that Lundahl was given to brief the Administration . Hughes was responsible for sharing the news with the Department of Defense . Lundahl and Hughes were given the same information .
 Lieutenant General Joseph Carroll and then the two proceeded to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s office . Lt. Carroll and Lt. General Carroll met with McNamara . Carroll and McNamara were the last members of the Air Force to meet with the President .
 McNamara directed the NPIC team to send their officers and brief their respective Service Chiefs so that everyone was prepared for the President’s 1145 briefing . McNamara ordered a briefing of the National Security Council members .
 Lundahl's briefing boards seemed rather small in sueh a large setting, but he had eome prepared . Lundahl’s briefing boards were rather small, but they were prepared to be prepared .
 Upon eompletion of his formal brief, he presented President Kennedy with eopies and a magnifying glass to walk him through the key features .
 Lundahl stated that he was unsure but believed it would be a matter of days given the eurrent eonditions in the photos and the faet that the missiles were shipped aeross the sea . Lundahl said he believed the missiles would be shipped out of the sea within days .
 Those at the brief recall that the President was very calm and asked thoughtful questions .
 JFK was “crisp and businesslike. Rather than displa 5 dng the anger of betrayal that Bobby demonstrated, JFK demonstrated,’s anger was ‘businesslike.’ Rather than . displa . than . Bobby demonstrated the anger he demonstrated .
 Department of Defense immediately began investigating what it could do to maximize U-2 coverage over the island . Kennedy expressed his gratitude and that of the nation for the men who had collected the photographs and those who had interpreted the film .
 There were only two aircraft at McCoy, and only two USAF pilots checked out in the Agency's aircraft .
 McNamara waived restriction that only CIA U-2Fs could fly over Cuba . McNamara directed 4 U.2As from Laughlin to join the detachment at McCoy . The U.S. Air Force was stationed at McCoy, California, in the 1950s .
 Things proeeeded as they had two days prior and weather over the target areas remained elear . Weather over the targets area remained the same as two days earlier .
 Four additional U-2s arrive from the west . This time, they would be joined by four more U-3s . The U2s were the first to arrive in the UK .
 Majors James Qualls and Buddy Brown, along with Captains Roger Herman and George Bull, departed Laughlin AFB, TX in four A-model U-2s . Three hours prior Majors Qualls, Buddy Brown and Captains George Bull were flying the A-1s
 After a brief deseription of what they would be doing, they were to go home, get some rest, and report back at 0100 on the morning of 17 October . They were to return to the UK on October 17 .
 A massive thunderstorm was delivering devastating weather to the airfield . Buddy Brown believed that their missions would be canceled because of the storm .
 The four men were surprised to see what seemed to be everyone from the Wing in the briefing room . The men went through the normal pre-flight routine, but believed the missions would be scrubbed .
 All four were shocked when they were told that SAC approved the missions, despite the weather being well outside of the operational limits of the aircraft . The missions were approved by SAC despite being outside of operational limits .
 Brown described his disbelief when he got to his aircraft, and the cockpit was full of water from the torrential rains . He described his apprehension when he could not even see the taxiway to get to the runway . Brown described how he was shocked to see his cockpit filled with water .
 He said the last words of wisdom imparted by his mobile offieer were, “say your prayers.” He said his last words to his mobile phone were: “Say your prayers .
 All four airerafts made it out of the West Texas thunderstorm and were on their way to Cuba . Eventually, all four made it through the storm and were headed to Cuba.
 Two additional MRBM sites were found along with MiG-21 and MiG15 aireraft and lL-28 nuelear bombers . Two additional sites were also found . The missions revealed that the situation was even more serious than previously known .
 SAC flew six U2 aireraft in the same airspaee throughout the eourse of the Cold War . 17 Oetober was the only day on that day that the U2 was flown in the air .
 Heyser and Anderson flew the U-2F every other day and were augmented by the other nine pilots . The U2F was the first U.2F to fly in the U.S. Navy .
 SAC requested to use other pilots and fly the A-model aircraft more often, but McNamara refused . McNamara's refusal to fly more often led to his refusal .
 Heyser and Anderson will see the lion’s share of the sorties . Agency aircraft to fly missions to the maximum extent possible .
 The pilots' day would begin shortly after 0100, and they would take off around 0700 . The pilots’ day would start at 0100 and take off at 0700.
 By 18 October, Hurrieane Ella was approaching Florida, and with it eame inereasing eloud eover . Low-level reeonnaissanee missions flown by United States Navy and USAF pilots began .
 USAF aireraft and USN ELINT vessels eondueted intelligence operations . The U.S. ELINT operations were also conducted by the US Navy .
 Anderson flew a mission that started fairly clear but by the time he finished his collection run, he estimated that the coverage had dropped to 10 percent cloud free . Anderson estimated that by the end of the mission, the coverage was less cloud free than usual .
 Captain Gerald Mcllmoyle prepared for his 25 October mission . Members of the world community readied themselves for a showdown at the United Nations .
 Both pro-Soviet and pro-American nations sought a peaceful resolution to the crisis . Pro-Russian and anti-U.S. nations sought to end the crisis in October .
 They proposed a missile exchange, the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey for a removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The United States and Cuba would exchange missiles in exchange for each other .
 Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin denied existence of offensive missiles on Cuba . However, throughout the debate, he denied the existence of any offensive missiles .
 Mario Garcia-lnchaustegui adamantly denied the presence of any offensive weapons . Garcia-lara denied any weapons were in possession of any weapons .
 Garcia: "The representative of the United States presented no valid proof of the affirmations made by his President that Cuba constitutes a nuclear threat to the countries of the Western Hemisphere" Garcia stated that the U.S. had presented no proof .
 The President instructed his brother to relay a message to Stevenson giving him the go-ahead to display the photos of Soviet missiles on the floor of the Security Council .
 Stevenson went on the attack. Emboldened by the President’s encouragement, Stevenson attacked the President .
 Stevenson replied, “all right, sir, let me ask you one simple question: Do you?” Stevenson replied to Zorin’s remarks .
 He called on his aides to bring in the briefing boards to demonstrate that proof to the members of the Security Council .
 Stevenson showed the development of the MRBM and IRBM sites erected at San Cristobal and Guanajay respectively . Stevenson showed how the IRBM and MRBM sites were built . Stevenson:
 Aerial photography was used in a public forum as a means of resolving an international dispute . The audience was silent; for the first time in history aerial photography was . Aerial photography is used in public forum to resolve international dispute.
 Cold War author DeWitt Copp: “No other proof could have been more irrefutable, and no other proof would have been acceptable to many among ourselves, our allies, and, of course, those unsympathetic to us .
 The UN could not debate away the iron reality of the aerial photographs, nor could the world . As Stevenson and Zorin were engaged in a war of words and a battle of wills, Gerald Mcllmoyle was involved in a fight for survival .
 Nearing the end of his mission Mcllmoyle was tasked to collect images of the SA-2 site near Banes . He was tasked with collecting images of a site near the site .
 The majority of the mission was flown over a cloud-covered island . The area around Banes looked clear, but the area around the island looked clear .
 Mellmoyle thought nothing of it as he went into his planned turn over Banes. As he approached the site, he notieed the yellow radar warning reeeiver light illuminate .
 Eontrails of two missiles streaking towards his aireraft . However, as he rolled into the turn, he saw the unmistakable eontrasils of the missiles streak towards him .
 Mellmoyle applied the proper avoidanee maneuver and watehed as the missiles passed his aireraft and exploded in the sky about a mile away from him . Mellmoy wade through the air to avoid an explosion .
 Mellmoyle was already on the outbound leg of his mission and returned to McCoy with news of the SAM launch . He was on his way back from his mission .
 Mellmoyle recalled that he was met at the aircraft upon landing by a three-star Air Force General . Mellmoye was met by the General at the time of his landing .
 The General told Mellmoyle that he was not fired upon and not to talk to anyone else about it . The General said he was 'not fired upon' and should not be allowed to talk about it again .
 Mellmoyle promptly disregarded the General’s instructions and shared the story with his comrades . Mellmoye decided to share his story with the General .
 Due to cloud cover on the processed images, the wing was tasked to refly Mcllmoyle’s 25 October mission, the mission that would be Rudy Anderson's sixth and final flight over Cuba . The mission was due to be the last of Anderson's six flights over Cuba
 Rudy Anderson planned for the following day and then called his mother, Mary Anderson, to check in on his mission . Rudy Anderson was found dead in a car crash on 26 October .
 He told her that things were going well and that he was enjoying his job . He said that things are going well in his new job .
 He also urged her not to worry about him beeause he was in a safe plaee . He also told her to not worry about his safety .
 If the aireraft deteeted the traeking radar of an SA-2 a yellow light would illuminate . The airecraft would then be able to see if the radar was turned on .
 If the aircraft detected a guidance signal, meaning that a missile was fired, the light would illuminate red . The light would also illuminate red if the plane detected a missile guidance signal from the aircraft .
 The system was very unreliable and known by the pilots to malfunetion . Mellmoyle reealls that most pilots simply ignored the lights . The pilots knew the system was malfunctioning and ignored it .
 He awoke early on the morning of 27 Oetober, expepeeting to be one of four missions flown that day .
 The other three missions were eaneeled but Anderson’s remained on the sehedule . The other four missions were also eaned . Anderson's mission was eaned, but Anderson's remained on schedule .
 Beeause Mellmoyle’s 25 Oetober mission was ineffeetive over mueh of the proposed area, it was deeided to launeh Anderson .
 The need to revisit the key sites near San Cristobal outweighed the weather forecast, and Anderson proceeded as scheduled . Anderson said the need for revisiting key sites outweighs the weather .
 The story of Anderson’s fateful ‘Black Saturday’ mission was detailed in the introduction and will not be repeated here . Anderson's fateful mission will be shown in the film "Black Saturday"
 Parts of the story have not been written about and may help shed light on the reasons Anderson was shot down . Anderson was unaware the missiles were fired at his aircraft .
 These stories reside in recently declassified unit histories and the mind of the last remaining U2 pilot from the crisis . The last remaining pilot of the U2 was the pilot of a U2 plane .
 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara did so with the understanding that ELINT would cover U-2 throughout their flights . When they approved BRASS KNOB missions at the beginning of October, President Kennedy did so .
 This was promised by SAC, but in reality, it was rarely, if ever, delivered upon . SAC was promised, but it was a promise that was rarely delivered upon. SAC promised that it would not be a failure to deliver upon .
 SAC coordinated with Navy ELINT teams at Naval Air Station Key West and Guantanamo Naval Base . SAC worked with the Navy to find out what was going on .
 These teams confirmed that they were willing to support U-2 missions over Cuba . The U.2 teams confirmed they are willing and able to support the missions .
 The U-2 was not capable of tracking the U.2 at operational altitude, nor detecting adversary radar emissions . However, their equipment was unable to detect adversary radar signals .
 On the day of Anderson’s fateful flight, the asset had been ordered to operate further off the coast due to security concerns . Anderson had been flying with the U.S. Coast Guard on the day he died .
 The USN and USAF did not coordinate a common frequency for the two reconnaissance platforms to communicate . Additionally, the U.S. and USAF didn't coordinate to communicate with the two platforms .
 Even if the Navy had detected the site at Banes, it is questionable if they would have been able to contact him quickly enough to facilitate the reaction . Therefore, the Navy would not be able to reach him quickly .
 Following Anderson’s death, SAC addressed these failures to use all available resources to protect the U-2 . SAC said Anderson's death was the result of these failures .
 R-4 ELINT aircraft off the coast of Cuba to support U-2 missions . They developed a plan to employ an ELINT plane to support the U.2 .
 These aircraft operated on a common frequency, ensuring that the U-2 had adequate warning of a threat . These aircraft cooperated with the aforementioned naval assets .
 General Mcllmoyle recalls the importance of this change and the fact that it became a requisite for further missions over Cuba after they resumed in November .
 In addition to the technical details of Anderson’s last flight, the opinions of his fellow pilots regarding the events of that day have received scant discussion, although they warrant telling . The opinions of Anderson's fellow pilots will be discussed here .
 He was a veteran reconnaissance pilot, accustomed to long, silent flights in the U.2 . He was an experienced U.S. Army reconnaissance pilot .
 The men all remembered the gut-wrenehing feeling when the time for Anderson’s arrival to MeCoy eame and went without his return . Anderson was the first to arrive in MeCoys eame .
 Mcllmoyle said he and eight of the other pilots were out on the golf course that morning, enjo 5 dng a break from their otherwise hectic schedule .
 When Andy’s arrival approached, he remembers looking up and checking his watch more often than he looked at the course . When the time for Andy to arrive at the end of the day, he looked up and checked his watch .
 They sat quietly in the Officer’s Club, thinking about the friend they had lost and how it could have been them . The Officer's Club is a popular club in London, England .
 The reaction of Anderson’s fellow pilots was echoed as a collective gulp in Washington, Moscow, and Havana . Anderson's fellow pilots were echoed in Washington and Moscow .
 Banes SAM site launehed its missiles at Target 33 and destroyed an Ameriean U-2, killing its pilot Major Rudolf Anderson . The eresegment of “Blaek Saturday” oeeurred when the U.S. missile was fired at
 By all accounts, this event should have escalated the crisis and nudged the belligerents over the brink . But instead it did the opposite, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "By all accounts this should have been a success"
 Each nation saw the shooting down of an unarmed reconnaissance aircraft differently, but all saw it as a slippery slope leading to all-out war . The shooting down was seen as a dangerous move that could lead to war .
 For the Americans and Soviets, this was a wakeup call that invigorated negotiations and resulted in an end to the Crisis . For the U.S. and the Soviets, the crisis was the wake-up call . This was the beginning of the Cold War .
 For the Cubans, it was a call to arms and preparation for what they believed would be an invasion of their homeland . The Cubans believed they were being invaded by the government .
 This chapter will explore the three contending nations’ military and political responses to the loss of Major Anderson and his aircraft . Major Anderson's aircraft was shot down by the U.S. and crashed into the Pacific Ocean on June 4, 1969 .
 It will begin with an exploration of Cuba’s response and then examine the sense of betrayal felt by Fidel Castro when the Soviets sought a peaceful end to the crisis . The film will explore the Cuban response to the Soviet-Cuban crisis .
 It will then review the Soviet response, analyzing both the opinions of the military officers deployed to Cuba and the political response from Premier Khrushchev and the Kremlin .
 The chapter will survey the gulf between the planned response and the course that President Kennedy decided to take, despite the guidance of his military advisors . Finally, the chapter surveys the American actions and the gulf .
 The American officer, Rudolf Anderson, the pilot of the U-2, was killed . The pilot was killed in the attack on the U.2 in June 1944 .
 At any time, another incident could have occurred and could have led to all-out war . "At any time," the U.S. military says . The U.N. says it is not looking for a repeat of the incident .
 Fidel Castro recalls the impact of “Black Saturday” and the results of the attack on Major Anderson’s aircraft . Castro was Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro in his autobiography . Castro's autobiography is published today .
 This quotation, along with the exchange of letters between Castro and Khrushchev in the days that followed, demonstrates Cuba’s response to the downing of an American U-2 .
 Castro felt that war was inevitable and was prepared to sacrifice himself, his people, and ultimately the world to defeat America . Castro felt he would sacrifice himself to defeat the U.S.
 He later said, “it never occurred to us to give into the adversary’s threats.” “It never occurred ... to give in,” he said .
 He viewed the fight as between the Cubans and their aggressive neighbors to the north . He said it was between the Cuban government and its aggressive neighbors .
 Major Anderson was angered and disillusioned by the Soviet response to Major Anderson’s death . Because of this, he was angered by the response to the death .
 Less than a year after the Bay of Pigs incident, Castro was approached by the Soviets with a proposal to defend Cuba from further attack . The Soviets approached Castro with a plan to prevent further attacks on Cuba .
 Soviet officials visited Cuba in February 1962 to inform them of an American plan to invade the island . Soviet officials told them of the plans to invade Cuba in 1962 .
 Castro initially rejeeted the proposal, one that he saw as a Soviet attempt to balanee power against U.S. weapons in Turkey and Italy . Castro initially saw the proposal as an attempt to counterbalance the United States . The proposal was rejected .
 Castro feared that if he did not accept the Soviet offer, he would be unable to defend against U.S. aggression . Castro feared he would not be able to defend himself if he refused to accept the offer . Castro was forced to accept it .
 The USSR and Cuba signed numerous agreements, and within three months, ships departed the Soviet Union bound for ports in Cuba .
 Khrushchev promised that he would defend Cuba to the end . If it looked like the U.S. was becoming aggressive, he would send the entire Baltic Fleet to defend Cuba, he said . For his own sake, he promised that if the United States became aggressive, the entire
 It was agreed that the Cubans would employ the less sophisticated and easier-to-use anti-aircraft artillery . The Soviets would maintain control of the SAM systems .
 Air defense systems were installed rapidly, and most were operational by the time Majors Heyser and Anderson began fl 5 dng over the island in October .
 From the outset of the Crisis, Castro ordered his forces to fire upon United States aircraft fl 5 dng over Cuba . From the start of the crisis, Cuban forces fired upon U.S. aircraft fl5 dng .
 Although Castro’s forces were ordered to shoot on sight, the Soviet forces were not given the same directive . The Soviet forces did not receive the same orders .
 Castro and Cuban military leadership frustrated Castro and the Cuban military . This disparity in operational guidance frustrated Castro, Cuban military leaders say .
 U.S. aircraft were fl 5 dng freely over Cuban airspace with no repercussions . Cuba had invited the Soviet forces to their country to prevent American aggression .
 Khrushchev's attitude is that while surfaee-to-air missile batteries were loeated all over the island, there’d been no attempt to prevent the adversary from spotting the Soviet-Cuban defense positions with spy planes .
 While there was a sentiment that the Kremlin lacked the willingness to engage the U.S. aircraft, the same was not true of the Soviet military men on the island of Cuba .
 They shared the same frustrations as their Cuban comrades and did not understand why Moscow would not let them fire upon the U.S. intruders . The Russians did not want to fire upon U.K. forces in Cuba .
 At the 1992 Havana Conference on the Crisis, Soviet General Anatoly Gribkov, army chief of operations in Cuba, shared feelings similar to those expressed by Castro . At the same time, Soviet general Anatoly .
 Gribkov recalled, “1 was not able to understand the purpose of the S-75 installation.” He said. “It was not the first time I was able to see it,” he said .
 Castro repeatedly asked the officers in charge of the SAM sites why they were not firing upon the invading aircraft . Castro continually asked why they didn't fire upon the SAMs .
 The Cuban intelligence service obtained information that the Americans were preparing for an invasion . On the evening of 26 October, the Cuban intelligence agency obtained information .
 Castro reiterated his order to fire, without warning, on any American aircraft entering Cuban airspace . Castro reiterated the order following the news of an invasion .
 The order was passed to the Soviet air defense officers who queried Moscow about their response . Moscow's response to the request was passed back to the Russian air defense .
 Soviet officers ordered their SAMs to fire upon Major Anderson’s U-2 . The question went unanswered and, in light of the intelligence information and a growing frustration with U.S. reconnaissance flights, the Soviets responded .
 The Cubans were elated that the Soviets had finally defended them as promised . The Soviets had promised to protect the Cubans as promised. The Cuban government was elated with the promise .
 They saw the aet of destroying a United States aireraft and killing its pilot as a prelude to war and expeeted immediate esealation . At the same time, they saw the destruction of a U.S. airecraft and killing a pilot as pre
 Castro sent a eable to Khrushehev asking him to carry out a nuclear first strike on the US . However, rather than escalation, the Soviets sent a proposal to withdraw the missiles .
 Confusion and frustration are apparent in a series of letters exehanged in the days following the death of Major Anderson .
 At multiple times Khrushehehev aeeused Castro and Cuban forees of shooting down the U-2, and therefore esealating the Crisis . Khrushesheheva aeeuses Castro and Castro forees  of shooting the U.2 .
 The Soviet Forees Command will be able to provide further information as to what happened with the downed plane, he said .
 In his final cable to Khrushchev, Castro summed up Cuba's reaction to the downing of Anderson’s aircraft . Castro: “The response that played out in the days that followed was that of the Cuban government . The Cuban government responded with a strong response .
 Castro wrote, “the eyes of many men, Soviet and Cuban, who were willing to die with supreme dignity, wept when they learned of the surprising, unexpected and practically unconditional decision to withdraw the weapons”
 Castro allowed Khrushchev to deploy weapons to the island of Cuba . Castro had misgivies about Soviet intentions, but allowed weapons deployment .
 Castro began to believe that the plight of his people was the raison d'etre for Soviet forces in Cuba . Over the course of the five months during which the missiles were deployed to Cuba, Castro believed that his people's plight was the reason for Soviet intervention .
 Soviet SAMs were not permitted to fire upon American aircraft overfl 5 dng his airspace . However, he grew frustrated when Soviet forces were not allowed to fire on U.S. aircraft . He grew frustrated at not being allowed to use SAMs in American airspace .
 When Rudolf Anderson was shot down on 27 October, Castro was euphoric, but the euphoria was short-lived . The euphoria lasted for a short time, Castro said .
 The Soviets quickly abandoned Castro and the people of Cuba, leaving them to live under increased sanctions and monitoring . The Soviets left Cuba and the Cuban people in the wake of Castro's assassination .
 At one point, Castro ordered our antiaircraft officers to shoot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane . In the words of Soviet statesman Anastas Mikoyan, “as a participant in the conflict, the Cuban side was all but forgotten .
 This time we feared that America's patience would be exhausted and war would break out . This time it was the first time the U.S. had been on the verge of war with the West .
 In the case of an invasion, our troops should coordinate with the Cuban forces and be subordinate to Castro . However, in the . case of a . invasion, the troops would coordinate with . Cuban forces .
 The Cuban people are "masters of their own natural resources," says President Obama . "Our only goal was to help Cuba embark on the path of building scientific socialism," he says .
 Khrushchev felt that his officers would not have disobeyed a direct order not to fire without the prompting of the Cuban Prime Minister. Grechko, Khrushchchev felt . Grechkov felt that the order would have been made by the Soviet Prime Minister .
 Khrushehehev believed his soldiers were falling under the influenee of Castro, and had destroyed an Ameriean aireraft at Castro’s behest . This belief drove him to seek an immediate resolution to the Crisis .
 The Soviet response to the downing of Major Anderson’s U-2 was outlined in a seetion . Major Anderson was killed in the attack .
 It reviews the response of the military forees on Cuba and Premier Khrushehehev’s response to the loss of the U-2 flown by Anderson . Anderson was killed in the crash in Cuba .
 The attaek that killed Rudolf Anderson eaused the Soviets to abandon haggling over details and seek an immediate end to tensions . Rather than esealation that would lead to assured destruetion .
 Soviet military forees in Cuba were disheartened by what they felt was a laek of reaetion from their government . As mentioned above, the Cuban government was disheartening .
 SA-2 sites did not understand why they were deployed to Cuba to protect nuelear weapons from being observed or attacked, only to be prevented from fulfilling their role . They were deployed in Cuba in order to protect the nuke from being attacked .
 The SA-2 sites were the first set up on the island, under the assumption that they were there to stop any further aerial reconnaissance from occurring . They were set up in the hope that aerial reconnaissance would not occur again .
 The officers and men manning the sites felt that the Kremlin was prohibiting them from preventing the U-2 from collecting intelligence on 99 nuclear weapons . The officers said they felt they were being prevented from preventing them from .
 They also believed that their positions were compromised and that they would likely be targeted if hostilities commenced . They believed they would be likely to be targeted in the event of hostilities .
 The men of the Air Defense Forces were anxious to do their job and prevent the U-2 from gaining any further valuable reconnaissance information .
 Colonel Grigory Romanovich Danilevich ready to stop merely observing the Americans and fight . Head of the political section of the Air Defense Forces, head of the air defense forces, says he is ready to fight .
 Gerchenov and others should not have shuddered at the thought that they shot down U-2 . U.2 was shot down by U.S. forces in the 1980s .
 Premier Khrushchev was shocked and frightened by the news that an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba . Khrushchev was shocked by the story .
 Khrushchev felt the situation slipping out of control, his son says . Khrushchchev felt instinctively that the missiles had to be removed, he says . His son Sergei recalls, “it was at that very moment...not before or after”
 Up until that point, no lives were really at risk and the crisis was a series of moves and countermoves, posturing for a position of strength . Up until now, no . lives were truly at risk, says CNN's John Sutter .
 After Anderson’s death, Khrushchev realized that it was important to get Americans to promise not to invade Cuba, but “beyond that, it was not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point,” Khruschev said .
 The orders from the Kremlin were very clear; SAMs were not to be fired unless in selfdefense when under attack from U.S. aircraft . SAMs are not allowed to fire unless they are under attack by the United States .
 The men in the Air Defense Forces had asked for permission but were denied multiple times . The men were denied permission to take part in the ceremony .
 The fact that they acted autonomously in firing upon and destroying an unarmed aircraft worried the Politburo . The fact . that they fired upon and destroyed an unarmed . aircraft worried .
 The thought sent shockwaves through the military and political establishment and drove Khrushchev to conclude that continuing down the path of escalation would lead to assured destruction . The third response was one of fear of Cuban actions .
 On the same day that Anderson was shot down, Castro sent a cable to Khrushchev proposing that the Soviets carry out a nuclear first strike against U.S. forces . The cable was sent by Castro the day after Anderson's shooting down . Khushchev began to see Castro as
 Khrushchev appreciated Cuba’s plight and believed in its people, but began to feel that Castro was irrational in his approach to war . He felt that Castro's approach to conflict was irrational .
 Khrushchev feared that Castro’s revolutionary zeal had permeated the ranks of the Soviet soldiers on Cuba . Additionally, he feared that the Cuban revolution had also permeated their ranks of Soviet soldiers .
 Khrushchev worried that this attitude was adversely affecting the judgment of his men stationed in Cuba . However, the attitude was not affected by the attitude of the Cuban soldiers .
 Soviet Minister of Defense, Rodion Malinovsky, explained the reason for firing on Anderson's aircraft . Anderson was shot by Soviet forces in the early 1950s . Anderson's plane was shot down by Soviet troops in the Soviet Union .
 Malinovsky told Khrushchev that due to time constraints and an inability to receive guidance from Moscow, the soldiers elected to follow the guidance Castro had given his men . The soldiers were ordered to follow Castro's instructions .
 These three factors shaped the Soviet response to the downing of an American U-2 . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be downed in the Soviet Union .
 When Major Anderson was shot down, Khrushchev faced with the likelihood of escalation in a conflict that he did not deem important enough to commit full Soviet resources . Major Anderson shot down .
 He questioned the possibility that his forces might drive escalation . Additionally, he questioned the idea that he might be pushing escalation .
 Khrushchev believed that Castro was acting irrationally and that his charismatic and persuasive nature might influence other Soviets to follow suit . The rhetoric coming out of Cuba led to the conclusion that the Cuban leader was acting out of control .
 Cold War adversaries also peered into the abyss and elected to take a step back rather than forward . Fortunately, they also chose not to engage in a fight .
 We had to send a U-2 over to gain reconnaissance information on whether the Soviet missiles were becoming operational . The U.S. had to use the U.2 to get information on Soviet missiles . Kennedy: "We had to go over to get reconnaissance information"
 Former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara outlines the chasm that existed between a preplanned response and the actual course of action taken by the United States as a result of Major Anderson’s death .
 The ExCom agreed that any offensive action taken by the Soviets or Cubans would result in a retaliatory response from the U.S. The United States. The U.N. agreed to increase reconnaissance flights over Cuba .
 President Kennedy chose to revise the plan and did not order the reactive strikes . Nevertheless, he chose not to order the strikes .
 This section will explore how Major Anderson’s death drove the President to reject the desires of his military advisors and alter the course of a nation . This section includes the President's decision to ignore the wishes of his advisors .
 Robert Kennedy describes the deliberations made in ExCom meetings before the commencement of military operations over Cuba . Thirteen Days is Robert Kennedy's account of the events leading up to the Cuban invasion of Cuba .
 The manner by which the U.S. would respond to a Soviet SA-2 launch against a U-2 reconnaissance mission is a topic of discussion .
 Military leadership felt that this was an unnecessary step and believed that they should be able to react to aggression . The military leadership felt this was unnecessary .
 President Kennedy expressed a keen interest in verifying the attack and was adamant about his role as the final approval authority for such retaliatory strikes . President Kennedy was adamant that his role was final approval .
 The news of the loss of a U-2 over Cuba reached the ExCom at 4:00 pm on “Black Saturday,” the group reacted strongly .
 General Maxwell Taylor immediately requested permission to strike back from the U.S. Gen. Maxwell Taylor has requested permission for the strike back .
 He wanted to scramble the alert aircraft and destroy the SAM site that had killed Anderson, along with the Cuban AAA sites that had fired on Navy RF-8As that morning . Anderson was killed in the attack .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara said the military plan was very clear, a limited strike is out . Defense Secretary McNamara went even farther; he said the plan was clear .
 All signs pointed to a U.S. response against, at a minimum, the SAM site that shot down Major Anderson . Major Anderson was shot down by a Russian rocket fired at the site .
 Kennedy saw the act of shooting down Anderson’s U-2 as deliberate escalation, but also challenged the idea of an immediate response . Kennedy said the shooting was deliberate escalation .
 Kennedy reminded them of the slippery slope down which such a response could lead them . While most of the ExCom was clamoring for airstrikes, Kennedy warned them of a slippery slope . Kennedy: "Airstrikes are not the answer"
 Kennedy: Both sides escalating to the fourth and fifth step . Kennedy: “We don’t go to the sixth because there is no one around to do so.”
 President Kennedy focused the ExCom on its responsibility to consider the implications of every step . The ExCom was tasked with considering every step in the government's decision .
 Kennedy asked his team to verify that the U-2 was intentionally shot down by Soviet forces . Rather than mechanically implementing the planned response, Kennedy asked for the truth . Kennedy's team believed the plane was shot down intentionally .
 He also asked them to consider what a surgical airstrike in Cuba would mean for U.S. forces in Berlin and Turkey .
 Team looked at the conflict in terms of a global war instead of a localized airstrike . By opening up the scope of the repercussions of action, the team looked at a global conflict .
 The President quickly decided that he would not authorize immediate retaliatory strikes against the SAM site at Banes . The President decided to allow 26 strikes against Banes but allowed 26 strikes .
 The President’s deeision to delay attaeks on the offending SAM site turned from military aetion to diplomaey . Following the President's deeaction, the . President of the South American nation turned to a diplomaey.
 The move enabled the President to focus on a response to Khrushehev’s letters, while preserving options for military engagement and preserving options . Ultimately, this move saved the President from looking for a diplomatic solution to the situation .
 Kennedy worked with the ExCom to devise a response to Khrushchev . He sent his brother Bobby to meet with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin .
 The two-pronged approach ensured that the Soviets received a clear and concise message from the U.S. from the United States . It was an attempt to de-escalate the crisis before an American response became necessary .
 Until the downing of the U-2, both the Soviets and Americans relied on vague statements and diplomatic “hints and feints” The U.S. and the Soviet Union used vague statements until the U.2 was downed .
 President Kennedy, like Premier Khrushchev, decided a direct approach was in order . President Kennedy decided to take action against the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy’s written response, and that provided verbally through Bobby to Dobrynin, communicated clear incentives to reach an agreement and even more obvious threats if the conflict was not rapidly resolved . Kennedy's written response and verbal threat were clear incentives for an agreement .
 Bobby Kennedy leveraged the loss of the U-2 in his communications with Dobrynin . The loss of a U.2 was a key part of the Kennedy-Dobrynin communications . The U.S. Air Force lost the U.K. mission to Dobryn
 One of our U-2s had been shot down and the pilot killed, the pilot said . He later recalled, “1 explained to him that in the last two hours we had found that our planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon and that one of our planes had been
 "We would have to make certain decision within the next 12 or possible 24 hours. We would have a certain decision" in the next 24 hours .
 The loss of Major Rudolf Anderson and the U-2 that he was flying caused the United States and USSR to realize the gravity of the situation, reassess their objectives, and step back .
 U-2 reeonnaissanee played a vital role in providing aetionable intelligenee that enabled President Kennedy to apply diplomatie pressure on Premier Khrushehehev .
 This ehapter begins with an exploration of Major Rudolf Anderson’s legaey . Anderson was a major figure in the U-2 eommunity .
 It examines the impact of the Cold War on strategie thinking and eivil-military relations . It then examines the impaet of the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Legacy of Major Rudolf Anderson . The loss of Rudy Anderson on 27 October 1962 had an effect on many people . The legacy of Major Rudy Anderson continues .
 The US, USSR, and Cuba each reacted differently to the death of Fidel Castro . All three reacted differently, but all were impacted by the gravity of the situation .
 Rudy’s death had much longer lasting effects on his family, the U-2 community, his hometown of Greenville, South Carolina, and the U.S. Air Force .
 When Rudy Anderson was shot down in October of 1962 his wife, Frances Jane Corbett, was at their home on Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas . She was at the base when her husband was killed .
 U-2 pilots stationed at Laughlin get only a few hours’ notiee before being asked to depart for another mission somewhere around the world .
 General Mellmoyle believes that many of the wives knew where their husbands were on this particular occasion, (primarily because most had asked their wives to send their golf clubs to Orlando) Jane had no way of being certain where her husband was .
 For two weeks Andy had been gone this time, Jane was busy at home taking care of their two boys, Rudolf 111, who was five when his father was killed, and James, three .
 Jane was also pregnant with a daughter, Robyn, who was born seven months later . Robyn was also a baby girl, Jane's first daughter, born in September .
 Jane was devastated when the car carrying the Chaplain and Wing Commander Colonel John DesPortes arrived at her home on the evening of 27 October 1962 . She was devastated .
 Jane Anderson was traumatized by false report of Rudy's death in an air crash . Seven months earlier, Jane Anderson had been traumatized . Jane Anderson: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 Rudy called his wife moments before the casualty team arrived and told her he was ok . Rudy called just moments before he called her to say he was OK . Rudy's wife says that Rudy called her just before the team arrived at the scene of the incident .
 "Jane and Rudy" survived the ordeal, but Rudy was still alive and they moved on . Jane and Rudy were together for the first time since Rudy's death . Jane said, "Rudy and Rudy are still alive"
 The casualty notification team arrived at her door, but there would be no call . This time, she would not be the first time she had been to the hospital .
 As Colonel DesPortes approached the front door of the Anderson home, Jane ran into the bathroom and locked the door . Jane ran in the bathroom to hide from the colonel .
 It took the prodding of her best friend, Marlene Powell, to coax her out of the bathroom . It took a long time for her to be coaxed out .
 Marlene Powell felt that if he hadn't been in the military, it wouldn't have happened . According to Marlene . Powell, “She felt that . If he hadn’t been in . the military . it wouldn”t have happened, she said .
 He recalls that she told him she wished it had been him flying that day and not Rudy . Rudy says she wished she had been flying with him, not Rudy, when she died .
 At the funeral Mcllmoyle recalls that Jane was despondent; ""Rudy’s death blew her mind and she never recovered"
 Rudy's wife gave birth to the daughter he always wanted seven and a half months later . Rudy had always wanted to have a daughter .
 Later in life Jane told Robyn that she had a very hard time believing that her husband was dead . Robyn's husband died at the age of 92 .
 Jane Anderson eventually remarried and had another child, but she was never the same . Jane Anderson died of a heart attack at the age of 50 .
 Rudy Anderson's family was significantly impacted by the events of 27 October 1962 . Rudy Anderson’s family was impacted by events of that day . Anderson's daughter, Rudy Anderson, was also a victim of the tragedy .
 Interview with Brig Gen. Gerald Mcllmoyle, 2 Feb 2017 . Interview with him on his experiences with the U.S. Army .
 If our ehildren ean be an . 5 Avhere near the sort of person their father was, they 11 be my wealth . If our . ehildre be . an . Avhere be near the . sort of . person their . father was .
 Rudolf Anderson is credited with inspiring the development of the U-2 . Anderson was the first pilot to fly in the U.2 . He was also the first to fly a German-built U.S. aircraft .
 Anderson’s aircraft had been equipped with a very primitive version of RWR . Later models would receive upgrades, stressing the importance of being able to detect and evade enemy air defense systems .
 No United States U-2 has been lost to a surface-to-air missile since 1962 . No U.S. aircraft has been hit by a missile in the past .
 No U-2s were lost to SAMs during the Vietnam conflict, despite 10,000 SA-2 fired by the North Vietnamese . The importance of the upgraded defense system was especially evident during the conflict .
 Rudy Anderson had an impact on the future of the Air Force . The U-2 was the first U.S. Air Force to fly the U.2 in the 1960s . Rudy Anderson was a major contributor to the development of the air force .
 President Kennedy posthumously awarded Anderson the first-ever Air Force Cross in 1964 . Anderson was awarded the first ever air force Cross by President Kennedy . Anderson died in 1966 .
 Lutie McGee, “Late Major Anderson’s Family Bravely Facing Life, With Pride,” Greenville News, 5 April 1964, 7.6 April 1964 .
 The highest award allowed for non-eombat aetion in the Cold War was the Bronze Star . The Bronze Star was the highest award for a non-combatant .
 President Kennedy awarded Anderson the Air Foree Cross, Purple Heart, and Cheney Award . President Kennedy believed Anderson’s aetions warranted mueh more .
 Anderson Hall is the location where over 25% of all U.S. Air Force pilots are now trained . Anderson Hall was the location of Anderson Hall's first base base for training .
 Each day, walking into the building, students pass a plaque describing Anderson’s action and a display of his partial pressure suit . Anderson was awarded the Air Force Cross and the accompan 5 dng citation .
 Anderson’s example is a constant reminder to the students that he and many pilots in the past gave their lives under enemy fire . Anderson's example reminds them that many pilots have given their lives to protect themselves .
 It is also a reminder of the importance of the service to which they are committing, the potential dangers that lie ahead, and the reason they must vigorously train and prepare every day .
 The award was established in 1927 and awarded annually to an airman for an act of valor, extreme fortitude or selfsacrifice in a humanitarian interest, performed in connection with aircraft .
 Many recipients received the award for acts of service rather than combat . This act does not have to be military in nature and many recipients are not .
 Major Anderson is remembered in Greenville, South Carolina . Anderson was a member of the Greenville community for more than 20 years .
 In 1998, Greenville resident Jack Parillo began a campaign seeking Congressional approval to award Anderson the Medal of Honor . Parillo is a former Air Force officer who has campaigned for Anderson to receive the award .
 This was not the first time that the idea of awarding the Medal of Honor had been considered .
 Some called for it in 1962 and 1963 but the Commander of Strategic Air Command, General Power, rejected the idea .
 Parillo wrote a letter to the surviving pilots who flew with Anderson, asking for their support . Parillo said Anderson's death would be a "national moment" for the country .
 Fellow pilot Steve Heyser thought that Mr Parillo's proposal was ridiculous and wrote back telling him so .
 Heyser said that he believed that Andy would be turning over in his grave with embarrassment if he knew about the proposal .
 The fear of further escalation after an American pilot was killed by a Soviet SAM made the dangers of the situation apparent and saved both nations from a nuclear exchange .
 Anderson’s death brought 13 History, 4080 SRW History, 1963. According to Parillo, Anderson‘s death brings 13 History .
 Brigadier General Mcllmoyle said that no one in the U-2 community cared about the medals . In an interview, he said that the U.2 community cares about medals .
 Mcllmoyle stated that it was an honor to meet the President but that the medals themselves meant little . He said it was a "honor" to meet President Obama but that medals meant little.
 The 11 men that flew the missions over Cuba in October of 1962 cared about getting the job done and ensuring that they presented their leaders with the best intelligence possible . What the 11 men cared about was getting the . job done .
 The loss of Anderson's U-2 was portrayed in the climax of New Line Cinema’s 2000 film Thirteen Days . Anderson's loss of the U.2 was featured in the final scene of the film .
 American actor Charles “Chip” Esten plays the role of Anderson in the film . The film is based on the life of Anderson Anderson .
 The scenes leading up to Anderson's flight are fictionalized with a personal call from Kennedy’s assistant, Kenny O’Donnell, telling Anderson that his mission was important and to be safe .
 Robert McNamara disputed O’Donnell’s role in the ExCom and stated that Ted Sorenson was the key confidant of the President . McNamara said that Ted O'Donnell was a key ally of President Nixon .
 There were also no calls from the White House to McCoy AFB during the crisis .
 The events surrounding Rudy's death were discussed in the 1985 TV show “Call to Glory” hosted on the ABC network . Similar to his appearance in The Missiles of October, Rudy’s death was discussed on the 1985 ABC network show .
 Anderson’s appearance in these shows has highlighted the role he played in the crisis, but they are a snapshot in time that look at the death of the man rather than his life of service . Anderson's appearance in the shows is a snapshot of time that looks at the life of
 Rudolf Anderson gave his life serving his country at a time of extreme peril . Anderson was awarded a posthumous award for his bravery . Anderson died in a daring act of heroism .
 There should be no debate that his death was the catalyst that drove the U.S. and USSR to seek a peaceful resolution to the Crisis .
 President Eisenhower grappled with the need for gathering intelligence on the Soviet Union and the danger of provoking a Soviet reaction . As outlined in Chapter 3, he grapples with the tension between gathering intelligence and provoking a reaction .
 Eisenhower weighed all decisions through the strategic lens of assured destruction . Throughout his Presidency, Eisenhower weighed his decisions with the aim of destroying the planet .
 Eisenhower’s primary goal was the prevention of nuclear war . Once the USSR gained the ability to strike the U.S. with atomic, and later thermonuclear weapons, Eisenhower's goal was to prevent war .
 While reconnaissance operations were necessary, they were always weighed against the risk of pushing the Soviets to respond . Therefore, while reconnaissance operations are necessary, it was always weighed up against the risks .
 Eisenhower resented when he was in the military . He understood that the value of information gained did not always outweigh the possible consequences . Eisenhower was President of the United States in 1953 .
 The CIA and military leadership felt they were being handeuffed by the former General. This poliey frustrated the CIA and . military leadership who felt they . felt they had to deal with it .
 President Kennedy inherited a plan to invade the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 . The invasion was the first invasion of the Cuban Islands .
 Relations between Cuba and the U.S. deteriorated dramatieally towards the end of Eisenhower’s presidency . Relations between the United States and Cuba deteriorated .
 Castro led a brutal purge of dissenters and those who did not support his insurgency against President Batista . A short time later, Castro led the purge of those who supported his insurgency .
 Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in reaction to gross human rights violations . Cuba and the USSR had increased ties between the two countries . Cuba was a major ally of the Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower approved, but did not launch, a covert plan devised to overthrow Castro . The plan was approved by Eisenhower, but not launched, in 1961 .
 When Kennedy assumed the presidency in 1961, he retained Eisenhower’s advisors who had helped plan the operation .
 Around 1,200 CIA-trained Cuban exiles to land at Bahia de Cochinos on Cuba’s southern coast . Cuban advisors persuaded President to implement the plan .
 The coup attempt failed miserably, with most of the exiles killed or captured . The Cuban people united ever more firmly behind Castro, rather than rising up to overthrow him .
 Kennedy was embarrassed by the incident and the disaster weighed heavily on his decisions for the remainder of his life . The disaster weighed heavy on Kennedy's decisions .
 JFK was concerned about how such a failure, mere months into his Presidency, would reflect upon his leadership and the nation’s credibility . JFK was worried about how it would reflect on his leadership .
 He knew that in the future he had to eontemplate the strategie impaet of his deeisions and eonsider both the effeets of sueeess and the eonsequenees of failure . The future was the future, he said .
 Following the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy kept his military advisors on a shorter leash and took a more measured view towards strategie deeisions . Kennedy's military advisors were kept on a short leash and he kept a shorter view of strategy .
 Premier Khrushehehev saw the ineident as a sign of weakness which he felt he could exploit . However, he saw it as an indication of weakness in the Russian Premier League .
 Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba in an attempt to gain a foothold in the Western Hemisphere . This led to the deployment of Soviet short-range ballistic missiles to the island of Cuba .
 The result of the deployment of those missiles became Kennedy’s ultimate test during his presidency . Kennedy's ultimate test was the closest that the Cold War ever came to escalating out of control .
 Based on the experience of the Bay of Pigs and the Vienna Summit, Khrushchev felt he could bully President Kennedy into submission . The Soviet Union felt it could bully the president into submission, according to a report .
 As outlined in Chapter 4, Kennedy applied the lessons of the Bay of Pigs and deliberately considered the consequences of all actions before making a decision .
 His prudent use of reconnaissance and diplomacy resulted in a de-escalation of the Crisis . His prudent rearrest and diplomacy resulted in the de-calamity of the crisis .
 Kennedy used strategic reconnaissance to make strategic decisions . Instead of acting rashly or responding to the adversary kinetically, Kennedy made strategic decisions with strategic reconnaissance . Kennedy's decision to take strategic action was the result of a strategic reconnaissance mission .
 Kennedy studied what the enemy was doing and, rather than keeping that information stove-piped, he revealed it to the world to shape a strategic narrative . Khrushchev’s unveiling of Gary Powers and the U-2 photos in 1960 was similar to the U.S.
 President Nixon ensured he had the support of the Soviet Union and China through detente before escalating attacks against North Vietnam in the 1972 LINEBACKER 1 8611 operations .
 Nixon ordered significant reconnaissance of the target areas to ensure maximum destruction and force the enemy to the bargaining table . The operations were conducted to ensure the enemy was brought to the negotiating table .
 The importance of strategic impacts of tactical actions remained at the forefront of U.S. decision making . How those decisions impacted relations between the United States and USSR/PRC varied .
 The thought will not go away that a time may come when it will be a tradition for Americans and foreigners as well to place wreaths at the grave of the U-2 pilot shot down over Cuba, our one casualty .
 U-2 aircraft discovered Soviet missile installations in Cuba in 1962 . U.S. aircraft discovered the installations by U.2 aircraft in Cuba .
 These offensive, medium, and intermediate-range ballistic missiles were less than one hundred miles away from Florida and capable of reaching nearly any point on the continental United States . Washington, DC, less than twenty minutes time of flight away .
 Almost fifty-five years ago, the United States and USSR were poised on the brink of destruction . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were on the verge of destruction in the Cold War .
 To many, it appeared that both nations were engaged in an escalatory spiral that could only end in a nuclear exchange . The two nations appeared to be engaged in escalatory spirals that could end in nuclear war .
 Throughout the US, families tuned in to their radios and were glued to their television sets, anxiously awaiting news about the Crisis . Families tuned into their radio and TV sets, anticipating an announcement of war .
 Civil defense programs sprung up ever 3 Avhere in preparation for Soviet attack . Civil defense plans sprung up in response to the threat of Soviet invasion .
 Students participated in daily “duck and cover’s drills at school, citizens stocked up on non-perishable supplies . Churches ever 3 Avhere called on their faithful to pray for peace .
 Let them do all that is in their power to save peaee; in this way, they will avoid the horrors of war, the appalling eonsequenees no one eould prediet .
 Leaders of both nations were shocked by the events of October 27, 1962 . That day, the leaders of both countries took to the streets of their countries to celebrate .
 A Soviet-manned SA-2 site fired upon Major Rudolf Anderson’s U-2, instantly killing him and destroying the aircraft . Anderson was killed in the attack on a Soviet-made SA-1 site .
 The established standard operating procedures dictated a swift response, a strike against the offending missile site and possibly the entire air defense network . The strike is likely to be the first strike against an air defense system .
 Such a strike would inevitably kill Soviets and force the USSR to retaliate . Such strikes would kill Soviets, force the Soviet Union to retaliate, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many members of the ExCom and Politburo believed that war was the only possible outcome and began preparation for hostilities . The ExCom began preparing for hostilities in preparation for war .
 Years after the Crisis, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara remembered “leaving the White House at the end of that Saturday and thinking that might well be the last sunset 1 ever saw’s .
 Major Anderson’s death had a profound, although unexpected, effect on the Crisis . Major Anderson's death had an unexpected, but unexpected effect, on the crisis itself .
 Rather than a rally to arms and a declaration of war, his death came as a wake-up call to President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev . The death of the Soviet Union leader was a wake up call to the world, not a rally of war .
 Two men understood that the chance for war was high and that their decisions had potentially devastating consequences . The two men knew that the risk of war was very high and could be devastating .
 Anderson's passing led the two leaders to the negotiating table instead of the war room . Anderson’s passing led to the negotiation table .
 The most intense and dangerous moment of the Cold War passed peacefully, says historian John Sutter .
 Rudy Anderson’s death would have led to many more sunsets due to his death . McNamara and billions of others would live to see sunsets .
 The heavy tensions that weighed on Americans were lifted, the Crisis complete . The heavy lifting of tensions lifted on Americans was lifted .
 Anderson’s life was sacrificed so that the rest of the world could carry-on . Anderson was sacrificed to allow the world to carry on with his life . Anderson's life was ‘sacrifice’
 Sevareid’s prediction could not be further from the truth . Time has shown, however, that Sevareids’ prediction was not true .
 Even in the immediate aftermath of the events of October 1962, Anderson was regularly referred as simply “the U-2 pilot,” with more emphasis placed on the platform than the man .
 Only one of his fellow pilots is still alive, the rest having succumbed to disease or old age . Only one pilot survived, the other has succumbed to old age or disease .
 Few outside of Anderson’s hometown of Greenville, South Carolina even recognize his name . Anderson died in the skies over Cuba .
 Maybe the quiet, hard-working man, who did not seek attention and said that he would continue to serve even if he was not being paid to do so, would prefer to be forgotten . Maybe he would rather be forgotten.
 His saerifiees in life and death ensured that national leaders had the tools they needed to make decisions of grand strategic importance . President Obama was assassinated in 1992 .
 Rudy did not want to be a hero and did not seek fame or glory, he should be remembered . Rudy should not be remembered as a hero for his actions . Rudy was not a hero, but he was a hero .
 In 1997, Anderson’s Clemson Reserve Officer Training Corps classmate and friend, Frank Sherard, wrote a letter to Senator Strom Thurmond, beseeching the Senate to award Rudy the Medal of Honor . Anderson's best friend wrote to Thurmond in 1997, urging him to
 Sherard’s efforts did not gain traction, but the words he wrote should . Sherard's efforts to gain traction didn't gain traction . The words should be heard, but they should be remembered for their impact .
 He wrote that we must remember Anderson “so that on other nights ... no matter how dark and cold, no matter . No matter how far from home or how great the odds may seem, other men will remember Major Anderson, the mere important fact that one man can make a difference
 In a world of intense eompetition and foeus on personal reeognition, Steve Heyser’s statement takes on a new meaning . In a new world, the statement becomes more important to people .
 Rudy Anderson was just doing his job that Oetober 4 Brigadier General Gerald Mellmoyle said . Rather than a negative eonnotation, the observation that Rudy Anderson's job was just a job .
 He volunteered to take on an extra mission when he eould have eaneeled due to weather . He joined the rest of the squadron on the golf eourse .
 Rudy flew over the most heavily eontested part of Cuba, after knowing that his friend and fellow pilot was fired upon flying the same routing just two days prior . Rudy flew the same route two days before his friend was killed in Cuba .
 Anderson did not do these things for glory or reeognition, he did them beeause they needed to be done and he had trained hard and prepared diligently to do them. Anderson did them for glory . Anderson did these things not for glory, but for glory and re-ogn
 It is important to remember the way he lived his life, a life of integrity, never taking shortcuts or the easy way out . A life focused on excellence in every endeavor in which he participated, he said .
 This legacy is the real story of Rudolf Anderson and the eleven men that took to the skies over Cuba in October of 1962 and is one that we must never forget . The legacy is a legacy that must never be forgotten .
 Eisenhower, the CIA and Cold War Aerial Espionage, is published by the Naval Institute Press, March 2010 . Eisenhower and the CIA were involved in aerial espionage .
 Memoirs of the Men Who Experienced the Legend of the U-2 Spy Plane, Berkshire, UK: Helion, 2011. Memoir of the men who flew the plane .
 America’s Secret Air War Against the Soviet Union, Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 2000 .
 High Altitude Strategic Bomber/Reconnaissance Weapon System"" Wright Patterson, Ohio: USAF , 1952 . Wright Patterson: "High Altitude . Strategic Bomber" Weapon System"
 Dobbs, Michael Dobbs e-mail message to author, January 11, 2017 . Dobbs: "I don't think it's a good day for Dobbs" Dobbs says Dobbs is the author of a new book, "Dobbs' first book of his
 Brig Gen Gerald E. Mcllmoyle, Brig Gen. Gerald E in discussion with author, February 1, 2017 . Brig Gen Mclllmoyle is a former British Prime Minister of Ireland .
 Sherard & Sons, to the Honorable, J Strom Thurmond, letter, 11 June 1997 . Sherard and Sons.
 Problems of Air Force Intelligence and Reconnaissance, Cambridge, MA, MA: Lincoln Laboratories, 1952 . Problems of . Air Force . Intelligence and . Reconnaissance . Problems . of Air . Force Intelligence .