 His writings on society and politics in the 1960s include Freedom Bound, an acclaimed history of the civil rights movement . His work includes Freedom Bound .
 The enduring fascination with the Cuban missile crisis begins with this sense of sudden, unfathomable terror . The gravest collision in the history of the cold war, it begins with a sense of surprise terror .
 On October 16, 1962, President Kennedy learned through CIA analysis of aerial surveillance that the Soviet Union was shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba, contrary to the Kremlin's repeated assurances and his own warnings . President Kennedy had learned through .
 The president told a shocked nation of the weapons poised ninety miles from Florida . The president announced a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba as a first step toward securing their removal .
 Americans braced for a Russian challenge as U.S. warships patrolled the Caribbean . The Strategic Air Command was one step short of an all-out nuclear strike .
 The prospect of escalation by the nuclear superpowers cast a global pall . Whether the chances of war were really, in Kennedy's words, ""between one out of three and even""
 Parents strained for radio and TV updates on the approach of Soviet ships toward the blockade line around Cuba . Schoolchildren practiced taking cover under their desks in case of a nuclear blast .
 Khrushchev publicly agreed to withdraw all missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The agreement was made in October 1958 . Khrushchchev agreed to pull missiles from Cuba in return for an American pledge to not invade Cuba.
 The swift, bloodless achievement of American aims, relieving fears of imminent war between the nuclear superpowers, transformed Kennedy's image . JFK's image was transformed by the achievement of his aims .
 Khrushchev's missile gambit had widely appeared as a bid to bully a young president of uncertain resolve . The missile attack was widely thought to be an attempt to bully the young leader of uncertain resolution .
 Camelot's literary courtiers added elegant exclamations to the nation's exultant mood . Camelot: Camelot’s literary courtier adds elegant ex-climations .
 Through the 1960s, these portraits of the missile crisis as Kennedy's finest hour gleamed in the twilight of America's staunch anti-Communist consensus .
 These revisionist scholars agreed with traditional historians of the missile crisis that Kennedy had acted boldly at the edge of Armageddon . But they asked why this should be remembered fondly, let alone with reverence, simply because we happened to survive .
 Henry Fairlie found in Kennedy's militant oratory and fixation with global challenges was a deeper failing of character . Kennedy's oratory was militant but also a failure of character, he said .
 They recast the young prince of American memory as simply a glib pretender driven by amoral ambition, amoral ambitions, and unbounded family yearnings for glory and power, they say .
 Historians still widely depict Kennedy as dangerously reckless . Despite a growing recognition that Kennedy tried to avoid war once the crisis was under way, historians still depict him as reckless .
 Michael Beschloss argues that the president was flawed by a craving to prove himself through confrontation . Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960-1963, is the subject of a new book, "Krushchev and Kennedy"
 The belief that President Kennedy's actions during the missile crisis reflected his singular character, judgment, and leadership may be the last great myth surrounding this clash of superpowers .
 Kennedy's efforts to rid Cuba of Soviet nuclear weapons seen as heroic statesmanship, machismo or machismo . For more than three decades writers have variously highlighted JFK's efforts as a triumph of heroic statesman .
 Kennedy etched a mainstream profile in caution, bounded securely by diplomatic precedent, partisan pressure, and the values of American political culture during the cold war . On closer inspection, one finds that Kennedy explored no new policy frontiers but rather etched a centrist profile .
 Kennedy's policies were largely inherited from the previous administration and hardened by a formidable public consensus that crossed party lines as well as regional and sectional borders . Yet in each of these areas, President Kennedy was largely inherited .
 Kennedy's insistence that the Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba was intolerable coincided with policies and public opinion that had crystallized long before his emergence in 1960 as the Democratic presidential candidate .
 Cold war attitudes were becoming more alarmist and belligerent, based on perceptions of proliferating global crises caused by Communist threats and subversion, growing Soviet nuclear and missile capabilities, and Cuba's increasing reliance on Soviet trade and aid, under its left-leaning president Fidel Castro .
 The appearance in Cuba of Russian military equipment and ""technical personnel"" further provoked fears that America was slackening in its anti-Communist vigilance . The Monroe Doctrine, which since 1823 had warned foreign powers against encroaching in the Western hemisphere, was violated .
 Eisenhower's administration had sanctioned covert efforts to topple Castro in 1961 . Eisenhower had said that any Soviet attempt to build an offensive military base in Cuba would require a U.S. military response .
 Kennedy's Cuban policy built on his predecessor's, though with scant initial success . Kennedy's Cuba policy was built on a predecessor's .
 In April 1961 the president's hesitant approval of a disastrous CIA-sponsored invasion of Cuba by exiles seeking to oust Castro was a shock to his image and his ego . The president's approval of the CIA-backed invasion of the island was a surprise to him, as well as his
 The defeat did not significantly alter U.S. policy toward Cuba, which remained to undermine Castro by all means short of occupation by American forces, and to deter the Soviets from converting the island into an offensive military base .
 No one in the administration believed diplomacy alone to be an adequate response to a nuclear intrusion ninety miles from the U.S. mainland . But few Americans generally believe diplomacy alone is adequate .
 Of the possible military responses, Kennedy believed a blockade to be the mildest, offering the best chances for a peaceful settlement . Kennedy believed that a blockade would offer the best chance for a peace settlement .
 Calls for a blockade of Soviet arms to Cuba had earlier gained strong support among Democrats and Republicans in Congress, and among newspapers and magazines throughout the country . For these same reasons, calls for such a blockade had also gained strong backing among Democrats, Republicans .
 President Kennedy's course built on widely shared perceptions of vital national interests, tempered by a concern to curb the dangers of unchecked escalation . Once again, President Kennedy built on shared perceptions that national interests were paramount .
 Adlai Stevenson privately urged withdrawal of American Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviets' removing their missiles from Cuba . Stevenson was Kennedy's ambassador to the United Nations and twice the Democratic party's candidate for president .
 Stevenson's advice was emphatically rejected, and when the Russians later pressed for such a trade, Kennedy publicly refused . Kennedy refused to accept the trade .
 Kennedy and his aides repeatedly considered this proposal in secret deliberations . It became a crucial though hidden addendum to a larger, public settlement, he says .
 Kennedy's policy shifts on this issue appear, first glance, to suggest the exceedingly personal and contingent nature of diplomacy during the crisis . Kennedy's foreign policy shifts appear to suggest that he was personally involved in the crisis.
 The president's policies reflect his caution in foreign policy and domestic politics, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: These maneuvers underscore the extent of his caution .
 The missiles in Turkey were a logical bargaining chip in the crisis, for they were by all accounts obsolete and militarily useless . Their proximity to the Soviet Union was a diplomatic embarrassment, tending to discredit professions of outrage .
 Kennedy took a firm military stand, to signal American resolve and avoid appearing to reward the covert Soviet nuclear deployment . Yet before Kennedy could include them in any deal, he had first to take a firm stand .
 The president also feared alienating Turkey and straining the NATO alliance by reversing commitments dating to the Eisenhower administration .
 By pledging to withdraw the Jupiter missiles yet concealing this from all but a handful of Soviet and U.S. officials, Kennedy reconciled several compelling but seemingly incompatible aims . Kennedy hid this from most of the Soviet and American officials .
 His compromise cost nothing in military security, defused the risks of escalation, and achieved what Americans most wanted . It all the while preserving his image at home and abroad as an uncompromising anti-Communist leader .
 Kennedy's cautious attempts to accommodate both domestic pressures and Soviet interests may best be appreciated in relation to each other . Kennedy's cautious attempts to accommodate both domestic pressures and Soviet interests .
 Too often scholars have tended to equate Kennedy's top-secret deliberations and formal authority with vast practical latitude in responding to the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's formal authority as commander-in-chief is often misunderstood .
 Political context acted more like a vise tightly wound around the entire decision-making process . Political context was often depicted mainly as a dramatic backdrop to Kennedy's decisions .
 In this light the president's policies, however fraught with risk, appear temperate and even unseasonably restrained compared with the alarums and calls for bold action by Democratic and Republican officials .
 Kennedy sought to curb the risks of escalation while forging a consensus from an electorate and a political establishment more militant than he . Kennedy sought a sharply limited realm for maneuver .
 No leader can effectively march to the beat of his own drummer unless others join the procession . Kennedy assiduously gauged public sentiment should scarcely occasion censure, for no leader can .
 Kennedy discerned that democratic leaders are subject to constraints that even scholars may find elusive . Kennedy's keen sense of history, Kennedy discerns that democratic . leaders must be constrained by constraints even scholars find elusive, he says .
 In 1962 he had started to fill out a poll evaluating American presidents, then decided the project was fruitless . In 1962, he had filled out an American presidential poll, but decided it was a fruitless effort .
 Only the President himself can know what his real pressures and his real alternatives are . Only the president can decide what he wants to do with his presidency .
 Kennedy's leadership should be studied with skepticism, but it should discourage interpretations detached from the dominant political values and concerns of his era . Such skepticism need not preclude a study of Kennedy's own leadership, Kennedy says .
 Persistent attempts to divine the president's character from his policies float free of historical context . The president's policies and personal traits too often float free from historical context.
 Kennedy reflected the harsh and largely unyielding terrain of American politics during the early 1960s . Kennedy was obsessed with personal honor, Red shadows over Cuba, a nonexistent ""missile gap,"" Khrushchev's arrogance .
 The public mood was alarmist, even apocalyptic, for a nation officially at peace . No public figure could expect to contravene that mood and still retain credibility . Public mood was even apocalyptic for nation at peace, and no public figure would be able to challenge it .
 The surest way to see Kennedy's role more clearly may be, paradoxically, to pull back from the relentless close-ups that have formed our standard images of him . It's possible to pull away from the constant close-up of Kennedy's life .
 No part of this excerpt may be reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher of the book .
 Maximum Danger redefines the problems confronting Kennedy at this most dangerous moment in human history . Maximum Danger is Maximum Danger. Maximum Danger will be presented at 9 p.m. ET on Monday on CNN.com .
 Jr Arthur Schlesinger An engaging narrative...a deft summary of the debates. An engaging . narrative... a deft summary . of the . debates. Jr. Schlesingers .