 Americans were supporting a rather corrupt regime under Fulgencio Batista, by the time the 1950’s rolled around . Americans supported the Batista regime in the 1950s .
 The Americans completely controlled the Cuban economy . The U.S. had control of Cuba's economy .
 Cuba's economy was productive when compared with other countries in Latin America, but wealth was not distributed fairly . Cuba's wealth was distributed fairly, says CNN's John Defterios . Cuba is one of the most productive countries of Latin America .
 Many attempts had been made to try and reform the system peacefully . January 1, 1959 was the first anniversary of the revolution in the country .
 By the late 1950’s, it was obvious that no economic or social progress would avoid a violent revolution . But by the 1950's, it had been obvious that . no economic . progress would . avoid a . violent revolution.
 A lawyer, who had a liberal nationalist political background, organized a guerrilla force in the mountain regions . He organized a force in mountain regions in the country .
 On January 1, 1959, Fidel Castro and his forces overthrew the Batista regime . Fidel Castro was one of the leaders of the Cuban revolution .
 Cuba's relationship with the U.S. did not take on a confrontational tone right away . The relationship between Cuba and the United States has been strained for years .
 As the year continued, American-owned factories and plantations in Cuba became nationalized by Castro . Castro nationalized many of Cuba's factories and plantation plantations .
 America made the first move in July of 1960, when they stopped buying Cuban sugar . America stopped buying sugar from Cuba in July 1960 .
 Castro signed a trade agreement with the U.S.R. in February, 1960 . Castro signed the agreement in February 1960 .
 The deal would see Cuban sugar going to the USSR, and aid and weapons going to Cuba . Cuba sugar would go to the Soviet Union, with Soviet aid and arms going to Havana .
 To a certain extent, the USA had driven the Cubans straight into the arms of the Soviets . The U.S. drove the Cuban government straight into their arms . The USA had also driven the Cuban army straight to the arms .
 In January of 1961, America broke off all of their diplomatic relations with Cuba . The U.S. broke off diplomatic ties with Cuba in January of that year .
 It called for U.S. support of Cuban exiles, to re-take and recapture Cuba . The Cuban exile group called for American support of Cuba exiles .
 The Americans offered their military base in Guatemala as a marshalling ground . They offered their base in the country as a 'Marshalling ground'
 The small force of 1400 Cuban patriots were shamed by the Cuban forces . None of them made it to shore .
 The U.S.R. decided to deploy missiles in Cuba, in the spring and summer of 1962 . The missiles were deployed in Cuba in the summer and spring of that year .
 America was capable of launching I.C.B.M.'s (inter-continental ballistic missiles) but the Soviet range was limited to certain targets in Europe . America was able to launch I.I.B.'s in the 1950s and '60s .
 Khrushchev could equalize the situation if he got away with missile bases in Cuba . The situation would equalize with the presence of missile bases .
 Documents have been released in the 1960’s, proving that the USA really did have military plans for a invasion of Cuba . The documents show that the U.S. had military plans to invade Cuba .
 The Pentagon had numerous plans for the invasion of many places . Be aware that the Pentagon had many plans .
 Khrushchev could convince the U.S.A. to remove missiles in Turkey . Perhaps if the Soviets were to put missiles next door to the United States, they could convince them to remove them from Turkey .
 "Superpowers" created significance each of the superpowers confronted each other . "Superheroes" were able to confront each other in the face-to-face situations .
 This conflict was different from others in the Cold War because it was military and direct . It was military, direct and military, and was military .
 Protected by submarines, Soviet ships were fast approaching the U.S. Navy . Protected from the American Navy .
 Other Cold War conflicts during the Cold War had been once-removed… with the USA against one of the U.S.R.’s clients and vice versa . Other conflicts during that Cold War were once removed .
 Other crises, like Berlin, weren’t directly about the deployment of nuclear weapons . Other crises like Berlin were not directly about nuclear weapons deployment .
 Kennedy’s need for a complete victory increased the possibility of a direct military confrontation . Kennedy's need for complete victory was greater than his desire to avoid a war .
 The manner in which Kennedy handled the ‘two letters’ and the issue of the missiles in Turkey shows that he was practising brinkmanship . The manner of handling the “two letters,” and the issues in Turkey show that Kennedy handled it well .
 Brinkmanship is a form of diplomacy where the participants take events to the brink, or edge . Brinksmanship is an art form where participants take things to the edge, or brink .
 Some see the Cuban missile crisis as a form of ‘nuclear chicken’…where the point of the game is to see who will back down first . Some see it as a game of "nuclear chicken"
 Khrushchev finally agreed to remove the missiles at the height of the crisis . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Before, this kind of high tense showdown had only been seen in the movies . Before, the high tension showdown was only seen in movies .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev set up a direct phone line between Washington and Moscow . The crisis was the result of a phone call between the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 Communication between the two leaders had been very slow, since the letters needed translation . Communication had been slow, with the letters needing translation .
 The first letter that Kennedy received at the height of the crisis took six full hours from the time it was sent, to the time Kennedy read it . Kennedy received the first letter from the White House at the time .
 Both agreed that to start a war, because communication was slow, would be stupid . The result of the crisis was that the U.S. and the world were unable to reach out to each other .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to sign an atmospheric test ban treaty . Nine months later, both agreed to a treaty banning atmospheric tests .
 As a result of the crisis, Cuba became a Soviet satellite . The crisis resulted in the collapse of Cuba as a result .