 This is the first historical investigation of the Crisis in the context of Australian-U.S. relations . The Crisis was the first of its kind in Australia and the United States .
 Its primary objective, therefore, is to fill a historical gap in Australia's Cold War history . The book will be released in Australia on September 28, 2015 .
 The thesis posits that the Menzies Government's management of Australian-American relations in this period is reflected in its response to the Crisis . The thesis says that the government's response to this crisis was reflected in the crisis .
 The factors that shaped its response, including its anxieties and dependencies, contribute to existing analyses of Australian-U.S. relations . The factors behind Australia's response to the U.S., including its anxiety and dependency, contributed to its response .
 This study, therefore, also illustrates who and what influenced Australian foreign policy at this time . This study also illustrates the influence of Australia's foreign policy .
 This thesis relies heavily on primary sources, predominantly declassified government records . This thesis is based on the declassified documents from the U.S. government .
 Almost all of the archived government records on the Crisis are contained in the files of the Department of External Affairs . Almost all government records of the crisis can be found in the department's files .
 Only scattered references to the Crisis can be found in the personal correspondence and papers of Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister for External Affairs, and Cabinet files .
 This thesis documents the Menzies Government's response to the Crisis in 1962 . Secondary sources have been used in this thesis . It also documents Australian-American relations and foreign policy during the Cold War .
 The Menzies Government pledged calculated support to the Kennedy Administration . The Kennedy Administration was the prime minister's first administration . The Mensies government pledged to support the administration .
 Australia's need to balance its desire to increase Australia's defensive capacity and Cuba's opposition to offensive weapons and bases in Cuba . This reflected its need to deal with the growing threat communism posed to stability and security in South-East Asia .
 Australia's dependency on the American alliance for its defence, however, was considered paramount . The US is considered the most powerful ally in the world .
 In simple terms, the Soviet Union had installed nuclear weapons and bases in Cuba . The Soviet Union also had military bases in the country .
 America learned of the placement of medium-range ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads, through photographs taken by reconnaissance flights . U.S. learned of placement of the missiles through photos taken by aircraft .
 It quarantined ships bound for Cuba, with the endorsement of the Organization of American States . The move is an attempt to prevent a further build up of weapons .
 For America, the missiles were perilously close, placing much of the east coast of America within range of a communist, nuclear attack . The missiles were placed on the U.S. east coast, placing it within range .
 For the Soviet Union, the missiles represented a strategic move to even the playing field . America had nuclear missiles in Europe directed at the Soviet Soviet Union . For the U.S., the missiles were aimed at Russia .
 For Cuba, the missiles offered protection from America which had expressed great consternation towards its conversion to communism . America had made several covert attempts to topple Dr Fidel Castro's regime since 1959 .
 CIA Covert Operations 1959-62 , 2nd ed., The Secret War Series I . 1 . 1 which for them, brought the Crisis to a close. 1 .
 Cuba, on the other hand, still maintains that the Crisis has not ended . Cuba, however, still insists that the crisis has never ended . The crisis is still ongoing .
 The studies of Michael Beschloss, Raymond Garthoff, Roger Hilsman, Arthur Schlesinger, and Theodore Sorensen, are some of the most notable of the last four decades .
 Robert Kennedy's memoir, Thirteen Days, never goes uncited in the literature . Robert Kennedy is a straight forward but insightful account of his life in his memoir .
 He provides new insight on the Crisis, including on reconnaissance flights, positioning of American ships during quarantine, and storage location of nuclear warheads, which is absent in the earlier literature .
 For a long period, the American narrative has overshadowed alternative standpoints on the Crisis . This is noteworthy, particularly in a post-colonial sense, as for a long time, the U.S. narrative has been overshadowed by alternative views .
 In doing so, they have . explicated the international dimension and significance of the Crisis .
 Astonishingly, there has not yet been a dedicated historical investigation into Australia's response to the crisis .
 "The relevant existing literature, including books, journal articles and biographical works, is superficial," says the author of the book . "It is superficial. It is not the first time I have read this. It's the second time I've read this book, and I'm not
 Prue Torney-Parlicki is the only scholar to have examined Australia's response to the crisis . She is the author of a book on the crisis in Australia .
 The Menzies Government's reaction to what it considered were inflammatory comments made by the journalist, Dr. Peter Russo . A biography and biography of Peter Russo, Behind the News, detail the government's reaction .
 Peter Russo of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation was killed on 29 October 1962 . Peter Russo was killed in a car crash in Melbourne, Australia, in 1962 .
 Russo claimed that both the Americans and Soviets had been dishonest in their handling of the Crisis . He questioned the immediacy with which Australia declared its support for America's actions . Russo also claimed that Australia declared support for the U.S. in the wake of the crisis .
 Through 'the Russo affair' case-study, Torney-Parlicki provided a useful insight into Australia's response to the crisis . She posited this response in the context of Australian-American relations .
 In doing so, Torney-Parlicki revealed the sensitivity of the Menzies Government to supposed anti-American opinion, and its attempts to silence it .
 Studies on Australian-American relations; Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty ; and Australian foreign policy during the Cold War neglect to examine Australia's response .
 The dispute over West New Guinea, the vulnerability of Thailand in light of instability in Laos, and the looming war in Vietnam, dominate the literature on Australia's involvement in international affairs in the early 1960s .
 Scholars have noted that Australian foreign policy increasingly looked to America in this period . Although British foreign policy was kept in close view, American alliance took precedence in consideration of Australia's national interest .
 There are few references to the Crisis in the memmrs of those who were Members of Parliament or representatives of the diplomatic corps .
 Those who have commented on the crisis have not provided insight of any real substance regarding Australia's response to the crisis . Australia has not responded to any of the world's most recent comments .
 John F Kennedy's handling of the crisis in the U.S. has been discussed in the wake of the Cold War . The Crisis was a major event in the United States' involvement in the Middle East .
 This is helpful in identifying attitudes and beliefs, even in hindsight, of those involved on the political front . However, their reflections raise more questions than answers .
 In the absence of a framework within which to place such reflections, their value both inherent and to this thesis remains limited . The absence of such reflections remains limited, says author .
 This thesis attempts to provide a framework for the following reflections . This thesis will attempt to provide an explanation for the reasons for the conclusion .
 In his first memoir, Sir Robert Menzies, then Australian Prime Minister, wrote of his admiration for Kennedy and his handling of the Crisis .
 The historic moment of truth will come when the Soviet Chairman is confronted by a democratic leader who has the power and the personality to say ""You go no further"", and who is believed . The Soviet Chairman will be confronted by the democratic leader .
 The only man who can say this, and be believed, is a President of the United States. And the only man can do this is to be believed. And that's true .
 Menzies, a self-confessed anglophile, had great faith in Kennedy, Kennedy and the U.S. presidency . He had great and passionate faith not just in Kennedy .
 This thesis will illustrate the extent of the faith in America held by the Menzies Government in October 1962 . It will also attempt to demonstrate who, and what, influenced Australian foreign policy in this period .
 Khrushchev had bungled and that Kennedy matched him in the missiles for Cuba plan of the Soviet. Caucus discussions show that it was the consensus that Khruschev bungled .
 Menzies' admiration for Kennedy and his response to the crisis is similar to his view held by Menzie . Kennedy's response to crisis was similar to that of the former Prime Minister . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Sir Howard Beale, then Australian Ambassador to America, also reflected on Kennedy ' s handling of the Crisis in his memoir, This Inch of Time . Beale was then Australian ambassador to America .
 Beale acknowledged that the Crisis was a triumph for Kennedy, but unlike Menzies and Haylen, he did not write admiringly of Kennedy's approach . Beale said that the crisis was a success for Kennedy .
 In this, the second volume of his memoirs, Menzies is silent on Kennedy and Cuba . In this volume of memoirs he's silent on JFK, Cuba and Kennedy .
 He considered Kennedy's foreign affairs record an 'uneven one' and concurred with Dean Acheson, former U.S. Secretary of State and unofficial adviser to the Kennedy Administration during the Crisis, that Kennedy was simply 'lucky'
 Menzies appeared to have held greater confidence in Kennedy and his actions than did Beale, his American emissary . Beale was a British diplomat in the 1950s .
 A Biography, 16 claimed that this speech represented Fraser's anxiety over Australia's national security . Fraser was the prime minister of Australia's first term . Fraser's speech was described as 'anxiety over national security'
 For Fraser, the Crisis symbolised that America and the Soviet Union were willing to use their nuclear weapons for their own interests, but would avoid encounters where a nuclear response could result . Like Beale, Renouf remarked that 'contrary to general opinion, Fraser drew no comfort from the
 U.S. would be inclined to retreat from what it may consider to be smaller disputes . Therefore, America would be willing to retreat, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Fraser: Such disputes could be ones in which Australian interests would be threatened . Fraser: For Fraser, such disputes could threaten Australian interests . Fraser says Australia's interests could be threatened by such disputes .
 Ayres: AustralianAmerican alliance was essential component of Australian foreign relations in the l 960s . This speech highlighted Australia's dependence on its allies, according to Ayres . Ayres says the speech highlighted the importance of the alliance .
 Fraser claimed to have been told that after much debate among Cabinet members, Menzies declared that it was in Australia's interest to support its American ally . This was the only course of action Australia could have taken, he said . Fraser claimed he was told by Cabinet members that Menz
 This thesis will examine factors including anxieties and dependencies regarding Australia's national interest that were considered by the Menzies Government in determining its response to the Crisis . It will examine the factors including anxiety and dependency in determining Australia's response .
 The limited literature on Australia's response to the Crisis suggests that this topic is worthy of historical investigation . Australia responded well to the crisis in the 1970s and '80s .
 It represents the first study to examine the Crisis in the context of Australian-American relations . The study was commissioned by the Australian government .
 Its primary purpose, therefore, is to contribute to the history of Australia's Cold War by filling a historical gap . The book's primary purpose is to fill the historical gap by filling the history gap .
 The timing of this study is also noteworthy, as aside from Torney-Parlicki's studies, the majority of existing literature was written during the Cold War . The study was published in the spring of 2009 .
 Historians now have the benefit of assessing the Cold War from outside rather than from within . Most of the archived government records have been declassified .
 In examining Australia's response to the Crisis, this thesis will not detail either the high drama or the private and public negotiations between America and the Soviet Union . This thesis will focus on the intricacies of the various resolutions tabled in the UN Security Council .
 The emphasis in this thesis will be on how the Menzies Government managed its relations with America in light of the Crisis . Rather, the emphasis will specifically be on the Mensies Government managing its relations .
 Alexander Trapeznik and Aaron Fox offer fresh insight into the Australian-American alliance relevant to Australia's involvement in other international affairs . They also provide a framework for, and add depth to, the memoirs of those who lived this experience .
 As much as the build up of Soviet arms in Cuba troubled America, it came as no surprise this communist collaboration over weapons began in July 1961 .
 Cuba no longer had defensive but offensive weapons, capable of delivering nuclear warheads into southern and eastern parts of America . From the American standpoint, Cuba had no defensive weapons, the U.S. says .
 Kennedy and his closest advisors privately contemplated these actions and their response for the next week before they made an announcement to their population and most of the world . Kennedy: "Kennedy and his . closest advisors ... contemplated these . actions and . their response"
 In that time, his advisors had divided into ""doves and hawks" as they considered ways to remove the threat the weapons posed .
 The former advocated diplomatic negotiation through the UN; the latter, prompt military action followed by invasion . The former was led by the U.S. President George W. Bush in the 1980s .
 Kennedy decided to first strike with words, not force, via his televised address to the nation on 22 October 'Day Seven' of the Crisis . After much deliberation, Kennedy decided not to use military force .
 It was only from this point that Australia learnt of this potentially catastrophic event . This was due to Australia's longitudinal position, this was Tuesday 23 October . It was the first time Australia learned of the event .
 This communique received by the DEA at 3:35am on Tuesday 23 October (Australian Eastern Standard Time ) was the first to alert the Menzies Government of an impending crisis . The DEA received the first communique at 3.35am .
 The urgency of the subject, Munro felt, was also reflected in Kennedy's scheduled meetings with the National Security Council, the Cabinet and Congressional leaders of both political parties, who were in the midst of campaigning .
 Increased American naval presence in the Caribbean hints at a regional crisis . Increased U.S. presence in Caribbean hinted at regional crisis, experts say .
 Munro advised the DEA that he and other Heads of Mission had been called to a meeting at the State Department immediately preceding Kennedy's broadcast . Munro said he and others were called to the meeting immediately before Kennedy's announcement .
 Under two hours later, Munro further advised that the subject was Cuba and its 'offensive capability' Munro correctly assumed that he would be briefed that evening on America's plans to deal with it .
 Ritchie, Canadian Ambassador to America, confirmed this, although claimed to be uninformed . Ritchie said he was 'inundestilled' by the claims .
 Munro suspected that Ritchie had been in contact with U.S. Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, or his staff . Munro said Ritchie spoke in terms of the 'crunch' coming for the United States of America .
 Suggestions of British and Canadian awareness of the Crisis indicated that, on the morning of 23 October, Australia was literally in the dark . Suggestions suggest that, in Australia, Australians were literally in a dark .
 Kennedy sent Menzies an advance copy of his announcement to lOam . Kennedy will announce his plans at the end of the year . Kennedy's announcement was a personal message from Menzie .
 Kennedy emphasised that the placement of missiles had shifted weapons from being defensive in nature to aggressive in nature . Kennedy said that the Soviets had previously guaranteed weapons to be defensive .
 If Cuba were to become an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, then the U.S. would do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies .
 Kennedy's message was delivered to Menzies by William C Battle, American Ambassador to Australia . Kennedy was the first Australian to deliver the message to Australia's premier .
 The DEA later instructed Plimsoll to 'speak forthrightly' in support of the resolution . Munro attended an intelligence briefing given by George W Ball, United States Under Secretary of State, and Roger Hilsman, Director of the United States State Department's Bureau of Intelligence
 Ball explained America's aerial reconnaissance of Cuba, evidencing the missile build-up . Ball also explained how the U.S. saw Cuba's missile build up . Ball said the Cuban government was building up its missile arsenal .
 Heads of State will receive the same briefing in their capitals, where advance copies of Kennedy's television address will also be available .
 Menzies relied on Kennedy's personal assurance and Munro's second-hand briefing, which Munro likely assumed would supplement other information sources . There is no evidence that Menzie received such a briefing, however, .
 The Heads of Mission then listened to Kennedy's televised address to learn of America's proposed response, which the briefing did not cover . 35 the Menzies Government, therefore, had the same information on America's response as the general population .
 In his broadcast, Kennedy described the evidence of missile sites in Cuba as having no other purpose 'than to provide a 32-mile-long base'
 Munro attended the State Department briefing for Heads of Mission . There is no evidence that Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador to America, was briefed . Munro, however, attended the briefing for heads of Mission.
 He emphasised Soviet deceit as to the nature of the weapons and asserted their placement in Cuba breached the Rio Pact, joint resolutions of Congress, and the UN Charter .
 We no longer live in a world where only the actual firing of weapons is considered national peril . Only the actual shooting of weapons are considered a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute national peril. We are no longer living in such a world .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere is an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States requiring a full retaliatory response . America's allies had been alerted, according to the president .
 Kennedy requested an urgent meeting of the Organization of American States to consider 'regional security arrangements' Munro noted that Hilsman then told Heads of Mission that America had no evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba .
 The State Department advised that the missiles would be pointless without nuclear warheads, which could be easily hidden . They believed storage for them was under construction . Nevertheless, the State Department said storage for the missiles was under way .
 By 8 November, Stevenson and John J McCloy, advisor in the Kennedy Administration, noted in a briefing to allies that 'Khrushchev had not explicitly confirmed or denied presence in Cuba' by that date .
 Munro asked Hilsman how many ballistic missile bases there were, but he refused to disclose this secret information . He had implied they were there and they would be removed ' ; see cablegram UN1622, Plimsoll to 14 Munro . Munro: 'He
 All surface-to-air missile sites, one of three intermediate-range ballistic missile sites and four MRBM sites, will be operational in a week . He was advised though that all surface to air missile sites would be operational .
 It was the most detailed information the Menzies Government had received . Munro was given access to photographs taken a day apart that demonstrated the pace of site constructions .
 This was the first evidence of the missile build up in Cuba sighted by a representative of the Menzies Government . The missile build-up in Cuba was first sighted in 1945 .
 Declassified government records have illustrated that Australia had no knowledge of the Crisis until 23 October . Declassified records show that Australia did not know of the crisis until 23 October .
 A closer examination of the communique revealed its true date 29 October . The communique was meant to be a joke .
 The content of the communique pertained to matters post-23 October . Not only was this noted on the final page, but its content was related to matters after 23 October .
 An initial shipment arrived in Cuba on 4 October, and another arrived on 23 October . CIA spotted this latter ship on 19 October but believed it was of no importance and that it contained dry cargo .
 In reality, America informed Australia of the crisis only a few hours before it notified the rest of the world . Australia was informed of the Crisis by the U.S. only hours before others .
 Nimmo, Deputy Secretary to the Department of Prime Minister, queried the implications of the crisis for Australia, if any, with Sir John Bunting, Secretary to both the . Department of . Prime Minister and Cabinet . Cabinet . Nimmo .
 Nimmo was apprehensive about Australian participation in quarantine, and more generally, support for U.S. actions . Nimmo: "I'm not optimistic about Australia's participation in a quarantine, but I'm optimistic about it"
 Any endorsement of the latest U.S. action should be in terms of support of a principle which in no way leaves us open to be called upon by the United States to play a part in these physical activities .
 Barwick noted that the Soviets objected to bases with offensive capability for a long time and had demanded their dismantlement . Barwick said the Soviets had objected to the bases with . offensive capability .
 Rusk had conversations with Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Foreign Minister, as to the locations of American bases in 45 Europe . They anticipated that the Soviets would create a fuss over missiles in Turkey .
 The greatest concern was the possible impact the Crisis could have on future Australian-American cooperation over missile bases . Barwick and Tange were concerned about the impact of the crisis .
 U.S. weapons could be located on Australian soil at some future time and targeted on the Soviet Union . Presumably vulnerable to a Soviet blockade .
 Tange and Barwick stated that Australia's foreign policy position was that it had 'a distinct interest in preserving the right of powerful allies to put bases and offensive weapons in Australia if we want them' Australia, therefore, was willing to host offensive American weapons and bases .
 Australian anxieties were concentrated on the threat posed to regional security and stability by the spread of communism in South-East Asia .
 It was considered in Australia's national interest to invest in alliances, more so than in its own military capacity to secure Australia's defences . These arrangements satisfied Australian desires for 'defence on the cheap'
 Defence spending in 1962-63 totalled only 2. percent of gross national product, down from 5.1 percent a decade earlier . The Menzies Government embraced this strategy throughout the 1950s .
 Australia sought to expand its offensive capabilities, proportional to the growing threat to its geostrategic interests, from 1961 to 1961 . Australia sought the expansion of its military capabilities from 1961 .
 Australia's geostrategic interests could be met through hosting offensive American weapons and bases on its territory . Australia would support the rights of powerful allies to do so, says Barwick and Tange .
 Barwick and Tange believed that the Menzies Government could not permit this policy to affect its position on Cuba . This would have amounted to Australian endorsement of Soviet actions in Cuba to install offensive weapons and bases .
 A Reinterpretation (Carlton North, Victoria, Victoria: Red Rag Publications, 2001), 69. The Reinterpresections of the works were published in 2001 .
 This would have been to the detriment of Australia' s defence policy, and more generally, its national interest . Consequently, this would have led to Australia's defence policy being weakened .
 Barwick and Tange determined that the maintenance of Australian-American relations were paramount to any risk that Australia could be subjected to a Soviet-imposed quarantine should it host offensive American weapons and bases .
 The DEA sought advice as to the legality of America's quarantine as distinguished from a pacific blockade . The agency sought advice from the U.S. government as to whether the quarantine is legal .
 Tange was briefed on the conflicting legal perspectives on pacific blockades . He was warned that the opinions of theorists appear to have been overruled by state practice .
 He was advised that pacific blockades are serious, but justified, measures when enacted under the UN Charter to prevent the outbreak of war . Outside of the parameters of the UN charter, many jurists considered it illegal .
 If this advice was received prior to Australia's decision to support America's UN resolution, then it is arguable that this shaped the Menzies Government's calculated response to the US resolution .
 By declaring support for a UN resolution, Australia sanctioned American actions which, if the resolution pass, would have had legal foundation . Australia sanctioned U.S. actions by supporting the resolution, which would have been legal .
 America's submission of a UN resolution showed that it, too, was seeking to legitimise its actions . America's submissibility of the resolution shows that it is seeking legitimisation of its actions, it says .
 Kennedy's declaration that missiles launched from Cuba against any country in the Western Hemisphere would be considered a Soviet attack warranting retaliatory action against it . Kennedy declared that missiles fired from Cuba from Cuba would be seen as an attack on any Western Hemisphere .
 Eastman did not return Harry's call until 7pm . Harry attempted to do so at 2pm, and noted that Menzies would address Parliament at 3pm . But Eastman said he would only return the call at 7pm.
 Time differences meant that it was 4am in London when Harry called Eastman . Eastman responded at 9am; a reply before Sam was an unreasonable expectation . Harry called Sam at 4am; Eastman replied 9am .
 The DEA said Menzies should make a statement to Parliament, which 'at this stage should not be more detailed than necessary' Nimmo's comments aligned with Nimmo, which reflected the DEA's concerns as to the legality of the quarantine, as well as the uncertainty surrounding possible implications
 Ralph Harry prepared Barwick for questions on Australian obligations under ANZUS in relation to the Crisis . Ralph Harry was prepared to ask Barwick questions on Australia's role in the crisis . Barwick was the first person to be prepared to answer questions about the crisis in Australia .
 A literal interpretation of Articles 4 and 5 on 'armed attack on the metropolitan territories of any of the parties in the Pacific area' would have no application, as no part of American metropolitan territory had been subjected to an attack .
 Last of the Mandarins (Crows Nest, New South Wales : Allen & Unwin , 2006), 84. Last of a Mandarin, 84.
 Ralph Harry, The North was Always Near, Australians in Asia no. 2 . See also Ralph Harry's book "The North Was Always Near"
 Australia did not want to read ANZUS too narrowly on this occasion in case America would one day interpret it similarly, and limit its obligations to come to Australia's defence . Australia had its national interest in focus, and it wanted to avoid it being misinterpreted .
 'International affairs' was the leading item on Parliament's agenda on the afternoon of 23 October . Unsurprisingly, it was the top item on the agenda on that day .
 Menzies mentioned Kennedy's personal message and acknowledged Kennedy's reference to the significance of regional defence arrangements . Kennedy's remarks were made in a speech at the Sydney Opera House on Monday .
 Menzies reiterated that America's UN resolution called for the missile bases and other offensive weapons in Cuba to be withdrawn under UN supervision . U.S. reiterated that U.N. Security Council resolution calls for withdrawal of offensive weapons .
 The whole matter will serve to test whether the Soviet Union's constant advocacy of peace possesses either sincerity or substance . Indeed, the whole matter is likely to test if it's true or not .
 The establishment of the naval communications base at North West Cape meant that it could be assumed that Australia' s western seaboard was within the scope of the Treaty . According to Millar, Australia 's Foreign Policy, 119.1, Australia's foreign policy, is a violation
 Menzies received a message via Nimmo advising that William C Battle, American Ambassador to Australia, and Donald W Lamm, First Secretary to the American Embassy in Canberra, heard his statement and expressed their personal appreciation . The message was received by Nimmo, the Australian ambassador to Australia
 Battle publicly acknowledged Menzies' 'marvellous, firm and unhesitating support' at a dinner hosted by the Australian American Association . Battle also publicly acknowledged the support of the former prime minister .
 Majority of Australian newspapers expressed sympathy towards America's response . According to Truscott, the general absence of disapproval indicated that the Menzies Government's response was accepted in the Australian print media .
 The calculated nature of Australia's response is apparent when contrasted against the Philippines' response . The calculated response is evident when contrasted with that of the Philippines .
 The Australian Government's deliberate statement of support to America's UN resolution indicated that Menzies had faith in the UN as a forum for dispute resolution . The Australian government's support to the U.S. resolution indicated it had a strong belief in the organisation .
 Menzies Government's desire for a UN solution may be unexpected . This would surprise Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador to America, who felt that the negative experience he gained from his involvement in the U2 Affair of May 1960, resulted in him having 'no high opinion of that
 John Diefenbaker, the Canadian Prime Minister, also wanted a UN solution to the Crisis, but felt that Kennedy simply sought UN + . 71 approva1 1or is act10ns.com .
 DEA also requested information on the 69 Beale, This Inch of Time, 141, and 141 Beale . DEA requested information about 69 Beales, 141. Beale and 141 . Beale was the subject of a federal investigation .
 Menzies included with his message his statement made in Parliament earlier that day . The message was intended to gauge how its response fared to other nations . It included reactions of the British, West European and Latin delegations .
 The Menzies Government believed that the attainment of American weapons and bases would conform to its forward defence policy, and therefore, its geostrategic interests .
 The DEA received a cable from the Australian High Commission in London regarding a press statement issued by the British Foreign Office immediately following Kennedy's address . Also on the evening of 23 October, the DEA received .
 The British learnt of the Crisis on 19 October, possibly as early as 17 77 October . Scott, the historian of Britain's response to the Crisis, says Scott . Scott .
 Britain was sworn to secrecy, according to Munro, 78 and it did not provide Australia with any indication of this news . Munro: Britain did not reveal this to Australia and did not give Australia any indication .
 America and Britain were Australia's closest allies . Australia did not share with either nation the special relationship that Britain and America shared with each other . Australia's special relationship with Britain was formed in the 1930s .
 NATO, OAS, SEATO and mission chiefs gathered for briefings just prior to the President's speech . This was supplemented by comprehensive briefings just before the speech .
 Rusk's communique did not reflect the different treatment America's allies actually received . Some heads of states received greater notice and in-person briefings . Menzies received neither in person briefings .
 These allies were provided with additional and more detailed information by the U.S.
 At this point, Australia still relied on information from the day before provided by Munro . Munro was the first person to contact the Australian team .
 Differences in communications with its allies were not known to Australia at the time . This suggests that adverse reactions were not anticipated in Australia' s region, nor required its involvement .
 The DEA had limited information regarding the reactions of NATO members, but believed they had 'grave misgivings' over America's handling of the crisis . The DEA believed NATO members were unhappy with the U.S. response .
 It was also concerned about implications for implications for American bases abroad and possible retaliation against Soviet actions involving NATO or other allies .
 Cuba is outside the geographical bounds of NATO, but the DEA says it is within the bounds of the NATO Treaty . The DEA says the crisis was within NATO's bounds .
 An attack on North America or Europe would be considered 'an armed attack against them all' 82 this exacerbated Australian uncertainty as to the support it was expected to provide to its Western allies should the Crisis escalate .
 Britain recognised the need to stand firm with its Western allies . Like Australia, Britain stood firm with Western allies in the wake of the terrorist attacks .
 Sir Kenneth Strong, Director of the Joint Intelligence Bureau; Sir Hugh Stephenson, Chairman of Joint Intelligence Committee; Sir Burke Trend, Cabinet Secretary-designate; and Thomas Brimelow of the British Embassy, Washington .
 Kennedy instructed Dean Acheson to brief in-person French President, Charles de Gaulle and the NATO Council . Kennedy had instructed Dean Acheson to brief in-person Charles De Gaulle .
 He detailed a variety of possible scenarios that could unfold, including that Khrushchev might instigate some sort of response in other parts of the world, or to Australia's alarm, South-East Asia .
 The primary concern of Macmillan was that the Soviets would take any opportunity available to exploit the differences of interest between America and her European allies . The Soviets took advantage of the differences between the two countries .
 I should be most glad to have your reactions and I think we should keep in close touch as the situation develops . I should also be glad to hear your reaction to the situation .
 "I should feel it my duty to take some action to try and prevent any possible escalation to war. For your private information, if the situation were to get enlarged beyond the purely Caribbean context, I should . I should take action, if I were to take action I would feel it
 "I certainly do not intend to take any initiative in the present uncertain circumstances. But I certainly do . I certainly intend to ... take no initiative in any initiative," he said in a statement .
 Macmillan's message, and Britain's official response, verified that Australia and Britain held the same initial views on the Crisis . Both pledged support for America's UN resolution, but simultaneously wanted to keep their distance given the uncertainty surrounding the Crisis and thus their involvement .
 Menzies also noted that Australia was conscious of the uncertainties you mentioned in your letter and we are keeping developments under close study . Australia is aware of the 'uncertainties' in the letter .
 Russia must not exploit any differences, however small, among alliance members, says Putin . Putin: We must avoid giving the Russians opportunities for exploiting any differences .
 Scott, historian of Britain's response to the crisis, claimed Britain was informed . Scott, a historian of the crisis in the UK, said the country was informed of the events .
 There is no evidence of any angst or anger on the part of the Menzies Government as to when it acquired knowledge of the Crisis . Apart from Munro's suspicions that the British and Canadians knew on 23 October, such assumptions could explain why .
 Britain was unconscious of its unprivileged situation, having found out about the crisis four days later than Britain .
 On 24 October, Dr W De Comtes, Charge d' Affaires of the Austrian legation, met with Harry . The Austrian ambassador to the British Embassy in London met Harry .
 Dr De Comtes expressed surprise that Menzies was in a position to respond so swiftly, compared to Western European states . He expressed his surprise at the rapid response to Cuba .
 Mr Menzies had had several hours in which to study the matter . The Australian Cabinet considered the issues before he made his statement yesterday afternoon .
 Apart from this initial occasion, time differences were to Australia's disadvantage . Australia won't be able to play again in Australia's first Test on Saturday .
 Macmillan stated that for Britain, this made receiving and disseminating news 'quite complicated' For Australia, it was more than nine hours behind events as they unfolded in America and Europe, which affected its ability to keep abreast of issues .
 South-East Asian states may seek to host weapons and bases of their allies . The other question without notice to Barwick from Max Fox, Liberal MP, pointed out that South-east Asian states, and not just Australia, may want to host .
 Most of the countries which accept aid from the Soviet follow a non-alignment policy . They have been consistently opposed to establishment of nuclear weapon bases in their areas .
 Barwick noted that India, Ceylon and Burma had all received Soviet aid and had pledged that they would not manufacture or house nuclear weapons . Burma, India and Ceylon all received aid from the Soviet Union and pledged not to use nuclear arms .
 There were Asian countries in closer proximity to Australia, which Menzies Government would have considered more likely to become Soviet satellite states .
 Barwick's reply did not convey the Menzies Government's unease over the possibility that some South-East Asian states may draw inspiration from Cuba . Barwick said the Government was not concerned about the possibility of Cuba's influence in the region .
 Australia's concerns regarding the ramifications it might face were amplified by its uncertainty as to whether its South-East Asian neighbours had like desires .
 Menzies and Calwell's parliamentary statements of the previous day had been passed to the US State Department . The menzies' parliamentary statements were passed to U.S. authorities .
 Menzies' statement may have been the first public declaration of support to America . Australia was not the first to pledge its support to the U.S.
 The State Department gave Australia a false sense of importance in its relations with the U.S. by advising Australia it was the first to respond .
 This study has clarified that Australia was encouraged to believe that the swiftness of its response was more significant than it perhaps was, which furthered Australia's belief that its relations with America were stronger and closer than in reality .
 Plimsoll cabled the DEA outlining a conversation between himself and Eric Lauw , South African Foreign Minister, on 24 October . The DEA said the DEA had been informed of the conversation .
 Lauw approached Plimsoll regarding his misgivivivings about Kennedy's statement . Lauw said he was disappointed with Kennedy's comments . Lauew said he had no idea what happened .
 Lauw felt that the transfer of weapons from one country to another did not amount to aggression . Lauw thought that America, he thought, was being hypocritical. Lauw said America, the U.S. was hypocritical.
 Plimsoll attempted to convince Lauw that it was illogical to compare similar actions by other states in different corners of the globe . He highlighted the threat the offensive weapons posed to America . Lauw claimed that the U.S. should not be allowed to use offensive weapons in
 There was a delicate balance of power in the world as a whole which is made up of disparate elements on each side . We had to look at the total world picture and recognise that there was a balance .
 Menzies' parliamentary statement prompted Louw to ask, if the present situation escalated to conflict, whether Australia would be in it 'boots and all' with America . Anything that upset this delicate balance by radically altering a single major element was like a stone setting off an avalanche and
 Fraser adopted like comparable views on Australia's national security to Plimsoll . In 1964, Fraser posited that as a result of the Crisis, America would be reluctant to enter into issues which largely did not affect its own interest .
 Australia's national security could be jeopardised if U.S. would hesitate in coming to Australia's defence . The Australian government's primary concern was that the US would hesitate to defend Australia .
 Plimsoll made it plain that Australia did not want to invoke any such hesitation in its relations with the U.S. on whom its policy of forward defence depended .
 Plimsoll interpreted his Government's instructions to do ""all in his power" to support America's UN resolution, perhaps more broadly than intended . Secondarily, he appears to have interpreted his instructions to support the U.S. resolution .
 Plimsoll's comments did not reflect the Menzies Government's cautious response, which stemmed from its significant concerns as to how the Crisis could impact on its national interest . Australia's support for America was unequivocal .
 Australia's policies on issues differed markedly from American policy, including West New Guinea dispute, and the United Kingdom's application to join the European Economic Community .
 Recent events in Laos, Thailand and Vietnam had increased the likelihood of regional instability . Recent events have increased the chance for regional instability, experts say .
 Australia has become ever more dependent on the American alliance for its security . The Menzies Government had come to accept that such dependency had a price .
 In 1962, it actively sought to do all it could to confirm America's commitment to Australia's defence and the security of its region as well as relieve any tension .
 The U.S. has committed commitments to Thailand and Vietnam, and Australia . This is evidenced by the establishment of an American naval communications base at North-West Cape in Western Australia .
 The Crisis, therefore, presented itself as another fitting opportunity for Australia to support its most important ally, America, and maintain goodwill in its relations . Ultimately in furtherance of Australia's geostrategic interests, Australia's support for the U.S.
 Gregory Pemberton, All the Way; and Barclay Barclay, A Very Small Insurance Policy . Gregory Barclay is best known for his book, "All the Way," and "Barclay," which he says is "a very small insurance policy policy" Gregory
 Khan thought that America would not consider U Thant, Acting Secretary General of the UN, appropriate for the role of mediator given he was a national of a neutral state . According to Plimsoll, Khan thought the U.S. wouldn't consider acting UN Secretary General U
 Khan asked Plimsoll to advise the Americans on his behalf that he would be available he did not want to approach them directly . Khan said he wanted to be able to speak to the Americans directly .
 Plimsoll received an update on the views of uncommitted countries . He spoke to Barrington Barrington about the uncommitted nations .
 A criticism, noted by Barrington, was that America should have sought a UN solution to the matter .
 Plimsoll told Barrington this was America's only option due to the speed at which the missile bases were being constructed, which Barrington did not believe was possible . The missile bases are being constructed at a rate of more than 100 years .
 Plimsoll added that he had viewed the photographs and had found them convincing . However, Barrington had not seen them, and claimed that the Americans had not talked to him .
 Plimsoll advised the DEA that he spoke to the Americans on behalf of Khan . Khan is accused of smuggling drugs into the U.S.
 He also advised the Americans of his conversation with Barrington, and noted his impressions from talking to many representatives ... that a lot more had to be done to convince them that a real and immediate threat existed to the United States .
 I said that the Americans ought to show the photographs to as many persons as possible from the uncommitted countries . The Americans should show them to people from uncommitted nations, he said .
 I suggested that they ought to do this also down the line to junior persons in delegations from NATO, SEA TO and CENTO because quite junior persons could influence delegations in corridor conversations .
 Labor MP Bill Hayden, Labor MP, stated that Britain did not consider itself committed to the U.S. In Parliament on 25 October, Bill Hayden said that Britain was not committed to America .
 It is likely that Menzies had this in mind when he refused to respond to Hayden's question . It's likely that he was thinking about this when he didn't answer the question .
 Labor MP Les Johnson asked Menzies whether Australia had consulted with Britain prior to his statement in Parliament on Tuesday . Les Johnson, Labor MP, then asked him whether he consulted with the UK prior to the statement .
 We did not propose to remain silent on a matter of this kind or to discharge the duty to inform honourable members of the Govemment. Australia responded promptly and expressed its own view. This was the reality Australia responded to .
 Menzies did not disclose that it had unsuccessfully tried to consult Britain over its reaction to the crisis . Australia opted to respond promptly, unaware of British views .
 Australia's alacrity may have intimated to the Opposition that the Government slavishly followed American foreign policy . However, its response was a considered, not generic, one .
 It puts the onus, it is true, on the other people to dismantle these offensive weapons and to refrain from supplying them, but also states that if this is done, the quarantine measures adopted could be lifted and should be lifted . The whole matter should be dealt with under United Nations
 Menzies reiterated his faith in the UN system from which he hoped a solution would prevail . That seems to be a method admirably within the spirit of the Charter .
 Skripov reiterated his wish and noted that the Soviet Union could and would not accept particular American actions . He said that the United States would not be willing to accept particular actions .
 Barwick asked for Australia's position on a summit conference, which he said was an issue for the Americans and Soviets . Barwick then asked for the Australian position on the summit conference .
 This suggests Barwick' s reluctance to become overly involved in the crisis . This suggests he is wary of becoming overly involved .
 Barwick needed time to obtain American and British positions on summit conference before Australia pronounced its own views . It also implies that Barwick needs to obtain U.S. and British views before Australia's own .
 He aimed to protect Australia's national interest by ensuring he did not give Skripov any ammunition with which to exploit any differences of opinion on summit conferences .
 Ivanov asked Woolcott what would happen if the Soviet Union imposed a blockade on say, Turkey or on Australia if she was to accept American nuclear weapons on her territory . Woolcott's record of conversation with Ivanov was recorded . The Soviet representatives also maintained that 'offensive nuclear weapons'
 Woolcott noted that according to Lessiovski, only Australia had made such a citation . Woolcott said that Australia had only ever made such an honour .
 Woolcott believed the Soviets had adopted a divide and conquer approach . Woolcott thought the Soviets were using a divide-and-confrontal approach .
 Woolcott focused on the undoing of the 'delicate nuclear balance' as Plimsoll had done with Louw . Woolcott said the balance had been maintained between the two parties to date .
 The Soviets, though, dismissed his argument stating that for years America had encircled the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union, however, dismissed him . The Soviets also dismissed his claim stating that the U.S. had encrassed them with weapons .
 Woolcott noted that the Soviets had put this argument forcefully to Afro-Asian states who were not unmoved by such views . This was in addition to claims that the weapons in Cuba were defensive and deterred American invasion . Woolcott notes that this was also true .
 Australia's trepidation that America's resolution would face a difficult path in the UN, which undercut the Menzies Government's hopes for a UN solution to the Crisis . This also furthered Australia's trepidation that America's resolution would face a 
 Support from Afro-Asian states was considered essential in ensuring that the American resolution would pass if brought before the UN General Assembly . Support from the African-American states was seen essential to ensure that the U.S. resolution passed .
 The United States Embassy requested Alan Renouf, Australian High Commissioner in Lagos, and other Commonwealth High Commissioners, to encourage Balewa, in order to guarantee his support . The U.S. Embassy requested the request from Australian High .
 Renouf was also asked to share Menzies ' parliamentary statement with Balewa . Renouf also shared a statement of support for the Syrian president .
 The Menzies Government had only a few hours advance notice of the Crisis before Kennedy informed the rest of the world . Kennedy had only been informed of the crisis by the government before the world had heard .
 Britain, France, and West Germany had more notice and information . Australia was in the dark unbeknown to itself .
 It relied on Kennedy's personal reassurances and evidence from its embassy in Washington regarding the build up of missiles .
 It sought British views on the matter, in vain, and thus was uninfluenced by them . The BBC sought British opinions on the issue, but was not influenced .
 The Menzies Government declared its position on the crisis on the same day it became aware of it . Yet none of these factors prevented the Government from promptly declaring its position .
 The Government pledged support for America's UN resolution, which perhaps unexpectedly, reflected Australia's desire for a UN solution .
 Plimsoll Australia's support was more broadly pronounced, although not to the detriment of its national interest . This possibly enhanced Australian-American relations, perhaps in UN circles .
 The Menzies Government's position on the Crisis was shaped by its national interest . Therefore, the Government's stance on the crisis was shaped in the national interest.
 This was reflected in its uncertainties and concerns and its growing dependency on its forward defence policy essentially the American alliance . This was demonstrated by its eager support for American interventions in 40 South-East Asia in this period .
 The Crisis, in short, was another chance for the Menzies Government to entrench its relations with America . The Crisis was a chance for Menzie's government to secure relations with the US .
 He had already sent Menzies a copy of his speech made that day in the House of Commons . He had also sent him a copy .
 Macmillan did not want the Crisis to become a point-scoring opportunity for the Soviets . A weak settlement may easily do more harm than good to the long term prospects of peace .
 Macmillan claimed that trust was not enough in international relations and stressed the need for verification in future exchanges with the Soviet Union . Thirdly, in light of Soviet deceit, he claimed that trusts were not enough to be trusted .
 Australia had done itself a service by distinguishing itself from Britain, says David Cameron . It was not the first time the country had done so much to distinguish itself from the UK .
 The Menzies Government responded promptly to America's claims and relied on the photographs of missile sites viewed by Munro m Washington .
 Britain was less forthright than Australia in responding to the Crisis . Britain was aware of the Crisis days prior and armed with further information . In contrast, Australia was more forthright .
 Kennedy intended to exhaust the UN process, presenting an opportunity for Khrushchev to avoid humiliation . Kennedy wanted to exhaust process, giving an opportunity to avoid humiliating humiliation .
 A proposal in the UN for nuclear free zones in both Latin America and Africa was one of the 'larger issues' that arose during the Crisis .
 Munro originally had an appointment with Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs, but due to Johnson's schedule, it was arranged for Munro to meet instead with Harriman . Munro was originally scheduled to meet with Johnson, the Deputy Under Under Secretary .
 Munro ensured the DEA that his meeting with Harriman was not in no way of lesser value . Munro assured the DEA the meeting was not a matter of less importance because Harrimans was involved in high level discussions within the State Department .
 Munro felt a need to clarify that whilst he was bumped from Johnson's schedule, Harriman had access to important information on the Kennedy Administration's position that would be useful for the Menzies Government . Munro obviously felt a . need to . clarify that while he . was
 Calls in the international community for nuclear free zones most likely caused unease over whether its desires to bolster Australia's defensive capacity with offensive weapons under its forward defence policy would be hampered . For the Menzies Government, however, it is most likely to be concerned about whether its desire to
 Munro's question to Harriman over possible implications of nuclear free zones in South-East Asia . Munro: Nuclear free zones could have implications for South-east Asia .
 Harriman advised that there were no implications because China was engaged in the region and was not a UN member . China is not a member of the UN but is engaged in region and engaged in it .
 The ALP campaigned on a nuclear free zone in the southern hemisphere in the lead up to the 1963 election . The Menzies Government campaigned on nuclear free zones in the following year . Nuclear free zones remained an issue for the following .
 Harriman also advised that discussion on bases could not be excluded . Munro also said there was a chance to discuss bases in the future .
 This was yet another 'larger issue' which would have furthered the Menzies Government's concerns regarding its forward defence policy, and thus its regional interests . This would have further furthered Australia's concerns about its defence .
 The DEA also received information from Sir James Plimsoll, Australia's Permanent Representative to the UN, advising it to expect discussion on bases . The DEA received the information on 26 October .
 The DEA received another cable from Plimsoll that day with his views on the legality of the quarantine . The DEA also received a cable from the same day with another cable .
 He agreed with the DEA's position that one way America could have justified its quarantine, in the absence of UN approval, was to rely on the OAS endorsement .
 In other words, America acted in self-defence and this was paramount to any conflict with principles of international law . This was the case of the U.S. acting in self defence, the author says .
 Plimsoll agreed that it was possible that America would intervene militarily to dismantle the bases and oust Castro . But he had not received any communication from the U.S. to that effect .
 Plimsoll also felt that the DEA had overlooked an important factor regarding the missile build up in formulating its position on the Crisis . Plimssoll said the DEA missed out on an important aspect of the Missile build up .
 Plimsoll felt that Australia had given insufficient attention to the serious impact the Crisis could have on Soviet policy worldwide, and thus, the global balance of power . The DEA had referred to the threat the missiles posed to American security .
 Khrushchev's recent delays on Berlin were prompted by a desire to wait until Cuba had built up, not as a bargaining counter in itself but as lead in to a basic readjustment of relative strategic strength . This was in contrast to information the Menzies Government received from the
 DEA sent a cable to some of its legations to clarify Australia's position on the crisis . DEA sent the cable to clarify the position of Australia's foreign policy .
 The DEA emphasised that it did not want the Crisis to distract the Americans and Europeans from matters arising in South-East Asia or inhibit its allies' 'capability to take effective action'
 The China-India border dispute was, for the Menzies Government, a timely example of such concerns . It was a timely reminder of the Chinese-Indian border dispute .
 Miller, 'Australia and the Indian Ocean Area, 1961-1965', in Greenwood and Harper, Australia in World Affairs, 432. Miller . Miller .
 The DEA did not refer to the quarantine in any further detail in this communication it was an issue that Australia did not want its legations to entertain . Furthermore, when questions were asked about this 46 regarding the quarantine, the DEA did .
 New Zealand's Permanent Representative to the UN, Foss Shanahan, thought that whilst the American position was not perfect, international legal considerations regarding the quarantine, were irrelevant .
 Shanahan also thought that the Crisis was one which the UN was unable to manage; thus it would be resolved by the 'two great powers' and that other states, particularly Afro-Asian states, would have little impact . Shanahan also believed that the crisis would be one of the '
 In light of the uncertainty surrounding Soviet actions and intentions regarding Cuba and Berlin, the DEA felt it pertinent to keep a close watch on Soviet activity in its region . The DEA said it would keep an eye on the Soviet activity .
 DEA sent another communique to its legations to ascertain the views of foreign offices on possible ramifications of the Crisis in South-East Asia . DEA sent a communique on the evening of 27 October, 27 October .
 DEA advised legations that it considered that the Soviets would have wanted to avoid initiating disturbances that were not within its full control . DEA also considered that it would have discouraged its allies, in particular North Vietnam and China, from augmenting international hostilities .
 The Australian High Commission advised that the British Foreign Office identified South East Asia 'as an area where the West is vulnerable and that it must therefore be included with other possible areas where pressure could be applied at this time' This underlined the Menzies Government's concerns that there could be
 American and European preoccupation with Cuba and Berlin amplified Australian anxieties that its allies on whom its defence arrangements depended may not come to its aid . Australia was worried about its allies' ability to defend itself .
 The Kennedy Administration acknowledged that within the last 24 hours, 'several inconsistent and conflicting proposals' had been made by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had made 'consistent and conflicting' proposals .
 The DEA received the text of Kennedy's reply to Khrushchev dated 27 October . That afternoon, 28 October, before the DEA learnt of the nature and content of the letters, it got the text . The DEA learned of the content of Khrushche's letters .
 Kennedy welcomed Khrushchev's intentions 'to seek a prompt solution to the problem' as noted in his first letter . Kennedy welcomed his intentions to seek a 'prompt solution'
 Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev which advised that the Soviets would accept the proposed solution . Stevenson confirmed that on the evening of 26 October, Kennedy received the letter .
 Khrushchev to Kennedy was broadcast via Tass and sent to Washington on 27 October . The message was broadcast by Tass on the morning of 27 October and was broadcast to Kennedy .
 This second message introduced the issue of American bases in Turkey, and therefore, broadened the context of discussions . The second message introduces the issue, which has broadened .
 United Kingdom, France, Canada, Germany, Norway, Italy, Japan, Turkey, Iran, Haiti, Chile, Chile and Venezuela (Latin American members of UN Security Council) 49 members of the U.N. Security Council . Venezuela and Chile are the only Latin American members .
 Khrushchev's demand for removal of Turkish bases complicated matters . The Jupiter missiles in Turkey were installed by NATO and thus, Stevenson asserted, could only be dealt with by the NATO Council and with Turkey's consent .
 Such a proposal 'would unbalance the defence structure of Europe', says Plimsoll . This would undoubtedly have global repercussions, he says . The proposal would 'unbalance Europe's defence structure'
 It was noted that the White House statement 'was not intended as a rejection', and in Kennedy's reply to Khrushchev which the DEA had seen before it received Plimsoll' s notes on his meeting with Stevenson .
 Plimsoll wrote that it was possible that America would be happy to discuss general disarmament but that Cuba was a separate question .
 We ought also to get across the point that it was not only the United States that had been deceived by the Soviet Union but all other countries as well . The United States was not the only country deceived by Soviet Union .
 Some Africans remain unconvinced that there are any missile installations on Cuba despite the photographs . Another representative had told the Russians that he had no reason to think there were any Russian military on the island .
 Khrushchev himself had pulled the rug from under the feet of such persons, says the former Soviet leader .
 The missiles in Italy and Turkey were stationed as a result of a NATO Council decision in December 1957 . The missiles were stationed in Turkey and Italy and Italy .
 Stevenson requested what the Americans wanted the representatives to do and Plimsoll suggested how they should do it . He demonstrated his confidence amongst his colleagues, particularly the Americans, in suggesting strategies for gaining support of non-committed countries .
 Plimsoll's desire to ensure the non-committed countries were onside also reflected the Menzies Government's concerns regarding its neighbours and its national interest . For Australia, this was an attempt to guarantee that South-East Asian states would not become Soviet satellites in its region
 In fulfilment of his promise to stay in touch, Macmillan sent Menzies two messages on 28 October .
 Macmillan wanted to share with Menzies, a message he had sent to Khrushchev regarding his second letter to Kennedy . The message was shared by the British Prime Minister .
 Macmillan expressed to Khrushchev Britain's willingness to discuss disarmament and test bans . But emphasised that the priority was to deal with the missiles in Cuba .
 Australia had received requests for support from both of its great and powerful friends during the Crisis . Australia had thus received requests from both the nations during the crisis . Australia's request for support was received by both Australia and the US .
 The Menzies Government found out about the letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev in a disjointed manner, mainly due to time differences . It has been demonstrated in this chapter that the government found out of the letters .
 This made it more difficult for Australia to follow the crisis as it unfolded . It made it harder for the country to watch the crisis unfold in Australia .
 Plimsoll was able to clarify events, although Soviet intentions remained unknown . The Soviet Union's intentions were not clear .
 Britain was particularly interested in disarmament and sought the Menzies Government's support on this matter . Australia had to juggle the requests and interests of both its allies .
 It believed disarmament and nuclear free zones would inhibit its geostrategic plans to increase its defensive capacity, such as through the attainment of American offensive weapons and bases . It also reflected its concerns over instability in South-East Asia .
 Australia was concerned that U.S. and European fixation on Cuba and Berlin would leave its region vulnerable to the communist bloc . Australia was worried that its region was vulnerable to communist blocs .
 Kennedy welcomed Khrushchev's decision and emphasised UN verification of the dismantlement of weapons and bases, in order for the quarantine to be lifted . Kennedy also emphasised the need for UN verification in order to lift the quarantine .
 Perhaps now, as we step back from danger we can, together make real progress in this vital field . Perhaps now we can . Together, together, together we can help each other step back to safety .
 Time differences meant that Australia went to bed on 28 October with the world on the brink of thermonuclear war . Australia awoke on 29 October to reports that the Crisis appeared to be over .
 Plimsoll noted in a cable to the DEA that, in a press conference, Dean Rusk, U.S. Secretary of State, requested the press not to boast about the outcome of the crisis .
 He was concerned that if the Crisis were depicted too much as a Soviet defeat, Khrushchev could feel pressured to restore his glory by undertaking action elsewhere . He was worried if the crisis were depicted as a defeat, he felt pressured to act elsewhere .
 On 29 October, William Battle, American Ambassador to Australia, forwarded a message from Kennedy to Menzies . Kennedy's letter dated 23 October was forwarded by Battle, who was the ambassador to Australia .
 Kennedy stated he was 'most pleased and grateful' for Menzies' letter and his forthright parliamentary statement on the Crisis . Kennedy said he is 'most grateful' to Menzie's letter and statement .
 The Menzies Government's anti-communist views, and the relations that had developed between Australia and America in the previous decade, meant that America was convinced it had Australia's support before it had so declared . America's support comes as no surprise, but it is specially reassuring to
 Australia had previously demonstrated to U.S. that it could respond swiftly to requests for support . Australia has demonstrated to America that it can respond swiftly .
 The Kennedy Administration did not feel it had to gain Australia's support for this crisis .
 America may have overestimated the extent of Australia's support for its actions . Australia's pledge was not an open-ended one Australia nonetheless met American expectations, and it did so more quickly than other allies .
 Munro spoke with Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of the Far East, on 29 October . Munro discussed post-Crisis impact in South-East Asia . He said that given recent events, the conversation did not focus on possible repercussions in Asia whilst America was pre
 The Cuban crisis could have repercussions in South East Asia and the Far East, not so much because of communist countries in the area seeking to take advantage of the U.S. preoccupation with Cuba as because of conflicting attitudes within the bloc itself . Harriman added that even if
 Harriman believed that there could be ramifications in South-East Asia about which Australia should be concerned . However, he did not attribute such ramifications to the Crisis, but to relations between the communist states .
 Consensus from Australia's most important allies that it could face repercussions in its region, would likely have exacerbated existing concerns of the Menzies Government . Irrespective of their catalyst, consensus from the Australian government would have exacerbated concerns .
 Munro also asked Harriman whether a deal over bases in Cuba and Turkey was possible . Munro: Deal could be possible over bases between Cuba, Turkey and Turkey .
 Munro and Harriman only met once that day however, Munro reflected the different issues discussed in separate cablegrams; 2871and2879 . Munro reflects the issues discussed that day in a cablegram .
 Harriman confirmed that America was open to the idea of them and could see their advantages in Latin America and Africa, but maintained that China would obstruct such a zone in the Far East . Harrimans said China would not allow such an area in China .
 Harriman had requested Australia's views on such zones which prompted Munro to seek instructions from the DEA on the Menzies Government's position . Munro sought the DEA's instructions on the position .
 Nuclear free zones in Africa and Latin America would have limited locations for housing nuclear weapons . The zones would be limited to locations for nuclear weapons in the region .
 Australia was faced with the challenge of wanting to adopt its own position on the issue at hand against the need to maintain its relations with its most important ally, America . Australia's national interest required careful consideration of the issue .
 Some sections of Australian society responded directly to Barwick over the Menzies Government's position on the Crisis . Barwick's views on the crisis have been widely debated by Australians .
 America endorsed Brazil's proposal for a nuclear free zone in Latin America on 30 October; see cablegram 2885, Australian Embassy Washington to DEA, 30 October 1962 .
 Truelove of the Australian High Commission, Wellington, and K Piddington, European and American Affairs Division, New Zealand DEA, Wellington . Trueloves of the High Commission and the DEA of New Zealand are in Wellington .
 Australia fared better than the public reaction in America and New Zealand . More striking was that few cables were received .
 On 31 October, Macmillan sent another message to Menzies . He attached the parliamentary statement he had made that afternoon . MacMillan sent the statement back to the Downing Street .
 He emphasized the need for verification in dealings with the Soviet Union and China, as well as China, in light of Soviet duplicity regarding the Crisis . The need to verify in dealings between the two countries, he said .
 Australia's pledge of support for America was indeed unequivocal; it had given deliberate support for the UN resolution . I had felt it important myself to make our public position from the beginning one of unequivocal support for President Obama .
 The extent of Australian support beyond the realms of the UN, however, was not made plain . It was not revealed how much Australian support was given to the UN .
 Menzies' reiteration of his firm support for Kennedy buries the doubt and uncertainty shared privately by officials of the DEA and also the Department of Prime Minister .
 Menzies' comments to Macmillan could reflect his more personal views, rather than the apprehension expressed by Barwick and other departmental officials who appear to have carried the burden of Australian foreign policy formulation .
 Barwick had decided to make a statement in Parliament on the Crisis when it resumed .
 DEA suggested it would be useful to include in the booklet of documents to be tabled in Parliament, the messages exchanged between Kennedy and Menzies . The DEA suggested the messages should be included in the bookies .
 DEA believed messages highlighted Australia's importance to the U.S. It is likely that the DEA wished to publish these messages as it believed they highlighted the strength of Australian-American relations .
 Menzies refused permission for their publication after much communication between the DEA and the Department of Prime Minister . The DEA, and the reluctant Department of PM, are eager to publish their findings . Menzie refused permission to publish them .
 The friction between the DEA and the Department of Prime Minister is also apparent in the departmental correspondence over publication of these messages .
 It is particularly revealing that the Department of Prime Minister, rather than the DEA, still managed relations with the United Kingdom . The relationship apparently required the direct involvement of the Prime Minister .
 The Menzies Government's management of American and British influences during the Crisis also involved dealing with divergent views in Canberra towards Australia's allies .
 As the Crisis itself receded, larger issues, such as nuclear free zones, became increasingly problematic for Australia .
 There were other challenges too, including ones that required the Menzies Government to look inwards . There were also other challenges, including those which required the government to look inward .
 A close reading of correspondence between the Departments of External Affairs and Prime Minister revealed tensions over the management of Australia's relations with Britain and the U.S.
 Kennedy expected Australia's support on the Crisis; such expectations were not unreasonable given Australia's recent support for U.S. interventions in South-East Asia . Also revealed is that Kennedy expected support from Australia .
 Kennedy, however, most likely overestimated the extent of Australia's support . Kennedy's comments suggest he may overestimate the support of Australia .
 As has been argued, the Menzies Government had serious reservations over the Crisis, especially regarding possible repercussions in its region . As has argued, it has also been argued that the government had serious concerns over the crisis .
 These are mostly expressed by officials in the Departments of External Affairs and Prime Minister . These were mostly expressed in the DPs and PM .
 Menzies does not appear to have made a significant personal contribution to the Crisis, and thus it is difficult to determine his faith in the Kennedy Administration throughout the Crisis .
 Some members of the Australian public also had reservations, which were directed at the Menzies Government's handling of the Crisis . They did not, however, appear to present challenges for it .
 Sir Ronald Walker, Australian Ambassador to France, informed the DEA that he had spoken about the Crisis to Charles Lucet, Director General of Political Affairs at the French Foreign Ministry . November-December 1962 .
 Lucet believed that America's handling of the Crisis had enhanced its position in the region . Lucet believes that the U.S. handled the crisis in Laos and Vietnam more effectively .
 DEA may have found this news promising, but Lucet's comments did not appear to be based on any rigorous assessment . Australian concerns supported by American and British views - that the Crisis could have repercussions in South-East Asia .
 The DEA received a cable from the Australian Embassy in Washington outlining a discussion its officials had with Ronald I Spiers, Chief of the Office of Political Affairs in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, on 31 October .
 Spiers confirmed America's interest in nuclear free zones . Spiers favoured their development through regional agreements external to the UN framework .
 The creation of nuclear free zones there would not go counter to the global requirement for balanced disarmament, says the UN . It would not be counter to a global need to balance disarmament .
 It might not be possible particularly in Africa to obtain the signature of all states, but the exception would not be of vital significance to the issue of East West balance .
 Australia could be deemed to have overreacted after Spiers' comments . Spiers argued that the agreements need not be without provisions for supervision .
 There is still every possibility that its Asian neighbours could host nuclear weapons . Nuclear free zones in Africa and Latin America would not significantly alter the current state of affairs .
 Australia would need to give careful consideration to the impact its conflicting views on nuclear free zones could have on U.S. relations . This further highlighted that Australia would . need to consider the impact of the Australian stance on the nuclear free zone .
 The DEA received a telegram from the Australian High Commission in London regarding nuclear disarmament . The DEA says it received the telegram in response to a request from Australia .
 British Foreign Office suggested to Australian officials that now was the time to try to take steps forward in this area .
 Australia was concerned about the effect nuclear disarmament could have on the South-East Asian region . Clearly Australia was worried about the impact of nuclear weapons on the region .
 Parliament sat on 6 November; it was the first sitting since 25 October . Parliament sat for the first time since October 25 October. Parliament sat in Parliament again this month .
 Barwick, rather than Menzies, provided a summary of the key events in the Crisis and detailed the Government's policy . Prime Ministers of Britain, Canada and New Zealand had already made similar statements .
 Disaster averted due to swift action in collaboration with its allies in the OAS and the bringing of the matter before the UN, he said . He also acknowledged the restraint exercised by Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 The Menzies Government credited America and its OAS partners for their cooperation over regional defence, which was of great importance to Australia .
 Britain did not think that nuclear free zones in either area would impair the West' s strategic position . Britain thought it would not impair its strategic position in either region .
 Peoples in many parts of the world are allied for defence with the U.S. Peoples in some countries are allied with the United States .
 Barwick claimed this would have given the Soviets grounds to repeat their 'monstrous blackmail' elsewhere . This, Barwick said, would have allowed them to repeat the 'monsters' blackmail elsewhere .
 Western allies united when faced with this Soviet nuclear threat, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The impact the Cuban regime would have on the complete resolution of the Crisis was still unclear . missiles and bases were still in the process of being dismantled and removed from Cuba and Castro had been uncooperative over permitting verification of this .
 Australia has declared its position on disarmament and nuclear testing . Australia will continue to do so but it does mean that every proposal must be examined realistically .
 Menzies Government was apprehensive as to what disarmament would mean for Australia's geostrategic interests yet again gave a calculated expression of support in preservation of its national interest . It was a calculated statement of support for the Australian Government .
 The now less critical period permitted consideration of whether the Kennedy Administration's response to the Crisis was well chosen to meet its aims . The Kennedy Administration responded to the crisis with a well chosen response .
 The blockade and other actions were taken in the grand manner of traditional power politics . Nevertheless, the blockade was taken in a grand manner, according to the president .
 The political reaction within the nation and the alliance has been gratifying to the Administration, but it is misleading because it is not the same as private reaction . President Obama's administration is gratifying but misleading, he says .
 He asserted that there was a great deal of suspicion about U.S. intentions, particularly among British officials . He said that despite the statements of support from its allies, there was great suspicion .
 Munro felt that this could have negatively influenced the unity of the Western alliance if the Crisis were protracted . Munro said that this would have negatively affected the unity in the West if the crisis was protracted .
 The outcome of the Crisis would tempt America to 'act brashly and impetuously', and consequently lead the Western alliance into unnecessary conflict with the communist bloc . Such suspicions were compounded by concerns, especially British ones, that the outcome would tempt the American .
 The Menzies Government remained uncertain of American actions throughout the Crisis . This was reflected in the calculated support it provided to the Kennedy Administration .
 Labor MP Bill Hayden, Labor MP, questioned Menzies as to whether Cuba had become 'a strategic target of paramount importance' when bases capable of launching nuclear missiles had been installed .
 Menzies had embarrassingly overlooked this description by the American President . He had been embarrassed to have overlooked this statement .
 I do not propose to speculate on the attitude of unnamed countries to the hypothetical situation of nuclear bases being established in this country at some time in the future . Australia has no nuclear bases in its territory and does not at present seek them, he says .
 Government does not intend to deny itself in advance the right to ensure by whatever means may be necessary the effective defence of this country . Menzies claimed that Australia had not sought nuclear bases, it had given it serious consideration .
 It did not want to close the door on any possible options for securing Australia's defences . But Menzies could see that the door was closing .
 This chapter has demonstrated that in November and December 1962, the broader, if related, issues of nuclear free zones and disarmament were receiving as much attention as the aftermath of the Crisis . This chapter shows how in November 1962, issues such as disarmament and nuclear zones were getting as much
 It was clear that America favoured nuclear free zones, and Britain, disarmament . America favoured free zones and Britain favoured disarmament, it was clear .
 The Menzies Government was concerned about what both issues could mean for Australia's national interest . It accepted that its relations with its allies would need careful management in light of its differing views .
 It is unlikely that the Government's anxiety was eased by suggestions that the introduction of nuclear free zones, for example, would not significantly alter the current state of affairs in its region .
 It did not announce its stance on nuclear free zones in December when it declared its position on nuclear tests and disarmament . Its views were calculated, just as they were over the Crisis, in December .
 Barwick believed that Australia could remain confident that America would come to its defence if faced with a Soviet threat . The Kennedy Administration was shown the determination shown by the Kennedy Administration during the Crisis to defend itself .
 Menzies had failed to recall that for America, Cuba represented an important strategic base . Australia had also focused heavily on its national interest .
 The missiles and bases in Cuba had been dismantled, crated and returned to the Soviet Union . The missiles were dismantled and crated .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove Ilyushin-28 bombers, which had increased tensions over whether they, too, were offensive in nature . Khrushchchev had also agreed that the Izhnik-28s should be removed .
 The quarantine was lifted but American aerial surveillance of Cuba continued . U.S. continued to monitor Cuba .
 Kennedy was frustrated that the Soviets had been unable to persuade Castro to agree to UN inspection of missiles sites . As such, Kennedy claimed that his agreement with Khrushchev had not been fulfilled . Kennedy was angry that he had failed to fulfill his agreement .
 Khrushchev did not obtain the noninvasion of Cuba pledge from Kennedy that he sought from Kennedy . Subsequently, the pledge was not accepted by Kennedy . The pledge was never accepted by the Soviets .
 During the darkest days of the Crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev secretly dealt over the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of missiles in Cuba . It was later revealed that during the . darkest days the . Crisis, the . Jupiter missiles were removed from Cuba .
 The Americans and Soviets ended the Crisis with a quid pro quo; a settlement in which the Cubans were absent . The U.S. and the Soviets ultimately ended the crisis with a deal that left Cuba .
 It did not receive significant advance notice of the crisis as previously suggested . The crisis did not take place as long as previously thought .
 The Menzies Government learnt of the Crisis only a few hours before Kennedy's televised address from Washington on 22 October, and only received limited information . The government learned of the crisis only hours before JFK's televised televised address .
 Britain, France and West Germany had received more privileged treatment from the Kennedy Administration . It was oblivious to the fact that other allies, such as Britain and France, had been treated better .
 The tension between these departments regarding the management of Australia's relations with America and Britain was evident in this study . The tension is evident in the study .
 The speed of Menzies' public declaration of support for America's UN resolution in Parliament in Parliament on 23 October inclined some to believe that Australia had rushed to the aid of its great and powerful friend .
 It also sought Britain's position on the Crisis, although without success . The UK has not been able to find a solution to the crisis crisis .
 This suggests the importance the Government placed on ensuring the Kennedy Administration received a prompt response, rather than wait for British views . As a result, Australia's position was not influenced by Britain, as a result .
 The calculated nature of the Government's pledge of support for America's UN resolution reflected its private reservations over America's actions . It was not in Australia's national interest for it to give America open-ended assurances . Australia's support for the resolution reflected private reservations .
 It wanted to strengthen its defensive capability to respond to the increasing threat communism posed to regional security and stability, including through offensive means, it said .
 It thought that it would be in Australia's best interests to host American weapons and bases on Australian soil . The Australian government thought it was in the best interests of hosting the U.S. forces on Australia .
 In this respect, Australian foreign policy did not align with American foreign policy over the actions of the Soviet Union in Cuba . In this case, Australia did not support U.S. policy on Cuba .
 Government could not afford to apply its policy 70 to the situation in Cuba and risk jeopardising its relations with its most important ally, on whom it depended for its defence .
 The Crisis had shown Australia that in the face of a Soviet threat, it could depend on America . The crisis had shown that Australia had to rely on the U.S.
 The Crisis presented itself as yet another opportunity for the Menzies Government to embed its relations with America . This was demonstrated by support for American interventions in South-East Asia at this time .
 Kennedy expected Australia's support over the crisis . Thus, it was not surprising that Kennedy expected support from Australia's government .
 This was despite his decision to act unilaterally with little consideration for, and consultation with, its allies . This is despite him making a decision to take action against the UK .
 Kennedy overestimated the extent of Australia's support and underestimated the extent to which the Government was principally focused on Australia's national interest . Kennedy, however, probably overestimated . The Government was primarily focused on the Australian national interest, Mr Kennedy says .
 Australia's regional concerns that its South-East Asian neighbours could become Soviet satellites like Cuba . Its allies' preoccupation with Cuba and Berlin could leave Australia vulnerable to actions of communist bloc .
 Australia worked feverishly in the UN to persuade uncommitted countries to support America's UN resolution . In light of its anxieties over the intentions of its neighbours, Australia was worried about its neighbours' intentions .
 Its proactive approach in the UN which was perhaps at times beyond the scope the Government intended and the deliberate nature of its support, also suggested, perhaps unexpectedly, that the Menzies Government sought a UN solution .
 Britain, however, was focused on disarmament, and sought the Menzies Government's support on this issue . Britain sought the menzies government's support for disarmament .
 Late in 1962, the Menzies Government had to juggle the requests and interests of both its key allies . It had to deal with the requests of both sides .
 When Menzies Government announced its position on nuclear tests and disarmament, its support for such initiatives was again calculated . Just as it had been over the Crisis, the Menzys Government was calculated .
 Australia would need to continue carefully to manage its relations with Britain and most importantly with America . Its apprehensions about the effect both matters could have on its national interest, for reasons similar to those associated with the Crisis .
 Last of the Mandarins (Crows Nest, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin, 2006) Escalante, Fabian The Cuba Project: CIA Covert Operations 1959-62, 2nd ed., The Secret War Series 1 Fruhling, Stephan ed.
 Australia, New Zealand and the United States 1940-1970 . Relationship between Australia and the U.S.
 Lowe, David Australian Between Empires: The Life of Percy Spender (London: Pickering & Chatto, 2010) Menzies and the 'Great World Struggle': Australia's Cold War 1948-1954 .