 After World War II, the United States and U.S.R. quickly became adversaries in the “Cold War” that would last more than 40 years . The Cold War was the result of World War Two and World War III .
 Cold War was “cold” only in the sense that because of nuclear weapons, the two superpowers never confronted each other in open warfare . The Cold War never saw open warfare, but the Cold War did see nuclear weapons .
 The Cold War led to frequent world crisis and regional confrontations on every continent . It was the Cold War between the world's superpowers .
 Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin met a the Yalta Conference in February 1945 to discuss post war reconstruction of Europe . The conference was held in 1945 in Russia .
 They agreed that Germany should be divided into four separate occupation zones . They agreed to divide Germany into four occupation zones in order to protect Germany .
 The structure of the new United Nations was negotiated five months earlier at the Dunbarton Oaks Conference . It was also confirmed that the new UN had been negotiated at the same time .
 President Truman met with Stalin in Postsdam Germany in July/August 1945 to decide on the treatment of Germany, the final campaign against Japan, and future of Europe . President Roosevelt died in April 1945 .
 The two countries did not resolve some key issues, particularly related to the future of Eastern Europe . The future of eastern Europe was not resolved .
 Winston Churchill told Americans in 1946 that an ‘Iron Curtain’ had fallen, closing off Eastern Europe from the West . Winston Churchill said the Iron Curtain had fallen in a speech in 1946 .
 Russia responded by blockading the old capital of Germany, Berlin, which was deep inside the Soviet zone . Russia responded to the blockade by blocking Berlin from entering the Soviet-held zone .
 NATO formed in 1949 – U.S. and its Western allies agreed to defend each other in the event of attack . NATO was formed by the United States and Western allies in 1949 .
 In 1945, the U.S. was the sole nuclear power in the world .
 The superpowers embarked on a strategy of mutually assured destruction . The US and UK have been at odds with each other over the years .
 Neither party could use its nuclear weapons, or the other would destroy them . Neither party would use their nuclear weapons or destroy them.
 Truman’s strategy to avoid a direct conflict with the the the Communists in China conflicted with his strategy . This conflicted with Truman's strategy of avoiding a direct clash with the Communist Party .
 China In 1949, the Communist Chinese, led by Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-Tung) defeated the Nationalist Chinese lead by General Chiang Kai-Shek . Mao Tse Tung was Mao's first Chinese leader in 1949 .
 Beginning in the late 1940’s Congress began investigating possible U.S. domestic communism in the House Committee on Un-American Activities . Part 2: The Red Scare began in the 1940s .
 The Red Scare The Hollywood Ten consisted of ten screenwriters and directors who refused to answer questions from this committee . The committee was formed by a committee of ten Hollywood writers .
 They were fired by their employers and had trouble finding work for a decade . They had to find work for 10 years after being fired from their jobs .
 Senator Joseph McCarthy became especially prominent in Congress’ anti-communist investigations in the early 1950’s . McCarthy was a key figure in Congress' anti-Communist investigations .
 Many people questioned his methods and said McCarthy ruined peoples lives and reputations without adequate proof of being communist . McCarthy's methods were questioned by many people .
 Dwight Eisenhower was a five-star general in the United States Army . He was supreme commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in Europe . Eisenhower was the first president of the Cold War era .
 He was responsible for planning and supervising the invasion of North Africa in Operation Torch and the successful invasion of France and Germany in 1944–45, including D-Day .
 In 1954 President Eisenhower committed to containing communism in the Middle East . President Kennedy committed to contain communism in Mideast . In 1954, President Eisenhower signed a treaty to prevent the spread of communism .
 Under this doctrine, 15,000 U.S. troops were sent to Lebanon in 1958 to support its pro-Western President against the threat of communist revolution . The doctrine was used by the United States in support of the President of Lebanon against a communist revolution.
 Nikita Khrushchev became leader of the U.S. in 1953, after the death of Joseph Stalin . In 1957, the Soviet Union launched the first man made satellite into space .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro and his guerrilla fighters overthrew the Cuban dictator, Batista . Kennedy and Eisenhower were in the midst of the Cold War . Castro and Castro overthrew Batista in 1959 .
 His government nationalized/confiscated private property, and turned it over to his government . His government also nationalized and confiscated private property .
 President Eisenhower’s administration planned an invasion of Cuba, but that plan was not executed until John F Kennedy became President . President Eisenhower's administration planned to invade Cuba .
 The Bay of Pigs Invasion was the United States plan to assist and arm Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba in order to topple Castro’s government . The invasion was the U.S. plan to arm and arm Cuba exiles to overthrow Castro .
 They complained the United States did not supply air support during the invasion . They complained that the U.S. did not provide air support .
 In October 1962, U.S. spy planed detected the Cubans preparing to install Soviet missiles in Cuba . In 1962, the United States detected the Cuban government's plans to install the missiles .
 This confrontation brought the superpowers dangerously close to a nuclear war . The U.S. and the world's nuclear superpowers were at risk of nuclear war, experts say .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Cuban missiles in exchange for a US promise to not try to invade Cuba again . The agreement was made in exchange with a US pledge not to try and invade again .
 Between 1959 and 1962, more than 200,000 Cubans fled Castro’s repressive government for the United States . Air travel was restored between the two countries from 1965 to 1973, and another 368,000 fled to America .
 In 1980, Castro permitted another 100,000 Cuban Marielitos to flee from the port of Mariel, in Cuba . Castro permitted more than 200,000 Cubans to flee in 1980 .
 The Space Race was the competition between the U.S. and the United States for advancements in space technology . The Cold War was the first space race in the history of the Cold War .
 The Soviet Union beat the U.S. to have the first human in earth orbit, Yuri Gagarin, on April 12, 1961 . The first human to orbit earth orbit was Yuri Gaggerarin, a Russian rocket .
 In 1962, President Kennedy proposed a United States priority to land a human on the moon by the end of the decade . President Kennedy said a U.S. priority was landing a man on a moon by end of decade .
 Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first humans to land on the Moon in 1969 . This goal was achieved in July 1969 when they landed on the moon .
 The wall was a concrete and barbed wire wall constructed to prevent East Berliners from fleeing to the West . It was built in communist-controlled territory in communist controlled territory . East Berlin was occupied by the West in the early 1950s .