 Fidel Castro’s excruciating meeting with Soviet deputy prime minister Anastas Mikoyan on November 22, 1962 . Cuba would have become the first nuclear power in Latin America 50 years ago, if not for the dynamics captured in this remarkable transcript .
 Even with the pullout of the strategic missiles, the tacticals would stay, and Soviet documentation reveals the intention of training the Cubans to use them . The Cuban military would be trained to use the tactical weapons .
 Khrushchev had not consulted or even informed Castro about any deals with the Americans . Fidel heard about the missile withdrawal from the radio .
 Cuban leader refused to go along with any onsite inspections in Cuba, and raised further demands . The Cuban leader also refused to accept any inspections .
 The Americans had to take back what the Americans called the “offensive weapons,” get the United States to confirm its non-invasion pledge, and most importantly, keep Cuba as an ally . The U.S. had to get the weapons back to Cuba .
 Mikoyan arrived in Cuba on November 2, 1962, and over 20 days of often-bitter conversations with Cuban leaders . He began to appreciate the danger tactical nuclear weapons posed if left on the island .
 On one day, Castro would refuse to see Mikoyan; on another, Fidel would order his anti-aircraft crews to shoot at the American surveillance planes . On another day, the Cuban leader would order the planes to shoot .
 The final straw apparently came on November 20, when Castro sent instructions to Cuba’s representative at the United Nations, Carlos Lechuga, to mention “we have tactical nuclear weapons, which we should keep” The weapons were in Cuban possession .
 Mikoyan cabled the Soviet Presidium that he now planned to inform the Cuban leader that all tactical nuclear weapons would be withdrawn from Cuba . The Cuban leader was extremely worried .
 Mikoyan had to break this unpleasant news to his hosts, and he had to do it in such a way that they would remain Soviet allies . Mikoyans had to tell his hosts that they were no longer Soviet allies, but they were allies .
 This four-hour conversation on November 22 provided the final blow to the Cuban revolutionaries, now that the Soviet Union was removing all the weapons for which Cuba had to suffer so much . Cuba had been suffering so much that it had to be forced to suffer .
 Castro was in a bad mood because Kennedy stated in his speech that all nuclear weapons were removed from Cuba, but surely the tacticals were still on the island . Castro opened the conversation saying that he was in the bad mood .
 Mikoyan confirmed that “the Soviet government has not given any promises regarding the removal of tactical nuclear weapons .’s not given promises regarding removal of the weapons, he said .
 Mikoyan says he is not under U.S. pressure, but the Soviet government has now decided to take them back . The Soviet government says it is under pressure from the United States to return them .
 Mikoyan tried to persuade Castro that “as far as far as . the Il-28s are concerned, you know yourself that they are outdated,” he said .
 Castro was very emotional and at times rough with Mikoyan . He criticized the Soviet military for failing to camouflage the missiles, for not using anti-aircraft launchers to shoot down U.S. U-2 spy planes .
 The Soviets did not treat the Cubans as a partner, they caved in under U.S. pressure . They did not even consult the Cuban government about the withdrawal, and did not consult them .
 In desperation, Castro almost begged Mikoyan to leave tactical warheads in Cuba, especially because the Americans were not aware of them . The tactical warheads were not part of the agreement between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 Castro claimed that the situation now was even worse than it was before the crisis . Castro said that Cuba was defenseless, and the United States non-invasion assurances did not mean much for the Cubans .
 If the Cubans were a little more pliant, and a little less independent, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island . Ironically, if they were more willing to be Soviet pawns, the weapons would have been kept .
 Soviet missiles were used as a parking lot for the Soviet missiles . But they showed themselves to be much more than just parking lots for the missiles .
 Mikoyan treated his Cuban hosts with great empathy and respect, while being highly critical of his own political and military leadership . He treated them with empathy, respect, and was critical of Cuban leadership .
 He admired the genuine character of the Cuban revolution, he saw its appeal for Latin America . The Cuban revolution was a genuine character, he said .
 President Obama saw the danger of the situation spiraling out of control probably better than other leaders in this tense triangle . But he also saw the dangers better than any other leader, and thus brought about the final resolution of the crisis .
 The following transcript was prepared by a Soviet note-taker, with the Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Alexandr Alexeyev, translating for Mikoyan . The transcript is published by the Soviet embassy in Cuba .