 The Operations Evaluation Group is charged with increasing the effectiveness of the Navy and Marine Corps through operations research . It is based in Washington, D.C.
 It engages in studies dealing with current and' near-future problems in tactics, strategy logistics, force composition and weapons employment .
 This study represents the view of the Operations Evaluation Group at the time of issue . It was published 30 April 1965 . The study was published by Leight, Leight's office .
 It does not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the Chief of Naval Operations . The opinion is that of the C.C.N.O. operations staff .
 It includes information of an operational rather than a technical nature . It should be made available only to those authorized to receive such information .
 Enclosure to CNO ltr Ser 005P03 . Prepared by the OPERATIONS EVALUATION GROUP Center for Naval Analyses .
 Enclosure prepared by the Operations Evaluation Croup of t ter T or ^ al Analyses . Enclosure provided for information and retention. Enclosure .
 The study represents the best opinion of OEC at the time of issue. lxi.il .
 The Chief of Naval Operations approves this study for review and consideration by those commanders responsible for surface surveillance operations . The study will be reviewed and considered by those responsible for surveillance operations.
 Tf additional copies are required, thev will be forwarded upon request . Additional copies of this article are required .
 Barriers from Puerto Rico and Bermuda could have been about twice as efficient if they had been designed for maximum effectiveness against westbound traffic .
 P3A aircraft, in a major operation for the first time, were used to take advantage of their longer range to do a job that P2 and P5 aircraft could not do . The aircraft were used in the first major operation in Operation Desert Storm .
 P3 identification coverage could not be determined from available data . P3 aircraft identification coverage was not available from P3 data .
 Search and track of special interest ships took 16 percent of aircraft effort . 9 percent of the cruiser -destroyer effort took part in the effort .
 About 86 percent of merchantmen bound for Gulf -Caribbean ports from Europe were identified . 72 percent of those from North America were identified.
 Intelligence had an important effect on the character of the operation. Intelligence had been an important factor in the success of the mission .
 Standby analysis teams should be organized and become prepared to begin analysis at the start of future major operations . The analysis produced us eful planning. factor :s_..and-histQxical insights .
 During this crisis the Navy supported at least 3 major activitiesthe quarantine and its surface surveillance; prosecution of many Soviet submarine contacts; and preparation and positioning of units to invade Cuba, if required . The Navy was involved in the quarantine, the surface surveillance and the prosecution of Soviet submarine
 Reference , analyzing the anti-submarine operations, and . dealing extensively with carrying out the contingency plans, cover other major aspects of these operations . not considered here . Reference .
 OpNav requested that OEG analyze and evaluate the force mix used in the Cuban Quarantine and assess the'P3A aircraft contribution . References include the original requests for OEG work .
 The general goals of this study were to evaluate the over -all effectiveness of the surveillance operations and to relate their results to the effort expended . The general goal was to evaluate over-all effectiveness .
 Other purposes were to derive improved planning factors and reporting methods from the experiences of Cubex .
 This will contribute to force requirement estimates, provide better inputs for future planning studies, and contribute to readiness for future large surveillance operations . The U.S. will also be prepared to participate in the operation .
 Data for this analysis were transcribed from the records of ships and aircraft which operated principally in the area bounded by 12° N to 33 °N and 52 W to 87 W . The data include aircraft sorties and ship positions from 21 October through 21 November 1962 .
 Due to time and manpower limitations, ship detections and identifications were recorded only from 21 October through 7 November .
 Orders given to locate, identify, report, and photograph all shipping in the Atlantic by reference . Order specified systematic search coverage of the Atlantic .
 "Time and discretion do not often permit the highest command level to inform forces participating in an operation of all the goals or considerations affecting its orders," the commander says .
 Lower levels may not have attached the same value to early location of specific ships at the expense of more ""effective" and systematic over-all surveillance .
 The special circumstances of the Cuban crisis led to use of much larger forces than would have been necessary for surveillance without these constraints . The surveillance operation was described as 'surveillance operation'
 References and contain a detailed history of the Cuban crisis and a description of the quarantine plot in CinCLant Headquarters at Norfolk .
 A review of the more important aspects of the situation and brief chronology are given so that this report will be reasonably self-contained . However, a review of some of the most important aspects are given .
 The Cuban crisis resulted from Soviet introduction of medium range ballistic missiles into Cuba, and abnormally high Soviet submarine activity in the area, confirmed in October 1962 .
 The President's insistence that the Soviet missiles and IL-28 bombers be removed from Cuba, were successful . These measures were successful.
 The USSR announced that it would remove the IL-28's within 30 days . From 5 to 11 November, the missiles were removed from the USSR .
 The quarantine forces, although not engaged in a full blockade, induced Russian ships carrying arms to stop and return . Russian ships with arms stopped and returned .
 This was apparently the result of the demonstrated U.S. ability to intercept them, and of our obvious intention and . ability to use force if necessary . The United States was apparently intercepting them, according to the report .
 The operation then evolved into an attempt to locate all ships which might be carrying prohibited materials to Cuba . The operation evolved into a search for ships with prohibited materials .
 Surveillance forces tried to examine and identify every ship in the approaches to Cuba . For this, the surveillance forces .
 Quarantine was effective in operation to detect and, if necessary, stop ships carrying prohibited military materials to Cuba . The quarantine was effective .
 Since the intercepting ships acted on information from aircraft, aircraft searches were required still farther from Cuba . The intercepts were carried out by aircraft .
 A line closer to Cuba would have provided very little time for the President and his advisors to act, and might have necessitated decisions by lower commanders which the higher authorities preferred to reserve to themselves . A move closer to the Cuban border would have left little time to act .
 Air coverage was concentrated in 3 basic zones . Force Dispositions and Missions are concentrated in three basic zones. Air coverage is concentrated in the 3 zones .
 The first zone ran north and south from Puerto Rico to Bermuda, and to the east and west of Bermuda . A second zone was from Puerto Rico to Jacksonville along the Bahamas and ""off the Florida and Georgia east coasts"
 Flights from Guantanamo toward the Bahamas also contributed to the coverage . Flights to the Bahamas were diverted from Guantanamo Bay .
 The third area was just outside Cuban waters covered from Key West and Guantanamo . The area is just outside the Cuban waters .
 In addition, flights from Laies in the ' Azores covered selected mid-Atlantic areas . In addition to Laies flights from the 'Azores, flights covered selected areas .
 Ships patrolled passages such as Florida Straits and Windward Passage . Ships also patrolled the waters such as the Florida straits .
 They altered the systematic search pattern and took forces away from prosecution of one submarine contact . The search pattern was altered to take advantage of the submarine's position .
 These flights observed the activities of the Russian ships enroute to Cuba in an attempt to determine Soviet intentions at a critical period when the President was considering an invasion of Cuba .
 U.S. Navy ships were assigned to intercept and follow ships of special interest . Navy ships intercepted and followed ships of interest . U.N. ships were also assigned .
 When 16 of the Soviet ships enroute to Cuba stopped and eventually reversed course, the effectiveness of the quarantine was demonstrated . When 16 ships en route to Cuba, they stopped and reversed course .
 The close coverage of Soviet ships which didnot turn around gave juwrnawuhu to FIGURE 1 the USSR additional proof of the United States control of the situation, as well as satisfying the U.S. that prohibited war materials were not continuing to .
 The USSR agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba after agreeing to remove them . The mission was carried out by tracking missions to verify and count the number of missiles removed .
 If the ships and aircraft on special search and tracking missions had been used as the other surveillance units were, the number of merchantmen identified might have increased slightly, but not in proportion because coverage was already near saturation . The effect of this diversion of forces from the systematic coverage can be estimated
 The requirement to identify all shipping in the surveillance area forced the use of search tracks which were less effective against inbound traffic than cross-over barriers, specifically designed to detect westbound traffic only .
 The data includes records from units which had no direct part in the operation . Some units were assigned surveillance duties for only part of the period or as an incidental effort .
 Efforts during the quarantine can be measured in terms of aircraft flight hours and ship-days in the quarantine area . Efforts were made to ensure the quarantine was successful .
 A description of the effort must'show the types of aircraft and ships were present, to what missions they were assigned how the effort was distributed geographically and what changes occurred in these distributions . A description must also include how the aircraft were assigned to missions .
 Surveillance was primarily done by patrol aircraft , with assistance from ships and carrier aircraft . General Surveillance Effort Surveillance was .
 These flights could locate and identify inbound inbound Bloc ships far enough from Cuba to permit surface intercepts to be made with sufficient decision time .
 This was the first full-scale operation for the P3A aircraft, which were used to take advantage of their ability to operate at longer ranges than the other patrol aircraft, as discussed below . This was used to operate in a full scale operation .
 The carrier aircraft spent nearly as many flying hours on surveillance as did patrol aircraft . This effort occurred in limited sectors and intermittently, but this effort was limited .
 Much of the ship effort was devoted to support or amphibious operations, rather than to search .
 Ocf-7 Nov 1962 %£0 Mission Ocean Special Ship ASW Task Group A/C Type Surveillance Search & Track. Ocf 7 Nov 1962 .
 Table ll-B AVERAGE NUMBER NUMBER OF PATROL AIRCRAFT AIRBORNE BY MISSION AND TIME OF DAY 21 Oct-7 Nov 1962 Mission Ocean Special Task Group Time of Day Surveillance Search & Track .
 The missions tabulated are ""ocean surveillance, "" to locate and identify all merchant ships in the search area; ""special ship search and track, "" flights to locate or track specific ships; ""ASW search, "" including area search and prosecution of contacts; ""task group escort
 During the first 18 days, about 55 percent of the patrol flying hours were on ocean surveillance and special search and track, while 44 percent were on various ASW missions .
 During the following 2 weeks the ASW effort was considerably reduced . However, during the following two weeks, ASW efforts were reduced .
 The average number of surveillance flying hours per day increased slightly during the last 14 days . The number of flying hours has also increased slightly .
 P2 aircraft flew 72 percent of the patrol aircraft flying hours . They accounted for over half of the flying hours in each major mission . P2 planes were used in most of the missions .
 The many ship days devoted to transit are due to the operations of amphibious and logistic support ships . The operations of these ships are often due to operations of the amphibious ships .
 It is clear that the buildup for the quarantine was not complete until 24 October . The quarantine was completed on 24 October.
 Sjoa -* vo o co •* -C a O CO u a CD CO CD CN ^ VO Jh <U CN £ g CO CO CO d • CD S^ .-i Q, ft cx-3 cu a) co -'CO q5 cu
 Cru rriers 3erway [er Log ; Others 3 •S 1 o V ^aW44 <d ess ra3w«S CO QU\2»©J33 2 Cinoipc CN o o -h m co c h CN — ^ _ TJX
 October, 1962 Date Nov.62 Employment of Desfroyers and Cruisers , ficu^ 2 Unclassified DiJWNffiftpED TO C*®^ "" ~~;*et JJNCLASSIJF1EQ IV EFFECTIVENESS OF
 The first part describes and analyzes contacts by source, location, time, time of day, and so on . The second part of this article includes the first part of an analysis of contacts made in this article .
 The measure of effectiveness here is completeness of coverage, measured by the fraction identified among all ships entering the surveillance area . The measure is the extent of the effectiveness of the surveillance system .
 Merchant Ship Analysis: All shipping in the areas of interest had to be examined . The mission was carried out by the U.S. Navy .
 The information obtained on ships entering the surveillance area differed greatly . The information was obtained by ships in the area known as the Great Lakes .
 The most complete identification included name, type, origin, destination, etc., not all of which could be obtained from the ships or aircraft reporting .
 For this analysis, an identification was considered as ""positive"" when the name and type of the ship were obtained . An identification of an identified ship was considered a 'positive'
 In some cases failure to obtain registry resulted in ambiguity . There are 6 ""Santa Maria's"" in Lloyd's Shipping Index Voyage Supplement of 16 November 1962 .
 The name and position of a merchant ship, usually permits identification when combined with intelligence, can be used to identify a ship . However, the name of a ship can also be found on the surface of the ocean .
 Less information on a ship may be sufficient for the type of identification desired . In many cases, less information is needed for identification purposes .
 Merely knowing that a ship, such as a U.S. tanker, is not one of the special class in the Cuban trade might be satisfactory .
 Negative IDs account for approximately 11 percent of the total number of identifications reported . Negative identifications account for about 11% of all negative identifications .
 Positive identifications and naval vessels identified account for a total of 4,758 ships . In contrast, the positive identifications account for 4,800 ships .
 The cable also shows the distribution of ships by reporting source, and indicates the predominant contribution of the land-based aircraft .
 Aircraft made nearly two-thirds of all the positive identifications . Patrol aircraft (including Air Force) made slightly more than one-half of all of the positive identification . The U.S. Air Force made nearly one-third of all positive identification.
 The number of contacts depends on opportunities, as measured by shipping densities and the search effort expended, measured by ship-days, flying hours, or length of barrier patrolled . Search efforts are also measured by the length of the barrier that is patrolled by ships .
 From 21 October through 7 November 1962, 2 CVA and 3 CVS contributed to ocean surveillance . During the month of the month, the U.S. Coast Guard was active in the area .
 Carrier aircraft also flew surveillance missions from Guantanamo and Key West . Carrier aircraft were also involved in surveillance missions .
 The difference in identifications per hour attributed to differences in employment, rather than significant differences in aircraft capabilities, is attributed to employment differences .
 Identifications per flight hour is a misleading measure of the effectiveness of carrier aircraft due to overcoverage of the area near the carrier . Identifications are often misleading due to the coverage of the carrier's area .
 Ship density was assumed to be evenly distributed within each of the 5x5 degree areas shown in figure 8, Figure 8, Estimated Number of Ships at Sea . Ship density is assumed to have been evenly distributed in each area shown in Figure 8 .
 The number of contacts represents the total reported by carrierbased aircraft on all types of missions, 21 October through 7 November . The number is the total contacts reported .
 He can receive Tacan and radar targets simultaneously; plot the range and bearing of the target from the carrier; fly out and identify tne target . He can then return to voice communications range to make or relay his report .
 It might have been more efficient to use the carriers for surveillance and ASW in areas where shipping was more concentrated, rather than in open ocean areas .
 One measure of ship surveillance efficiency is the fraction of ships passing through the quarantine line which were identified . The number of ships which passed through quarantine line has been identified .
 Of a sample of 90 ships on westbound courses from Europe and the Mediterranean to Caribbean ports 26, or 29 percent, were identified by ships of the quarantine line .
 Thirteen of these were identified before October 30 on the Walnut Line, 13 after October 30, when the shorter Chestnut Line was manned . Thirteen were identified by October 30; 13 were identified after October 31 .
 Different merchant ship densities, the presence of ship lanes, and the use of ships for trailing and interception, all affected the efficiency of the ship search .
 Some data was transcribed inconsistently, affecting the accuracy of the estimates of identifications per day . Also, some data were transcribed in some cases .
 A few ships made most of the identifications because they were in areas of high shipping density . As pointed out earlier, a few ships were identified because of the density of shipping traffic .
 Many identifications were made without approaching close enough to read the ship's name . Finally, many identifications of the ship were made by people who did not know their names .
 The fractions identified by signaling or by radio and visually by close approach are not iaiown . The fractions are identified by . signaling or . radio or visually by . close approach to each other .
 Several aspects of patrol aircraft operations are analyzed . In this section several aspects of the patrol aircraft operation are analyzed.
 Ocean surveillance is an assigned mission for patrol aircraft, and many of the crews are accustomed to keeping detailed records . Ocean surveillance aircraft are assigned to patrol aircraft .
 Separate portions of this section deal with search and identification rates, ordnance expenditures and failures, the use of the P3A, and aircraft utilization . Separate sections deal with ordnance expenditure and failures .
 When they detected ships, they flew toward them to identify them visually, after which they resumed their surveillance tracks . They continued to fly to identify ships, then resumed surveillance .
 For some planning purposes, it is useful to know, how many square miles per hour an aircraft could cover in this mission . For example, an aircraft can cover an area of more than 100 miles per Hour .
 The data received were sufficient to make estimates of the surveillance rate for P2 and P5 aircraft, but not for the P3 aircraft . The data was enough to make an estimate of surveillance rate .
 The term ""identification width"" refers to the sweep width for identification, not for detection . The width of a sweep width is the width of the sweep, not the width used for detection, rather than identification .
 In addition, shipping density in various areas has been estimated by ONI . Figure 8 is a tabulation for October 1962 .
 With such information, the value of an identification sweep width mav can be estimated . The value of the mav is estimated .
 ONI survey shows numbers of ships within regions bounded by parallels and meridians in multiples of 5 degrees . The survey was conducted by the Office of the ONI .
 The estimated number of ships per region varies from one region to another . The areas of regions differ with latitude and latitude .
 Patrol tracks, particularly from Guantanamo and Key West, were so close to land that the ocean area surveyed was reduced . Patrol tracks were often so close that ocean area was reduced, officials say .
 If a patrol track includes' or excludes a dense traffic, estimates of sweep width can be much larger or smaller than expected for a uniform density in a region .
 Some of the Guantanamo and Key West flights also included considerable overlap . Some of those flights included flights from Guantanamo to Key West .
 The assumptions of uniform -random distribution of shipping and nonoverlapping flight tracks, with no surveillance of land, are most valid north of Puerto Rico to Bermuda . The assumptions are most likely to be based on the distribution of ships and planes .
 A sample comparison between ships' positions and those estimated by dead-reckoning ships showed a mean deviation of 88 miles from the lanes .
 Ships with many origins and destinations transit this area, so they tend to be more uniformly distributed in it . Ships tend to arrive in this area more often than others .
 The estimates are for positive identification by name by name; negative identifications would increase the values shown by less than 10 percent . Negative identifications are more likely to increase the number of positive identification .
 With perfect coverage, an identification width of 90 miles would be expected; achieved identification widths were about 1/2 of this . The identification width would be 90 miles wide .
 Although it is not possible to explain or isolate every reason why actual performance falls short of the theoretical, several contributing factors may be considered . Several contributing factors could be considered.
 First, the tracks do overlap themselves, which is unavoidable when all the tracks all emanate from two points . First, they do overlap, but it's unavoidable when the tracks are all emanated from one point .
 The greatest overlaps occur near Burmuda and Roosevelt Roads, where the aircraft also have land in sight .
 Estimates of identification width were made after deleting regions closest to the bases .
 About one-third of the tracks in the sample were in the 2 deleted areas adjacent to the bases . About one third of the track was in the area .
 The combined identification width in the remaining areas was 48 miles . For those tracks, the combined ID width in those areas was 15 miles .
 On the basis of track lengths and shipping density, the deleted adjacent areas should have accounted for 45 percent of the identifications, but actually provided only 21 percent . Deleted adjacent areas accounted for just 21 percent of identifications .
 An aircraft near its endurance limit must return to base without investigating all contacts on the remainder of its route . Another possible reason for the number of contacts near base to be lower than expected is that an aircraft near it's endurance limit .
 Weather also occasionally degraded search results . This effect evidently did exist in this operation, as shown by table X .
 The speed of advance of patrol aircraft on surveillance depends mainly upon the aircraft's cruising speed and the number of contacts it must investigate . Speed of advance on surveillance aircraft depends on the number and the speed of the aircraft is cruising .
 To estimate the speed made good along surveillance tracks, the total mileages of the individual tracks were measured . To estimate speed, the speed was estimated at the time .
 The average contacts per hundred miles of track and the average speed of advance along each track were computed . Then the average contact rate and speed speed were also calculated .
 The P2 SOA is reduced 1.36 knots for each additional contact per 100U miles of track, which implies about 5 minutes ""lost"" per additional contact . P2SOA reduces P2 soA by 1.2 knots .
 The corresponding figure for the P5 is somewhat larger, being 7 minutes . The corresponding figures are 7 minutes and 7 minutes.
 P3A aircraft were sent on missions where their greater range was essential . They were deployed on missions with greater range . The aircraft were deployed in the U.S.
 On special ship search and track missions, the P3A's averaged 5. hours in transit to and from station, and 5.hours on station . The mission took place on special ships searching and tracking missions .
 At this radius the P2 would be able to stay on station for only an hour or two and the P5 capability disappears . The P2 can't stay at this radius for two hours .
 This is undoubtedly a major reason why so much P3A effort was spent on special search and track missions . This is also a major part of the mission to find the missing persons .
 It shows a very short average sortie time for surveillance because of many short transit flights during which the aircraft also rigged ships .
 The P3A special search and track and ASW flights were slightly longer, on the average, than those of other aircraft .
 Because of the P3A's higher speed to and from station, their total tracks were longer . However, because of the higher speed, they had longer tracks than the other stations .
 Quban Quarantine provided an excellent data source for planning factors on the ordnance expended by VP aircraft in realistic ASW and surveillance operations . The data was used to provide planning factors for planning .
 Data can assist in estimating logistic requirements for similar operations, determining ordnance reliability, and examining aircraft loading requirements . These data can also be used to assess logistic and reliability of an aircraft .
 It is assumed' here that if an aircraft reported at least one expenditure, it reported all of them . The aircraft is assumed to have reported all the expenditure .
 Sorties having what was thought at the time to be a submarine contact are listed separately . Sorties with what was believed to be an aircraft thought to have made contact with a submarine .
 Total expenditures by type are shown in table XIII with the reported reliability and average expenditures per sortie . Total expenditures for each sortie are shown by type .
 Because of the great variability of ordnance expenditures per sortie, no valid planning factors for ordnance can be derived . Figure 11 for both ASW missions and non-ASW missions is shown .
 Previous sections of this report dealt with the effort expended in the quarantine and associated surveillance operations . The resulting contacts and identifications have been identified .
 Some of the over-all effectiveness of the operations are treated here . Some important aspects of the operation are treated in this article .
 Groups of ships with about the same exposure must be studied . Therefore, groups of ships which had about the . same exposure need to be studied.
 The method used was to select samples of ships with roughly similar exposures and then to determine whether, when, and where each ship was identified . The method was used to identify samples of each ship .
 Examination of data showed that surveillance was not fully mounted until October 24, the day quarantine began .
 It is sufficient to select a sample, if it is large enough, and without discrimination or bias . It is necessary to select samples if a large enough sample is selected without bias .
 Ships listed in Lloyd's Shipping Index Voyage Supplement which made trips from Northern Europe to Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico ports .
 Outbound from Gulf and Caribbean ports to Northern Europe . Voyages with same origins and destinations as sample 1, but outbound .
 Arrows show the geographic sequence of selected ports, and numbers abreast selected ports indicate the numerical sequence of ports listed . Arrows show how many ports are located in South America .
 Ships outbound from Caribbean and Gulf ports to Southern Europe . Southern Europe and Mediterranean ports . Caribbean, Gulf ports . Southern European ports .
 Ships southbound from the east coast of North America to Caribbean Ports and the Panama Canal . Ships from the East Coast of America to the Caribbean ports .
 It was difficult in many cases to determine whether a ship identified and reported was the same as one of those on the sample lists . Ship names were frequently misspelled or garbled .
 Cyrillic letters of Russian ship names caused considerable difficulty . In particular, the Cyrillian letters of ship names were difficult to use .
 A computer program was written to compare reported names with each other to be properly designated . The program was created by a computer program .
 This program associates two names if they differ by no more than two letter substitutions and/or letter transpositions . Two names are associateable if they are two letters or letters that differ by two letters .
 The program worked well to associate spellings such as Port Hudson and Fort Hudson with other spellings .
 There were also spellings such as BEADBACK for BEJ10B0&CK where the correct association was made only with luck . The correct association is made only by luck .
 Some names reported were so distorted that it was not possible to identify the ship . Some names of the ship were so blurred that it could not be easily identified .
 The differences between inbound and outbound fractions identified, or east and westbound, were not statistically significant .
 A x test of the hypothesis that the probability of identification was the same for all 4 samples did not reject the hypothesis, even at the 10 percent level . A . x test that the . probability of identifying was the . same for . all four samples was not rejected at 10 percent .
 A common probability of .86 that a ship steaming between European or Mediterranean ports and the Caribbean Sea would be identified . Thus, aggregating samples is justified, yielding a common probability .
 Grozny was identified 17 times and Karl Marx 14 times because they were subject to special search and tracking, greatly increasing the frequency of sighting . Karl Marx was identified 14 times and was tracked 14 times by the Soviets . Grozne was identified .
 Figure 13 shows frequency distribution of ship identifications . These two have been omitted from figure 13, showing the frequency distribution .
 These results indicate effective coverage of the ships going to and from the Caribbean and Gulf Ports .
 The proportions identified are lower, rather than upper, estimates of effectiveness for the following reasons . There is now rather complete knowledge of those ships in the area and available for identification .
 The high probability that a ship would be sighted and reported indicates that most, but not all, negatively identified vessels were probably also given a positive identification . Most of the negative identification of a ship is likely to have been made by negative identification .
 Most of these were transits and would not be expected to produce many identifications . Many of the ships which these aircraft may have identified were also identified by other units .
 Any missing data could only increase the estimates of over-all effectiveness of the project . Nevertheless, any missing data would only increase overall effectiveness of project .
 Some ships' names were transmitted with errors that now preclude identifying them . Finally, some ships' name has been changed to indicate they are in service .
 The sampling data may also be used to indicate in more detail the relative contributions to surveillance of the several force components . FREQUENCY .
 The identification results in the tables have been separated according to whether they were made on the eastern or western side of the barrier . They are shown to have been made on either the east or west .
 As planned, aircraft made over three -fourths of the first identifications on the westbound ships in the outer zone . Aircraft made over 3 -fourth of the . first . identifications .
 Seventy-one percent of the westbound ships were first identified in the outer zone . 11 percent of those first identified were in the inner zone . Seventy percent of westbound vessels first identified first in outer zone; 11 percent were in inner zone.
 The distinction between zones is not particularly significant for eastbound ships . Eastbound ships will not be able to use the distinction between the zones .
 Because of duplications and multiple identifications, the numbers and percentages of identifications don't add up to those identified by the combined effort . The numbers and percentage do not add up with the identification numbers identified .
 -landbased air identified 58 by the time they reached the quarantine line . For example, considering the 90 westbound ships, it identified 58 .
 There were 6 westbound ships identified only by ships east of the quarantine line . 15 westbound . ships were identified only . by ships west of the line . 8 westbound ship were identified during their transit through the entire surveillance area .
 Carrier air contributed substantially to surveillance, and identified about 20 percent of the transiting ships, but their incremental effect was only 2 ships beyond those identified by land-based air and ships .
 Landbased air identified a total of 64 of the westbound transitors; without that air effort 27 of the identified transitors would not have been identified . The remaining 37 were also identified by either ship or carrier air .
 A smaller fraction of sfMP3Mfi^riS''fth*'spflth. runs was*cf§t||g:ed than on eastwest voyages, as shown in table XVII . The surveillance width in the north-south direction was about
 More important was the disposition of forces, particularly ships, in a manner to intercept ships between Europe and Cuba . More important, however, was the placement of forces in a way to intercept vessels .
 Much of the flying was east of the track between North American east coast ports and the Gulf -Caribbean area . Finally, much of the air travel was in the Caribbean .
 A lower percentage of ships identified while transiting north-south or south-north . There were also fewer repeat identifications, according to the study .
 The marginal contribution of carrier air was small, due to their deployment . Carrier air made a marginal contribution to the carrier air .
 Future analyses of this type could be improved by insuring better and more complete data . IMPROVATION OF FUTURE ANALYSES could be made using better data .
 The Cubex data were not transcribed until 4 months after the operation . Many of those responsible for transcribing it had had little to do with the aspects of the operation under study .
 When information is missing or obviously wrong, little could be done to supply or correct it . Consequently, when information was missing, little was done to correct it. Consequently, the information was not immediately available .
 Quality of data can be much improved if analysis team is present during the operation . Analysis team can examine the data being generated and can examine it .
 An analysis team should be organized in advance and become ready to report promptly in a significant operation . Preferably, an analysis team must be organized .
 Such a team could be named or mentioned in appropriate OpPlans and check-off lists . It could be a team of people who want to help the U.S. military .
 An earlier decision should be made on the scope and nature of analyses . At the very least, an earlier decision is needed to be made .
 In analyses of this type of operation, the nature of the operation is unlikely to be precisely known in advance . It is not possible to anticipate all the reporting needs for analysis .
 "It is impossible to report routinely all data required by every conceivable contingency," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Many reports are to be filled out only in specific circumstances, such as for specific circumstances . Many reports will be filled in only for specific reasons .
 Such reports will contain some discrepancies when filled out the first few times . Such reports may contain some discrepancy when filled in the first time .
 "Basic information, essential in most analyses, be reported routinely and that special reporting requirements be minimized and simplified" "It is desirable that basic information be reported regularly," says the author .
 There is a basic body of information needed for nearly all reports and analyses . Pieces of which may be available at different places and to different people .
 Information from original forms must be transcribed to one coherent form . This makes it difficult or impossible to assemble information without some redundancy .
 Ship's course, speed, and position is normally logged on the bridge . For example, ship's speed, speed and position are logged .
 Information about an ECM contact is logged in CIC . Both sets of information may be available in both places but the information is recorded separately .
 Much information now being recorded could be entered on a form which permits easy conversion for machine analysis . Much of the information is now being entered on an entry form which can be entered for analysis .
 It may contain courses or headings, speeds, positions, times and times, and changes in these . It may also contain courses, speeds and speeds .
 All of these could be recorded on a standard form with a special marking pencil, so that the completed forms could be handled automatically without further transcription .
 A computer would be able to enter the history of a ship's movements into a computer, eliminating much clerical labor and the possiblity of transcription or coding errors .
 Narrative information would still be required and could still be entered beside or between sections of numerical data . Narrative data would still need to be entered and entered into sections of data .
 It appears possible to standardize this type of record considerably for machine use and at the same time reduce, or at least not increase, routine record-keeping, says author .
 Commander Antisubmarine Warfare Force, U.S. Atlantic Fleet ser 00187/43 of 5 Nov 1963 to Chief of Naval Operations w/encl. Operations w. Commander of Naval . Operations .
 The aircraft on special search and track missions averaged less than 2 identifications per flight, while the aircraft on surveillance missions averaged 7.2 identifications .
 Identifications made by aircraft on special missions were likely to be duplicated by other units on routine surveillance missions . Moreover, identifications made during special missions are likely to have been duplicated .
 This agrees well with the actual result of the 86 percent of the sample identified . The results are based on the actual results of the survey .
 This might have led to an increase in the total of 2085 identifications made by patrol aircraft by 195, or slightly over 9 percent . The total number of identifications increased by 9 percent to 2085 by 195 .
 The number of destroyer and cruiser ship-days devoted to special search and tracking was also about 10 percent of that devoted to ocean surveillance . It is convenient to consider the potential effect of increasing by 10 percent .
 The data forms showing primary mission of the ship reported 14 days on ocean surveillance and 10 days on special search and track and track .
 The aircraft carrier's reports of missions showed very little time on special search and track missions .
 The results on over-all effectiveness in the main body of this report show that carrier aircraft to a large extent duplicated identifications by the patrol aircraft and ships .
 This would have removed carrier air from other missions, such as ASW and air support, which they were to perform . However, this would have taken off carrier air .
 Only the effects of additional contributions from ships and patrol aircraft have been considered . Therefore, only the effects were considered .
 A 10 percent increase in effectiveness of individual forces would be expected to result in a less than proportional increase in the overall effectiveness . The coverage was already near saturation, according to the U.S. government .
 The length of each flight is 2 L miles and it takes 2 L/V hours, where V is aircraft speed . Each flight is a flight of two L miles, the length is 2 miles .
 In a strip of width Ax parallel to the track at distance x, the expected number of targets identified will be L • s • tx • P and the distribution will be Poisson . The distribution of targets is Poisson.
 The expected number of ships identified at all ranges from the aircraft's track will be WLs . Since the combined mean is the sum of the individual means, the expected number is WL .
 In order to select suitable values for the coefficients a desirable to minimize the variance . The coefficients are chosen to minimise the amount of variation in the coefficients .
 By differentiating V, 2 with respect t , it can readily be shown that is the desired estimate . The estimate is based on the fact that V, t and t can be used to estimate the desired amount .
 W l + L 2 S 2 W 2 jl/2 1/2 may be considered as a normally distributed variable with mean and variance 1 to test the hypothesis of no significant difference between W and W 9 at any specified level of statistical confidence .
 Center for Naval Analyses of the Franklin Institute, Operations Evaluation Group 2o. The Franklin Institute is a center for naval analysis of the U.S. Navy .
 Other qualifie* users shall request through their sponsoring government agency to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations . tIs 12.1.2.1 .
 In late 1962 Navy ships and aircraft patrolled large Atlantic and Caribbean areas to locate and track Soviet Bloc ships suspected of carrying intermediate range missiles and support equipment .
 This study analyzes the effectiveness of these quarantine operations and the contributions of the several naval components . The study was conducted by the Department of Defense .
 Operations were carried on under conditions which greatly increased the force requirements . Because of the special circumstances of the Cuban crisis, the operations were carried out under conditions . Operation was carried out in Cuba under the conditions of the crisis .
 Automatic downgrading in specified rective 5200.10 end Armed Forcea Industrial Manu .
 When applicable, show th markings have been used for Group 3 and Group 4 3 . Also, show that the markings used in Group 3 are those of Group 4 .