 Administration officials said they would not yet pursue serious negotiations with senior leaders of the Afghan Taliban . For many months, this argument was offered by Administration officials to explain why they had not yet pursued serious negotiations .
 Administration officials are saying that they have moved significantly . Administration officials say that they are moving significantly .
 Washington is eager to make happen – perhaps more eager than most Americans realize . Washington wants to make it happen, and it's not surprising that it's happening .
 U.S. officials have quietly dropped Bush administration’s resistance to talks with senior Taliban officials . They still say any Taliban willing to negotiate must renounce violence, reject Al Qaeda, and accept the Afghan Constitution .
 The Administration’s shift – if real – is tremendously good news for ending the war . The shift, if real, would be tremendously good for ending war .
 Even if this accurately reflects the intentions of the Administration, the arguments made earlier against serious negotiations are still politically powerful . They will likely be thrown back in the Administration’s face by some of its Republican critics if efforts at a negotiated settlement begin to bear fruit .
 These arguments still need to be countered, even if the Administration is no longer making them . Therefore, these arguments still must still be countered .
 A key obstacle to moving the debate forward in the United States is that most Americans don’t know much diplomatic history . Not every negotiation that ends a war follows a military defeat is a negotiation .
 "We don't spend much time studying in school. That’s part of the diplomatic history that we don’t study in school," he says .
 This ignorance makes us vulnerable to facile slogans that assume the all-conquering efficacy of military force and dismiss the possible efficacy of alternatives . This ignorance of alternatives is dangerous, and it makes it easy to dismiss alternatives to force .
 Diplomatic efforts to avert the Second World War failed in Munich in 1938 in 1938 . For the neocons in both parties, all you need to need to know about the diplomatic history of the world .
 For the neocons, every argument is a noun, a verb, and Neville Chamberlain . The neocons are obsessed with Neville Chamberlain, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Every argument is an argument against Neville Chamberlain"
 Fredrik Stanton has recently published a corrective to our ignorance of our ignorance . He has published a book on how to deal with our ignorance.
 In each of these negotiations, with the exception of the Congress of Vienna, the U.S. was a key protagonist .
 Portsmouth Treaty most clearly ended a war without one side having defeated the other militarily . The Portsmouth Treaty speaks most directly to our present predicament in Afghanistan, writes Peter Bergen .
 Russo-Japanese war cost more than 150,000 lives between 1904 and 1905 . Russo-Russian war cost over 150,00 lives .
 President Roosevelt believed that continued fighting would make both sides worse off, but until mid-1905, neither side shared his view . Each side thought they would benefit from continued fighting .
 In May 1905, Japan and Russia agreed to Roosevelt’s proposal for negotiations . Roosevelt's proposal was rejected by both countries .
 Each side knew they had something to lose from continued fighting, and that a negotiated settlement might not be very different from what they could accomplish through force . The U.S. military says it's not the first time it's been to negotiate a deal with the Taliban .
 The bloodshed had turned world opinion sharply against the war, and this had begun to affect the ability of Russia and Japan to raise money for the war . World opinion had turned around the world opinion against the conflict .
 When negotiations began, there was no cease-fire, and it was far from obvious that the negotiations would succeed . Yet when the negotiations began there were no cease - and it wasn't obvious that they would succeed. The negotiations will continue .
 Both sides had difficulty finding delegates, because insiders believed that the negotiations would fail and that the negotiating officials would be ruined politically . Both sides were unable to find delegates because of fears that the talks would fail .
 The chief Russian delegate to the peace conference, an opponent of the war, didn’t believe that Russian leaders sincerely wanted to end it, he said . He said he didn't believe that Russia would want to end the war .
 If some folks in the White House fear they might pay a political price for an agreement ending the war that doesn’t ""smell like a win"" but will ""end in an argument"" – as Gen. Gen. John McCain says .
 Komura made concessions to secure an agreement with Russia . The concessions were wildly unpopular in Japan, but he lived to tell the tale . Komura continued to serve as a diplomat for several more years, receiving promotions and honors .
 If Richard Holbrooke succeeded in making a deal with the Afghan Taliban, one suspects that most Americans who were paying attention would be grateful .
 The majority of Americans, the Washington Post reported in June, say the war is not worth fighting . It's a far cry from the war fever of Japanese public opinion during the Portsmouth talks .
 If you can get people to have unrealistic goals, it’s easy to argue against a diplomatic settlement, says John Defterios . He says it's easy to get unrealistic goals to achieve diplomatic success .
 Further military combat won't result in unicorns and ponies either . But further military combat isn't likely to end up with unicorns or ponies .
 To declare that one won't support a diplomatic settlement because it won’t achieve a goal that is very unlikely to be achieved by military force is something akin to believing that you are not overweight because you haven't been on a scale lately. It's like believing you're not overweight
 With an occupying army largely ignorant of local history, tribal structures, language, customs, politics and values, the U.S. cannot, through social engineering, win over, in the foreseeable future, sufficient numbers of the Afghan Pashtun .
 They aren’t going to magically transform an existing balance of forces into something completely different . They’re not going to be able to change the world’s balance, they’ve said .
 Ayatollah Khomeini described the UN-mediated truce between Iran and Iraq in 1988 that ended the Iran-Iraq war . Any ""cup of poison"" you have to drink at the diplomatic table is almost certainly a ""cup of poison" you would otherwise eventually have had to
 A persistent theme in Stanton's book is the need to have realistic assessments of the interests and capabilities of one’s adversaries and interlocutors, he says . Stanton: "Realistic assessments of one's adversaries and capabilities are needed to be realistic"
 Franklin appealed to France’s evident self-interest in weakening the British Empire . Franklin did not appeal to the Rights of Man . He appealed to the kingdom of France to take America's side .
 In negotiating the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson and Monroe knew that Napoleon needed money for expected war in Europe . Napoleon suspected that a deal would be in France’s interest insofar as it could put Louisiana beyond the reach of British .
 France knew that Jefferson was under extreme pressure to resolve the problem of New Orleans . Jefferson knew that he was under pressure to solve the problem .
 France had ordered authorities in New Orleans to block American goods from passing down the Mississippi . The move brought half of America’s trade to a halt .
 Residents of western states called for war and threatened secession if Washington failed to act . Residents also threatened secession from the U.S.
 A Senate resolution demanding an immediate U.S. attack on New Orleans failed narrowly . The resolution failed narrowly to reach the Senate .
 There were influential people who were skeptical about the possibility of a diplomatic solution . Then as now, there were also doubts about the idea of a solution .
 Its acquisition is of immense importance to France, and has long been an object of her extreme solicitude . Its acquisition of the French capital has been a long-standing French interest .
 Hamilton was far from the only influential American who was pessimistic about the possibility of a diplomatic solution . Hamilton was not the only prominent American who said he was optimistic about the outcome .
 Jefferson pressed for a diplomatic solution because he believed a war with France for New Orleans would take seven years and cost over a hundred thousand lives . Jefferson believed the alternative was a war that would take 7 years and kill over 100,000 .
 President Kennedy was determined to create and maintain a realistic path for the Soviet Union to stand down from the confrontation without ""defeat"" or humiliation . President Kennedy struck the pose of standing firm, but in his private diplomacy with Premier Khrushchev and Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy was ready to agree to a U.S. commitment not to invade Cuba . In exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the United States agreed to remove missiles from Turkey .
 President Kennedy let the ship Bucharest pass through the quarantine line in 1962 . The ship was the first ship to reach the U.S. quarantine line .
 President Kennedy carefully avoided turning the outcome into a public humiliation for the Soviet Union . President Kennedy chose not to turn the result into a humiliating defeat for the U.S.
 During the 2008 presidential campaign, Barack Obama was often compared to President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .