 It was not until 1963 that the ostentatious nature of that defiance overrode United States intelligence doubts . The U.S. intelligence doubts finally overcame the doubts .
 The strength of the cognitive bias existing within the U.S. intelligence community was such that, when not dismissed outright, these Romanian outreach efforts continued to be assimilated into current interpretational paradigms . These biases were intentionally exploited – and reinforced – by targeted Soviet disinformation .
 The U.S. legation in Bucharest received intelligence that the entire Romanian approach was part of an elaborate Soviet plan to subvert the West . Bucharest acted as Moscow’s Trojan horse, with Bucharest acting as the Trojan horse .
 Thayer advised Washington not to respond to Bucharest’s outreach by concluding any economic arrangements with it . In consequence, Romanian actions were regularly discounted in U.S. intelligence assessments .
 Since the Hungarian revolt, the Romanian regime has in some ways gone farther than the other orthodox satellites in the general direction of post-Stalin reform . For example, a U.S. National Intelligence Estimate of February 1958 acknowledged that .
 Estimate: Romania’s relations with Yugoslavia have consistently been better than those of other orthodox satellites and it has renewed its pre-Hungary campaign to improve relations with the US . Despite this, the same Estimate then continued to assert that Romania is gradually attempting on its own initiative
 Crawford was one of the U.S. government’s top experts on the communist world at the time of his appointment to the United States Legation in Bucharest . Crawford was uniquely qualified to judge Romanian developments within the Bloc-wide context . Crawford noted that the greatest obstacles
 It’s awfully easy to recall the situation in a country as it was when you were there, Crawford said . As Crawford explained, "Things usually move very slowly, and are unlikely to change much"
 As of October 1962, Soviet crews and equipment were still responsible for transporting Romanian leaders during international excursions . This created a serious problem when Soviet authorities requested approval on 21 October 1962 for the party to overfly Chinese territory from India in order to briefly visit Moscow .
 Gheorghiu-Dej pretended to continue to believe earlier Soviet negations and characterizing such international media allegations of missile deployments in Cuba as completely crazy .
 Khrushchev admitted in further attempts to excuse his failure to notify Bucharest that he had told Ulbricht, Gomułka, Novotny and Husak beforehand . Along with the conviction with which the Romanian delegation left Moscow on 24 October 1962, Bucharest had two
 Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe Mauer explained to Romanian party activists that the Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba without Romania’s knowledge . The Soviet command of the Warsaw Pact had ordered the Romanian Armed Forces “placed in a state of alert”
 U.S. ambassador to Romania: "We were not taken into the confidence of the Russians" Ambassador Crawford: "They had no inkling of their plans to install missiles in Cuba" Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej: "A contest between two big
 The Bucharest was allowed to pass through the quarantine line . It was followed by the Völker Freundschaft, carrying East German students and Czechoslovak technicians .
 Romania was in fact the only Soviet ally with a blue water navy that had not been informed of missile deployments before they became public . The Bucharest did indeed come close to becoming the first test of the blockade .
 The obligatory consultations stipulated in the Warsaw Pact had proven themselves insufficient . Clearly, the obligatory consultations had proved themselves insufficient. Clearly, it was not enough .
 Romania was responsible for blocking Mongolia’s admission into the alliance in July 1963 . Bucharest had been battling Soviet efforts to give the Pact a supra-state character or expand it from a purely defensive alliance against military aggression in Europe into an instrument of Soviet power projection .
 Bucharest advocated a “two-key arrangement” of the sort that NATO employed, whereby U.S. nuclear weapons deployed on the territory of another NATO member could not be fired without their approval . Bucharest said the new arrangement would be part of a ‘two-
 First announced by Prime Minister Maurer in the journal of the socialist community in November 1963 . It was reaffirmed in what has become known as Romania’s ‘declaration of independence” in April 1964 .
 Abnormal phenomena began appearing in Romania even from the end of 1962 . As Podgorny underscored in their 11 July 1964 session: Abnormal phenomenon occurred in Romania even in 1962 . Abnormalities began appearing from the beginning of 1962.
 Romania did not approve of the Soviet missile deployments; noted that Romania would only participate in defense operations, and that it would carefully consider the nature of the call for assistance by fellow alliance members before sending its troops outside of Romania .
 Given resistance elsewhere in the State Department and especially in the U.S. intelligence community, this stance was not universally shared nor uncontroversial . Given resistance, the stance was neither universally .
 Preoteasa was in Moscow’s bad graces for promising Red Cross access to former Hungarian leader Imre Nagy while he was being held under Soviet guard in Romania after the 1956 revolt .
 The conference brought together members of Romania’s UN delegation at the time of the crisis . Members of the entourage that accompanied Gheorghiu-Dej to Indonesia, Burma, India and then to Moscow .
 For an inside description of some of these efforts see Paul Niculescu-Mizil, România şi Războiul Americano-vietnamez , Bucharest, Bucharest .
 Romania’s objections were circulated beforehand and the Romanian delegation also raised its pointed questions during the discussion . In contrast, the Romanian government circulated its objections beforehand .
 CIA presumed from 1963 until 1990 that Romania would participate in a Soviet offensive against the West . CIA or community-wide intelligence analyses, which assumed from 1963 to 1990, were inconclusive . It certainly made no impact on CIA .
 Through an award winning Digital Archive, the Project allows scholars, journalists, students, and the interested public to reassess the Cold War and its many contemporary legacies . The Project's award-winning Digital Archive allows scholars and journalists to . reassess Cold War .
 No. Not Only Nixon Could Go to China, Nixon could go to China . One Woodrow Wilson Plaza Plaza1300 Pennsylvania Ave.