 American U-2 RECON spy plane returns with intelligence photos catching Khrushchev red-handed . U.S. spy plane returned with intelligence photo of Soviet Union's secret nuclear missile installation in Cuba .
 Khrushchev categorically denied it until Adlai Stevenson, an American statesman, showed the photos to the U.N. Stevenson . The photos were shown to the United Nations .
 This angered Khrushchev to the point that he took his shoe off and pounded on the table in an effort to gain attention . The incident happened in the early 1960s .
 He also imposed a naval blockade on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of offensive military weapons from arriving there . The Cuban government imposed the blockade in 1953 .
 The stand-off lasted for a day or two after the United States blockade against Cuba . The U.S. embargo against Cuba lasted for several days .
 He recalls lots of flying time in the C-47 Gooney Bird taking Army VIP's down to Key West, Florida . He recalls flying time with Army VIPs in the plane .
 Nike missiles were installed in preparation to shoot down any Russian missiles should they appear over the horizon . Nike missiles have been installed in place of Russian missiles . Nike missile systems were installed to protect against any Russian missile threats .
 Most of his work that he did while stationed there is still classified . Most of the work he did during his time there still is classified .
 Twins Kevin and Ken disappeared overnight overnight . Twins were Navy brats living across the street from Army brats . Twins lived in the Navy Navy .
 I asked at the bus stop that morning and was told their family were given eight hours notice to bug out . The family were told they were given 8 hours notice by the police to bug-out .
 U-2 almost shot down over Russia when it strays into Soviet airspace . Soviets agree to move missiles out of Cuba if the U.S. makes a public statement not to invade Cuba . U.N. made public statement that U.K. made not to attack Cuba .
 Kennedy's primary advantage over the Soviet Union was that he was in possession of a series of reports from a spy . One of Kennedy's main advantages over the Soviets were that he had a spy named Col. Col. Peter Col. John Sutter .
 Oleg Penkovskiy, who had 'defected' to the CIA, remained in Moscow to provide information . He had been working for the CIA in Russia for more than a decade .
 Penkovskiy's reports had, for several months, indicated unequivocally that the Soviets were, in fact, nowhere near as advanced in their missile technology and deployment as American analysts and policy makers thought them to be .
 He had been for some time bolstering the Soviet position through brash assertions of nonexistent forces . This alone would not necessarily have doomed him .
 The exposure of the Soviet Union's weak hand, as evidenced in its withdrawal from no more than an achievement of parity, nailed some of the final brads into Nikita's political coffin . Nikita was forced to step down from his post in order to avoid further embarrassment .
 Kennedy was right to oppose the Soviet maneuver . Still, it was right and proper for Kennedy to oppose Soviet maneuver.
 To fail to do so would have indicated either that the U.S. hadn't the political will to back its claims, and/or that the Monroe Doctrine had no weight . "To fail to back your claims, the United States would have had to back it claims," he says
 The Soviets had also installed SAM sites and MiG fighter jets to protect the missiles . A blockade of the island to prevent more weapons from coming in . A ground mop-up operation to ensure they had all been destroyed .
 Puts the least amount of lives at risk, could be undertaken with relative speed . Relies on convincing the Soviets to pull out missiles and might lead to extending the crisis even longer . Considered a diplomatic solution might be seen as a sign of weakness .
 President Kennedy could not just ignore the missiles in Cuba, not only were they a danger to the people of the United States, but the mere existence of the crisis was also a threat to Berlin .
 The city of Berlin lay inside Soviet-controlled territory and construction of the Berlin wall had begun one year earlier, splitting the city in half . The wall had been built in Soviet-held territory .
 The plight of the people of Berlin was always close to the people in the Kennedy administration, especially since they could all recall the Berlin blockade that had taken place only 12 years earlier .
 Kennedy himself had also written a book in 1940 entitled Why England Slept about the failure of appeasement the need for military response against totalitarian regimes .
 Many of Kennedy’s advisors felt that the movements in Cuba were just a precursor or a feint for a larger operation . Kennedy's advisors believed that the movement in Cuba was a precursor .
 Khrushchev would see this as an opening to attack Berlin if the U.S. ignored the missiles or showed any weakness, he says . If the Americans ignored the missile or showed weakness, it would be a sign of weakness . Khrushvic would see the Americans ignore the missiles
 If the Americans staged an assault on Cuba that destroyed Russian missiles and killed Russian missile crews, Khrushchev could use that as a pretense to attack Berlin . If the U.S. staged an attack on Cuba, then the Americans could attack Berlin, writes Peter Bergen .
 McNamara: We have United States troops there. That's what it would seem to me. That’s what it seems to me .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk: You'd have to start at least with tactical nuclear weapons if he tried to attack Berlin. Guess you have to .
 It must be made clear the several different ways that the Crisis could have led to a major nuclear exchange . It must also be clear that the crisis could have been prevented by a nuclear war .
 Any sort of military attack on Berlin would have triggered an immediate nuclear response . Russia's missile teams in Cuba could also have a possible response to an attack .
 All ships attempting to enter Cuba were stopped and searched by the U.S. military . Choosing to call it a “quarantine”, all ships were stopped by the American military .
 Negotiations were opened with the Soviets with the implicit threat that if they did not proceed smoothly, air strikes would commence to take out the missiles . Air strikes were also threatened if negotiations did not progress smoothly .
 SAM site also shot down an American U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba, only adding to the tension . U.S. U.2 plane was shot down by SAM site .
 The Soviets demanded that the U.S. remove nuclear missile installations in Turkey in the 1950s . The Soviets initially demanded the United States remove the missile installations . The missile installations had been placed in Turkey .
 The Soviets agreed to dismantle missiles under the watch of U.N. weapons inspectors . They asked only that the United States agreed to never again invade Cuba .
 Unofficially, the United States had also agreed to pull their Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, but one of the stipulations of this decision was that it was never to be broadcast . The decision was also made by the U.S. government .
 The Jupiter missiles were dismantled in April 1963, under the guise of the U.S. upgrading their European arsenal . They were dismantled by the United States in the hope they would upgrade their arsenal .
 At the same time, an American Polaris missile submarine took up residence in the Mediterranean . The U.S. Polaris missile sub was also stationed in the region .
 When faced with real evidence of weapons of mass destruction, the U.S. President chose not a military solution that would have caused the deaths of thousands of people and mired the United States in a difficult occupation of another country . Instead, he ended the situation peacefully .
 In 1962 the world came to the brink of nuclear war, as the U.S. found out that the Soviet Union had emplaced nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 If launched, the missiles could have annihilated several major U.S. cities . The missiles were launched in 2007 .
 The Kennedy administration put Cuba under blockade, and contemplated invasion . Kennedy administration contemplated invasion of Cuba . Cuba was under blockade .
 The crisis was ended when the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on the condition that the United States pledge not to invade Cuba and remove their Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba on condition that they were removed from
 The purpose of this essay is to analyse the reasons for the Soviet Union sending missiles to Cuba . It is also to assess how successful Khrushchev was in attaining his goals . The aim of the essay is both to analyse and assess the reasons behind the move .
 Two major reasons for the Soviet action was to redress the imbalance in nuclear capability between the Soviet Union and the United States and to protect Cuba from American invasion . I shall argue that the two major reasons . for the . action was the two main reasons for . the . Soviet action . was
 I adopt the position that Khrushchev failed in meeting his first objective, but was successful in the second . I adopt a position that . Khrushvic failed to meet his first . objective, he said, but succeeded in the . second . He said: 'I adopt the .
 The missile crisis was also a success for the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union's position as the other superpower was acknowledged even though it was militarily inferior to the U.S.
 The U.S. learned that the Soviet Union's supposed superiority in nuclear weapons was a myth . The United States had recently learned that . The Soviet Union had never been able to achieve a nuclear superiority .
 The Soviet Union would have considerable difficulty reaching parity with the U.S. It would be difficult to reach parity with other nations .
 Positioning missiles in Cuba presented the Soviet Union just such an alternative . The U.S. placed missiles on Cuba in Cuba in the 1950s .
 Taubman points to Khrushchev's view on nuclear deterrence he thought the Soviet Union only needed a few nuclear weapons to deter the U.S. He says he thought a few weapons would deter the Americans . Taubmann: Khrushvic's view was that a few n
 The official Soviet reason for positioning missiles in Cuba was the protection of Cuba . The official reason for placing missiles was to protect the country .
 The United States had attempted to topple the Castro regime in the Bay of Pigs incident . The Soviet Union had every reason to believe that the U.S. would invade again. The U.N. had every chance to believe it would again .
 The United States conducted a large military exercise in the Caribbean in the autumn of 1962 . Congressmen called for an invasion of the Caribbean .
 Cuba was the only socialist country in the Western Hemisphere . The survival of Cuba was important for Soviet prestige . Cuba was one of only socialist countries in the world .
 A successful defence of Cuba could project a powerful image of the Soviet Union to other countries in Latin America . The United States could no longer enforce the Monroe Doctrine, perhaps suggesting that the U.S. no longer .
 The Soviet Union needed other countries to think it and communism were making advances . A successful communist revolution in America's backyard could surely be used to back this up .
 Allison criticizes this explanation by arguing that if the Soviet Union feared an invasion of Cuba, surely conventional military forces would have been at least as good a deterrent as nuclear weapons . Allison argues that such a possibility would be similar to the presence of American troops in Berlin . Allison:
 The American capability to launch nuclear attacks was at least as big a deterrent on the Soviet Union as American troops in Europe . The Soviet capability to annihilate American cities would have been a powerful deterrent against an American invasion of Cuba . The U.S. capability to attack Cuba was a powerful
 Even if Soviet troops in Cuba might discourage the U.S. from invading, nuclear missiles in Cuba offered a much stronger guarantee of this . Nuclear missiles would have made it easier for the United States to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev's willingness to take the huge risks involved in sending missiles to Cuba . These factors contributed to the risk of sending missiles into Cuba, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev was trying to redress the strategic imbalance between the Soviet Union and the United States . The Cuban missile crisis was a failure for him, writes Peter Bergen .
 His relations with the military were already strained, and these were exacerbated by the events in Cuba . The president's relationship with the country's military was already strained .
 If one accepts the defence of Cuba as a reason for the Soviet Union sending missiles to the country, then it was successful in this respect . The Soviet Union sent missiles to Cuba in order to defend the country .
 Khrushchev did not send the missiles to Cuba only to bring them back a few weeks later . The Soviet Union achieved its goal but not in the way it had envisioned . Gaddis points out that the Soviet Union did not return the missiles back .
 In a curious respect the missile crisis can be seen as successful from the Soviet perspective in a way the Soviet Union did not intend . The missile crisis was seen as a success in a strange way, the author says .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union sought detente . Having come to the brink of nuclear war and mutual destruction, both the United States and the . Soviet Union seek detente. The United States is now the only two nations in the world to have nuclear weapons .
 The ""hot line"" set up between the White House and the Kremlin can be seen as a mutual acceptance of both countries' special status .
 The Soviet Union achieved diplomatic and political parity with the United States, even though it clearly lacked the military capability to back this up . The U.S. achieved diplomatic parity with Russia, but lacked the ability to back it up .
 Khrushchev had achieved his goal regarding the strategic imbalance . It should be pointed out that this did not mean that Khrushche had achieved . It was not the case for Khrushchchev to achieve his goal .
 His objective was to change the military situation to enhance the Soviet Union's ability to launch nuclear attacks against the U.S. He says he wanted to increase the possibility of attacking the United States with nukes .
 The U.S. retained a much greater capacity to attack the Soviet Union than vice versa . What happened was that the diplomatic advantage was gained, but the United States retained a greater capacity .
 Khrushchev's decision to send missiles to Cuba was made in the context of the Cold War, but it ended up changing this context, not enhancing the Soviet Union's position in the old conflict . The Soviet Union ended up losing its position in Cuba .
 The conventional perception of the Cuban missile crisis as a total failure for the Soviet Union and a total success for the U.S. is incorrect, says John Sutter .
 The successes the Soviet Union did have came about in ways that were not anticipated . The Soviet Union was not expected to be successful in the long run .
 In a broad strategic sense, the outcome of the crisis was a success for the Soviet Union, says historian Andre Treisman . The crisis was 'a success' for the USSR, he says .
 America in the Age of Soviet Power, 1945-1991 Gaddis, John Lewis; 1990. Lewis. Lewis . Lewis: "America in the age of Soviet power, 1945 to 1991" Lewis: 'I am a man of honor'
 It is the climax of the period in human history when the threat of the complete annihilation of humanity was an everyday reality . It gains this status by being the climax to the period when humanity was threatened by the threat to humanity .
 The intrinstic importance and profundity of this event seems belied by descriptions of the banal bureaucratic and tactical happenings which constituted it. It was not the first time the U.S. military has been involved in a major war in the Middle East .
 Such processes could, if they'd gone wrong, have obliterated mankind . This is until you realize that its profundity lies entirely in the fact such a thing could have gone wrong .
 Khrushchev made the decision to send medium-range ballistic missiles to Cuba in May 1962 . The decision was made by Nikita Khrushchchev, a Soviet leader .
 It's not possible to entirely know his objectives, but we make pretty accurate guesses . "It's not impossible to say what his objectives are," he says .
 The USSR still couldn't carry out a debilitating first strike, and its strike capacity wasn't massively increased by the move . The USSR's strike capacity was still not massively increased, and the move was not a success .
 If America could station missiles in Turkey, the Soviet logic went, then the USSR had a right to station them in Cuba . The U.S. could station missile bases in Turkey and Cuba, so the logic went .
 This option is even more attractive because it would help Cuba defend itself . This option would help the Cuban government defend itself, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Castro regime held a special place in the heart of many Bolsheviks . The Castro regime was held in the hearts of many of the Bolsheviks.
 It was the only country on the planet to have gone Communist and enter the Soviet bloc without the imposition of the Red Army .
 The Cuban regime was a sure signal to the Soviets that nowhere in the world was safe for capitalism any longer . Only 90 miles from the coast of Florida, the Cuban regime sent a signal to them . The U.S. was only 90 miles away from Florida .
 They were especially keen that the flower of the revolution in Cuba not be squashed by the Americans, who had attempted to overthrow the Castro regime at the Bay of Pigs .
 The Soviet military build-up in Cuba was not limited to strategic weapons . It was not only that it included strategic weapons, it also included military equipment .
 The U.S. knew something was afoot before the discovery of the MRBM launch sites . Clearly this couldn't proceed unnoticed, and even before the 15 October discovery, the United States knew something is afoot .
 Republicans in Congress denounced Kennedy's acquiesence in the Soviet military build-up . JFK continued to deny the magnitude of the deployment .
 Its full scale would not be known until the opening of Soviet archives in the 1980s . Indeed, the full scale of the operation would not have been known until opening of archives .
 This is lucky, because had the scale been known then the crisis would undoubtedly have been more serious . The withdrawal of tactical nukes, for example, would be almost impossible to verify . The crisis is lucky because it is unlikely to be more serious, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Soviet infiltration operation had been carried out with honed skill, as befitted a military that had now spent over fifteen years creeping where it was not wanted . The operation was carried out by a military which has spent 15 years creeping around the world .
 It was nigh on impossible to hide the missile bases from U-2 RECON planes . However, it was impossible for the U.2 to hide them from U.3 aircraft .
 Colonel Oleg Penkovsky leaked pictures of MRBM sites in Cold War days before they were identified . A positive identification was made only hours after the photographs were taken .
 The bases were not yet operational, giving crucial time to act . They also allowed the U.S. to see that the bases had not yet been operational .
 This was the first miracle of the crisis, meaning that rather than leaping straight to offensive action the administration sat down and considered its options . The administration is considering its options, rather than rushing straight to attack the situation .
 The strategy eventually decided upon was a blockade of Cuba, to which the Soviets responded with nothing more than a political offensive by denouncing it in their propaganda .
 As the blockade had the approval of the Organization of American States, Soviet denunciation proved ineffective . The blockade was approved by the OAS .
 Many Soviet ships immediately turned back or changed course . This blockade went into effect on 22 October .
 The Russians were not keen on the thought of the Americans capturing a ship with their latest military equipment onboard . They were not willing to escalate the incident by commencing military action especially when the MRBM bases were not operational .
 He had taken this risk partly to appease those in his inner circle who believed he was too soft on the West . He took the risk partly because he had taken a risk to appease some in his circle .
 This means if he was going to back down he'd need an excuse, or he risked being overthrown by hard-liners . This meant if he went to backdown he'd have to be forced to do it, or face a backlash .
 Some members of the Soviet Presidium had fallen for their propaganda in believing the USA was planning a decisive and cataclysmic confrontation with the Communist world and they wished to steal a march by striking first .
 Khrushchev, by a process largely closed to us, managed to overrule those who were willing to risk local or general war over Cuba . He managed to do so by overruling those who wanted to risk a war, he says .
 He was helped by faulty intelligence he received suggesting the U.S. was planning to invade Cuba on the night of 26 October .
 This threw the reality of the situation into sharp focus for the Soviet side, as an invasion of Cuba was bound to result in general war . The Cuban invasion was bound for general war with the Soviet Union .
 At this point he ordered a stand down and started pushing hard for a diplomtaic solution . At the end of the interview, he said: "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with you"
 It seems that the local commander who ordered the shooting down of the U-2 RECON on 27 October had sour grapes . Luckily this didn't lead to any further escalation .
 Khrushchev's demands were telling first, a pledge by the U.S. not to invade Cuba and a withdrawal of nuclear missiles from Turkey . The withdrawal of nukes from Turkey was also a key demand for the United States .
 In fact, the Soviets had gained a small quid pro quo, but that this outcome was seen as unfavourable was shown by Khrushchev's overthrow shortly afterward . The Soviets were seen as gaining a small but not a large amount of power .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev held the fate of the world in their hands, but anyone who has seen Dr. Dr. Kennedy has never seen him in his life .
 The crisis put power in the hands of multiple men, and fate herself, to bring about nuclear war . The crisis was the result of a nuclear war in the U.S.
 Before the crisis, the CIA was running a program called Operation Mongoose designed to destabilize the Cuban regime by aiding exiles with an axe to grind . The CIA was in charge of the program .
 On 7 October one group of exiles decided, entirely on its own authority, to blow up a factory . The group blew up the factory in an entirely on their own authority .
 Luck played a decisive role in this encounter, which made the introduction of those red telephones afterward even more comforting .
 Both powers had come so close to the nightmare of nuclear holocaust that they blinked, woke up as if from sleepwalking, and pondered how they'd got in such a state . Both powers blinked, blinked, and woke up like they'd been sleepwalking .
 We wouldn't be here today if this defining moment in the history of the world had gone even slightly wrong, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .