 The Cuban missile crisis is one of the most intensively studied events of all time . The Cuban crisis is now one of world's most studied events .
 If our understanding of it stood in strict proportion to the shelf space devoted to it, then surely by this point there should be little or nothing left to know about it .
 Every year it is possible to say more about what actually happened in October 1962, and why . Every year, every year, we can learn more about the events in 1962 .
 Every question scholars answer, two or three arise or must be reopened . But for every question scholar answers, there are more questions to be asked .
 The greatest obstacle facing students of the missile crisis has been imbalance, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 For more than 25 years, virtually all of the sources available to scholars were American . American sources have been available for 25 years .
 Only with Mikhail Gorbachev and glasnost' was it even possible to have an interesting conversation with knowledgeable Soviets about the crisis . Only very recently have Cubans begun to speak .
 Soviet archives have been open for a few years now, sporadically and incompletely, but Cuban archives, such as they are this we do not even know remain closed . Cuban archives are closed.
 Most scholars of the crisis are in any case themselves Americans . They are predisposed to look at it primarily through the lens of American politics and diplomacy .
 Most of the questions we have asked and attempted to answer concern the U.S. side of the crisis . It is hardly surprising that most of the . questions we . have been asked and answered are about the American side of that .
 Scholars of the crisis have tended to ask a great deal about the decisions and actions of national leaders (John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro, in that order) but very little about the activities of the hundreds of thousands of soldiers and bureaucrats .
 We have paid very close attention to the high politics of the missile crisis, but relatively little to its seemingly mundane operational dimensions . We've paid little attention to high politics, but little to the operational dimensions of the crisis, writes Peter Bergen .
 This imbalance reflects both the availability of sources and our natural interests . It reflects the availability and availability of resources, rather than the natural interests of the country .
 The works that first captured our attention were memoirs, court histories, or journalistic overviews . We look back at the works that captured us attention in the first place .
 The first significant body of documents declassified in the 1980s focused on White House decision-making .
 Relatively few have sought out information on the important minutiae of the crisis, and when they surface, they have had difficulty competing with high politics for our attention . Few have sought to find out the important details of this week's crisis, but they have been difficult to compete with
 There is a great imbalance between the importance of intelligence in the missile crisis and the attention scholars have paid to it . For similar reasons, there is also an imbalance between intelligence and its importance in missile crisis .
 Virtually every interesting decision or action that has captured our attention has turned upon, or related, intelligence and intelligence assessment . Virtually all interesting decisions or actions have turned upon or related to intelligence and assessment .
 The story of the Cuban missile crisis is a story about intelligence its collection, analysis, use, non-use, or abuse . In that sense, the story is about intelligence collection and analysis, analysis and use .
 Goodquality information about intelligence has emerged slowly, but it's been slow to emerge . "Good quality information has emerged from the U.S. intelligence community," says the CIA .
 A comprehensive story of intelligence assessment in the Cuban missile crisis has never properly been told . A comprehensive intelligence assessment has never been properly told .
 There is a small body of literature on intelligence in the missile crisis, some of which is both fascinating and important . Some of the literature is important and fascinating .
 We now have enough of a critical mass of evidence and testimony to permit a first telling of the 'big view' intelligence story .
 While it is possible to document the American intelligence story extensively, the Soviet story can be documented only to a much lesser extent . The Cuban story while it can be told cannot yet be documented at all . For example, the American story can't be documented extensively, and the Cuban story cannot
 Within the available body of American and Soviet documents, there are notable gaps . The gaps in the available documents are notable .
 Neither the U.S. nor Russia has declassified details of signals intelligence in 1962 . Information on human intelligence that would compromise certain by-now-surely-defunct sources and methods .
 We believe that it is possible to tell an enlightening and surprising story about intelligence in the missile crisis that must, in certain respects, make us once again rethink the event . Nevertheless, working within the limitations of the available materials, we believe that we are able to tell a surprising story
 The Cuban missile crisis remains the most thoroughly documented historical encounter of all time . While an irreducible element of mystery enshrouds the event, it is still the most thorough documented history .
 It presents us with a unique opportunity to reflect in an empirically rich way upon the collection, analysis, and use of intelligence from a comparative and longitudinal perspective .
 It is possible to identify a large number of crucial moments, issues, processes, tendencies, and patterns in the processing and exploitation of intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis, and to reflect upon them .
 The intelligence story of the Cuban missile crisis is the story of literally hundreds of important individual judgments, and of almost constant interaction between intelligence professionals and national leaders in all three countries, over a period of time .
 We believe some very interesting insights emerge from a longitudinal and comparative examination of the activities and judgments of American, Soviet, and Cuban intelligence .
 For 25 years, scholars working with open sources could see but a glimmer of the workings of intelligence in the missile crisis .
 Memoirs and histories referred to crucial actions, reports or judgments of (almost exclusively American) intelligence at various stages of the confrontation . Details remained classified, but the details remained classified .
 Documents on American intelligence began to appear in quantity in the mid-1980s, partly as a result of routine declassification and requests under Freedom of Information Act .
 It was the first opportunity for scholars and practitioners to discuss the performance of American intelligence against the backdrop of a significant documentary record .
 Documents on missile crisis began to appear in the late 1980s . Soviet documents on the missile crisis first appeared in the 1980s and '90s .
 Western scholars have had only patchy and sporadic access to Russia since the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Only very recently have scholars had access to KGB documents . They have mined some archives relatively well, and merely scratched the surface of others .
 Scholars are rarely deterred by limits on information, however, and for many years there has been active discussion of certain issues concerning the performance of the U.S. intelligence community .
 The issue most widely debated is the failure of American intelligence to predict that the Soviet Union would attempt to deploy strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba in 1962 . U.S. intelligence failed to predict the Soviets would try to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Had American intelligence predicted the Soviet move, the Kennedy administration would have attempted to forestall it more energetically . Kennedy administration certainly would have sought stronger deterrent threats, or active diplomacy .
 Many are inclined to see this as a failure of the first magnitude . Hence many are inclined . to see it as the first . magnitude of the failure .
 U.S. intelligence failed to estimate that Soviet Union would try to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba . Policy makers failed to anticipate Soviet Union's intent to attack Cuba, report says .
 The crisis might have been avoided had U.S. intelligence anticipated the deployment . But it would be a mistake to conclude that a crisis would have been averted .
 Much would have depended upon how the Kennedy administration played its hand, and when . The Kennedy administration would have played a key role in the decision .
 Khrushchev's motives for the deployment now appear to have been primarily defensive, reflecting deep anxiety about Soviet strategic nuclear inferiority and the vulnerability of Cuba to an American invasion . The deployment now appears to be primarily defensive .
 Khrushchev appears to have been deeply committed to his gambit, and insensitive to warnings . The former Soviet leader appears to be deeply devoted to his strategy .
 Kennedy could have forestalled the Soviet deployment only by making clear his unwillingness to tolerate it very early in the game . Kennedy's hunch is that he made clear he was not willing to tolerate Soviet deployment early in 1962 .
 Kennedy was evidently unaware of Khrushchev's fears, and since he was evidently deeply suspicious of Kennedy, it is difficult to imagine what carrots Kennedy might have brandished alongside his impressive arsenal of sticks .
 Kennedy did not need a formal estimate from the Central Intelligence Agency that the Soviet Union would attempt a strategic deployment to Cuba in order to take timely steps to prevent it . In any case, Kennedy did .
 He could have attempted to send clearer and stronger warnings on the mere suspicion of the possibility of the possible .
 "It would be a mistake to place much importance upon this particular failure," he said . "I would not be surprised to see how much of this has happened," he added .
 Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone did anticipate a Soviet nuclear deployment . What makes this failure titillating is that he did not anticipate the Soviet deployment .
 McCone consistently voiced his belief in August 1962 that the Soviet Union was in the process of deploying strategic nuclear missiles to Cuba . McCone: "I believe in the intelligence community and at the White House"
 McCone brought to his position no professional intelligence experience . McCone has no professional experience with the CIA .
 His credentials as an anti-communist were impeccable, but he could claim no authority on the Soviet Union, or on Soviet foreign and military policy . He could not claim authority on Soviet Union or foreign policy, he said .
 The fact that a rank amateur got it right while the professionals got it wrong was a storyline too intriguing to resist . It was one that could be pursued without much in the way of sensitive information .
 Central Intelligence Agency noted in August 1962 that the Soviet Union was deploying its most advanced surface-to-air missile system, the SA-2, around the perimeter of the island, rather than simply around airfields .
 McCone concluded from these two facts that the Soviets wished to hide something of extreme importance from the United States . McCone decided that this must mean that they were deploying strategic nuclear missiles .
 There were many reasons why the Soviets would go to great lengths to disguise their activities in Cuban ports for example, so as not to alarm the United States, or even the Cuban people, about their military buildup .
 Third, it was natural for the Soviets to deploy SAMs around the perimeter of Cuba . Cuba's geography did not offer any meaningful opportunities for defense in depth . The U.S. might do so virtually anywhere along Cuba's vast coastline .
 Fourth, the Soviets had also deployed SA-2 missiles to Egypt, Syria, and Indonesia, and in none of those cases had they also deployed strategic nuclear weapons . None of the cases had seen a strategic nuclear weapon deployment .
 The United States intelligence community expected that the Soviet Union would deploy SA-2 missiles to Cuba, precisely because it had done so elsewhere . The U.S. intelligence community expects that the Soviets would deploy the missiles .
 If the purpose of the SAM deployment had been to prevent American U-2s from observing the construction of strategic missile sites, the Soviets should have attempted to shoot them down, he says . He says the Soviets wandered over Cuba with impunity in September and October 1962 .
 McCone's instincts were good, but his reasons were bad . McCone may provide a good example of how a DCI should 6 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS .
 American intelligence discovered the deployment in time to give President Kennedy and his advisors an opportunity to seize the diplomatic initiative . But they did so quite late in the game .
 McNamara decided that it would be wiser to have military rather than civilian pilots flying over Cuba, in case the Soviets shot one down . McNamara: "It would be better to have a military pilot over Cuba"
 The only real question is whether Rusk and Bundy prevented earlier detection . Rusk, Bundy and Bundy's actions prevent earlier detection, Bundy says .
 This, too, is for the most part a red herring less interesting to students of intelligence than to followers of sordid Camelot sub-plots . The most interesting subplot is that the main character is in the middle of the plot .
 The Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance did seek permission to fly missions with extended routes directly over Cuba . Rusk and Bundy successfully lobbied instead for oblique photography of Cuba from international air space .
 Rusk and Bundy feared that if the Soviets downed a U-2 over Cuba, the U.S. would face international pressure to respect Cuban sovereignty and discontinue high-altitude surveillance altogether . Rusk feared international pressure would be on Cuba .
 SA-2 missiles were capable of downing U-2s, because one had done so just the previous month . U.2s were downed by a U.K. missile earlier this year . The U.S. knew well that SA- 2 missiles could be capable of
 There was nothing improper in, and nothing irrational about, their insistence on caution . There is nothing irrational in, or anything improper, about the caution of caution, they say .
 In principle, there can be a trade-off between caution in intelligence collection and speed of discovery . Just as plausibly, aggressive collection efforts may impede discovery, as would have been the case in 1962 had Soviet air defenses in Cuba shot down American U-2s .
 Rusk and Bundy insisted upon a modification of flight plans, the U.S. would have discovered the missiles earlier . But it's not clear that had Rusk not insisted upon the modification, the missiles would have been discovered earlier .
 Bad weather delayed for four days the flight that discovered the missiles, and the first site identified as a medium-range ballistic missile base was in a low state of readiness .
 Had a U-2 photographed the area even just a week earlier, crucial items necessary for a positive identification might not yet have been present . Had a photo of the area taken a week ago, it might not have been possible to identify the victims .
 American intelligence did positively identify Soviet missiles prior to their becoming operational, which permitted the Kennedy administration to seize the initiative in attempting to remove them .
 A full airing of this question requires looking at a much broader range of issues than the scheduling and flight plans of photoreconnaissance missions, as our contributors indicate in the pages that follow .
 The historiography of intelligence assessment in the Cuban missile crisis raises important questions about how intelligence can serve policy, but it answers them unsatisfactorily . The historian of intelligence assessments in the missile crisis is unsatisfactory .
 "It pays too much attention to personalities, bureaucratic rivalries, and enthralling storylines," it pays too little attention to personality and rivalries .
 The question that dominates the limited historiography of intelligence assessment in the Cuban missile crisis is what should policy makers be able to expect from their intelligence analysts?
 Intelligence cannot serve policy if policy makers do not understand it and treat it with respect and circumspection . Policy makers must treat intelligence with respect, respect, circumspection, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 National leaders are rarely passive recipients of information and analysis . National leaders don't need to be passive recipients, they should be leaders themselves .
 In order to get what they want and need from their intelligence communities, they must also be willing to direct inquiry, to ask questions, to listen carefully to the answers . Intelligence communities must also ask for clarification on technical matters, to challenge, to prod and to reward both good news and
 They must also have a sense of the possibilities and limits of intelligence, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 These possibilities and limits are a function of the technical and organizational capacity on the one hand, and of the human capacity to observe, organize, and process information . The possibilities and limitations are a result of a person's ability to observe and organize information, the author says .
 On these issues, the historiography of intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis has largely been silent . On the issue, the historian of intelligence on the missile crisis is silent .
 American, Soviet, and Cuban intelligence are involved in the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. and Soviet intelligence were involved in both sides of the debate . The Soviet-Cuban conflict is the result of a CIA operation in Cuba .
 We asked the authors of each of these essays to sketch the organization of the relevant intelligence community . The authors also discussed the sources and methods of their intelligence gathering .
 We invited them to raise and discuss any issues that they considered to be of particular interest . Beyond this, we invited people to discuss any of their own issues with us .
 We intended the three empirical essays, supplemented to some extent by additional primary and secondary materials, to provide the grist for two additional analytical essays . One on the politics and organization, and one on the psychology, of intelligence assessment.
 The purpose of these essays would be to bring relevant bodies of organizational and psychological research to bear on the empirical essays, in order to help explain the particular judgments and inferences of analysts and policy makers .
 Five essays on the history of the Cuban missile crisis and the study of intelligence . Five of the essays discuss the implications of these five essays for the history and for intelligence .
 We were fortunate early in the process to enlist Raymond Garthoff to prepare the essay on American intelligence .
 Garthoff is one of the world's foremost scholars of Soviet military and foreign policy, and of US-Soviet relations . He is also a leading scholar of US and Soviet relations in the world .
 Currently a senior researcher at the Brookings Institution in Washington DC, Garthoff is the author of several important books and articles on the Cuban missile crisis .
 Two scholars were the first to gain access to KGB and GRU documents on the crisis . Their book, 'One Hell of a Gamble', is the first and only monograph to make extensive use of them .
 We had difficulty enlisting a suitable author for an essay on Cuban intelligence . We also had difficulty finding a suitable writer to write about the country's intelligence .
 We arranged for a senior official at the Ministry of the Interior to prepare the essay, in collaboration with a noted Cubanologist, to translate . We had arranged for an American Cubanologist to translate and provide background and context from the relevant literature .
 Our contributor fell out of favor with his government, and temporarily disappeared from view . In 1995, however, he was back in touch with the U.S. government .
 Cuba shot down an unarmed American aircraft piloted by the exile group Brothers to the Rescue over the Strait of Florida . While we were attempting to reestablish contact, the aircraft was shot down .
 Havana apparently decreed that no Cuban scholar or official should collaborate with us further . As US-Cuban relations further deteriorated, Havana appears to have decreed no one should collaborate .
 Amuchastegui notes that the lack of documentation on Cuban intelligence represents a constraint upon his ability to corroborate his recollections and the testimony of those who helped him prepare his essay behind the scenes .
 We were equally fortunate to enlist the aid of two younger scholars working at the cutting edge of their respective disciplines to prepare the two analytical essays . The two essays were written by two young scholars working in their respective fields .
 James Wirtz is an Associate Professor in the Department of National Security Affairs at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California . He is an authority on the organization and politics of intelligence .
 Reagan's dramatic shift in Soviet policy forcefully demonstrates the power of cognitive and motivational explanations of policy change vis-a-vis more common structural, domestic political, and bureaucratic explanations .
 The empirical essays, which came in first, all made startling claims and advanced provocative, sometimes highly counterintuitive theses . They were made by empirical essays from the empirical essays .
 On some points these essays corroborated each other, and on others they appeared flatly to contradict each other . On some of these points, the essays corroborate each other. On others, they appear flatly contradicted each other to the point .
 Authors of 10 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS and the Cuban Missile Crisis provided abundant material for the authors of 10 . The authors managed to place it in broader theoretical perspectives .
 We circulated drafts among the authors, immediately precipitating extensive, sometimes animated correspondence between them, as they sought to clarify or challenge each other's specific claims and interpretations .
 With each iteration, the essays became more tightly integrated, and the points of similarity and of difference came into ever-sharper focus . With each essay, the essayists' similarities and differences became greater and greater .
 It was apparent to us that, collectively, these essays formed the basis of a deeper and more extended conversation . The essays form the basis for a deeper conversation, we asked .
 We began that wider conversation at the 1997 annual meeting of the International Studies Association in Toronto . We continued it at a symposium at the Wilson Center for Scholars in Washington DC, attended by professionals .
 The authors test-flew more refined versions of their arguments with each other and with the other participants . In a weekend of freewheeling discussion, the authors discuss their arguments .
 What you see below are the final versions of some of the most important issues that arose at the Washington meeting . They are polished to address the more important themes and concerns that arose .
 We expect the conversation to continue, and we expect the arguments and analyses to evolve, especially as more and more documentation becomes available against which to check .
 We will resist the temptation here to speak about what we believe to be some of the more interesting and important implications of these essays . A little more than a little more of the essays will be discussed in the next edition of this week's edition .
 Three empirical and two analytical essays foreshadow some of the important claims, disagreements, and remaining mysteries . However, we would like to foreshadow the three empirical and three analytical essays just a little .
 Raymond Garthoff examines the structure, processes, activities, and estimates of the American intelligence community in great detail . In his essay, he reviews the existing literature and documentation .
 Garthoff catalogues strengths and weaknesses of the American intelligence effort . He argues that, on balance, U.S. intelligence served national leaders well in the world .
 Garthoff argued that the Soviet Union would not attempt to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba, while incorrect, were nonetheless defensible . Garthoffs: American analysts were insufficiently sensitive to Khrushchev's defensive motivations for attempting to deploy secret nuclear weapons .
 The discovery of the strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba prior to their becoming operational was, in Garthoff's opinion, an important intelligence success . It enabled policy makers to take timely preventive measures, he says .
 American analysts underestimated the size or nature of the Soviet deployment at the time . The Soviets were in the process of deploying not merely strategic nuclear missiles and their supporting equipment, but a full battlecapable combined arms group of forces capable of mounting a conventional defense of the island .
 Garthoff argues that this failure was inconsequential to the management of the crisis . Garthoffs argues that the failure was not a failure but a failure to manage the situation .
 Ignorance may not always be bliss but in this case, Garthoff argues, it was beneficial politically . Garthoffs: "Ignorance is not always bliss, but it is beneficial politically"
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali paint a picture of the KGB that sends chills up and down the spine . In their essay on Soviet intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis, they say .
 According to Fursenko and Naftali, the KGB was largely cut out of the decision making process leading to Soviet deployment . The KGB was unable to obtain any good-quality information that would have been relevant to Soviet leaders as they attempted to anticipate and manage the American challenge .
 Soviet intelligence suffered from a preoccupation with secret sources, failed to assimilate open source material, conducted little or nothing in the way of real analysis . It did not present the Kremlin with formal estimates, and did not give them formal estimates .
 Incompetence and organizational norms can explain the poor performance of Soviet intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis to some extent . But much of the blame must rest with Khrushchev himself .
 Khrushchev disdained, distrusted, or failed to appreciate the value of intelligence, he says . He says he was disappointed at the loss of intelligence .
 He proceeded with the deployment without any formal analysis of the likelihood that the Americans would discover it, and without any estimate of Kennedy's probable response if they did . The deployment was made without formal analysis .
 Khrushchev preferred to conduct his own analysis, apparently under the misapprehension that the 'raw' information that found its way haphazardly onto his desk provided an adequate basis for policy . 'Raw' information was not enough to provide policy, he said .
 Domingo Amuchastegui's essay on Cuban intelligence in the missile crisis is the only scholarly treatment of its 12 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS kind .
 Its novelty means that few readers will have expectations against which to decide whether or not it is surprising .
 Amuchastegui describes a nascent professional intelligence community cobbled together from various revolutionary groups . The community is forced to find its feet and define itself under the most difficult conditions imaginable .
 Cuban intelligence performed creditably, given the constraints and experience under which it operated . Threatened equally by U.S. hostility and Soviet friendship, Cuban intelligence did well .
 The relationship between Cuban intelligence and Cuban leadership appears to have been particularly complex . The relationship appears to be particularly complex, with the Cuban leadership .
 Cuban intelligence appears to have had unusual difficulty speaking to Power not because of any unwillingness to speak, but because of Power's unwillingness to listen . Most such relationships are complex, but Cuban intelligence seems to have difficulty speaking Truth to Power .
 Castro appears to have been the most willing to meddle in intelligence . Of all three leaders in the crisis, Castro has been willing to manipulate the intelligence process in accordance with his political needs .
 Readers will no doubt notice several apparent tensions and inconsistencies between the empirical essays . Readers will also notice that there are some apparent tensions between the essays .
 Amuchastegui claims that, following the Bay of Pigs, Soviet intelligence systematically insisted that an American invasion of Cuba was imminent .
 This contradicts account of Fursenko and Naftali, who maintain that during the same period the KGB issued no dire warnings to Moscow . This contradicts the account of the two men, who say they were not warned .
 Amuchastegui notes that Cuban intelligence could itself find no evidence of a waxing American threat . Cuban intelligence became suspicious of Soviet reports .
 It is possible that the Kremlin used the KGB to deceive Castro for ulterior purposes, but this is a discrepancy whose resolution must await further documentation . Amuchastegui suspects that the KGB used to encourage Castro to accept a Soviet nuclear deployment .
 Fursenko and Naftali insist Khrushchev neither informed the KGB of the missile deployment nor tasked it to assess the likely U.S. response . Similarly, they say Khrushchetschev did not inform them of the Soviet missile deployment .
 Amuchastegui credits the KGB with orchestrating an elaborate scheme of deception intended to mask the deployment something the KGB could hardly have undertaken had it been in the dark . The KGB was responsible for the deployment of the Soviet Union .
 Interesting and important interpretive differences arise in the three empirical essays . The essays are written in three different ways .
 Amuchastegui interprets the CIA's apparent failure to discover missiles earlier as evidence of incompetence or conspiracy . Garthoff is inclined to consider the American discovery of missiles on 15 October an important intelligence success .
 This is clearly an important question for anyone who is interested in improving the performance of intelligence .
 These are just a few of the many fascinating issues that arise within and between the three empirical essays .
 James Wirtz argues that strategic position, degree of bureaucratization, and leadership style interact to induce characteristic policy dangers and intelligence errors . He argues that the risk of intelligence errors is to blame for intelligence failures .
 Wirtz applies an appropriate typology to the accounts given in the three empirical essays . He demonstrates how it can help us find deeper patterns in the seemingly very different experiences of the American, Soviet, and Cuban intelligence communities .
 Beth Fischer demonstrates how several misperceptions, misjudgments, and errors of inference by intelligence analysts and policy makers in all three countries fit well with certain postulates of cognitive and motivational psychology . Fischer also demonstrates how misperception and misjudgment fits well with some postulates .
 Fischer argues that intelligence analysts more likely reflect simple information processing errors to which all people are prone simply by virtue of being human . Fischer: While many of the most significant errors made by national leaders may have their roots in emotional or psychological needs, intelligence analysts are more likely to make simple information
 Wirtz and Fischer suggest that organizational and procedural changes may to some degree enhance the performance of intelligence and its ability to serve policy makers . But these are ultimately limited by the human capacity to manage value trade-offs .
 There is much more to be said about these five fascinating pieces but we believe that this will suffice both to whet the appetite and to orient the reader .
 We have studied the missile crisis long enough and deeply . We have a profound sense of wonderment that the world managed to escape disaster in 1962 . The depth and extent of the mistakes and misunderstandings on all sides, and because of the bloomin' confusion both .
 The following five essays only increase that sense of wonderment . They further attest to the idiosyncrasy, the incommensurability, the relativity, and perhaps above all the 'noisiness' of the crisis .
 Mystery of the Cuban missile crisis mirrors its profound mysteriousness to those who precipitated it, coped with it, and somehow extricated themselves from it . Our own sense of the enduring enduring 14 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS .
 There are paradoxes in here Escher-esque nesting dolls, for want of a better metaphor — for the better metaphor . The book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Cambridge, England .
 For the purposes of this volume, we presume that the reader is familiar with the broad outline of events . The reader is told that the events took place during the Second World War II .
 The National Security Archive in Washington DC most actively pushed the declassification process . The Archive maintains the largest collection of declassified United States documents on the crisis .
 The Cold War International History Project at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington DC, is the premier repository of primary information . It and the Cold War . History Project are the premier .
 Four Case Studies (NY: Columbia UP 1991); Sagan, Limits of Safety ; and Gen. Gen. Sagan, limits of Safety; . Sagan: Limits of the Safety; and Gen., limits of the Force; . Gen. Carl Sagan: Limit of Safety is the Force of the
 The Cuban government has released a few documents selectively in order to rebut, clarify, or amplify interpretations of newly released Soviet documents . The documents have been released selectively in response to new interpretations of documents .
 There are reasons to believe that overly aggressive deterrent signaling might simply have intensified Khrushchev's risk-taking . There are also reasons to think that overreactive signaling might have intensified his risk taking .
 Richard Nixon and Sen. Richard Nixon were convinced that the Soviet Union would deploy or was deploying strategic nuclear weapons to Cuba . Others convinced were former Vice President Richard Nixon .
 Keating's charges that the Kennedy administration was allowing the Soviet Union to establish a major nuclear capability in Cuba were a constant irritant to the White House .
 It remains unclear whether Keating had any hard information on the Soviet deployment . Keating remains unclear if he had hard information .
 The difficulty American officials had imagining that the Soviets could have defensive motives for their military deployments in Cuba may help explain oversights of this kind . Fischer discusses in her essay later in this volume, the difficulty American .
 The Stennis Report concluded that there was 'no evidence whatsoever to suggest that any conflict between the CIA and SAC existed' The report concluded that the U-2 program was being operated by the CIA prior to 14 October .
 Rusk and Bundy have been characterized as overly timid, indecisive, ineffective, and obstacles to crisis management . Chroniclers of Camelot most notably, Robert F Kennedy, Theodore Sorensen, and Arthur Schlesinger, have characterized Rusk as over timid and ineffective .
 Rusk appears to have been the target of deliberate character assassination . Rusk appeared to be the victim of character assassination. Rusk has been accused of deliberately targeting him .
 On 8 Sept.62, the People's Republic of China shot down a 'Nationalist' U-2 over the mainland . The incident occurred in China's capital, Beijing .
 On 1 May 1960, another SA-2 brought down a U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers over Sverdlovsk, deep inside Soviet territory . The U2 was the first to be brought down by a SA 2 in May 1960 .
 While the historiography of American intelligence has been preoccupied with interesting characters and storylines, it is nevertheless much better than the meager history of Soviet intelligence .
 How a Soviet Colonel Changed the Course of the Cold War a narrow and sensationalistic treatment fraught with errors . The film is based on the book "How a Soviet Colleagues Changed The Course of Cold War"
 The historiography of Cuban intelligence assessment in the missile crisis is non-existent . The history of Cuba's missile crisis in the 1950s and 1960s is not known to exist .
 See also Detente and Confrontation, which deals with the various 'mini-crises' that have complicated US-Soviet-Cuban relations .
 He resurfaced too late and in an inappropriate institutional capacity — to contribute to our study . While he later resurfaced, he did so too late to contribute, to contribute .
 Amuchastegui provides a more extensive biographical sketch in 3 of his essay, below . He also provides an extensive biographic sketch of his life .
 Other participants included Wayne S Smith, political officer in the US embassy, Havana, and later in Cuba . President Kennedy's special envoy for Latin American affairs .
 William Y Smith, special assistant to chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Gen. William Y. Smith . Smith is a special adviser to the chairman of the Joint chiefs of Staff . Smith: "I'm not going to be surprised that the U.S. military has never been