 President Kennedy interpreted the act as one of hostility that would not be tolerated . The Soviet Union placed offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy said .
 The situation was blown way out or proportion by the president, American media, and ultimately the citizens of the United States. However, the president and American media should not have blown the situation out of proportion .
 The Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev, was reacting to the Bay of Pigs Invasion of Cuba, United States Missile installations along the Turkey/Soviet border, and the clear anti-Communist policy of the U.S.
 He was raised in a poor family whose income depended solely on the coal mining job of his father . His father was a coal mining worker who left his family in poverty .
 In 1918 he joined the Bolsheviks and attended a Communist school the following year . He joined the Communist Party in 1918 and attended the Communist School in 1918 .
 He moved to Moscow in 1929 and began working for the Communist government . He worked for the government in Russia .
 After Stalin died in 1953, the USSR went through two more premiers before Khrushchev came to power in 1958 . The USSR had two premiers between 1953 and 1958 .
 As Premier, Khrushchev publicly condemned the terror filled reign of Stalin . As Premier of the Soviet Union, he condemned the Stalinist regime .
 Eastern European countries united with the USSR under Stalin s reign and millions of innocent people were slain . Millions were killed under Stalin's rule .
 Stalin also restricted Soviet citizens personal liberties to previously unheard of measures . Stalin also limited personal liberties .
 He acridly criticized Stalin s crimes against humanity and began a rapid process known as destalinization . He began the process known by destalinizing .
 This entailed destroying statues, pictures, or images of Stalin and renaming most things previously named for Stalin . Most of the statues and images were destroyed .
 Khrushchev also restored many of the personal liberties that Stalin had taken away . He also restored personal liberties .
 He let political prisoners free, restored much freedom of thought, and restored freedom of the press . He restored much of the country's political prisoners .
 He increased production in factories and placed a strong emphasis on the Soviet space program . The Soviet leader increased production of factories and put emphasis on space programs .
 Although he had little pity for small, weak Europe and Asian countries, he worked to avoid war with Western nations . He had little sympathy for Europe and Asia, but he avoided war with them .
 Khrushchev was concerned for the welfare of his country and did not want war with the U.S. Despite being communist, he was concerned about his country's welfare . He was not interested in war with America .
 Khrushchev was faced with an aggressive U.S. government, and had to act accordingly . Despite his desire to avoid conflict with the western world, he faced an aggressive United States government .
 This overt military action took place when the CIA funded a paramilitary force of rebel Cubans to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro . The CIA funded the paramilitary force to overthrow Castro and overthrow him .
 Kennedy refused to give the invasion strong American military force so it ultimately failed, thus becoming a great embarrassment to the U.S. The invasion was an embarrassment for Kennedy .
 It was also a United States sponsored military offensive against Cuba, a communist country and Soviet ally . Not only was it an incredible failure and embarrassment, the U.S. military offensive was also an embarrassment .
 It was a challenge to the governments of both the Soviet Union and Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba were the last two countries to accept it .
 Khrushchev was also faced with U.S. missile installations in Turkey and Italy that posed a serious threat to the Soviet Union . In addition to the attack on Cuba, the United States also faced the threat of missile installations .
 The installations here were MRBMs, Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles, and were nearly identical to the missiles Khrushchev had installed in Cuba . The installations were almost identical to those in Cuba, with the same name .
 He was merely trying to prevent the U.S. from gaining the upper hand in a power struggle, which could have meant serious disaster for the Soviets . He was only trying to keep the United States out of power .
 Khrushchev, just like Kennedy and the rest of the U.S. didn't want the enemy to gain a nuclear advantage . Kennedy and others wanted to prevent the enemy gaining an advantage in nuclear weapons .
 The hysteria created in the U.S. as a result of the Soviet installations was immense . The hysteria over Soviet installations in the United States was immense.
 U.S. media was calling Khrushchev s actions aggressive and people began to panic . The United States media called the actions aggressive . The U.N. media called it 'aggressive' and "aggressive"
 Kennedy and his advisors were debating whether or not to invade Cuba to destroy the missiles . Kennedy was debating whether to invade the country or negotiate with Khrushchev . Kennedy's advisors were discussing whether to destroy missiles .
 Khrushchev sent his first of two letters to Kennedy on October 24, 1962 in which he explained his reasons for installing the missiles . The first letter was sent to Kennedy in October 1962 .
 He said that the action was not aggressive, and that they would remove them immediately if the U.S. missiles in Turkey were dismantled and Kennedy publicly promised not to invade Cuba . Kennedy said that they will remove them if the United States missiles were dismantled .
 The fact that Khrushchev wanted the Turkey missiles dismantled was hidden from the American public for several years . The move was hidden for many years, making the U.S. look more militant than he truly was .
 Kennedy debated with his brother, Robert, and Vice President Johnson for a few days . Kennedy still debated with Robert and his brother .
 In the meantime a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba as it was surveying the missiles, suggesting that Khrushchev might be aggressive .
 Planes were continually flying over Cuba, posing a threat to the Cubans and Soviets . However, planes continued to fly over Cuba in the 1950s .
 Kennedy voiced that if another plane was shot down, we would invade Cuba . Kennedy decided not to retaliate but voiced that . He decided to retaliate, but said that if . another plane . shot down .
 Khrushchev wrote another letter on October 26 reiterating that they would quickly dismantle the Cuban Missiles if the U.S. would publicly promise not to invade Cuba and if they would dismantle their missiles in Turkey . If the United States publicly promise to not invade Cuba, they would remove
 Kennedy merely said that the U.S. blockade would be lifted if the missiles were taken out . Kennedy said the United States would lift the blockade if missiles were removed from the region . Kennedy: "The blockade will be lifted"
 Khrushchev agreed and ordered the missiles to be removed from the Soviet Union in October . The missiles were ordered removed by the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 The United States had outlined a clear Anti-Communism policy through the Korean War, Bay of Pigs invasion, and missile installations in Europe . The U.S. had outlined an anti-Communist policy .
 Khrushchev didn't want to jeopardize the safety of his country so decided to install missiles in Cuba to protect the Cubans and the USSR . The United States media along with the government, did not inform the public of the installations in Turkey .
 This created intense public opposition to the Soviet leader as he was made out to be much more militant than he actually was . The Soviet leader was made to be a militant rather than a moderate figure .
 He was simply fighting fire with fire, but the government and media prevented the public from having the truth, he says .
 It looks almost like a blatant attempt to manipulate the American public by over-dramatizing a situation for which the United States government was predominately responsible . The U.S. government was predominantly responsible for the situation .
 Kennedy threatened invasion and he would have had support of the entire nation if he had proceeded with this plan . Kennedy would have supported the invasion of the U.S. if he'd gone through with the plan .
 Khrushchev eventually agreed to remove the missiles and allow the U.S. to have a nuclear advantage . He agreed to allow the United States to have the advantage .
 He was a vast improvement over Stalin as a Premier and had restored much freedom to his country . He was also a major improvement in Stalin's rule of Soviet Russia .
 He wasn't a mad killer like Stalin and simply wanted to protect the citizens of his country, unlike Stalin had . He wasn t a mad killing like Stalin like Stalin . Instead, he was simply trying to protect his country from Stalin .
 The United States government wanted the media and public to think otherwise . The U.S. government, however, wanted the public to believe otherwise, it said .