 It's not hard to imagine a world where at any given moment, you and everyone you know could be wiped out without warning at the push of a button . The world is now in danger of being wiped out at any moment .
 The Cold War was the 45-year period after World War II, now known as the Cold War . Millions of people were in the grip of Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union knew each other had nuclear weapons capable of destroying it . Each knew that the other had a nuclear weapon capable of killing it .
 In 1961, the United States unsuccessfully tried to overthrow Cuba's new communist government . The U.S. failed to overthrow the new government in Cuba .
 Khrushchev was happy to comply by secretly deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba . The move was meant to protect the island, and counteract the threat from U.S. missiles in Italy and Turkey .
 By the time U.S. intelligence discovered the plan, materials to create the missiles were already in place . The materials were already being used to make the missiles .
 At an emergency meeting on October 16, 1962, military advisors urged an airstrike on missile sites and invasion of the island . At the same time, the U.S. considered an invasion of Cuba .
 On October 22, he announced that the U.S. Navy would intercept all shipments to Cuba . He announced that he would intercept shipments to the island .
 The President called it a quarantine that did not block basic necessities, the Soviets didn't appreciate the distinction . President called the quarantine a quarantine but the Soviets did not appreciate it .
 Cuba and the U.S.R. insisted the missiles were only defensive . The United States demanded the removal of the missiles, but Cuba insisted they were only defense .
 The weapons continued to be armed, the United States prepared for a possible invasion . The U.S. continued to prepare for the invasion .
 Major Rudolph Anderson's spy plane was shot down by a Soviet missile on October 27 . Anderson's plane was the first to be shot down in Soviet-controlled airspace .
 The same day, a nuclear-armed Soviet submarine was hit by a small-depth charge from a U.S. Navy vessel trying to signal it to come up . A small depth charge from the United States Navy vessel hit the submarine .
 The commanders on the sub, too deep to communicate with the surface, thought war had begun and prepared to launch a nuclear torpedo . The commanders were unable to communicate to the surface with the sub .
 The captain and political officer both authorized the launch, but Vasili Arkhipov, second in command, refused . The launch was the first of its kind, with a launch from the base in Moscow .
 For the first time in history, the United States Military set itself to DEFCON 2, the defense readiness one step away from nuclear war . The U.S. military is now one step closer to nuclear war than ever before .
 Doomsday Clock stands at one minute to midnight . With hundreds of nuclear missiles ready to launch, the metaphorical Doomsday Clock stood at one point .
 In Washington, D.C., Attorney General Robert Kennedy secretly met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin . Robert Kennedy's secret meeting with the Soviet ambassador was a secret affair .
 The U.S. would remove missiles from Turkey and Italy and promise to never invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba under United Nations inspection . The United States would remove their missiles from . Turkey and . Italy and . promise never invading Cuba in return for a U.N
 Dobrynin cabled Moscow saying time is of the essence and we shouldn't miss the chance . Once the meeting had concluded, Dobryn in Moscow said time was of the utmost . The meeting was the first time the Russians had met with the Russian president .
 Khrushchev announced the Soviet missiles would be removed from Cuba . The next day, the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union's Cuba .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev were criticized at the time by their respective governments for bargaining with the enemy . Today, historical analysis shows great admiration for their ability to diplomatically solve the crisis . Kennedy and Krushchev were criticized for their actions at their time .
 A slight communication error, or split-second decision by a commander, could have thwarted all their efforts . Vasili Arkhipov's courageous choice saved the lives of the Russian troops .