 Remembering the Thirteenth Day Arms and influence . The political uses of violence, for good or bad or bad . Remembering The 13th Day of the Revolution .
 A terrorist nuclear attack is inevitable. Counterterrorism is easier, part III is part III . Counterterror is easier than terrorism, part IV .
 Captured terrorists have information that could help stop an imminent attack, officials say . Captured terrorist information could help the U.S. fight against terrorism .
 Doing something and having the right values are the measures of leadership . Doing something is the measure of leadership, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Constitution doesn't fit the new reality of war against terrorists, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz says the Constitution is outdated and outdated .
 We are fighting a single insurgency in Iraq that's part of the global terrorist network. We're fighting the single insurgency, says President Obama . Iraq is part of a global terror network, Obama says .
 Since Americans now live in a time when we are intensely focused on our current wars, it's worth resurrecting the tradition of marking past conflicts with a day of remembrance .
 Generic holidays, like Memorial Day and Veterans Day, serve their own, somewhat different function . They remind us of the sacrifices that the men and women in our armed forces have made on our behalf .
 A national day of remembrance for a particular conflict would remind us of the lessons of a past war . A national holiday would be a good reminder of lessons of that past war, says David Cameron .
 There is no better way to ensure that the blood and treasure spent in these struggles will benefit more than a single generation . The blood and money spent on the war effort will benefit the next generation .
 I propose a day of remembrance for the Cold War, the most recent of our past conflicts . I therefore propose a Day of Remembrance for Cold War .
 It's more closely resembles our current antagonisms than the massive clashes across entire continents that characterize the two World Wars and the American Civil War . It also closely resembles the massive conflicts that characterized the two WWIs and the two American Civil Wars .
 If there's a lesson to be learned from past wars, we should look back on those that most resemble our current generation of conflict . We should also look back at past conflicts that most resembled our current conflicts .
 The Soviet Union smuggled intermediate-range ballistic missiles into Cuba . IL-28 bombers, MiG fighters, and anti-aircraft batteries were smuggled under the noses of the United States military and intelligence services .
 In September, the U.S. Intelligence Board submitted a report that noted a number of Soviet ships entering and leaving Cuban ports . But it missed the clues that they were carrying nuclear weapons .
 A few weeks later, the intelligence community pieced together a more accurate picture of what was happening from aerial photographs and signal intercepts .
 Revolutionary Cuba has gone from annoying mosquito close to America's shores to a deadly threat . Revolutionary Cuba had gone from an annoying mosquito to deadly threat. Revolutionary Cuba is now a threat to U.S.
 The intelligence community corrected a grievous error, but no witch hunt resulted from their failure . "No witch hunt" resulted from the failure of the intelligence community .
 The missile deployments had occurred under such secrecy that even the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, did not know about them until United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk told him an hour before Kennedy told the world of their existence .
 Kennedy Administration immediately took action after learning of the truth . Kennedy Administration took action .
 The United States Navy set up a blockade around Cuba, threatening to sink the Soviet cargo ships, en route from the USSR, loaded with further missiles . The U.S. Navy also threatened to sink ships en route to Cuba loaded with more missiles .
 American missile silos, bombers, and submarines were put on high alert . The U.S. was on the brink of war with North Korea in the 1980s .
 A tense series of threats and counter-threats began between the White House and the Kremlin . The tensions have been building up to a series of tensions .
 Soviet and American leaders in the Crisis exchanged notes at a conference . The risk was as high a probability as one out of three, they said .
 The top decision-makers in both governments enforced caution and level-headedness among their own ranks . As simultaneously determined and fearful as the two adversaries were, the top decision makers in both countries enforced caution .
 The White House prefers to announce the Soviet missiles in Cuba in the most sober fashion possible . The U.S. did so in the case of the Cuban missiles .
 The time in which to order a response to a presumed attack was dangerously compressed . With only minutes from the launch of a nuclear missile to its detonation over a target, the time was also dangerously compressed. The time was only minutes .
 Strategic Air Command dispersed long-range bombers and fighter-interceptors from their normal bases . But it failed to inform air defense units, also on high alert, about these flight plans . The bombers and interceptors were dispersed from normal bases, but did not inform defense units .
 It more than quintupled the number of B-52s kept airborne, but may have flown some with nuclear weapons whose arming circuitry had not yet been certified as safe .
 Minuteman missile crews bypassed normal safety procedures to bring new silo-based ICBMs on line as quickly as possible . The weapons were in effect ""hot wiring"" their weapons in ways that risked unauthorized launches .
 Reports of saboteurs attempting to penetrate an air force facility near Duluth set of an aircraft launch alarm at another base in Minnesota where nuclear-equipped F-106s scrambled . The Duluth infiltrators turned out to have been a lone inquisitive bear .
 Kennedy's decision to move the naval blockade closer to Cuba was one of his key measures . Another such measure was the decision to close the blockade of Cuba to Cuba .
 This redeployment put American warships within range of enemy aircraft in Cuba . It also gave the Soviets more time to reconsider turning back their cargo vessels before they reached the American cordon .
 Eventually, the Soviets backed down, agreeing to remove the missiles from Cuba, under humiliating U.S. supervision . The Soviets eventually agreed to remove them under humiliating United States supervision .
 As is usually the case, the first news reports were wrong—or, at least, missing important pieces of the story . CNN.com: "As is usually, it was wrong --or, or, missing ... missing important points of story"
 To borrow Gaddis' phrase, we now know that the Soviets were far weaker in a strategic nuclear conflict than the general public at the time realized . The Soviets were much weaker than the public realized in the Cold War .
 Kennedy was elected on the platform of a presumed ""missile gap,"" with American nuclear forces weaker than the Soviet arsenal, the reverse was actually true . The reverse was true .
 In fact, one of the Soviet motives for deploying missiles in Cuba was to offset this nuclear imbalance . The Soviet Union deployed the missiles to offset that nuclear imbalance in Cuba .
 While the real missile gap might reinforce the conclusion that the Soviets ""blinked,"" that conclusion would be largely wrong . The real gap would be much smaller than the real gap in missile technology .
 In fact, Kennedy made concessions to Khrushchev, such as the removal of American Jupiter missiles that had been recently deployed in Turkey . Kennedy also made concessions, including removing missiles from Turkey .
 Kennedy worked hard behind the scenes, often against his more hawkish advisors, to ensure that the Soviets had a way of retreating with at least some of its dignity and interests intact . Kennedy worked to ensure the Soviets retreated with some dignity intact .
 The Kennedy Administration handled an explosive situation, with the worst calamity in human history looming as a real possibility . Equally important was the way in which the Kennedy administration handled the situation .
 Decisiveness and flexibility, courage and caution, courage, caution, open-mindedness and skepticism, coercion and compromise . We should understand them as capabilities we want in our leaders and government, at any time, but especially during a crisis .
 The stakes were arguably higher in 1962 than any time in human history . When the stakes are high, we need our leaders to be have whichever among these skills the moment requires .
 Had Kennedy and his closest advisors lacked even one of these skills, the events of October 1962 might have turned out far worse . Kennedy's closest advisors were key to his decision to make the decision .
 It is possible to handle the threat of nuclear weapons without exaggerating that threat, CNN.com's John Sutter says . Sutter: It's possible to deal with the nuclear threat without overplaying it .
 Those who use the threat of violence, from a suicide bomber to the head of a nuclear-armed government, cannot be defeated unless the target of their attacks refuses to be frightened by them . The target of these attacks should not be scared by them, says David Cameron .
 During times of national crisis, leaders and subordinates must be constantly checking each other's assumptions and information . Leaders and subordinates need to be constantly check each other’s assumptions, experts say .
 Too many great historical failures to ignore were the tragic result of the statement, It must be so, because we want it to be so. Too many of the greatest failures of the past were the result of that statement .
 The threat or use of force is only justified if it produces the desired outcome . Use of force should be justified only if it is necessary to achieve desired outcome, says police officer .
 Acting tough is a means, not an end, even when dealing with our most mortal enemies, says President Obama . Acting tough isn't a means of defeating our enemies, Obama says . Obama: 'Acting tough is not a means but a means'
 If you agree with my argument for marking October 28th as an important anniversary, I urge you to make the case in other online forums, conversations about current affairs .