 The United States had been at odds with Communist ideals for many years beginning with the onset of the Cold War . The U.S. had been fighting against Communist ideals .
 The direct stimulant for the Cuban missile crisis, however, was due to the emergence of the Communist led regime of Cuba, by Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban regime, which led to the crisis .
 President Kennedy, aided by the CIA, attempted to take control of Cuba . Wanting to prevent Castro from gaining too much power, President Kennedy tried to take over Cuba .
 This failure, known as the Bay of Pigs, only secured Castro's as well as Cuba's power . The failure of the failed Bay of Pigeon, Cuba's first failed to secure Cuba's position .
 The Soviet Union provided protection by way of nuclear weapons, for Cuba . For fear of further attacks, the Soviet Union had nuclear weapons .
 The United States reached near destruction due to President Kennedy's refusal to tolerate Communism . Kennedy can not be lauded for his success in ending the crisis which he himself started, he writes .
 President Eisenhower severed diplomatic relations with Cuba in the 1960s . Cuba had been a large assent for the United States throughout the 1950s .
 After Fidel Castro and his Revolutionaries took control of Cuba, they began to gain mass popularity and power which upset Government officials in the U.S. The United States.
 Eisenhower developed a plan which the Kennedy Administration later followed through on, to overthrow Castro and his Communist Regime . Eisenhower developed the plan to overthrow the Castro Regime in Cuba .
 It is often referred to as a docudrama as it is very entertainment oriented but still remains close to the roots of what actually happened . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in September 2015 .
 Thirteen Days was able to access recently declassified information which helped in attaining a more historically accurate film . Since it was produced at a later date than many other films portraying the events, Th13 Days was .
 In 1962 Fidel Castro agreed to the placing of nuclear missiles belonging to the Soviets in Cuba . Fidel Castro said he would allow the missiles to be placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 All placing of these missiles was done in secrecy, however on October 14th an American U2 plane took photographs of the missile site . The American Government was immediately informed of the photographs .