 Khrushchev believed that the U.S. government would do nothing about the deployment if it did not recognize what was happening until the missiles were in Cuba and on — Cold War — combat ready .
 The Soviet military created an elaborate deception program to conceal the missile deployment . To do that, the Soviet military used a deception program .
 The Deception A robust deception plan must include four eleventh Soviet Deception ments . A robust Deception plan must also include four key points of deception .
 There must also be denial, deceit, and misdirection, to lead the opponent away from the full or actual truth by Robert M Clark . Clark’s ‘story’ of what is happening must be a false picture .
 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was had all four elements facing a serious threat that had to be dealt with . The Cuban deception I n 1960 was the result of the Cuban deception .
 The story for the missile deployment was that the Soviet shipments to Cuba contained only nonmilitary cargo . During 1958 and 1959, the United States had deployed its Jupiter MRBMs in Turkey and Italy, posing a strategic threat .
 ICBMs capable of reaching the U.S. were still in biles, tractors, and harvesters were placed on the top development list .
 The Soviets had their own decks so that imagery of the ships would convey the supply of MRBMs . Those posed no threat to the United States if impression that they had only agricultural equipment based in the USSR .
 VOANews.com regularly reported that the Soviet Union was supplying Cuba with machine tools, wheat, agricultural machinery and fertilizer . The Soviet Union regularly supplied Cuba with equipment and agricultural machinery .
 For IMINT denial, military cargo was loaded onto the ships under cover of darkness . Military cargo would be loaded onto ships under the cover of night .
 Cuba, however, offered an attractive option for and moved directly a fait accompli . Upon reaching Cuba, concealed weaponry was unloaded only at night .
 If the Soviets could somehow place to the deployment bases along back roads, again their nuclear-equipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba, they could counter the United States strategic edge .
 A Medium Range Ballistic Missile is defined as having a range of from 1,000 to 3,000 kilometers . SS-5 is a medium range ballistic missile of 3,200 to 5,000 km; SS-2 is an intermediate range missile .
 It is standard practice, of course, to attempt to deceive the opponent . Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Page 67 .
 U.S. troops and senior military leaders are among those who might be HUMINT targets . There were some flaws, but the effort unraveled, and the effort unravelled .
 The operation was designed to appear to be a military exercise in northern Security Agency . In 1961, COMINT analysts at the U.S. National designed the operation to appear as an exercise in Northern America .
 The cargo manifests were for the Cuban assignment were informed that an blank, causing suspicion that the shipments could be exercise would be held in a cold region and outfitted carrying military significance .
 Missile experts assigned appeared to be heading for Cuba after reporting to the project were told that they would be working another destination . They declared less cargo than on ballistic missiles in the Soviet arctic test range .
 Officers and missile specialists travintercepts indicated that Cubans were unloading eled to Cuba as irrigation and agricultural specialists ships at night and taking unusual precautions to keep or machine operators .
 In one communication, Cuban declarations when exiting the Black Sea and Bosport authorities mentioned the arrival of tanks; in porus. In porus . In one . communication, the Cuban declarations were made when . exiting the . Black Sea . Bosport officials mentioned the presence of tanks in one
 Cubans discussed “highly unusual aircraft” tonnage well below what was being carried . They altered the cargo records and declared others, Cubans said .
 During 1962, the pattern of suspect deliveries proceeding to Cuba continued, and United States leadership became concerned . They often and radars. listed Conakry, Guinea, as their destination .
 If the military deliveries were purely for defensive During September, Soviet diplomats gave repeated purposes, that was a problem . But not one that called assurances to top U.S. officials that they had no intention of putting itself in danger .
 If offensive weapons were being delivered, that offensive weaponry in Cuba was another matter entirely . The Cuban government was in control of Cuba in the 1980s .
 The freighter Poltava was observed enroute to innovative misdirection was one that few intelligence Cuba on September 15 . But the most interesting thing was that the freighter was observed on the same day .
 The Soviets leaked informato deliver ballistic missiles about the deployment to mask it . The Soviets used the leak to mask the fact they were sending missiles .
 Other refugees had made simiidentified the crates; they were identical to lar claims in newspaper reporting . Other refugees made similar claims .
 Soviet intelligence ones used in shipping fuselages of IL-28 saw an opportunity to misdirect by adding to that medium bombers flood flood flood . Soviet intelligence used to shipping the fuselage of IL - and the bombers .
 The discoveries prompted top U.S. leaders to order sile deployment through counterrevolutionary Cuban U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba . They funneled accurate details about the misappropriations .
 The Soviets had a and DIA analysts did not regard the groups as credible; standard way of building a missile launch facility, and and in fact, those analysts dismissed the subsequent they kept that design intact .
 NSA Center for Cryptologic History, “NSA and the Cuban Missile /vol46no1/article06.06.html. The Cuban Missile was launched in 1961 .
 On October 22, President Kennedy announced a never deployed nuclear weapons outside their direct naval “quarantine” of Cuban ports to prevent further control, and U.S. analysts assessed that they would deliveries .
 President and Premier Khrushchev agreed to a solution missiles in Cuba . After several days of tense negotiations, the not do so by deploying nuclear warhead-equipped President . President and premier agreed to an agreement on a solution .
 The Cuban missile crisis is a notable exception . It detected the deception and identified the deception .
 The deployment so that policymakers could act in nevertheless has occasionally been called an intellitime – that is, before the missiles could reach operagence failure . The deployment of missiles was the first to be deployed in the region .
 Four times in the nine-month period leading up October 15, U.S. National Intelligence Estimates assessed that Soviet activities in Cuba were . Robert M Clark is the author of several books on Cuban intelligence .
 Counterdeception lish an offensive base in Cuba . Counterintelligence with William L Mitchell, CQ Press, 2019. and Counterintelligence .
 In the next issue of The Intelligencer, we’ll examine a later case where the opponents had better success with exceptionally well executed until its final stages . We’re going to examine the later case in which the opponents were better executed .
 CIA Director John McCone estimated that only six of the CIA's most accurate intelligence were accurate . CIA Director McCone said that the agency was faced with mass of misleading raw intelligence .
 Before 1962, the Soviets had material has been reviewed by the CIA to prevent the disclosure of classified information . The CIA has reviewed classified material before .
 The new AFIO breathe-easy logo face masks have a double-layer tight weave with wide behind-the-ear elastics to make long periods of wear comfortable .
 The masks do not have a nose wire but are sculpted, shaped, and sewn to fit most users . The masks are designed to be sculpted and shaped to fit the most comfortable user .
 The all-cloth composition allows the masks to be washed or steam-disinfected without concern over metal wires .
 For tax-deductible donations of $50 you will receive a receipt and a thank you gift of two of these newly-arrived face masks . For $50, you will get a receipt .
 We wish all members and donors continued good health, safe social distancing, and warmly appreciate any support you can provide the association .