 Kennedy had just two weeks before these Soviet missiles were operational . Kennedy had two weeks to prepare for the launch of the missiles .
 President John F Kennedy requests your services . President Kennedy requests his services .
 He asks that you sit on the newly established Executive Committee of the National Security Council in order to provide advice and guidance .
 The freedom, liberty and lives of millions of your fellow Americans and the SAFETY of the world depend on your abilities . The freedom of the American people and the safety of the entire world depends on your ability .
 U2 spy-planes have photographed Soviet missile sites under construction in Fidel Castro’s communist Cuba . The sites are only 90 miles from the U.S. coast .
 The soviets are denying that there are any offensive weapons on the island . Although we have photographic evidence showing . Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites . The sovets deny that . there are no offensive weapons in the . island .
 You have been selected to sit on this special committee because you are the best and brightest in the country . You are selected for this committee because of you being the best of the country.
 I trust that you will weigh up ALL of the available options thoroughly and without prejudice, without prejudice in order to ensure that freedom and peace continue to reign in this country of ours . I trust you to weigh up all the options thoroughly .
 Force the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba before they become operational . Force them to remove them from Cuba . Force the Soviet Union to remove missiles before becoming operational .
 Khrushchev and the Soviets think that they have won a victory in Cuba 4.4.5.5 years ago . Let the Soviets win a victory over Cuba 4: "Let's go to Cuba 4"
 The United States will be made to look like the aggressors in Cuba . The US are expected to be the aggressor in the next two weeks .
 The clock was set of the crisis: at 11.53pm . U2 spy planes have discovered more nuclear missile sites on Cuba .
 Most soviet ships en route to Cuba have slowed down or turned around . One ship is continuing towards the blockade line . Another is continuing to head towards blockade .
 The government has received this communication thought to be from Chairman Khrushchev . Despite this the USSR denies their presence in the USSR .
 We will send no more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba will be withdrawn or destroyed . We will withdraw or destroy any of the weapons within Cuba .
 The government has received a second communication from Moscow thought to be from Chairman Khrushchev . The government receives a second communications from Moscow .
 A direct communication line between Washington and Moscow was set up, this became known as the ‘hotline’ August 1963: Test Ban Treaty was signed by USA, Britain and USSR, all 3 countries agreed not to test nuclear weapons in outer space, underwater or in the atmosphere .