 The 50th anniversary of the crisis is about to be observed . That it continues to fascinate us, including those who have no memory of it, should be no surprise .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to pull his missiles out of Cuba on Oct. 4, 1962 . The confrontation did not end in resounding triumph for the U.S.
 “Khrushchev’s capitulation had not brought the finality to the crisis that many had hoped for.” Instead, as Coleman demonstrates, “Many hoped for the end of the crisis,” he writes .
 The only people who knew about this system were his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, Secret Service agents, aide Kenneth O’Donnell and secretary . The system was installed by the Secret Service and maintained by Robert Kennedy .
 The Kennedy library released the images in January . Coleman used them in "The Fourteenth Day" The images were not released until early this year .
 These are the voices of John and Robert Kennedy, Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk . They charted the country’s way through and beyond one of the most dangerous moments in history .
 Khrushchev humiliated Kennedy at their summit meeting in Vienna in 1961 in 1961 . Precisely what inspired him to put Soviet nuclear missiles just ninety miles off the U.S. is not known .
 Probably he felt he had the upper hand; probably he wanted to bolster the position of Fidel Castro . Probably he wanted “to retaliate for American-made NATO missiles deployed close to the borders of the Soviet Union”
 Kennedy had no choice but to accept the challenge that he had to accept . Kennedy handled the challenge coolly and imaginatively . Whatever the reasoning of this “mercurial and stubborn” man, the result was the result .
 It was a benchmark he referred to repeatedly in the days following the crisis . He referred to the benchmark as 'the benchmark' in the aftermath of the crisis.
 U.S. surveillance overflights, weapons inspectors to Cuba to conduct on-the-ground inspections, have failed to solve the problem . Red Cross inspectors to inspect Soviet ships leaving Cuba .
 Acting secretary general of the United Nations, U. Thant, volunteered to go to Cuba and inspect missile sites himself . U.N. Secretary of State to inspect the missile sites .
 The IL-28 planes were cumbersome aircraft that probably posed little actual risk to the mainland United States . They had high symbolic value as evidence of continuing Soviet presence in Cuba . Kennedy knew that their removal was important to reassuring the American people that the threat had dissipated .
 CIA director: U.S. was always going to have a ‘missiles in Cuba’ problem . Soviet-Cuban relations were going to pose challenges to the United States, no matter what form they took .
 The greatest problem Kennedy faced was not in Cuba but in West Berlin . As an enclave in the middle of deeply hostile East Germany, West Berlin posed innumerable complications .
 It was a central element in the shifts of the cold war in 1963 that culminated in early moves toward detente .
 The neutralization of the Berlin problem was not the only development that made detente possible, but it was a crucial one . It was also a crucial development that led to detente between the two countries .