 The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies . The series includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted .
 The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series .
 The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series . The staff is responsible for the volumes .
 Official regulations codified specific standards for the selection and editing of documents were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B Kellogg on March 26, 1925 .
 These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991 . These regulations were followed by a series of minor modifications .
 The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity .
 The Foreign Relations series must be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded . The statute also requires that the series be published within 30 years of its publication .
 The editors are convinced that this volume, which was compiled in 1990-1991, meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing . The editors say this volume meets all standards and standards .
 This volume documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years of John F Kennedy's administration . This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series . The Foreign Relations Series documents issues in foreign policy in the Kennedy administration .
 Subseries presents in 25 print volumes and 5 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Kennedy's administration . The subseries is a collection of 25 print books and five micro-fiche .
 This volume presents the documentary record of the Cuban missile crisis and its aftermath . It also presents the United States policy toward Cuba during the period October 1962 to December 1963 . This volume includes documentary record and U.S. policy on Cuba .
 Volume X, Cuba, 1961-1962, covers the period January 1961 through September 1962 . Includes documentation on the Bay of Pigs incident and U.S. courses of action in response to the unsuccessful invasion .
 A separate microfiche supplement will contain additional documentation on the crisis and U.S. policy toward Cuba for the period 1961-1963 . The editors of Volume XII, American Republics. Volume X will also include documentation supplementing Volume XII .
 Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail or in brief .
 Some general decisions are also made regarding issues which will be included in microfiche supplement . Some of these issues will not be available in the volume, but will be published in micro-fiche .
 Foreign Relations is the Foreign Relations series of volumes . Selection criteria are used in preparing volumes for the series of Foreign Relations .
 Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation . Individual compilation-editorates use these criteria to compile software .
 In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records, which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes . The editors give priority to classified records .
 The U.S. made major foreign affairs commitments on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the U.K. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 4 . 5. 5 . 7.
 Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted; 3. Major decisions, such as major decisions, are made; 4. Major foreign policy decisions, including dissenting opinions, are
 The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy; 4. The President is constitutionally constitutionally responsible . The President's actions, decisions, actions and considerations are considered by the President . The president is responsible for direction of
 The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members; 5. The discussions, actions of these bodies and members of these groups are included in the report . The report also includes the
 The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies; 6. The most important decisions taken to . implement Presidential . decisions or . policies; . 6.6.5.5 .
 Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues . 7.7.7 .
 Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State . 8. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions . 9.5% of the President's decisions were made on behalf of the United States. 8.6% of President Barack Obama’s decisions on foreign policy were made
 Foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the U.S. are made without the involvement of the White House or the Department of State . 9.9.9: Major foreign affairs decisions are made by officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community .
 The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region . If they provided key information in the formulation of major United States policies, such as relevant National Intelligence Estimates, as may be declassified .
 The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions; 11. 11.11.11 . 11.12.11: The role is the role of Congress in preparing and executing foreign policy .
 The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance; 13.13. 13.14.14 military, economic assistance, as well .
 The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies; 14. 14. The military establishment's decisions, decisions and activities, as well as those of major regional
 Diplomatic appointments reflect major policies or affect policy changes . Diplomatic appointees reflect major policy changes or major policy shifts .
 The original research and compilation of this volume was completed in 1992 . Additional documents were added after access agreements were concluded with various agencies . Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume XI .
 The editors of the volume focused much of their selection on documenting the most serious U.S. -Soviet confrontation of the Cold War . The Cuban missile crisis and its aftermath were the subject of the book .
 The editors included the major policy option papers Kennedy and advisers were examining as part of these discussions . Kennedy and his advisers were looking at the papers that they had been examining .
 Only a small fraction of the extensive intelligence material relating to the crisis was included . Most of the important documentation is in the microfiche supplement with footnote and editorial references in the print volume .
 Much of the documentation printed in this volume relates to discussions with key Soviet officials through a variety of channels . The volume includes Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, correspondence with Soviet officials .
 The editors have included only the most important examples of the frequent and detailed consultation with key allies regarding the crisis . Because of space constraints, the editors have only been able to include only a few of the important examples .
 Less well-known in published works was the second dangerous crisis over the removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba . The U.S. insisted that the Soviet bombers were "offensive weapons" and thus subject to the October 28 agreement .
 The editors have given full attention to this second crisis using the same methodology used for the missile crisis . This second crisis has taken place in the same way as the crisis in the 1980s . This is the first time this crisis has been covered in full coverage .
 The editors gave special emphasis to the negotiations regarding the removal of Soviet bombers from Cuba and the establishment of procedures for the verification of Soviet compliance . The editors consider these negotiations an important if unsuccessful epilogue to the crisis .
 In the concluding portion of the volume, the editors focused on United States concern with Cuban President Fidel Castro . The editors focus on the U.S. concern with Fidel Castro.
 The documents included documentation on a possible rapprochement with Castro through intermediaries at the United Nations . They also included a highly secret document on a highly . secret effort to explore a possible . possible rabbi's return of prisoners captured in the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion .
 Only a representative amount of finished intelligence on the viability, strength, and weakness of the Castro regime has been selected for publication here .
 U.S. efforts to prevent Cuban subversion in the rest of Latin America are documented in Volume XII, American Republics, released in July 1996 .
 The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in order of individual meetings . Editorial Methodology is based on Washington time .
 Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted . Memoranda is placed in the order of conversation, not the date it was drafted.
 Editorial treatment of the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and chief technical editor .
 The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes . The author's version of this article has been published in this form .
 Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography . Texts will be printed in accordance with accepted conventions and printed in the limited typography of modern .
 A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume .
 Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected . Typographical errors will be silently corrected silently .
 Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text . A list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume of the book .
 The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted from the document .
 Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for . They are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in chronological place .
 The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated .
 All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes . Footnotes are used to identify some of the brackets in this article .
 An unnumbered source note to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information . The unnumbered sources note is a summary of each document's contents .
 This note also provides the background of important documents and policies . It also indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document . The President and his advisers are expected to read it .
 Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published . This information has been included in the source footnote .
 Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume . Editorial notes indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents .
 Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record .
 Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series . Committee advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification .
 Advisory Committee does not attempt to review contents of individual volumes in the series . It does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention .
 The declassification review of this volume at the Department of State resulted in decisions to withhold less than 1 percent of the documentation selected .
 The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information . It was superseded by Executive Order 12958 on April 20, 1995, and laws .
 The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security, as embodied in law and regulation . Declassified information will be released subject to current security requirements .
 Louis J Smith did the research for the volume and he and Charles S Sampson selected and edited the portion of the volume dealing with the Cuban missile crisis . The volume was published in 1959 .
 Edward C Keefer selected and edited the portion of the volume beginning with November 1962 through to the end of 1963 . Keefer edited the section from November 1962 to November 1963 .
 All three editors worked under the general supervision of then Editor in Chief John P Glennon .
 Kerry E Hite, David C Geyer, and Donna Hung coordinated the declassification of the documentation . Vicki E Futscher, Deb Godfrey, and Rita M Baker did the copy and technical editing . Kerry Hite and David Geyer coordinated declassification .
 The editors believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute . We are happy to make clear that this volume is accessible to the general public .
 The editors were able to use intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research . The editors are happy to use these files to share with the public .
 When this volume was compiled, all Department of State records consulted were still under the custody of the Department . Footnotes citing . Department of . State files suggest that the Department is the repository of the .
 Many of the Department's decentralized office files covering this period will also be transferred to Archives II over the next several years . The National Archives deems these files worthy of permanent retention . Archives II will also transfer many of these files from the department's custody over the years .
 The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Eisenhower and other White House foreign policy records .
 Presidential papers preserved at the Presidential Library include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council .
 Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense . The Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants .
 Since 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency has provided expanded access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency .
 This access is arranged by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a 1992 memorandum of understanding .
 This access arrangement was concluded in connection with the research of volumes for the 1961-1963 triennium and in order to enlarge the scope of coverage .
 Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record .
 The variety of documentation made available to Department of State historians and ultimately selected for publication in the volumes has expanded .
 Sources for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume XI . All sources for this volume are briefly identified in the list below .
 The records of the Executive Committee and the National Security Council Standing Group were key . Within it the Memoranda and Meetings Series, the records were key.
 Also valuable were the records in the Country Series for Cuba and the Soviet Union as well as the files of Kennedy's key advisers such as Arthur Schlesinger and Theodore Sorensen .
 The sound quality is often poor and it is occasionally difficult to determine the identity of the speakers . It is sometimes difficult to identify the speakers in the video .
 Transcripts were used only when no written account of a meeting had been found . Transcripts are only used when there is no written record of the meeting . The transcripts were used when the meeting was not found .
 These transcripts are not a substitute for listening to the tapes themselves . They provide context and nuance that cannot be adequately reflected in a verbatim text .
 Clifton's files include memoranda of most of the President's meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The files include the memoranda from most of President's meeting with Joint Chiefs .
 Some important materials are also available in Department of State files . In the U.S. State Department files are available for download .
 The most valuable Department of State collections are the lot files, as described below . The lot files are described below.
 Lot 65 D 438 is the most concentrated Department of State collection on the missile crisis . Lot 65D 438 has the most detailed collection on missile crisis in the world .
 Several relevant files in the Department's decimal and subject-numeric indexed central files are consulted . Also consulted and listed below are several relevant files .
 This extensive collection on the missile crisis includes material that, for reasons of space and redundancy, was not included in the volume or microfiche supplement .
 handwritten notes on EXCOM meetings by Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric and Paul Nitze . The notes include notes from Roswell and Nitze on meetings held by the Defense Department .
 Also contains drafts of messages and memoranda to the President and Secretary of State about the correspondence . Includes drafts of . messages and memos to the . President and . Secretary of state about correspondence . Also contains draft messages and . memoranda .
 Includes background material from 1961 and 1962, including documentation on Operation Mongoose . Also contains background material for 1961-62 . Includes material from Operation Mongoose .
 Secret and Top Secret records of the U.S. Mission to the United Nations with extensive material on the post-missile crisis negotiations .
 Includes files of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of defense, and the Assistant Secretary of the Defense for International Security Affairs . Includes files from the secretary of Defense and the deputy secretary of defense for international security .
 The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor endorses their interpretation of events . The memoirs are published by the State Department .