 The mission of the book, Blue Moon over Cuba, is to tell the story of how low-level photographic reconnaissance assisted President Kennedy to resolve, peacefully, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War .
 We are fortunate to have Mr Dobbs, former Washington Post reporter and prolific author of many books, write a magnificient introduction to our book .
 His combat experiences in the Pacific form the basis for his leadership in VFP-62 . He was deployed to the Pacific with the U.S. Navy in 1991 .
 Squadron history from FASRON 3 in 1949 through the 50's with VC-62's F2H-2P Banshees and F9F-6&8P Cougars . F8U-1P photo-Crusaders became VFP-62 in 1956
 The history of the Bay of Pigs is told and how fateful both incidents were on the eventual Soviet military build-up in Cuba . The film tells the story of the events in Cuba and Cuba .
 The Soviets provided military armaments, including nuclear missiles, and training to Fidel Castro in early 1962 . The Soviets also provided training and armaments to the Castro family .
 The CIA was sending U-2s over the island and caught them in the act . Fortunately, the CIA was able to catch them .
 This chapter tells of the difficulties intelligence agencies had in gathering the intelligence and how the need for low-level high-resolution photography became apparent . This chapter also tells of how intelligence agencies struggled to gather intelligence .
 The photographic evidence showed that the Soviets had introduced a defensive-ring of surface-to-air and medium-range ballistic missiles around the island, which caused great alarm in Washington .
 Also told was how VFP-62 got selected for the first missions over Cuba . Photo interpreters analyzed the aerial photography, providing President Kennedy with the bad news of expansion of missile sites .
 The chapter includes stories of the evacuation of Gitmo dependends by VFP-62's PN3 George Montgomery . The chapter culminates with President Kennedy's address to the nation and world on Oct. 9, 1962 .
 This chapter captures VFP-62 mission planning, tactics, and first-hand ""in-the-cockpit" mission accounts by Captain Ecker and Lt. Ecker . This chapter includes first hand accounts from the VFP62 .
 The film was couriered to Washington from NAS Jacksonville photo lab . Also included are accounts of the VFP-62 ground crew and the ground crew .
 Captain Ecker debriefed his mission to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and various intelligence agencies in Washington after his mission . The story of Ecker's debrief of his mission will be aired on CNN iReport .
 It tells how the Air Force had to obtain Navy cameras to obtain useable photography . The Air Force was forced to obtain the Navy cameras .
 The presentation of the photographic evidence to the world and the high drama confrontation between Ambassador Adlai Stevenson and Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorian at the UN Security Council provides insight into how powerful aerial photography was to gather support for U.S. unilateral military action in Cuba .
 The story of the Marine squadron VMCJ-2 joining VFP-62 missions over Cuba tells the story of its pilots . The story is told by pilots Col. Col. John Sutter of the squadron . Col. Sutter: "It's been a great experience for the
 Dick Conway and LCPL Jack Hayden provide colorful stories of their contributions to the U.S. military . Dick Conway, Jack Hayden and Dick Conway will appear in a new documentary on their contributions .
 Wayne Whitten provides historical information on the squadron and its electronic counter meassures around Cuba . Wayne's information includes historical information about the squadron's electronic countermeasures .
 Jerry Coffee's story of how he photographed the presence of tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba . Coffee's photo of the Cuban missile base was taken in Cuba in 1959 .
 Tad Riley and Captain Ecker describe what VFP-62 was doing during this important period . The Crusaders were having on Cuban and Soviet morale and their attempts to shoot them down .
 This chapter celebrates and presents the RF-8A Crusader . Maj. Maj. Gen. John Sutter describes the aircraft as a tour de force of the aircraft .
 Cdr. John Glenn's speed run in Project Bullet is Project Bullet . Glenn tells stories of escorting the unarmed photo planes, the dangers of flying and the joy of flying .
 Newby Kelt's accidents and includes comments by VFP-63 pilots on photo mission tactics . Newby also includes comments on photo missions .
 Jim Curry's night photo missions from the USS Enterprise over Guantanamo Naval Base check out the perimeter defenses for the base commander . Jim Curry: "The perimeter defenses are very strong"
 While a serious mission, it has some humorous incidents surrounding it . The mission has a history of humor .
 Lt. Tad Riley tell about VFP-62 missions during this period . Tells story of how MiG-21s jumped Lt. Lt. Riley .
 Also included are the diplomatic struggles to get the Soviets to complete their commitments . Also included is the struggle for the U.S. to complete commitments .
 Captain Ecker tells about the awarding of Distinguished Flying Cross medals, the Navy Unit Commendation, and other kudos from the President and others after the crisis . Ecker: "It was a very difficult time for the Navy to get back on the ground"
 This tells the story of Captain Ecker's involvement with the movie that tells the . story of the crisis, including VFP-62's mission on Oct. 31 and debriefing in Washington . This is the first time the movie has been shown in theaters .
 The film critiques the movie's positives and negatives as well as shows how scenes involving the Crusader were made . It also critiques the film's positive and negative aspects .
 A summary of the crisis, including an analysis of the intelligence successes and failures . President Kennedy's conflicts with the military brass, the aftermath and events in 1963 . The crisis was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in a major crisis .
 In addition, a critique of post-crisis efforts against Cuba and failed attempts to normalize relations between the U.S. and Cuba . In addition to the Cuban crisis, the author also critiques post-war efforts against the country .
 The chapter concludes with the burial of the time capsule at NAS Cecil Field and the subsequent discovery of it by former AT2 Greg Engler in 2011 .
 Three maps of Cuba, including the ranges of Soviet missiles, over 60 photos and color plates . Speeches by President Kennedy and three maps of the Cuba . Over 60 photos, color plates, and a complete VFP-62 roster are included .