 Missile crisis letters to go public . U.S., Soviet leaders had several exchanges in exchange for each other's .
 Official: Kennedy letters might contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved . The official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters could contain clarifications .
 Some of the letters had remained classified because they contained references to Berlin, a key point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period . One official said some of those letters remained classified .
 Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters was linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis . The Cuban government is holding a conference on missile crisis starting Thursday .
 For 13 days in October 1962, a confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union brought the world to the brink of nuclear destruction . The confrontation lasted 13 days, with 13 days of nuclear warfare .
 Clouds Over Cuba was created in partnership with the Martin Agency and Tool of North America .
 The account will allow a new generation to understand one of the most trying times in American history . It will offer a realistic perspective of the fear and danger felt by President Kennedy, his advisors and the American people .
 @JFK1962 has borrowed largely from the secret EXCOMM tapes and declassified material to portray the most accurate representation of life during those perilous two weeks . The account was created in an effort to make it as historically accurate as possible .
 Started in 2010 with President Kennedy's 1960 campaign, this social media project has used news clips, material from the Library archives, and JFK's own words to retell the 1,000 days of his administration from his own viewpoint .
 Visitors listen in as President Kennedy and his advisers work furiously to avert a nuclear war and solve the crisis through strategic diplomacy . Visitors listen to President Kennedy's efforts to avert nuclear war .
 Original documents, artifacts, and photographs complement the tapes, breathing humanity into this milestone 20th century event . Original documents and artifacts, including photographs, complement the recordings . Original photos, documents, and photos complement each other .
 A free mobile app based on the exhibit currently on display at the National Archives is available at the Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . The free app will be available for download at the museum .
 Zoom in on President Kennedy's notes, read the actual classified memos, and listen to his words . Listen to Kennedy's words as he alerts the nation to the crisis in Cuba . Zoom in and read the classified memos from the president .
 In October 1962, President Kennedy announced the discovery of Soviet missiles armed with nuclear warheads in Cuba . The U.S. announced an American blockade to intercept vessels from Soviet bloc countries bound for Cuba . In a televised address on October 22, 1962, Kennedy disclosed the discovery .
 Rape of the Sabine Women's classical subject and allusions to earlier masterpieces also allow it to carry a more universal message . The film was likely intended as a criticism of President Kennedy's policy decisions in Cuba .
 The 13-day confrontation tested the mettle and resolve of both Kennedy and Khrushchev . The confrontation tested as no other Cold War encounter .
 Fidel Castro objected to the removal of offensive weapons aimed at U.S. cities . Fidel Castro was angry that the weapons were not being removed . The weapons were clearly offensive weapons .
 In accordance with a secretly drafted agreement, the Russian missile systems were removed by Dec. 2013 . The deal ended the most perilous face-off of the Cold War . The Russians were removed from the U.S. in accordance with the agreement .
 Kennedy learned for sure of Soviet intentions to construct offensive missile sites in Cuba on Oct. Oct. 1962 . Kennedy learned of his discovery when he was given photographic proof of their construction . Kennedy had first learned of Soviet intent to construct missile sites .
 Both communist leaders, ever since the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs fiasco, feared another United States invasion attempt . Both leaders feared another attempt to invade the U.S.
 Unlike his actions during the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy now acted quickly and decisively . Kennedy acted quickly, decisively. Unlike his . actions during . the . Bay of . Pigs invasion .
 Robert Kennedy established a special committee to make recommendations on the U.S. response to the threat . The committee was comprised of his top advisers, top military commanders, and importantly his brother Robert Kennedy .
 The military, almost unanimously, demanded a nuclear airstrike to destroy the missile sites . The military has been criticized for not doing so so .
 The president agreed with his brother that such a military strike could well precipitate a nuclear war . However, after much thought and soul-searching, the president said such a strike could precipitate nuclear war, he said .
 He instituted a naval blockade of Cuba, which was successful in convincing Khrushchev to back down . Instead of stopping Cuba, he instituted a blockade of Cuban territory .
 Kennedy received photographic proof of the missile sites’ construction . Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, who openly lied to Kennedy in a face-to-face encounter, but also Khrushchev, said that the Soviets were not supplying Castro with offensive missiles .
 The Soviet premier was caught with his “hand in the cookie jar” when he saw the folly of supplying missiles to Castro . Castro agreed to remove the missiles from the Soviet Union . The missiles were removed from Cuba in 1961 .
 Kennedy wisely gave Khrushchev a face-saving out by agreeing to the removal of, what were obsolete, U.S. missiles in Turkey and stating that the United States was not contemplating an invasion of Cuba . Kennedy wisely agreed to remove the missiles from Turkey and stated that the U
 He went against the advice of the military and many of his advisers to pursue a peaceful solution to what could well have ended in a nuclear conflict . President George W. Bush went against his military advice to pursue peaceful solution .
 Frankel's short and graceful account is an excellent introduction to a vital part of our recent past . For those too young to remember the only direct nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, Frankel is a good introduction .
 Frankel offers new insights based on his personal memories and newly available archives . Frankel: For those already steeped in missile crisis lore, Frankel shares new insights . He says the missile crisis was the first time the U.S. launched a nuclear weapons program .
 Nuclear missiles were being secretly placed off Florida by a dangerous adversary seeking a fundamental change in the balance of power . A dangerous adversary sought to change the power of the U.S. President .
 High-altitude photographs identified the missiles before they were deployed . The missiles will be deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Kennedy decided that the deployment of such weapons was unacceptable . But within hours after the missiles were discovered by a U-2 flight, Kennedy decided not to deploy them .
 During the first week of the crisis, no one but a small group of advisers knew about the missiles . The missiles were launched in Iran's first strike in 2009 .
 The importance of this total secrecy cannot be overestimated . A rush to action under public pressure could easily have resulted in a catastrophic mistake, says the BBC .
 Frankel's Kennedy is the most careful person in the ExCom, always searching for a solution that would meet his bottom line . Khrushchev gave him a fig leaf -the promise not to invade Cuba -to cover his retreat .
 There was one other issue, which has been denied, debated and finally revealed bit by bit . There was also another issue, and it's been denied and debated for months .
 This concerned the removal of 15 obsolete medium-range missiles from Turkey . The move was part of a plan to remove 15 of the missiles from the country .
 Khrushchev's 'trade' of Soviet missiles for American ones in Turkey would have been a substantial propaganda victory for the Soviet leader . The deal was a public ""trade"" for the U.S. missiles .
 Kennedy set out to construct a fully deniable ""non-deal deal"" on the Jupiters . Kennedy set . out to create a 'deniable' deal . Kennedy said it would be a 'non' deal'
 A Soviet missile team in Cuba shot down a U-2, killing its pilot . The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended immediate military retaliation .
 Washington and Moscow have a private deal struck . It was a night of fear in both Washington and Russia, but a deal was struck .
 The U.S. was fortunate to have a chief executive who handled the crisis with coolness and skill . President Obama handled the only nuclear confrontation between superpowers in history's first nuclear confrontation .
 Frankel brings it all back for those who lived it, but, more important, also for a generation who did not . Frankel: "It's important to remember, but also important to those who didn't"
 Fidel Castro, who was in power at the time, is also expected to attend . President Fidel Castro is expected to be at the ceremony .
 The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles . The missiles were discovered on the Caribbean island just 90 miles from Florida . The crisis was marked by the discovery of missiles in the Caribbean .
 Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the communist-run island . The conference will bring together American and Cuban players of the Cold War standoff .
 Earlier in the day, some 2,500 relatives of U.S. forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay were given 15 minutes to pack a bag each before being evacuated to Norfolk, Va. Some 2,000 relatives were evacuated from Guantanamo Bay .
 Dozens of reporters from the U.S. and other countries have been coming to Cuba to take a look back at those days of nuclear brinksmanship . With a new threat of war looming -this time with Saddam Hussein's Iraq -dozens of reporters have been visiting Cuba .
 Barbara Walters interviewed Castro over several days 25 years ago . Barbara Walters met with Castro Monday for first time .
 Last year, Cuban organizers worked with the National Security Archive to release a wealth of documents about the failed CIA-backed invasion attempt known as Bay of Pigs .
 Fernandez led Cuban ground troops at the Bay of Pigs a year before the missile crisis . Under Castro's command, Fernandez led ground troops in Cuba . Fernandez is Cuban president of the Cuban government .
 He also played a key organizing role in last year's Bay of Pigs conference . He was also a key organizer of the conference .
 The missile crisis conference will feature morning and afternoon seminars on Friday and Saturday . The conference will be held in London on Friday .
 Fernandez said he hoped the conference would teach the world more about Cuba's experience with the missile crisis . Fernandez hopes the conference will teach more about the country's experience .
 Intelligence sources insist there is no ambiguity about the missile's presence in Cuba . The missile is in Cuba, one of the world's last communist bastions . Intelligence sources say it is no longer ambiguous about its presence .
 All SS-20s were banned by the 1988 INF Treaty, and must be destroyed by May 31 . All must have been destroyed by the end of the treaty .
 The Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement ending the 1962 Cuban missile crisis barred offensive missiles from Cuba, any and all kinds .
 Bush administration officials are trying to develop a plausible theory for what they view as audacious conduct by the Soviet military and Cuban President Fidel Castro . The U.S. government is trying to find out what happened in Cuba .
 Few Soviet actions could stir the patriotic juices along the Potomac as quickly as the transfer of SS-20s to the Caribbean dictatorship .
 Bush considers a July summit with Mikhail Gorbachev and special aid for his crumbling country . The news is being held top secret while President Bush considers the summit . Bush is also considering a special aid package for the Soviet Union .
 The only explanation would appear to be linked to a minor proviso in the INF treaty that permits what is called ""museum piece display"" of the SS-20, set up in unarmed deployment .
 The treaty demands full Soviet government consultation with the U.S. before putting any weapon on public display . The treaty also demands full consultation with United States .
 One United States official told us that there is absolutely nothing to substantiate the ""museum piece"" explanation . One U.S. official said there was absolutely nothing substantiating the "" museum piece" explanation .
 A treaty-banned SS-4 medium-range missile was anchored in Cuban soil near Havana last year over strong U.S. objection . This same little-known proviso was employed by the Soviets and Cubans when the missile was deployed .
 State Department protested when Soviet Foreign Office told U.S. that Moscow wanted to send SS-4 to Cuba for that purpose . The State Department said it was a violation of the law . State Department says it was not authorized to send the SS-3 to Cuba .
 Even a missile for sightseers capable of firing warheads against the U.S. would damage relations with the Soviets and generate a strong political backlash from American politicians, particularly conservative Republicans . Despite the INF treaty, it said, even a missile that could be fired at the United States would
 Then-Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze assured the U.S. in July that no-SS 4 would be sent to Cuba . Then-Russian foreign minister Eduard .
 The latest CIA studies suggest that the Soviet Union is still mass-producing strategic weapons, including mobile missiles, that dwarf anything being produced in the United States . The Soviet Union, riven by the divisive nationality issue and a bankrupt economy, is still producing strategic weapons .
 Intelligence findings suggest Cuba may be developing a nuclear reactor capable of producing weapons-grade fuel in a new facility near Cienfuegos . It is the same area in which the one or more outlawed SS-20s have been placed .
 The Soviets have long had a facility there suspected of handling nuclear warheads to arm their strategic nuclear submarines . The facility is believed to have been used to arm strategic nuclear subs .
 Sudden, inexplicable spasms are natural in the life of expiring organisms, including empires . Sudden death is natural in life of empires, such as empires .
 The savagely split and dying Soviet system may be producing just such aberrations today, says historian John Avlon . The dying system may produce aberrant results today, Avlon says .
 Bush administration officials are not likely to accept that as any final answer to Castro's missiles of April . But authoritative Bush officials say they will not accept that .
 They will soon be demanding a definitive response, and Gorbachev will be compelled to give it . The Russians are demanding a response, but they will soon demand it . They will be demanding it .
 U.S. President Barack Obama has ruled out direct diplomacy between Iraq and the United States . But he ruled out any further efforts at direct diplomacy with Iraq .
 Diplomats from other countries and the U.N. are expected to keep trying to negotiate a settlement . The United Nations is expected to continue to try to find a way to reach a settlement for the dead .
 Iraqi President Saddam Hussein may blink at the final moment and withdraw his troops from Kuwait by next Tuesday's U.N. deadline . The United Nations has a deadline for withdrawal of troops from the country .
 Secretary Baker and Iraqi foreign minister Tariq Aziz got nowhere in their talks in Geneva Wednesday . Several administration officials and members of Congress said diplomacy or Hussein's backing down were still possible outcomes .
 House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin, D-Wis., has drawn a parallel between the current crisis and the Cuban Missile affair . He suggested that this showdown could end in much the same way the earlier one did .
 President Kennedy demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba or risk war . Kennedy raised the chilling prospect of nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 The crisis ended six days later when Khrushchev backed down and agreed to remove the missiles . Kennedy's ultimatum was met with a deadline to remove missiles .
 Kennedy made secret concession to remove U.S. missiles in Turkey that were aimed at the Soviet Union . Unannounced at the time was a secret concession Kennedy made to remove missiles from Turkey .
 Bush could promise to address Iraqi concerns but only after Kuwait is liberated, says Aspin . Aspin argued that as in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, Bush could address the Iraqi concerns .
 Iraq's dispute with Kuwait over borders and rights to a shared oil field . Iraq's demand for an international conference on the PalestinianIsraeli conflict also raised .
 Bush insists he won't pursue any public or secret diplomacy with Hussein that could be viewed as a prewithdrawal concession . Bush insisted anew Wednesday that he would not pursue any secret or public diplomacy with Saddam Hussein .
 The U.S. is negotiating with Russia in the Middle East . But that does not prevent other parties from trying to cut deals on behalf of the United States . Russia and the U.N. have not been able to reach a deal with Iran .
 French President Francois Mitterrand has sided with Iraq in its demand that there be an international conference on the Middle East .
 Bush does not oppose the idea of a conference but will not endorse one now because it would look like a reward for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait . Bush says a conference would be a 'reward' for the withdrawal of Kuwait from Iraq .
 Mitterrand hints that Bush might be satisfied with start of Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait by Tuesday . U.N. has authorized use of military force to drive Iraqis from Kuwait .
 U.N. Secretary-General weighing trip to Baghdad before deadline to try to settle the crisis peacefully . United Nations secretary-general also spoke with Bush by telephone .
 Bush already had ruled out serious negotiations . Aziz is regarded in the West as merely a high-level messenger who is not a close Hussein adviser .
 The gloomy expression on Baker's face after the session caused a palpable sense of fear in Washington . Yet despite these low expectations, Baker's gloomy expression was low .
 Just because Khrushchev blinked 28 years ago does not mean Hussein will do the same . Hussein will not blink again, he says, just because he blinked at the same time .
 Straus acknowledges that as Hussein and Bush go eyeball-to-eyeball during the next six days, the Iraqi leader may change his mind . Straus acknowledged that as Saddam Hussein and George W. Bush .
 The crisis erupted in October 1962 when former President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States . Kennedy learned in October that Cuba's nuclear missiles could reach the U.S.
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorenson are also attending the conference . Kennedy aides are also at the conference.
 Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted the now famous photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba, will also be present . The former CIA analyst will also attend the event .
 The former defense secretary refused to draw parallels between the missile crisis and President Bush's current calls for a pre-emptive strike on Iraq . He said he could not second-guess a sitting United States leader .
 Among the Cuban actors expected to participate in the conference are 76-year-old Castro . Castro, then a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years, was in office for three years .
 Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, a key organizer of the conference and a military commander at the time of the crisis, will also attend . Fernandez was a key military commander during the crisis . Fernandez will be the first president to attend the conference .
 National Security Archive releases declassified documents from the National Security Archives in Washington, DC . Documents will be studied for two days by officials from the NSA in Washington .
 The group will travel on Sunday to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in Pinar del Rio . It will travel to the western province of Pinar Del Rio .
 More than 40 bombs were to be emplaced, capable of obliterating nearly every major U.S. city . The bombs were intended to obliterate nearly all major United States cities .
 The two superpowers confronted each other at the brink of nuclear holocaust . The United States and the West faced each other in the face of nuclear war .
 Much has been written about the 13 days of the missile crisis, and the heroes who helped avert Armageddon . This week marks the 13th anniversary of the nuclear crisis .
 He skillfully forced Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to capitulate by devising a patient strategy of carrots and sticks . He skillly forced . He made the deal with the Soviet leader .
 Several members of the president's team of advisers have also been heralded .
 Khrushchev recognized that retreat and disgrace that accompanied it were preferable to war . He had belligerently provoked the crisis in the first place, but might be thought of that way .
 His personal correspondence with Kennedy reflected a man deeply troubled by what he had wrought . Kennedy's personal correspondence reflected a deeply troubled man . Kennedy was deeply troubled during the crisis .
 Another Russian, Oleg Penkovsky, was indisputably one of the heroes of those frightening days . Oleg was indisputable one of Russia's heroes of the days .
 A colonel in military intelligence, he was ""the spy who saved the world" according to the authors of a book by that title . He was a colonel in the military intelligence and a former member of the CIA .
 He provided American and British intelligence with blueprints and detailed information about Soviet missile systems . He also provided detailed information on Soviet missile technology .
 CIA analysts studied U-2 photography taken on Oct. 1962 in Cuba . They found vague tracings of a large excavation near San Cristobal in Pinar del Rio province in western Cuba .
 Students wondered why the U-2 was directed to that exact location . Yet for many years, students of the crisis wondered why .
 McCone: "I was not surprised to discover that it was McCone himself who wanted to talk to me" "He would not leave it to a subordinate. When they did, I would not be surprised to find out," he said .
 The secret he was protecting would be kept for many more years . The full details would not be disclosed by the CIA until 1992 .
 It turned out the epochal U-2 flight had nothing to do with Penkovsky or elaborate technical intelligence collection systems . The U.2 flight was the first of its kind in the history .
 The secret of San Cristobal was broken by three Cuban heroes, arguably the most indispensable of all the heralded figures of those 13 days . Three Cuban heroes broke the secret of the city, but not its secret, but its secret .
 Their identities have not been revealed by the CIA, and they have never come forward to claim the fame and respect they earned .
 One was a covert CIA agent, a resident of Havana, identified only as ""Julio" in a book by the CIA's chief officer in Miami at the time .
 Two Cuban refugees with corroborating information arrived in Miami and were interviewed at the Opa-Locka debriefing center . The center was manned by bilingual intelligence officers .
 One described a Soviet military convoy he had seen before departing Cuba . One described the convoy he'd seen before leaving Cuba .
 The third anonymous Cuban hero had observed a similar tableau before emigrating . He had observed the scene before leaving Cuba .
 Cuban President Castro saw a large Soviet military convoy in Pinar del Rio, Cuba . Castro also saw a Soviet convoy in Havana .
 CIA scheduled the U-2 specifically to photograph the San Cristobal area as the suspected location of a strategic Soviet missile installation . With such specific information, from three independent sources, the U.2 was assigned to the mission .
 The identities of the three Cubans arguably among the most important heroes of the missile crisis remain, even today, locked away in CIA archives . Sadly, however, the identities of these heroes are still not known .
 At Epiphany parochial school in Miami, each child was asked to bring a bedsheet and can of fruit juice .
 A teacher assured her students that the items were only for a ""social living"" project .
 South Florida leaders were facing the prospect of nuclear war with a brave innocence . They were convinced they could prepare for mushroom clouds the same way they prepared for any other disaster .
 The children weren't so sure that this new threat was that simply met . The children, however, weren't quite sure .
 Social scientists are still trying to determine what the long-term effects of the crisis had on a generation of children . Thirty years after the crisis, social scientists are trying to find out what the effects have been on a whole generation .
 The threat of nuclear destruction created the idea in the minds of young children in both America and the Soviet Union that The Bomb would cut short their lives . A study by Harvard psychiatrist John Mack has shown .
 Thirty years ago today, school kids were struggling to cope with the concept of nuclear disaster . The Americans and the Soviets were playing a nuclear game of chicken on the high seas .
 Officers aboard a U.S. Navy destroyer decided the tanker was carrying no military equipment and allowed it to proceed on to Cuba . The tanker was allowed to proceed to Cuba after it was found not to be armed .
 Miami exile Eugenio Martinez was supposed to sabotage the Matahambre copper mine . Meanwhile, off the coast of Cuba's Pinar del Rio province, a CIA mother ship was preparing to put ashore a team of Cuban rebels .
 Some military leaders are pushing for a quick air strike to get rid of the missiles . In Washington, some military leaders were pushing for an air strike .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff: Air attack on Cuban targets could be carried out within 12 hours . Maxwell Taylor: An air attack against all Cuban targets can be done within 12 days .
 Joyce Joyce was a firstgrader at Sunset Elementary in Alabama . Joyce, now a nurse in Alabama, recalls that she and the other kids practiced crouching under their desks . Joyce is now a first-grader and a nurse .
 After two weeks, she says, adults seemed to relax, and she's not certain if the incident had any lasting influence on her psyche . She says after two weeks of the incident, she was able to get back to normalcy .
 Kids also had a strong feeling of helplessness -whatever they did wouldn't be enough to overcome The Bomb . Kids also felt like they couldn't overcome the bomb .
 Many Baby Boomers postponed having children until they were well into their 30s, when the danger of nuclear war had diminished . In fact, many Baby Boomer's postponement of having children was due to the threat of a nuclear war .
 The image of nuclear holocaust, Mack suggests, may have influenced the arts as well . Mack suggests the image of the holocaust may also have influenced art .
 Studies have shown that children incorporated the nuclear bomb into their fantasies about the possibility of dying young . Michael Hughes, a Miami child psychiatrist, says that studies show that children incorporate the bomb into fantasies .
 So you go from nuclear threat and missile crisis to Vietnam war and hedonism. So go from nuke threat to Vietnam War and Vietnam war. Vietnam war . Vietnam war is Vietnam war, hedonistism. Hedonism is a form of madness .
 One news report stated that from blastoff in Cuba to explosion in Miami would be less than 15 minutes . Another report said it would take less than a half an hour to reach Miami .
 They bought water purification tablets and rushed off to one of the eight CD courses being offered . They rushed to the university to learn how to use water treatment .
 In many Florida cities, people were preparing for the crisis by buying guns . People were buying guns to prepare for the tragedy .
 Most guns shops in Dade reported no increase in sales . Dade gun shops reported no increased sales . That's not true, however .
 Officially, the U.S. government still believed in Civil Defense, in the assurance that people could get ready for a nuclear attack . People could prepare for an attack by conventional bombs .
 At the time of the missile crisis, only eight of 24 planned sirens had been installed in Dade, Florida . Only eight of the planned 24 sirens were installed .
 Most people would not be able to hear the sirens if they were ever to warn of nuclear attack . Most people don't hear sirens because of nuclear attacks .
 At one point, officials thought Miami should be evacuated in case of imminent attack . Evacuation route signs were put up on Miami's streets .
 A culvert that can be blocked off at the ends will furnish protection . Outdoors, a culvert can also provide protection .
 One company obtained 15 ""firm orders,"" and probably would have gotten many more if it had been able to build the shelters more quickly . The estimated eightweek timetable for construction for the shelters is estimated eight weeks .
 A six-person underground shelter approved by the Defense Department was a stiff $2,500 - the price of a decent new car or about $11,000 in 1992 dollars . The shelter was approved by Defense Department .
 One contractor says it's possible to get FHA financing for a shelter, but it might take weeks for approval . One contractor noted that it could take weeks to get approval .
 North Miami family uses an old, unused septic tank to make a tight-squeeze shelter . The family is using the old tank as a way to get around the neighborhood .
 Americans seem to be trying to prepare for the nuclear threat, residents of Cuba seemed to be much more fatalistic . Cuban residents were more optimistic about the situation .
 Cuban official says he does not feel fear, but not fear . Cuban official: "No, not really. Not really. I feel fear"
 "I do recall feeling sadness at the prospect of the death of my wife and children," he says . "I remember feeling sadness," he adds .
 In Pinar del Rio province, militia men scared off the Mongoose sabotage team . The Mongoose team had to fight to retreat to the CIA mother ship off-shore .
 CIA Director John McCone informed the White House that some of the missiles in Cuba were now considered operational . McCone: Some of Cuba's missiles are now operational .
 He ordered the U.S. Navy to stop and inspect a Soviet ship the next day . The next day, he ordered the United States Navy to inspect the Soviet ship .