 Fifty years ago during the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviet Union and the United States came dangerously close to war . President John Kennedy: "When we said we’re not going to, and they go ahead and do it, then I think our risks increase"
 In October 1962, the U.S. had about 27,000 nuclear weapons, and the Soviets had about 3,000 . The United States and the Soviet Union had about 30 nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. could have launched about 3,000 nuclear weapons and the Soviets about 250 . In a first salvo of a nuclear exchange with its intercontinental adversary, the United States could launch 3,200 nuclear weapons . The Soviets could launch about 250 weapons .
 The total megatonnage in that initial exchange would probably have been approximately 50,000 to 100,000 times greater than that of the Hiroshima bomb . The initial detonation would have been 50,,000-100,000 greater than Hiroshima's .
 Such use of nuclear weapons in 1962 would have imperiled not only the Soviet and U.S. peoples, but much if not all of humankind . Use of such a weapon would have led to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the United States .
 President John Kennedy met in secret from October 16 to 22 with his chosen high-level advisers in the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm . ExComm met with President Kennedy in secret to determine policy in October 1962 .
 To the world, the week of the Cuban missile crisis began publicly on October 22, with Kennedy’s dramatic TV and radio announcement of what he termed Soviet “offensive” missiles in Cuba .
 He declared that the weapons must be withdrawn and that he was establishing a naval quarantine . The weapons were withdrawn and he declared that he wanted to quarantine them .
 To do nothing in the face of the Soviet act would be unacceptable, he indicated . The Soviet act was unacceptable, according to the president .
 The implication of Kennedy’s October 22 speech was that the Soviet deployment in Cuba was overturning the strategic nuclear balance . The implication was that unless the Soviet missiles in Cuba were removed, they would place the United States in imminent military peril . The U.S. government said that
 Kennedy implied that first trying secret diplomacy would have been inadequate and that a public confrontation, the quarantine, was both essential and prudent . Kennedy also implied that the quarantine was necessary .
 Kennedy: What would happen if the Soviets militarily challenged the U.S. quarantine or if they did not soon agree to withdraw their missiles from Cuba . Kennedy: If the Soviets did not agree to pull their missiles out of Cuba, it would be a disaster for the United States .
 The U.S.-imposed quarantine and the dangers of a shoot-out at sea or worse, seemed to end when the Soviets backed down on October 28 . The near-deadly week of dramatic public confrontation, with the U.N. imposed quarantine, was the end of a
 They publicly promised to withdraw their missiles from Cuba, and the United States seemed to promise not to invade Cuba in the future . The U.S. also promised not to attack Cuba in any future .
 The two great powers argued about the removal of Soviet bombers from Cuba in fall of 1962 . In fact, the crisis continued, although behind the scenes and in greatly reduced form .
 The missile crisis raises many important and often interrelated questions that should be considered in this article . It is not the first time the missile crisis has been discussed in the past .
 Kennedy’s handling of the missile crisis was viewed as his finest hour . In the fall of 1962 and for about a quarter-century afterward, it was seen as his best hour . The ‘Finest Hour’
 Kennedy had been skillfully tough and resolute and therefore eminently successful, says historian John Avlon . Kennedy was a tough, resolute figure in the mid-1980s, Avlon says .
 He avoided war while compelling Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to back down . He had, through shrewd intelligence and careful planning, avoided war .
 Kennedy resisted the Soviet Union’s public demand for a trade of the 15 U.S. intermediate-range Jupiter missiles in Turkey in return for Soviet removal of its missiles from Cuba . Kennedy, in that popular version, had resisted the public demand .
 Kennedy showed that victory could be won without yielding to Communist demands . Kennedy had maintained NATO alliance, defended the U.S.-led system of collective security .
 It was a story of American pluck and skill, of U.S. strength and power, and of wise presidential leadership in managing a crisis . It was also a tale of pluck, skill, and wise leadership, Obama said .
 Kennedy aides Theodore Sorensen and Arthur Schlesinger Jr. in their memoirs-cum-histories . Such general contentions were promoted in the memoirs of the Kennedy administration . The memoirs were published in the 1960s .
 Their uncritical analyses of the missile crisis were further advanced in the late 1960s by Robert Kennedy’s Thirteen Days on that dangerous period . Robert Kennedy's Th13 Days on the dangerous period was published in 1964 .
 The truly great triumph of the pro-Kennedy memoirists was the celebration of United States and Kennedy success and the creation of often false history that sometimes involved knowing deception on crucially important matters .
 Key documents and tapes of the ExComm meetings were slowly declassified and other new information became available . The narrative and interpretation of the events on the Kennedy crisis was punctured decisively .
 President Kennedy and his brother wanted new sabotage expeditions against Cuba, documents reveal . They didn't realize that such quasi-military activities could have led to a U.S. attack .
 McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy, and President Kennedy had all agreed that the Soviet missiles did not realistically increase the military threat to the U.S.
 At the time of the crisis, the U.S. assumed it had significant superiority over the Soviet Union in intercontinental ballistic missiles and other delivery systems capable of reaching its main adversary . The United States assumed it was superior in missile technology to Russia .
 It turned out, according to Soviet information released much later, that the Soviets probably had only about 20 to 44 ICBMs . The Soviets had about 20 or 44 ICBM missiles .
 The U.S.-to-Soviet ratio of at least 4-to-1 and possibly more than twice that gave the United States a near-counterforce capability . The United States had a nearly-counter-force capability, according to the historian .
 A U.S. first strike could destroy a very high number of the Soviet land-based ICBMs and might, according to the then-recent public explanations of counterforce thinking, make any retaliatory strike unlikely .
 U.S. buildup in missiles under Kennedy meant that the Soviets were dangerously behind and that the situation would worsen for them . Such analysis, with the continuing large United States buildup in missile defense, would have worsened the situation for the Soviets .
 Analysts should be struck by the poor intellectual quality of the discussions at those high-level meetings, writes Peter Bergen . In particular in focusing on the ExComm transcripts, analysts should be surprised by the quality of those discussions .
 "Some of the most important issues were treated inadequately or virtually ignored," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The most important issue was not treated adequately or ignored"
 ExComm members were asked why the Soviets had put the missiles in Cuba . The Soviets had placed the missiles there in Cuba, the ExComm said .
 It was not pursued systematically; distressingly, it was treated in piecemeal ways . It's not been pursued systematically, it's been treated in piecesmeal ways, says Simon Tisdall .
 Khrushchev was seeking to gain valuable leverage in the ongoing Berlin problem . The general answers often converged, albeit loosely, on the idea that he was trying to weaken United States support in Latin America .
 The analysis of a likely Berlin motive for Khrushchev was possibly correct, although the evidence on that interpretation is still not adequate . The analysis is still incomplete, however, and the evidence still not enough to support that interpretation .
 Kennedy and members of the ExComm in October 1962 received little attention from Kennedy and the Soviet Union in October . Yet, other Soviet motives now generally recognized as important were ignored . Kennedy and ExComm members of October 1962 .
 No one in the ExComm focused on the fact that the Soviets were far behind in the strategic arms race . The Soviets might well be acting, in part, to narrow that gap .
 Excluding motive helped narrow the range of options that U.S. decision-makers considered during the crisis . Excluding that motive undoubtedly helped greatly narrow the options .
 No ExComm member suggested Khrushchev and the Soviets might have been acting, at least in part, to defend Cuba from a feared U.S.-sponsored attack .
 The Soviets seemed genuinely to fear that the United States might sponsor such an attack . Yet in a well-publicized statement of September 11, 1962, the Soviets emphasized their commitment to defending Fidel Castro’s regime against a U.S. attack .
 ExComm members knew the U.S. had carried out a series of secret CIA marauding attacks on Cuba in the preceding 12 months as part of Operation Mongoose . The United States had developed secret plans for possible large-scale military attacks .
 No one in the ExComm concluded that Khrushchev and the Soviets might have been responding to the very recent U.S. emplacement of Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy did briefly liken the Soviet emplacement in Cuba to a U.S. missile in Turkey, but he apparently had forgotten that the United States already had put missiles in Turkey . At one juncture, Kennedy did .
 Soviet reaction was a response to the U.S. action in Turkey, President Vladimir Putin said . When he was told that the United States had done so, he seemed to lose interest in thinking about explaining it .
 Khrushchev was publicly and quite plausibly to claim exactly that . Yet, years later, years after that, he was publicly saying exactly that. Yet, later, he claimed that .
 There was a marked failure of intellect in the ExComm, as well as a failure to seek, even briefly, to view the international situation from an adversary’s perspective .
 That may require a level of empathy and a reduction in self-righteousness, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't think it's OK"
 The various pro-Kennedy memoirs also concealed a crucial set of facts that significantly alters the narrative . The memoirs conceal key facts about Kennedy's life, including that he died in 1968 .
 On October 27, Kennedy made a deal with the Soviets through his brother Robert . The United States would yield to the Soviet demand for removal of U.S. Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 Only about half of Kennedy’s top U.S. advisers knew of the agreement . Only about . half of . Kennedy‘s top United States advisers knew . of that agreement, only about half knew of that .
 The deal was kept secret for about 25 years, and thus most of the attentive world did not know . Kennedy, despite the many claims about his steady toughness, had actually “softened” to make a deal in order to achieve a deal .
 Even Lyndon Johnson, who, as Kennedy’s vice president, succeeded him as president after his assassination, was not aware of the deal .
 As president, Johnson often was driven by his sense of rivalry with his dead predecessor . Johnson often would be driven by rivalry with the late president's predecessor .
 Kennedy's claim of toughness in Vietnam was factually false, says historian . One wonders whether he would have known if he had known that the claim was false in Vietnam .
 Another issue, probably separate from the problems of not understanding Soviet motivation, was failing to anticipate the profound difficulties of managing a crisis and avoiding potentially catastrophic errors .
 In discussing U.S. responses to Soviet missiles in Cuba, no one dwells on the likelihood of catastrophic error . No one dwelled on the need to take that issue into account .
 Serious mistakes would not occur, organizations would not make dangerous errors, and crucial orders would not be misunderstood or violated . Serious errors would not happen, and serious mistakes would be avoided . Serious mistakes are not likely to occur, says President Obama .
 The group ignored basic and seemingly obvious problems, such as if someone in the U.S. system launched nuclear missiles through error or anti-Soviet anger .
 In elaborate chains of command with various people operating at different levels and often acting amid anxiety and fatigue in a crisis in making crucial decisions, various mistakes are virtually inevitable .
 Signals will be misinterpreted, actions will not be properly calibrated, situations will be misunderstood, and necessary revisions of procedures won't be made, say officials . "Excessive risks will be taken, and excessive risks will also be taken," says the government .
 What is desired at the upper levels of government may easily unravel and come undone elsewhere in complicated systems and organizations . These problems may be compounded, adding to the danger that what is desired is easily unraveled and undone .
 Political scientist Scott Sagan and journalist Michael Dobbs have done important work documenting this phenomenon for the missile-crisis period .
 "Any one of these acts could have escalated, and some might have quickly involved the use of nuclear weapons," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . Sutter: Any one of the acts could've escalated, including nuclear weapons .
 In none of these frightening U.S. cases was Kennedy or even one of his top associates actually in control, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev and other high-level Soviet officials were not truly in control of the submarine captain . Similarly, in the Soviet case of the . submarine captain, in . the . case of . the Soviet . case, Khrushchev and others were not in control .
 McNamara concluded that such crises cannot be managed and therefore must be avoided . The many revelations, decades after the crisis, of near misses led McNamara to conclude that . McNamara: Such crises can be managed .
 JFK and his advisers rejected an initial attempt at secret diplomacy with the Soviets before moving to the dangerous option of a quarantine . It still seems lamentable and not easily explicable that Kennedy and advisers so easily rejected the initial attempt to secret diplomacy .
 The scattered evidence indicates that no one in the ExComm significantly pushed for trying secret diplomacy first, the quarantine emerged as the responsible alternative to invasion or attack . The majority, not including the Joint Chiefs of Staff and a few others, endorsed the quarantine route .
 Dissenters wanted stronger military action without initial attempts at diplomacy . Those dissenters wanted strong military action before diplomacy .
 Charles Bohlen, a former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union, wrote to Kennedy on October 18 . Bohlen is a recognized Soviet expert and a former diplomat to the USSR .
 If it fails, the U.S. could still move to other routes to try to secure withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . If it failed, the United States could still seek other routes .
 If the United States began with a public confrontation, a quarantine or even more, the result could be war . In contrast, if the U.S. begins with a quarantine, it could be a quarantine . The result of a quarantine could be the result of war .
 Such painful implications indirectly raise a related set of unstated issues dealing with ethical considerations, such as ethical considerations . Such issues may also raise questions about the role of ethical considerations in the U.S.
 No one in the upper reaches of government explicitly raised that profound question of ethical rights and responsibilities reaching beyond obligations to the United States itself and involving responsibilities to and the rights of other peoples elsewhere .
 On the 50th anniversary of that perilous crisis, it seems appropriate now to analyze and assess it . The 50-year anniversary of the crisis is 50 years old .
 He wishes to acknowledge Alexander George, Martin Hellman, David Holloway, and Scott Sagan for their advice over the years . McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara for their participation in interviews for their .
 This is the source for all references to Kennedy’s October 22, 1962, speech . The speech was made by President Kennedy in 1962 .
 Dmitri Volkogonov in 1989 stated that there were only “about twenty” Soviet ICBM launchers in October 1962 . The ICBM was launched by the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Most analysts seem to have accepted Volkogonov’s report, not the U.S. intelligence, that number of missile launchers indicated the number of ICBMs in 1962 .
 Analysts should have serious doubts about ascribing a Berlin motive because the evidence on that issue seems weak, they say . Analysts say the evidence seems to be weak .
 These general notions were developed far more fully and with sophistication, other works. These ideas were developed more fully, with sophistication in other works .
 Arms Control Association depends on the generous contributions of individuals who share our goal of promoting public understanding of and support for effective arms control policies . Donate about $1,000 to the Arms Control .
 ACA is a nonpartisan, nonprofit membership organization, and your financial support makes a difference . ACA is nonpartisan and nonprofit membership is nonpartisan .