 If you find papers matching your topic, you may use them only as an example of work . Use these papers only as examples of your own work .
 This work was submitted once by a student who originally wrote it . Also you should remember, that this work was alredy submitted once .
 U.S. destroyers were positioned along a picket line with the aim of intercepting Soviet ships moving missiles and atomic warheads to Cuba .
 American air, naval pegged with ground forces got ready for air raids against Soviet missile sites under structure in Cuba .
 The tick tack of the watch was retelling him there was not ample time left left. The tick tannoy was telling him there wasn't enough time left .
 Similar to a chess game, John F Kennedy was at the verge of making a quick and clever decision . Similar to chess games, Kennedy was about to make a quick decision .
 A lot of people’s lives depended on his decision, hence were in his hands, says CNN.com . The decision was made by President Barack Obama on Thursday night .
 The ‘Fourteen days of October’ stood as the closest that the universe had ever witnessed to a nuclear war . What is branded as the “Fourteen Days of Oct.” stood as a close encounter between nuclear war and a nuclear bomb .
 In 1962, the Soviet Union started to construct secret missile headquarters in Cuba for the drive of creating equilibrium over the United States arms collection . The Soviet Union built the headquarters for the purpose of creating an equilibrium with the U.S.
 The U.S. took instant actions to avert this progress from the Soviet Union, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States took instant action to avert a Soviet advance"
 Chess is a game of chess, but one can either gain, loose, or the game is haggard . As in each chess game, one player can gain or loose, the game must be won .
 In politics, the game is only haggard when there is cooperation amongst the players . In politics politics is only when there are cooperation among the players, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 President Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev were able to influence a compromise . In this case, the destiny of millions hinged upon the capability of two people President John F Kennedy and Prime Minister of Soviet Union to influence the compromise .
 One of the choices that Kennedy had was to block Cuba so as to strike the missiles located by USSR in Cuba’s terrain . Kennedy had to choose between striking Cuba and striking the missiles in Cuba's terrain .
 Some people still consider that it would have been a harmless option into backing the end of the conflict .
 This would not function as a way to terminate the conflict but somewhat to initiate it . However, this would not be a way of terminating the conflict .
 The United States deliberated on placing an attack on Cuba via air and sea . The U.S. deliberated for years on a possible attack on the island nation .
 The Role of Diplomacy in Preventing the 3rd Word War"" with a personal 20% discount . The role of diplomacy in preventing the Third Word War is at the center of the book .