 All other staff and students are only entitled to browse the material and should not download and/or print out a copy . Staff and students should not be allowed to print out copies of material .
 This Digital Copy and any digital or printed copy supplied to or made by you under the terms of this Licence are for use in connection with this Course of Study . Use of this licence is limited to allow us to use it in the course of study .
 You may retain such copies after the end of the course, but strictly for your own personal use . You may keep such copies .
 No further copying, storage or distribution is permitted without the consent of the copyright holder . Except as provided for by copyright law, no further copying is permitted .
 The author has moral rights in the work and neither staff nor students may cause, or permit, the distortion, mutilation or other modification of the work, or any other derogatory treatment of it .
 History offers no parallel to those 13 days in October 1962, when the U.S. and the Soviet Union paused at the nuclear precipice .
 For thirteen days, the USA and the Soviet Union stood 'eyeball to eyeball', each w ith the power o f mutual destruction in hand . For 13 days the two countries fought over each other .
 Both nations edged backwards towards detente . Having peered over the edge o f the nuclear cliff, both nations edged back .
 Never again was the risk o f war between them as great as it was during those last tw o weeks o f October 1962 .
 An understanding o f this cris is -h o w w it arose and how it was resolved-is thus essential for every serious student o f foreign affairs . An understanding of this crisis is essential to every serious foreign affairs student, he says .
 The Soviet governm ent first began supplying arms to Cuba in the autum n o f 1959 . The Soviet government first began providing arms to the island nation in 1959 .
 The Soviet Presidium approved Cuban requests fo r a substantial increase in weapons in April 1962 . The pace o f shipments accelerated in the months following .
 The first Soviet medium range ballistic missiles designed to deliver nuclear war heads reached Cuban soil on 8 September . The missiles were secretly transported beneath the decks o f Soviet ships .
 In the days that followed, additional MRBMs, missile trailers, fuelling trucks, special radar vans, missile erectors, and nuclear warhead storage bunkers arrived .
 The final decision to put missiles in Cuba was made in the Soviet Presidium . The path from the general decision to the actual emplacement o f operational missiles in C u b a -w e re .
 Secrecy deprived each organization o f inform ation about other organizations and made it difficult fo r anyone to keep the w hole operation in view . Secrecy deprives each organization of access to other organizations .
 The clandestine shipping, unloading, and delivery of the missiles to the construction sites was a m ajor organizational success, eluding detection by U.S. intelligence agencies .
 Once weapons and equipm ent arrived in Cuba, control of the operation shifted to the Group o f Soviet Forces in Cuba .
 A successful effort to camouflage the operation could have been possible . A successful attempt to camouflage was possible, but it was not successful .
 President Kennedy never camouflaged construction projects in the Soviet Union . Kennedy's administration never tried to cover up the fact that construction projects were being camouflaged .
 Construction managers were aware that the mission was secret, they were under orders to com plete the project in an accelerated timetable .
 Better ca m o u fla fla g e -w h ich could have been achieved by w orking under netting o r plastic covers in the tropical heat .
 Had the operation been managed by an intelligence agency, a different choice w ould likely have been made . A fie ld organization in the business o f deploying missiles could be expected to focus first on preparing a site fo r possible com bat .
 A US U-2 spy craft had flow n over the areas where the missiles were deployed on 14 October . The missiles were fired by the U.S. in October .
 Gribkov: 'M oscow had sent them to Cuba to defend against air attack, not espio­ nage' But, he said, they were sent to defend from air attacks, not from espio ­ nage .
 Standing orders to air defence units told them to fire only if attacked, to avoid provoking any incident o r unwanted attention before the nuclear missiles were operational . Air defence units were told to fire if they were attacked .
 Khrushchev expressed his intentions never to enter the relevant organizations' operational directives . These orders were undoubtedly w ritten by someone not present when Khrushche expressed his concerns, causing the Soviet leader's intentions to never enter the .
 Pliyev suspected that the missiles had been discovered on 14 October, and told Gribk­ ov about his suspicion days later . He suspected that they had been found in October .
 There is no evidence that the Soviet governm ent learned o f Pliyev's misgivings . However, fo r 18 O ctober there was no evidence .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met w ith Kennedy on 18 October, he saw no sign that the Americans knew what was going on .
 Fearing that Kennedy was about to announce an invasion o f Cuba, the Presidium drafted an instruction authorizing Pliyev to use tactical nuclear weapons to repel it . The Presidium of the Soviet Union drafted the instruction .
 Operationally, he had full control o f f those nuclear weapons, since PALs (permissive action links) had not yet been installed on Soviet weapons . PALs require a code from higher authorities to unlock the weapons, which had not been installed .
 Pliyev reported his move to his superiors in Moscow . They sharply reminded him that he needed authorization from Moscow before using any weapons .
 When they convened at 11:50m. on Tuesday 16 October, senior advisers considered these questions . Kennedy's senior advisers consider these questions when they met with Kennedy's team .
 Analyst who knew nothing about the Soviet Union, except that it was a powerful country, assumed that one o f its im portant allies, Cuba, was at risk of attack by a large threatening neigh­bour .
 Attempts to explain Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba w ith the Cuban defence hypothesis do not withstand careful examination . Although persuasive, attempts to explain the existence of the Cuban missile programme are not persuasive .
 If deterrence, meaning the pre­ vention o f a m ajor attack on Cuba by threatening a response that w ould impose unaccepta­ ble costs, had been the objective . A sizeable contingent o f Soviet troops in Cuba would have been sufficient .
 If the Soviets believed that a nuclear deterrent was necessary, the tactical nuclear weapons then deployed provided a better solution . If fo r some reason the Soviets thought that a . nuke deterrent was needed, the . tactical . weapons then provided a . better solution.
 They could not only be brought to Cuba more quickly, but w ith considerably less likelihood o f being discovered .
 The defining feature o f f the Cold W ar was global com petition between American and Soviet values and interests . Cold War politics was a key feature of the Cold War . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were united in Cold War terms .
 Kennedy responded to McNamara's initial assessment that the Soviet missiles in Cuba had little m ilitary significance . President Kennedy fell back on this hypothesis when he responded to initial assessment .
 Kennedy's response m ight remind us o f debates over the use of're d lines'in international relations today . Kennedy responded to the question: 'What do you think of the world's most important line?'
 First, the Soviet Union wanted to demonstrate that it was capable o f bold action in support of a com m unist revolution, impressing China and healing a split between Moscow and Beijing that had widened since 1959 .
 Second, the Soviets sought to radically redefine the context o f the Berlin problem . The Soviets sought the context of the Berlin crisis in order to deal with it .
 Even a few MRBMs threatening the entire south-eastern USA (including Washing­ ton) should have sufficed . To challenge American intentions and firmness, the U.S. should have given enough .
 The number o f missiles and character o f their deploym ent show that making them a fait accompli was not a high priority . But the num ber o f missile missiles and . character o . f their deployments show that . making them . a . high priority was not
 At no point on the globe outside the continental USA were the Soviets so m ilitarily disadvantaged vis-a-vis the USA as in the Caribbean .
 This arsenal was being rapidly expanded by the Kennedy administration . Moreover, this arsenal was expanding by the administration .
 M oving its existing nuclear weapons to locations from w hich they could reach American targets was one option for addressing this problem . The U.S. could also move its existing nukes to locations where they could be located, such as New York .
 Khrushchev could use the missiles to solve the Berlin prob­ lem on his own terms, writes Peter Bergen .
 Khrushchev w ould force the West Germans out of Berlin, confident that the missiles in Cuba would deter the Americans from starting a war . If the U.S. did nothing, the West would have been forced to leave Berlin . The U.K. was confident the missiles
 Berlin was immeasurably more important to the Soviet Union than Cuba . Khrushchev's trade w ould also be a w in fo r Khruschev .
 Each of the hypotheses assumes that the Soviet decision to emplace missiles led to a coherent plan for implementing that decision .
 This would require comprehensive air defences and camouflage to avoid detection until the weapons were emplaced . This w ould require comprehensive . air defences . and camouflage . This would also require . comprehensive air . defences and camouflaged camouflage .
 He planned to visit the USA and unveil his triu m p h in the second half o f November . He was due to unveil his new triu p h triu .
 Even on the round-the-clock construction schedule adopted after the U.S. announcem ent that the missiles had been dis­covered, only the MRBMs would be in place by that time .
 President Kennedy assembled a select circle of advisers designated as the Executive Com m ittee o f the National Security Council, also known as the 'ExComm', from 16 to 19 October . Kennedy assembled the 'Commons' from 16-19 October .
 Because the W hite House meetings were secretly taped, unbeknownow nst to participants except fo r the President and his brother, Robert Kennedy, we have unprecedented evi­ dence abo u t w hat members o f the United States governm ent w ere
 Failing to act forcibly could produce undesirable political outcomes . The U.S. has a history of failing to act forcefully .
 First, it w ould underm ine the confi­ dence o f his adm inistration, especially those members of Congress who had so firm ly defended his policy towards Cuba .
 The entire circle o f pressures to w hich Kennedy as president had to be responsive pushed him in a single d ire ctio n -vig o ro u s action . Kennedy's actions were the result of a single decision to take action .
 Joint Chiefs o f Staff wanted an invasion to elim inate the missile threat, thereby finally putting an end to a main Soviet outpost in the western hemisphere .
 Dean Rusk, the Secretary o f State, says the face o f the issue was diplomatically atic .
 He saw an o p p p o rtu n ity to persuade Castro to push the Soviets out of Cuba . He saw it as a way to get the Soviets to push them out .
 Rusk proposed warning the Cuban leader that the Soviets were putting his regime in m ortal danger and w ould in the end happily sell him out fo r a victory in Berlin . Rusk's proposal was rejected by the Soviets .
 McNamara raised the idea o f blockading future weapons shipments to Cuba . His suggestion did nothing about the missiles already deployed there except to warn the Soviets not to use them .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy was uncharacteristically ambivalent . Bundy was ambivalent about the situation in the wake of the terrorist attacks . Bundy's comments were uncharacteristic .
 On 18 O ctober he advocated taking no action, fearing that the Soviets w ould retaliate in kind against Berlin . He also advocated not taking action against the Soviet Union .
 Bundy changed his mind and supported an air strike against the missiles . Bundy later changed his position and supported a strike . Bundy was the first Republican to support a strike against Syria .
 Taylor jo in e d his JCS colleagues in support o f an invasion to fo llo w up the air strikes . As new overflights revealed that IRBMs had also been shipped to Cuba .
 President Kennedy outlined the most telling argum ent he w ould repeat over the days to come . Kennedy outlined his subordinates on 18 October .
 An attack on Cuba w ould cause a retaliatory attack on Berlin, w. ould instantly present Kennedy w ith no meaningful m. ilitary option except nuclear retaliation .
 President Kennedy met w ith the JCS and found them in support of an air attack on Cuba . The attack would retain the m ilitary advantages o f surprise .
 A ir Force chief o f staff Curtis LeMay, confident in his own political base o f support on Capitol Hill, was boldest in confronting the President . LeMay: "I'm confident in my political base. I'm not going to back down"
 The blockade w ould be coupled w ith an ultim atum demanding removal o f the missiles . The blockade would be coupled with the ultimatum demanding removal of missiles .
 Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon and McCone then supported this option . U.S. Treasury Secretary Doug Dillon then supported the option .
 Rusk sug­ gested a fourth option o f a blockade, which, instead o f accompanying an ultim atum or an offer to trade U.S. assets, w ould be intended purely to freeze the situation . Rusk: A blockade would be intended to
 Kennedy sided fu rth e r w ith the b lo cka de -u ltim a tu m m  faction . Kennedy sided with the fu llo w in g day faction .
 First, he decided, they w ould see how Khrushchev dealt w ith with the missiles in Cuba . First, they decided to see how the missiles were deployed in Cuba.
 First, it was a middle course between inac­­ tion and attack-aggressive enough to comm unicate firmness o f intent, but not as precipitous as a strike . First, the course was between the inac ­ceptceptional and aggressive .
 By flexing its muscles, the U.S. could exploit subsequent non-nuclear steps in which it w ould enjoy significant local superior­ ity . The blockade also perm itted the USA .
 At 7m. on 22 October 1962, President Kennedy delivered the most significant foreign policy address o f his career . At 7.30pm on 22 Oct. 1962, Kennedy delivered a major foreign policy speech .
 JFK: Let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out . JFK's address to the American people, 22 October 1962, was published in 1962 .
 The cost o f freedom is always h ig h -b u t . Americans have always paid it. The cost of freedom is the cost of living in America, says President Obama .
 President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for the Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba . President Kennedy signed the proclamation in 1961 .
 President Kennedy's announcem ent o f the blockade emphasized that it was an initial step in a series o f moves that eventually threatened air strikes o r invasion . Kennedy's announcement was a series of steps toward a possible air strike .
 Hundreds of U.S. tactical fighters moved to airports in Cuba . Hundreds of Cuban targets were easy striking distance for U.N. forces .
 The next day, 24 October, Khrushchev issued a flat, unyielding response to Kennedy's demands . Kennedy's response was a flat response to the demands .
 By the m orning o f 25 October, Kennedy had sent the Soviets a tough, terse reply . Kennedy sent a tough reply .
 He promptly sent instructions to accept UN Secretary-General U Thant's proposal to avoid a confrontation at the quarantine line .
 Excerpts from Khrushchev's letter to JFK 1 k . Excerpted from the letter to Kennedy: "You are worried over Cuba. You are worried about Cuba"
 'Friday let­ ter' suggesting withdrawal o f Soviet missiles fo r a non-invasion pledge was sent secretly and considered by theExComm in secret .
 The'Saturday letter1not only changed the terms o f the deal, adding a new dem a n d -th e withdrawal o f Turkish missiles as w e ll-b u t it did so in a public mes­ sage , making it politically impossible for Khrushchev's
 NATO missiles in Turkey would be traded for Soviet missiles in Cuba, Cuba . The U.S. government is considering a proposal to trade NATO missiles for Soviet ones in Cuba .
 Kennedy could simply reject it, as many members of the ExComm urged; but he found that unaccepta­ ble. He found it unaccepted . Kennedy could have simply rejected it .
 Before the USA had made a final decision about m ilitary action, Khrushchev had begun to move . The U.S. had not yet made a decision on whether to take action .
 W arning signs o f im m inent com bat in Cuba arrived in Moscow during the day o f 27 October . The signs are believed to have arrived in Russia from Cuba .
 Castro asserted that an American attack in the next twy-four to seventy-two hours was'almost inevitable'-probably a massive air strike, but possibly an invasion . In a letter to Khrushchev from the previous night, Castro said an American . attack was 'almost inevitable'
 Soviet guards manning the SAMs shot down American U-2 reconnaissance pilot Rudolf Anderson . The very next day, Soviet guards shot down an American U.2 reconnaissance plane .
 As Anderson flew through Cuban airspace, General Pliyev had been off-duty, giving low-level Soviet officers free rein to use SAMs .
 Ken­ nedy had decided earlier that any SAM used against United States aircraft wuld be met with retaliatory strikes on Soviet air defences .
 Kennedy held back, correctly surmising that the attack m ight have been a mistake . Nonetheless, Kennedy held his back and said that it might have been an error .
 Castro seemed unconcerned about the possibly disastrous consequences o f the shootdow n and indifferent to the risks o f nuclear escalation . In a letter to Khrushchev on 28 October, Castro wrote .
 President Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen to compose a response to Khrushchev . President Kennedy also asked Theodore Kennedy and Robert Kennedy to write a response .
 I mentioned four or five m onths-l said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily . I mentioned . four or . five m months ago that I said I would be sure that . these matters would be resolved, he said .
 Soviet leaders broadcast an urgent message over the radio announcing that they w ould w ithdraw their missiles from Cuba . Shortly thereafter, Soviet leaders said they would withdraw their missiles .
 Only when coupled w ith the threat o f further m ilitary action and sweetened with the prospect o f rem oving th e ju p ite r mis­ siles in Turkey did it succeed .
 The blockade may have provided tim e fo r the Soviets to adjust to A m eri­­ can determ ination to w ithdraw the missiles, but it also left room for the Soviet Union to bring the missiles to operational readiness .
 Khrushchev believed he faced a clear, urgent threat o f America moving up the ladder o f escalation on the one hand, o r the opp o rtu n ity to achieve withdrawal o f United States missiles from Turkey if he backed down . The U.S. was
 In thinking about problems o f foreign affairs, professional analysts as well as ordinary people proceed in a straightforward non-theoretical fashion . In the U.S. iti­ zens have a simple point of view: think about foreign affairs .
 The concluding section o f this chapter revolves around three central propositions that the Missile Crisis helps to illustrate . The conclusion of this chapter is that the missile crisis helped to illustrate three key propositions .
 Explanations o f events reflect underlying assumptions that subconsciously guide our think­ ing . Professional analysts and o rd in a ry citizens th in k ab o u t problem s o f foreign p olicy .
 These assumptions affect how we perceive the character o f puzzles, the categories in w hich problems should be considered, the types o f evidence that are relevant, and the driv­ ers o f events .
 Explaining the event logically requires the use o f conceptual models to isolate the critical determinants that led to one state o f the w orld rather than another . Explaining this logically requires using conceptual models .
 Our default posture is to understand events in foreign affairs as purposive acts o f unified national governments acting rationally . We have a default posture to understand foreign policy as a matter of principle . We need to find a way to deal with foreign policy in the world .
 Predictions about w hat a nation w ill do are produced by calculating what a rational actor in this certain situation w ould do, given specified objectives . Predictions are based on what rational actor would do if he could have done, given objectives .
 Model I has significant predictive power, it clearly must be supplemented by frames o f reference that break the government down into the organizations and political actors involved in the policy process . Model I can be used to predict the future direction of the government, say experts .
 In making bets about what he/she is likely to do, analyst must consider options, costs and benefits associated w ith each option, and the actor's readiness o r to take risks . Analysts must consider not only objectives, but also his/her options, the costs and
 Model I analyst seeks to answer core questions in explaining government action . Model I analysts try to estimate the likelihood of a government action by estimating the likelihood it will take place .
 Model I gives us considerable predictive power on little inform ation, it must be supplemented by frames o f reference that disaggregate the governm ent into its constituent organizations and actors . Model I can be used to help predict the future of the world's most important institutions .
 M odel I's grasp o f national purposes and pressures created by problems in international relations must confront intranational mechanisms and pres­ sures from w hich governmental decisions emerge .
 Organizational Behaviour Model and Government Politics Model provide a basis for improved explanation and predictions . Two alternative conceptual models provide an alternative conceptual model for the government .
 According to the Organizational Behaviour Model, 'acts' and 'choices' are thought to be outputs o f previously established organizations . Analysts characterize 'acts and choices' as outputs of pre-existing patterns of behaviour . 'Choices' were thought to instead as outputs o
 Model II analyst focuses on the relevant governm ent organizations and their standard operating pro­ cedures . Faced w ith the fact o f Soviet missiles in Cuba, the Model II analysts look at the relevant governing bodies and their policies .
 President Obama is a conglomerate of loosely allied organizations, each w ith a substantial life o f its own . They are not ju st the president, or leaders, but they are not .
 Government leaders sit form ally on to p o f this conglomerate . Governments perceive problems through organi­ zational sensors, but governments perceive problems .
 Government behaviour can be understood, according to the second conceptual model, less as deliberate choices and more as outputs o f large organizations func­ tioning according to predetermined standard patterns o f behaviour . Therefore, governmental behaviour can't be seen as deliberate and deliberate choices .
 Dramatic organi­ zational change can occur in response to m ajor disasters, but both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities and procedures . Dramatic organizational change is possible, but it can also be influenced by organizational capabilities .
 Governments are thought o f as if they were an individual person, animated by particular purposes . Governments thought to be animated by specific purposes. Governments thought of as individuals, not individuals .
 The subjects in M odel II explanations are organizations . Their behaviour is accounted for in terms of organizational purposes and practices com m on to the members of the organization .
 Model Il's grasp of government action as organizational output, partially directed by leaders, enlarges efforts to understand governm ent behaviour as the choices o f a unitary decision maker .
 Each individual in a group is, in his/her own right, a player in a competitive game . Each individual is a member of a group that is playing in its own right .
 M odel III focuses on individual players that compose a governm ent and the bargain­ ing among them .
 For this model, events in foreign affairs are characterized neither as unitary choices nor as organizational outputs . Events are characterized by unitary decisions and organizational output, says Julian Zelizer .
 W hat happens is understood instead as a result of bargaining games am ong players in the national governm ent. It is understood that this is not the result of a lack of understanding of the situation .
 The proposition reflects the fact that power in governm ent is most often shared . Power in government is often shared, with power often being shared .
 Model III analyst has explained the event when he/she has discovered w ho did w hat to w hom that yielded the action in question . Model III analysts have explained the events when they have discovered w what happened to a Model III .
 M ost players sent a departm entm ent o r agency along w ith the interests and constituencies that organization serves . Players repre­­sent a list of players who represent their organizations .
 For an anal­ ogy, consider similarities between using the three models to examine governmental behav­ iour and looking at a leaf through a microscope . The three models are used to examine government behavior .
 Model I considers the entire leaf as a single functional body that converts sunlight into stored energy . Model I considered the leaf as an entire functional body which converts sunlight to stored energy.
 Model II examines the leaf through a lens that al lows one to see chloroplasts, i n effect 'organ izations' in each cel I that function in concert to store energy . Model II examined the leaf in a light similar to a microscope that focuses on the leaf . Model
 The advance o f science, however, has largely been a story o f further clarification through disaggregation . The advance of science has been largely a story of further clarification, however .
 Each o f f the three models combs out a lim ited num ber o f causal strands that are woven into our explanation o f the event . The three models are based on a number of causal strands, each of which are woven together .
 Each emphasizes different factors in explaining the central puzzles o f the crisis . Moreover, each emphasizes different features of the crisis, such as climate change, to explain why .
 Model I defines the broader context, the larger national patterns, and the shared images . Model I is a snapshot of the nation's most recent national trends .
 Gromyko and his colleagues in the Soviet central circle expected the USA to discover the missiles being installed in Cuba before they became operational . The question arose in preparation for President Kennedy's meeting with Foreign Minister Gromko .
 Some analysts believe the Soviets wanted the USA to discover the missiles at about this time . The extraordinarily effective disguise o f the missiles during shipment from the Soviet Union to sites in Cuba, on the one hand, and the absence o f any equivalent cam ou­ flage at the sites
 If the adm inistration had accepted this Model I judgem ent, it m ight have developed a different script fo r the conversation w ith Gromyko . If the ad inistration accepted this, it would have had different script .
 Model I assumes that the Soviets acted out o f an assessment o f national interests . M odel II notes that different Soviet governm ent organizations controlled the shipm ent and emplacement o f the missiles at different stages .
 This caused the Soviets to 'accidentally' act in a way to ental to th e ir'M o d e l I'calculations . The Soviets were forced to act in the way their calculations were calculated . This led to the discovery of Soviet secret weapons .
 Model II competes directly w ith M odel I and the tw o yield precisely contrary conclusions . Here, Model II will compete directly w h ith with the others .
 The USA responds affirmatively to the first Khrushchev letter, but says that, first, missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable and urges quick agreement .
 At this point, the Soviet governm ent w ould be intensively consid­ ering possible pre-em ptive nuclear strikes against the USA, especially comm and and control centres such as Washington, in order to lim it the damage inflicted by the first strike they fear could
 A single p ilo t carrying out this o rd e r'w o u ld have been able to achieve the full nuclear detonation o f the ,9 weapon . As a nuclear safety officer observed, 'by an inadvertent act', a single p. ilo
 Unknown to destroyer's commander, there was a 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo stacked in the submarine's bow . Unknown to the commander, the torpedo was in the bow of the submarine .
 W ith the push o f a button, Shumkov could have fired the weapon, w hich had an equivalent destructive force to the nuclear bom b dropped at Hiroshima .
 Model II and Model III analysts caution against confidence in the im possibility o f nations stum bling into the use o f nuclear weapons, in the manageabil­ ity of nuclear crises .
 Through a M odel II lens, the USA's suc­ cess included crucial organizational rigidities and even mistakes . The USA's organization was criticized for being too rigid, too rigid .
 If not fo r the organizational and political factors that delayed an im m ediate m ilitary attack on Cuba, the probability of w ar w ould have been much higher . If not, the likelihood of a Cuban attack would have been more likely .
 Khrushchev's plan to stage a nuclear confrontation in Berlin could have proved dangerous . If not fo r the organizational and political dynamics that produced sufficiently persistent displays o f American resolve to tilt Khruschev's estimates, Khruschchev's plans might have been thwarted .
 The options presented to the leaders are much narrower than the menu analysts might con­ sider desirable . SOPs exhibit unavoidable rigidities o f SOPS, and are rigidly rigidities .
 In a crisis scenario, the overw helm ing problem w ill be controlling large organizations and coordinating between them . The overw helming problem is controlling large groups of organizations, and coordinating .
 ExComm's free-wheeling discussions and devil's advocacy exemplified by ExComm have many advantages . The mix o f personality, expertise, influence, and influence that allows such a group to clarify alternatives, even w hile it bargains .
 It is a situation in which we w ill most likely be forced, ultimately, to make a choice between attacking Iran and accomom m odating a new nuclear state .
 The current deal between the P5 + 1 and Iran, though the best o f many bad options, w ill most likely serve only to 'lengthen the fuse' on Iran's breakout to a bomb .
 M odel II and III explanations for Iranian behaviour are invaluable to policymakers as they navigate an opaque governm ent decision-m aking process . Just as in the Cuban case, they are invaluable in navigating an opaque governing process .
 As the U.S. confronts this and other policy challenges in regimes such as Vladim ir Putin's Russia and Xi Jinping's China, these lessons w ill become more valuable .
 Presidents Obama and Bush agree that nuclear terrorism is the single largest threat to U.S. national security . Nuclear terrorism is a threat to America's national security, they say .
 This book illuminates the internal decision making of both sides of the crisis based on seldomconsulted classified documents . It is based on the internal decisions made by both sides .
 This volume brings to light significant re-evaluations of the crisis . This volume includes some startling challenges to the conventional wisdom surrounding much of that crisis .
 This book offers an insightful look into the executive power of American presidents, thereby accounting for the 'agency' around foreign policy decisions . It offers an insight into the president's power in foreign policy .