 There have been two diametricall opposed points of view about why Cuba was a crisis and why it was resolved . The traditional interpretation, enshrined in the writings of Theodore Sorensen, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and Elie Abel, describes the Cub missiles as
 President John F Kennedy had compel the Soviet Union to withdraw the missiles to defend the balance of power, preserve NATO, and convince Nikita S Khrushchev and the world of American resolve .
 Sorensen, Schlesinger, and Abel laud the ""quarantine"" the ontimal strateev. deoict the outcome of the crisis as an unaualified American triumph .
 Revisionist interpretation contends that Kennedy needlessly risked war for domestic political gain . Th revisionist interpretation, primarily associated with the writings of I F Stone, Ronald Steel, Barton J Bernstein, and James Nathan, argues that Kennedy should have avoided war .
 Revisionist condemn the blockade as irresponsible and explain the resolution of the cris as the result of Soviet moderation and American good luck . Revisionist say the resolution was result of good luck and Soviet moderation .
 The new evidence that has become available in the last several years compels us to reevaluate the competing claims of these divergen interpretations . New evidence that becomes available in recent years comports with the claims of this .
 The traditional interpretation vie response to the threat posed by the m was to communicate American resolve to Khrushchev but avoided violence of the air strike, which might have compelled a Soviet military response . The traditional meaning of the U.S. response is that it avoided a military response,
 He chose the quarantine in preference to an air attack because it demonstrated resolve without violence . The quarantine provided the Soviets room to maneuver and a peaceful way out of the crisis, he says .
 Sorensen is also effusive in his oraise of Kennedy's ahilitv to keen his emotions in check .
 He stressed the importance o that Khrushchev would never Cuba . He stressed Ken Kennedy's need to get the government to Cuba . Kennedy emphasized the importance of the need for unity in Cuba .
 Private overture to Khrushc would have led to resolution of the conflict and avoided the crisis . For both of these reason private overture would have been made . Private overtures would have prevented the crisis in Russia .
 The revisionist interpretation has received its fullest expression in the writings of Barton Bernstein, a Stanford historian . Bernstein's writings have received the fullest expression of his views .
 Bernstein has portrayed Kennedy and his most intimate advisers as men driven by the perceived necessity of impressing Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders with American resolve . In a series of carefully researched articles, Bernstein portrays Kennedy as driven by a desire to impress the Soviets .
 Som Som now willing to acknowledge this truth John Kenneth Galbraith, Kennedy's about the role domestic politics played in blockade . Som now acknowledging this truth .
 If the administration tolerated the missiles, he it would be faced with a revolt from the military, from the hardliners in other departments, both State and CIA, from not only Republicans on Capitol Hill but some Democrats, too . The U.S. might well put the United States in
 Hilsman: Domestic politics was only one component of Kennedy's decision to seek showdown with Khrushchev . He says domestic politics was just one component, albeit an important one, of the decision .
 Theodore Sorensen now acknowledges the existence of these political influences but downplays their significance . Theodore says the influence of these influences is not significant .
 He maintains that the pressures pushing Kennedy toward a confrontation were always offset by those pulling him in the opposite direction . Kennedy maintains that pressures pushing him toward confrontation were offset by others pulling him .
 Public opinion was divided in its response to the blockade . Some Americans believed that Kennedy was needlessly courting nuclear war .
 There was also a sizable minority who believed he was not being tough enough . There were also some who thought he was too tough .
 Kennedy heard complaints to this effect from senators, some of them Democrats, with whom he met prior to his announcement of the blockade . Kennedy says he heard complaints from some of the senators he met with him .
 The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F Kennedy , 196. John F. Kennedy . John F . Kennedy . JFK .
 Kennedy's concern ab to a very real concern for th policy . Almost any leader in harbor second thoughts about that people often resort to bol .
 McGeorge Bundy sug Keating —and, much Richard M Nixon, would ha administration . Bundy sued Keating, and much of Nixon's administration, to sue Keating . Bundy would have sued Keating for $1 billion .
 Robert Jervis, Richard Ned Lebow, and Janice Gross Stein, Psychology and Deterrence, chaps.-4,9.9. The Nature of International Crisis (Baltimore, 1981)
 The assertion that domestic politics were never referred to in the Ex Comm is incorrect, it is incorrect . The assertion is incorrect. Domestic politics were not referred to as domestic politics in any case .
 The announcement —we didn't say we'd go in and not, and kill them, we said we'd act. The announcement . We said we would act, not say we wouldn't kill them. We said it would act .
 "We carry out open surveillance, so we know what they're doing. Well, first place, we carry out surveillance," she said . "Well, first ... we carry open surveillance," the British PM said .
 "I don't believe it's primarily a military problem. Because, as I suggested, I don't think it's a problem," he says . He says .
 Some Ex Comm members disagreed strongly with McNamara, insisting that the missiles did have strategic significance . McNamara: "The missiles are not only missiles, but they are strategic."
 No one challenged his assertion that the president confronted a serious political problem . But no one challenged the president's assertion .
 Bundy's comment, and that of the unidentified speaker, indicated agreement . Bundy: "I don't think it's OK. It's not OK. I don't believe it"
 The general discussion that ensued made it apparent that neither the president nor his advisers was at all certain about the military importance of the missiles . The president and his advisers were at all uncertain about the importance of missiles .
 McNamara told the Ex Comm that he had put the question to the chiefs and found them perturbed by the military threat the missiles would pose . McNamara said he had asked the chiefs of the U.S. armed forces if they would launch the missiles .
 He did not believe that the missiles would make no military difference . He said they would make "no military difference" from the missiles .
 The U.S. could be attacked by ICBMs stationed in the Soviet Union and Moscow would significantly augment the size of this force in the next few years .
 The only advantage of the Cuban deployment was that it allowed the Soviets to close the missile gap a few years earlier than they would in any case . The Cuban deployment allowed the Soviet missile gap to be closed sooner than it would have been any more .
 In the ensuing week, two memorandums on the missiles were submitted to the president and secretary of state . The missiles were sent to the White House .
 The first serious evaluation of their military implications only became available to Ex Comm on 27 October in the form of a memorandum prepared by Raymond L Garthoff, special assistant for Soviet bloc politico military affairs in the State Department .
 This advantage would be offset by the missiles' vulnerability to a U.S. first strike . The missiles are vulnerable to a United States first strike, the U.N. says .
 Garthoff s memorandums are of academic interest only because by the time they were submitted the decision in favor of the blockade had already been made and implemented . The decision to impose a blockade was already made, implemented .
 Both interpretations address only the expected costs to the president of not challenging the Soviets in Cuba .
 He was sensitive to the likelihood that the Republican opposition would turn on him if U.S. military operations met with serious resistance in Cuba . The Cuban government was wary of an invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy would have remembered the fate of his Democratic predecessor, Harry S Truman, Truman . Kennedy would remember Truman's fate as a president .
 Ohio Senator Robert Taft was initially full of praise for Truman's decision to come to the aid of South Korea . Ohio Senator Taft, leader of the Republican opposition, initially praised the decision .
 Truman's invasion of North Korea was primarily a response to domestic political pressures . But within weeks, he and other Republican senators were derisively referring to the conflict as 'Truman's War'
 Republicans successfully made Truman's conduct of the Korean War a major campaign issue . But as soon as Douglas Mac Arthur's advancing forces ran into the Chinese and were forced into an ignominious retreat, the Republicans turned on Truman .
 Kennedy's desire to avoid this kind of political trap was probably one important reason why he shied away from an air strike . Kennedy sent Anatoly A Dobrynin that he was prepared to pull out of Turkey .
 It also may have influenced his apparent willingness to consider further concessions if necessary to resolve the crisis .
 This is an u contemplated concessions at th war reveals nothing about his Soviet missiles at the outset between the role domestic po dénoument and the role of Soviet missiles in the war .
 Revisionists are correct in seeintr something extraordinary about Kennedy's propensity to see Khrushchev's assessment of his resolve as an important component of all of his foreign policy initiatives . Kennedy's concern for his any objective foreign policy ne .
 From the very beginning of his presidency, Kennedy felt the need to convince Khrushchev of his resolve . Kennedy felt that he needed to convince him of his commitment to the U.S. nuclear program .
 For the president and his advisers, the Cuban missiles were confirmation of their worst fears . The Cuban missiles are confirmation of the president's worst fears.
 Soviet testimony indicates that Kennedy's understanding of Soviet foreign policy expectations was wrong in two fundamental respects . Kennedy's thinking was wrong, according to testimony from Soviet testimony .
 Khrushchev's provocations were neither opportunity driven nor prompted by his lack of respect for Kennedy's resolve, says historian John Avlon . Kennedy: "Khrrushchev was not driven by opportunity driven or prompted by respect for JFK."
 Khrushchev's foreign policy was a response to Soviet fears about the consequences of their own strategic and political weakness . U.S. efforts to demonstrate strength and resolve were only intensified by American efforts .
 It was not Kennedy's performance in Vienna, acceptance of the Berlin Wall, or failure to commit troops to the Bay of Pigs that led to the Cuban missiles . Instead his deployment of Jupiters in Turkey, proclamations of strategic superiority, and political-military nress
 Kennedy's failure to grasp Khrushchev's motives was due in large part to conceptual biases he and most of his advisers brought to the analysis of Soviet foreign policy . The biases were derived from the experience of the 1930s .
 At the outset of the Cold War, U.S. policymakers treated Stalin's Russia as the linear descendant of Hitler's Germany . At the start of the 1950s, American policymakers thought Russia was Hitler's Russia .
 Like Hitler, Stalin and his succe opportunists, constantly probing for w that could be exploited to extend their advantage . Kennedy gave every indication of vi prism of the 1930s. Like Na assumed to be ideologically motivate. And like Hitler .
 It is probably not view as largely shaped by the fiasco o hand in exposing its political and mor to the Court of St. Peterborough .
 The twenty time with his father in England, used thesis, published under the title W indictment of England's lack of prepa associated with it. The twenty times with his dad in England .
 The young Kenne his father's commitment on the other in the war that followed made him even more committed to the so-called lesson of Munich and its relevance to Soviet-American relations, Kenne says . Kenne: "The lessons of Munich are still relevant today and relevant to
 In fairness to Kennedy, we must recognize that whatever predisposition he had to see parallels between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union was undeniably abetted by Khrushchev's bullying speeches and crude displays of force .
 All of this evoked memories of Hitler and had the effect of legitimizing the hold of the lessons of the 1930s on American minds, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev's bellicose posturing was designed to mask Soviet inferiority . We know today that Khrushchev's belliose rhetoric was primarily designed for masking inferiority. We also know that the threat posed posed by the Soviet leader was to mask inferiority,
 Kennedy did not know this and his analogical reasoning led him to put the worst possible interpretation on Khrushchev's rhetoric and behavior . But Kennedy didn't know this . Kennedy did know this.
 Khrushchev's admittedly threatening behavior cannot in itself account for Kennedy's doubts about his own reputation for resolve . Kennedy doubts his reputation for his own resolve, he says .
 Kennedy's comments to advisers and newsmen are revealing for their one-sided fixation on events and policies that he believed conveyed an impression of weakness to Khrushchev . Kennedy believed that his actions conveyed a weakness to the Soviet leader .
 The Bay of Pigs was admittedly ambiguous in its implications, but Vienna and Berlin crisis could only be interpreted this way by someone prepared to distort reality to confirm his unjustified fears . Vienna and the Berlin crisis were only interpreted as a result of the Vienna crisis . Vienna is Vienna, Vienna and
 Even Khrushchev had come away impressed by Kennedy's bravura performance . Kennedy had been tough at the Vienna summit .
 The kindest explanation for Kennedy's fixation on his resolve is cognitive, it's cognitive . Kennedy: "It's the kind of explanation for his fixation on this issue."
 His book is based on his use of the images and lessons of the 1930s as his organizing principles for understanding international relations . Its starting point is the use of these principles to understand international relations, he says .
 Khrushchev would behave aggressively if he had a military advantage or doubted the resolve of his adversaries, he says . These images and lessons led him to draw analogies between the 1930s and 1960s .
 When Khrushchev took the offensive in Southeast Asia and Berlin, Kennedy assumed it was the result of his belief in Soviet strategic superiority and his lack of respect for Kennedy's resolve .
 Khrushchev's repeated assertions that the ""correlation of forces"" increasingly favored the Soviet Union appeared to confirm the first of these assumptions . The Soviet Union became a major ally of Russia in the 1950s .
 Kennedy's personal insecurities might have distorted his understanding of Khrushchev's motives . It directs our attention to the ways in which they may have distorted Kennedy's thinking . Kennedy was a man who had a close relationship with the Soviet leader . He was a great admirer of Kh
 Kennedy may have had deep-seated doubts about his own courage and capability . He may have projected them on to Khrushchev and interpreted his actions in terms of them .
 Whichever explanation is correct, the effect was the same on the Earth . It's not clear whether it's the same, but it's a good thing for the world .
 Kennedy's analysis of his encounters with Khrushchev only served to confirm the validity of those assumptions in his mind and to tighten their grip on him . Kennedy: "Krushchev was a man who had a very difficult relationship with the Soviet Union"
 This process blinded him to the possibility that Khrushchev might be motivated by any defensive reason, or combination of reasons, he says .
 A review of the evidence offers considerable support for the revisionist interpretation of the origin of the crisis .
 Kennedy unquestionably misunderstood Soviet motives and had an exaggerated and largely counterproductive concern for demonstrating resolve . Kennedy had exaggerated and counterproductive concerns about demonstrating resolve, he says .
 His vulnerability on Cuba and Republican efforts to exploit it led him to define the introduction of ballistic missiles into Cuba as unacceptable . His vulnerability led to him defining ballistic missile introduction as unacceptable.
 Theodore Sorensen has made a remarkable admission about the calculations that entered into Kennedy's warnings to the Soviets . The calculations entered into the calculations were made by Theodore Sorennsen .
 The president had no qualms about his warnings, according to Sorensen . He did not believe Khrushchev had any intention of introducing missiles into Cuba, he says . The president did not want to use missiles in Cuba .
 Whether Kennedy would have drawn the there are good political reasons for d indicate the extent to which the presi domestic political, not military threat, was not a military threat . I say that beli would have been an act of prudence, not wea one reason the line was drawn
 Some revisionists a of the world to improve his political stan the Democratic party . He a of avoiding political loss, not in the expe is simply not true, as some revisionists .
 The difference between avoiding loss a Sorensen's remarks indicate that he would have to c confrontation and political loss . The difference is between avoiding a Kennedy confrontation and avoiding a political confrontation .
 His desir motivated his public and private warni line at the introduction of ballisti ivnrusncnev . "Ine ne ne wouia not oppose me ongoing soviet conventional buildup in Cuba"
 This was a major concession given the American public's opposition to that buildup . "This was a big concession," President Obama says .
 It stands as a clear indication of the president's willingness to incur real political costs in the hope of forestalling a more serious confrontation . The president is willing to incur political costs to forestall a serious confrontation with Russia .
 To seek such a confrontation in the hope of gain would have been as anathema to Kennedy as it is to the revisionists . Kennedy would not have been willing to engage in such confrontation, he says .
 Revisionists err in ignoring or dismissing the strategic and foreign policy implications of tolerating the Cuban missile deployment . Revisionists also er er erases or dismiss the strategic implications of tolerance .
 It is not clear that their military consequences were so minimal—the evidence indicates otherwise . But this was not why Kennedy opposed the missiles . It is by no means clear .
 Even if Khrushchev's dec dec nothing to do with his assess oppose them could have rai Cuba was entirely different implications of those incide marginal because it was not been engaged . But in evaluating fundamental distinction, the introduction of missiles i bet the introduction to missiles i made a bet
 President Bush staked his reputation on def Soviet missiles into Cuba would have revealed his well-publicized commitment to have been a bluff .
 Khrushchev's apparent failure to take this dimension of the problem into account when formulating his policy does not mean that he would have remained blind to it in its aftermath .
 The domestic political consequences of tolerating a Cuban missile deployment would have been enormous . President Barack Obama would have had to deal with the threat of a missile deployment .
 Kennedy's presidency would have been crippled and the Republicans might even have won control of Congress in November . Kennedy's administration would have brén crippled and his presidency might even be crippled .
 Kennedy's willingness to accept these losses in preference to the risks of a Soviet-American crisis would have communicated a clear and dangerous message to Khrushchev . Kennedy would have sent a clear message to the Soviet-U.S. leader .
 It could have emboldened him, as Kennedy feared, to embark upon further provocations . Kennedy feared he might be emboldened by his actions .
 The revisionists are wrong to dismiss the serious international implications of the deployment . The traditionalists err in ignoring the domestic political consequences of the decision .
 Kennedy's decision to impose a ""naval quarantine"" of Cuba as the preferred means of compelling the Soviets to withdraw their missiles . The traditionalists and revisionists disagree on the issue of Cuba .
 Traditionalists view the blockade as a judicious and successful choice . Traditionalists believe the blockade is a judicially successful choice.
 Revisionists believe that it unnecessarily risked war for a goal that could have been achieved by purely diplomatic means . Revisionists say that it risked war unnecessarily for the sake of diplomacy .
 The evidence seems to support the traditionalists, but not necessarily for the reasons they advance .
 Traditionalists insist quiet diplomacy was ruled out by the need to act before the missiles became operational . Military action against the missiles would make military action against them immeasurably more costly .
 Pressure on the president to act had little to do with the status of the missiles, CNN says . But we know that the pressure on President Obama to act was not the issue of missile tests .
 Kennedy rejected a secret overture to believe it would succeed in halting work the removal of the missiles . Kennedy rejected the overture, believing it would halt work on removing missiles from the site .
 Kennedy also viewed a secret overture a needed to be taught a lesson, not just r tempted to renew his challenge of the U.S. diplomacy succeeded in convincing Khrushchev would not have conveyed American reso .
 He was troubled by both the foreign policy and domestic political implications of the Cuban missiles . The Cuban missiles were launched in 1961 .
 He chose the blockade because it conveyed resolve without violence, he says . The blockade is less likely than an air strike to lead to runaway escalation, he adds .
 The blockade represents a tradeoff between the imperatives for action and the risks of confrontation, which pulled him down . The blockade represented a trade off between action and risk of confrontation .
 The Ex Comm's Soviet experts, Charles ""Chip"" Bohlen and Llewellyn ""Tommie"" Thompson, argued unsuccessfully for a private overture to Khrushchev . The Ex-Commisio's experts argued unsuccessfully .
 Bohlen proposed that Kennedy write a letter to Khrushchev asking him to withdraw the missiles and then decide whether to proceed with a blockade, air strike, or invasion . Bohlen suggested that Kennedy then decide on the basis of the response of Khrushchen .
 The letter was meant to avoid a crisis, but the U.S. was unable to find a way of expressing American indignation and the demand that the missiles be removed in a manner that would not provoke a crisis .
 None of the revisionists offers any reasons to support the contention that Khrushchev would have responded positively, they say . The revisionists offer no reasons to back the claim that Khrrushchev responded positively .
 Lippmann: Backing down in response to a private rather than public ultimatum would have been less costly for Khrushchev, and hence more attractive . Backdown was less costly than a response to the private rather .
 A crisis could have been avoided if Kennedy had told Gromyko that the U.S. had discovered the Soviet missiles and would tolerate them . It might also be argued that a secret overture would have changed Moscow's estimate of the risk involved .
 It is possible Khrushchev might have been persuaded by a combination of threats and promises to dismantle his missile bases in Cuba . It is certainly possible that threats and promise to dismantle Cuba's missile bases may have been made .
 Revisionists correct in asserting that the public foreign policy costs to Khrushchev of backing down in an ""eyeball to eyeball" confrontation could have been avoided by a private accommodation . The public costs of the public policy costs of backing up in an 'eyebal to eyeb
 Khrushchev withdrew the missiles, but it was not the only price of withdrawing the missiles . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1962 . The missile withdrawal was the most important price to Khrushchchev .
 Evidence from the Soviet side indicates that Fidel Castro and the Soviet political and military officials were the two most critical constituencies for Khrushchev . The two most important constituencies were Fidel Castro, and Soviet officials, upon whom he relied for internal political support .
 Malinovsky and other Soviet hard-liners felt the same way and almost eeiiaiiny wuuiu nave accuseu rviirusncnev or cowaruice ana or selling our Castro had he agreed to dismantle the missile sites and withdraw missiles .
 The crisis probably necessary to convince both Castro and Soviet hard-liners Khrushchev had no choice but to remove missiles or face w with the U.S. The crisis was probably necessary, but it was probably not necessary .
 The crisis softened the blow for Khrushc politically by allowing him to secure a noninvasion pledge from Kenn and a private commitment to withdraw the American Jupiter missiles fr Turkey . The crisis also softened the impact of the crisis by allowing the U.S. to withdraw missiles .
 Most Americans did not view the pledge as craven accommodation but as a statesmanlike gesture to end the confrontation by allowing a defeated adversary to save face . The pledge was made in response to the crisis, and the promise to rem later became a reality .
 There is also the important question of Kennedy's objectives to consider . There are also important questions to consider.
 Kennedy also sought to teach Khrushchev a lesson, something he did not believe he could accomplish by quiet diplomacy, even if it led to the withdrawal of the missiles . Kennedy also believed he could not accomplish this feat with quiet diplomacy .
 The president sought a dramatic public confrontation as the only means of accomplishing this end . Rightly or wrongly, the president sought to achieve this end, he says . President Obama sought to do this as a way to get a better deal, he writes .
 Soviet-American relations have been hotly debated over Cuba's role in the Soviet-Cuba relations . Like every other aspect of Cuba, its significance for the subsequent course of Soviet relations has been debated .
 The traditional interpretation views Cuba as a notable American victory with long-term beneficial consequences for Soviet-American relations . The traditional view is that the U.S. victory in Cuba was a notable victory .
 Revisionists agree that Kennedy imposed his will on Khrushchev but insist that his victory was a pyrrhic one because it prompted the subsequent Soviet strategic arms buildup . Revisionists insist that Kennedy's victory prompted the Soviet buildup .
 Kennedy's successful use of coercive diplomacy led ineluctably to U.S. intervention in Vietnam, critics say . They say it led to the Vietnam War . Kennedy's success in coercive diplomacy ultimately led to Vietnam intervention .
 Kennedy's immediate reaction to the resolution of the crisis was relief, not triumph . Kennedy's reaction was relief not triumph, but triumph, he says .
 He instructed all members of the Ex Comm and government that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory . The former Comm Comm. and government instructed all . members of . government to remain anonymous .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski said Cuba reaffirmed U.S. strategic supremacy in 1967 . He said it reaffirmed America's strategic supremacy . Brzezzinski was a self-congratulationist .
 The outcome of the crisis was closer to a compromise than to a one-sided 63Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 128. Kennedy .
 Kennedy privately agreed to withdraw the Am considered making a public declaration to tough"" for another day or two . Kennedy favorably to an appeal from UN Secretar on the basis of a missile swap .
 Khrushchev was acting in response to his own country's perceived weakness and seeking to prevent loss . Soviet testimony reveals that he was acting to prevent the loss of his country . The Soviet leader was acting as a response to a perceived weakness .
 Kennedy's bargaining reputation, considered the most important determinant of credibility by deterrence theorists, seems to have been largely irrelevant to Khrushchev's expectation that his provocation would succeed . Kennedy's reputation was considered to be a key factor in deterrence theory .
 If the missile deployment was not triggered nor abetted by Soviet doubts about U.S. resolve, it was unnecessary to forestall this or other challenges .
 Bundy, Rostow, and Schelling are right in seeing Cuba as an important turning point in Soviet-American relations . Bundy and Rostow were right to see Cuba as a key point in relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The most fundamental reason why there has been only one Cuba has to with the origins of the crisis . Cuba's crisis has to have to have started with the birth of the Cuban Revolution .
 Khrushchev acted out of a sense of despera . He was willing to embark on a high-risk challenge to the United St. He believed that the consequences of inaction would be detrimental to Soviet strategic and foreign policy interests .
 Neither superpower has ever felt as threatened by the other as the Soviets did in the spring summer of 1961 . We have neve had another crisis of the magnitude of Cuba because neither superpower .
 Western analysts generally agree that the Soviet ""ultimatum"" that triggered that crisis was issued in respo to Soviet fears that a continued Israeli advance would result in a humiliating defeat of their client state Egypt and the possible overthrow of its leader .
 President Kennedy's emotional cloud clouded his judgment and made empathy with President Kennedy impossible . President Kennedy made empathy for President Kennedy and constraints under which he operated all but impossible .
 It also ruled o uiuiuugu aim uidpaddiuuau/vaiuauun ui urn ltjA/i^uaawjiia ui a v-uuan missile deployment . The missile was also ruled out of using missiles
 We have only spotty evidence ab subsequent Soviet leaders, but it supports the theory . The combination of anger and threat are a potent catalyst for foreign policies .
 Brezhnev's decision in October 1973 to t in the Middle East was made in such circumstances, as 1978 to invade Afghanistan . The decision to invade the Mideast was made as a result of the situation in the region .
 To put Cuba in its proper perspective it also necessitates the personality of Nikita Khrushchev, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Cuba fits this pattern of behavior, often with little apparen Cuba . He gambled, often without apparen . Cuba fits that pattern, and he gambled .
 It should be seen in t bluff about the potency of Soviet strategic forces, his B his virgin lands program . It was seen as a bluff, says the author .
 Together with Cuba, these ""harebrained schemes"" that his politburo colleagues refer of his dismissal . Together with . Cuba, the . Politburo . colleagues refer to his dismissal of his . dismissal as a result of his 'harebraining schemes'
 Soviet pronouncements after the Cold War had interest in reducing Cold War tensions . Soviet policy in the 1950s and '60s was a key part of Cold War efforts to reduce tensions .
 Kennedy officials testify to the way i look down the barrel of the nuclear gun rekindled their some way to reduce the chances of war . Many Kennedy officials have testified to the . way . of the way they look . down the . barrel of nuclear gun .
 James Nathan has traced the impact of the missile crisis on Vietnam policy . Nathan has identified four "lessons" of the crisis that disposed U.S. policymakers to intervention in Southeast Asia .
 President Johnson's decision to use U.S. air power against Hanoi in 1965 was based on his belief that success in international crisis was largely a matter of national guts .
 It created the mood and determination that was necessary for the test ban and hot line agreement . But this momentum did not carry the superpowers much further along the road to accommodation .
 Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 and Khrushchev was removed from power in October 1964 . Perhaps this was because of Kennedy's assassination and his removal from power was in 1964 .
 Their successors had neither their commitment to bury the Cold War hatchet nor their special intimacy, both of which were essential prerequisites for this objective . Their successors were not committed to burying the cold war hatchet or special intimacy .
 American and Soviet officials agree that the missile crisis created a unique bond between the two superpower leaders . The missile crisis was the first time the U.S. and the Soviet Union had been involved in the crisis .
 It was based in part on having guided the destinies of their respective nations through the most acute confrontation of the nuclear age . The two countries were involved in the most severe confrontation of nuclear age.
 Only Kennedy and Khrushchev really knew what it was like to make decisions that might determine the survival of their countrymen . Kennedy's decision to make such a decision might determine survival of his countrymen.
 The two men had developed a personal relationship during the course of the crisis . More important still was the personal relationship between them .
 His image of the willing to risk the peace o communism's sphere of influen a man who was as concerned a countrymen and motivated by moved him .