 Much of the conversation that day centered on the military option and the hazardous unknowns of Soviet retaliation, including the possibility of nuclear escalation . Much of that day was focused on the potential of a nuclear escalation in the Soviet Union .
 The Kennedy administration never had to answer that extraordinary question . Thankfully, the Kennedy administration did not .
 President Kennedy chose to initiate a naval blockade against Soviet ships carrying missile equipment . Ultimately, the blockade was initiated by President Kennedy .
 Three decades later, the world learned how close the world had come to a nuclear conflagration . The Soviets withdrew the missiles end nuclear war was averted .
 At a conference held in Havana, Cuba, in January 1992, former Kennedy administration members and Soviet participants in the crisis . Soviet General Anatoly Gribkov informed participants that the Soviets had deployed nine tactical missiles in Cuba to be used against any U.S. invasion force .
 U.S., Soviet Union, Cuba brought the world to the brink of the unthinkable . New information about the Cuban missile crisis continues to emerge .
 No event during the Cold War has generated more popular and scholarly attention . Hundreds of articles, books, and essays have already written on this episode . It has become perhaps the most studied international confrontation of the twentieth century .
 The death of history as we know it is the one time that world leaders and the international community stare down what they call the gun barrel of nuclear war . And so it should be, for the first time, for world leaders to stare down .
 Despite the end of the Cold War, the process of exploration and discovery remains necessary to understand more fully what caused this crisis and to learn how to avoid such potentially cataclysmic events .
 The National Security Archive began a concerted campaign in 1987 to advance the historical record on the missile crisis . The archive is dedicated to preserving the history of the crisis .
 The objective was to build a major collection of declassified U.S. government documents, through the systematic use of the Freedom of Information Act . The aim was to make them available to scholars, students, journalists, and concerned citizens .
 In the early 1970s, many key internal documents had been made public at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library .
 Thousands of secret documents remain beyond the access of the public at large . Thousands of other secret documents remained beyond the public's access .
 U.S. government refused to declassify documents for reasons of national security . Papers from all the national security agencies were scattered throughout the executive branch .
 Some important records, for example, were found in a shopping cart in the basement of the State Department .
 In 1965 the Johnson administration had retrieved some seventy-five files from various agencies and stored them in Room 7512 on the seventh floor of the State Department . Researchers at the National Security Archive discovered the files in 1965 .
 In April 1987, the National Security Archive filed a series of FOIA requests for these files . This mini-archive of approximately three thousand records, totaling ten thousand pages in all, included contingency plans, military scenarios, minutes of Kennedy's Executive Committee .
 Archive filed a FOIA lawsuit nine months later seeking to compel the release of all requested documents . State Department proved unresponsive to the Archive's request . Archive filed the lawsuit in response to the State Department's refusal to release documents .
 By mid 1989 the State Department had declassified two thousand documents in full or in part . Pursuant to that suit, by mid 1989 State Department declassified 2 thousand documents .
 The Archive has continued to pursue and obtain declassification of hundreds of important documents relating to the Cuban missile crisis .
 The declassified U.S. records have allowed scholars to highlight the inevitable distortions, limitations, and inaccuracies in the narratives of former Kennedy administration officials . Scholars have been able to augment and supplement these officials' memories .
 The most striking example of this dynamic occurred between 1987 and 1992, during a series of retrospective conferences sponsored by Harvard and Brown universities . Former policymakers and scholars from the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba reconstructed the perilous events of 1962 .
 Blight used a research technique that he calls ""critical oral history,""Blight used the documents to supply facts and details that the former policymakers had distorted or forgotten . Participants supplied the missing context of the documents .
 The result was a new body of information that provides a much fuller picture of events . The result fundamentally alters how the scope and meaning of the missile crisis has been and will be considered .
 Rather than a sudden episode, the crisis emerges as the culmination of deteriorating relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The crisis now emerges as a culmination of growing tensions between the United States and Cuba .
 The confrontation began with discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba on October 16 and ending with Khrushchev's decision to withdraw missiles on October 28 . No longer can the confrontation be understood as confined to Robert Kennedy's ""thirteen days"
 A series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev, declassified and released to the National Security Archive in 1992, demonstrates that the crisis lasted through late November of 1962 .
 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.'s description of President Kennedy's decision-making as ""so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly calibrated"" reflected a mythology that the successful outcome of the missile crisis derived from Kennedy's masterful management of both the making and implementation of U.S. policy
 U.S. officials mistook a number of Soviet political and military actions as deliberate ""signals"" from the Kremlin when, in fact, they had not been cleared by Khrushchev . For example, during the crisis, the United States .
 Unbeknownst to the White House, officials of the CIA and the U.S. military undertook a number of threatening operations, including the dispatch of covert sabotage teams into Cuba . The operations were similarly misunderstood by the Soviets and Cubans .
 There were also dangerous accidents, such as the straying of a U.S. aircraft into Soviet airspace at the height of the crisis .
 U.S. officials were well aware that their deployment of Jupiter missiles near Soviet borders in Turkey and Italy in 1959 would be deeply resented by Soviet officials . President Eisenhower noted that it would be a ""provocative"" step analogous to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Mexico or Cuba .
 A declassified military history of the Jupiter system reveals that the rockets became operational in April 1962 . That may have contributed to Khrushchev's proposal, made the very same month, to deploy similar weapons in Cuba . Documents lend credence to his claim that a primary Soviet motivation was the
 U.S. analysts have dismissed this as a face-saving, after-the-fact rationale that enabled the Soviets to declare victory in the confrontation rather than admit defeat .
 Former top-secret documents detail a 1962 U.S. covert action program . Operation MONGOOSE combined sabotage, infiltration, and psychological warfare activities .
 Cuban intelligence had infiltrated the CIA's exile groups and learned of plans for a potential invasion . The invasion was scheduled for October 1962 . Kennedy never formally authorized an invasion .
 New documents illuminate how the crisis began, they also clarify how it ended . If the new documents are illuminating how it began, it will also clarify the end of the crisis . The new documents illuminate the beginning of this year's crisis .
 Conservative analysts have alleged that, in return for the Soviet withdrawal of the missiles, Kennedy made a secret deal with Khrushchev not to invade Cuba .
 The recently declassified Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence reveals that no such U.S. commitment was made . The correspondence was published here .
 Khrushchev repeatedly urged Kennedy to ""formalize through the U.N." a noninvasion pledge to end the crisis . Khrushchevitch had been critical of Kennedy's handling of the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy refused, citing the Soviets' inability to meet U.S. inspection and verification demands . The letters show Kennedy repeatedly refused . Kennedy refused to meet the demands .
 This book is an effort to tell the story of the Cuban missile crisis through the documents that were generated by these extraordinary events . In the end, United States officials preferred free rein to intervene in Cuba over an international accord .
 This book is designed to provide access to some of the most important declassified documentation . Not every person has the time or resources to sift through the vast quantity of secondary and primary materials available .
 Policy, and hundreds of other documents obtained through the Freedom of Information Act . Policy, Policy Policy and other documents were obtained through FOI Act .
 Most of these documents are original photoreproductions; a few have been transcribed . Khrushchev's letters to Kennedy were transcribed for reasons of legibility or length .
 Almost all of the selected documents were once highly classified internal United States government records . However, important public communiqués or speeches have been included to render as complete an account of events as possible .
 The records are organized chronologically, although in a few cases, materials on one specific aspect of the missile crisis have been gathered together .
 Admittedly, the documents reproduced here do not present a complete picture of the extraordinary events surrounding the missile crisis . Those readers who prefer to start with a comprehensive overview of events are urged to read the chronology .
 For reasons of space limitations, we were forced to select records that, in our judgment, represented important aspects of the crisis . Some of these records were edited for length .
 The vast majority of these documents are United States government records that reflect only the view from Washington . Even more important, the vast majority are U.S. government records from Washington, D.C.
 The recent conferences in Moscow and Havana have contributed critically needed Soviet and Cuban information and perspectives to the history of the crisis . The conferences have contributed critical needed information, perspectives on the crisis, the author says .
 U.S., Soviet, Cuban historians will be unable to present anything approximating a full account of the crisis . Until these nations' archives are opened to the public, historians will necessarily remain incomplete . There is more than enough accessible information to advance our collective education and sustain an ongoing discussion
 A broader public discussion of issues such as intervention, nuclear weapons, and the use of military power is similarly essential to chart the future foreign policy course .
 Peter Kornbluh Laurence Chang October 1, 1998 . We hope this volume will contribute to just such a debate .
 These conferences have resulted in three major books and numerous articles by Blight and his colleagues .
 James Grimwood and Francis Strowd, ""History of the Jupiter Missile System,"" July 27,1962. James Grimwal and Francis . Strowd . Grimwood . Grimwal: "Jupiter Missile System"