 Fifty years on, it is difficult to comprehend just how high Cold War tensions were in the summer of 1962 .
 In 1962, the nuclear stockpile of the United States, consisting of more than 3,500 warheads, was six times that of the Soviet Union . In 1962 the U.S. nuclear stockpile consisted of over 3,000 warheads .
 The most powerful weapons -Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles -had ranges greater than 8,600 miles . They were capable of hitting targets almost anywhere within the Soviet Union from U.S. soil .
 The weapons were between 7,560 to 14,280 times greater than the Hiroshima bomb . Although much lower than the long-range missiles held by the Americans, these weapons still represented a nuclear power . The Hiroshima bomb was more powerful than any other nuclear weapon in the world .
 It is difficult to comprehend just how high Cold War tensions were in the summer of 1962, when the world’s most powerful states were on the brink of nuclear war . Fifty years on, the Cold War crisis of October is 50 years old .
 The United States also held significant superiority in its strategic bombing forces . The U.S. held significant air superiority in the air force .
 At the end of the crisis in October, a total of 1,306 American bomber planes were deployed with the ability to deliver 2,962 nuclear weapons . In October, the U.S. deployed 1,307 American bombers were deployed .
 By the time the Strategic Air Command reached its maxiumum strength on November 4, these weapons were either continually in the air or on a fifteen minute alert . By the end of the month, the U.S. Air Force had reached its maximum strength .
 The deployment of arms abroad was another crucial factor in the balance of international power . Deployment of weapons abroad was also a crucial factor, the author says .
 By 1962, 30 ‘Jupiter’ Medium Range Ballistic Missiles had been stationed in Italy by the United States, with a further 15 in Turkey . By 1962 the U.S. had stationed 30 'Jupiter' medium range missiles in Italy .
 60 “Thor’s medium range missiles are deployed in Britain, each with equivalent power and range to the Jupiter . This was in addition to 60 ‘Thor” medium-range missiles deployed in the UK . Each missile is equivalent to a Jupiter missile .
 Medium range missiles stationed in the Soviet Union were of little danger to the United States . If placed in Cuba, they would pose an immediate threat to American territory similar to that felt by Russians .
 National Security Archives – image shows an R-12 missile in Red Square, Moscow . Image was taken by the Russian military in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Referred to as “SS-5s” by the CIA, these never reached Cuba as the ships carrying them turned around in the Atlantic on October 23 . Referred to the CIA by the name, these were never made to Cuba . The ships carrying these never made it to Cuba
 These were tactical weapons capable of firing nuclear cruise missiles at targets such as the United States Guantanamo naval base and any potential American landing sites . The U.S. Navy base and potential landing sites were the targets .
 These were considered tactical nuclear weapons, to be targeted at potential landing sites . The weapons were considered to be aimed at targets .
 Within the United States these were referred to as “FROGs” due to the road-based mobility of the missile launchers . Within the U.S. these were known as ‘FROG’s’ due to their mobility .
 As the events of 1962 unfolded, this mixture of force and fallibility would push two superpowers to the edge of mutual destruction . The events of that year's events would push the world's most powerful nations to the brink of war .
 The United States also held significant superiority in its strategic bombing forces . Although much lower than the long-range missiles, these weapons still represented a nuclear power .
 60 medium range missiles with equivalent power and range to the Jupiter were deployed in Britain . This was in addition to 60 medium-range missiles .