 This paper examines the major explanations for deterrence failure and propo an additional explanatory variable drawn from psychoanalytic theory-the exience of shame and humiliation by foreign policy leaders . The author of this article discusses the theory of shame in foreign policy .
 Decision-makers have undergone such experiences may be inclined to challenge the status quo order to restore their sense of self-esteem . Such behavior violates precepts of rational deterrence theory . Decision-making decisions may be motivated to challenge status quo to restore self esteem .
 The foreign policy behavior of Nik Khruschev and John F Kennedy, during the Cuban missile crisis, is examined in detail to demonstrate the way in which feelings of shame and humiliation frequently followed by narcissistic rage expresses itself in acts of aggres .
 Policy-makers that push them by peaceful me balance balance balance . For t is only one of s policy makers that pushes them to balance .
 If it is not ext perceived vuln tions they enge & Stein, 1987). need to offset behavior. need to be offset behavior . Thus d attention to the military capabi . If it was not extemperate, it would be a distraction for the military .
 This paper will Crisis both as a explanation of vious experienc important and this crisis . Stei 1969 and 1973 s Sinai before de Egyptian milita escalating dome were erased by Humiliation ap these failures .
 3A more complete pass such additiona defensive styles is a defensive style of play . Superp has been compared to 3A with its critics of ratio deterrence or ratio deterrence .
 Different models are requ anomalies in behavior that rational deterrence is not dictating or explaining . Different models can be used to explain anomalies such as irrational deterrence .
 Shame involves feelings ranging in intensity from bashfulness to embarrassment . Shame involves the experience of bein down, dishonored, disgraced, humiliated, or mortified . Shame is a form of embarrassment and embarrassment .
 For a detailed treatment of the debate between proponents of rational deterrenc cates of comparative case analysis, see ""The rational deterrence debate" (1989 5) Blight and Welch c cognitive orientation of much of the psychological literature on crisis psychology is due to references to Freud .
 He and links it to and fecal prod comes a lasti claims that th things is the b humiliation. He and . links it . to and fecesal prod . Comes a week after the president's arrest .
 From this perspective, cissistic wishes are abruptly disappointed, and when unexpectedly violated . From this vantage point, they can be expected to be disappointed, but when they are, they are disappointed .
 Others assert that narcissism includes i aggressive as well as libidinous feelings . Others say narcissism is also aggressive and includes libiduous feelings .
 According to Piers and Singer , in the drop in self-esteem occasioned by the failure to live ideal contains a core of narcissistic omnipotence-gr ideals, the sum of the positive identifications .
 Morrison argues the ego ideal represents the classif object representations which an individual internalizes as a ch himself . Morrison argues that a defect or failure of the s shame carries with it a decrease in the narcissistic self-e affect of shame .
 When a child is chastised, some aspect of the idealized omniscient parent is lost, but in order to maintain a stable-if no longer real-object image, the ego introjects a sense of parental omniscience .
 Kohut (1968, 1971) maintains that many shame-prone people do not possess strong ideals . Most are exhibitionistic and driven by ambition, says Kohut . Kohut: "Shame-prone" people don't have strong ideals; most are exhibitionists .
 "Shame, from his perspective, is not about the failure of the ego to live up to the ego ideal," he says . Shame is not only about failure of ego, but it's about failure to live according to the ideal, he adds .
 It is a reaction to the loss of grandiosity and omnipotence of early childhood and, later, to the . loss of narcissistic supplies afforded by idealized objects which take the role of real loved objects .
 The current interpersonal unresponsiveness of an external object may not be what determines shame . Instead it may be repeated developmental experiences of emphatic failure during development .
 Aggression may be a pure accumulation of a special type of psychic energy without intrinsic direction . Aggressive may be construed as a pure accumulation of special psychic energy . Aggressance may be an accumulation of special energy without direction .
 In becoming functional, it must have a target, whether it be the subject's own ego or an external object, or the ego's projection . The subject's ego must be the target of its own ego .
 The phenomenon of narcissism, the lever for externalization of aggression, is critically important . The phenomenon is critical to the success of the U.S. President Barack Obama's presidency .
 It contributes decisively to the sense of differentiation of the self from the outer world, and later to the modes, directions and degrees of externally directed aggression .
 In Freud's first lengthy treatment of the subjec aggression seemed to be a component of the sexu not until later that Freud gave separate a aggressive and destructive instincts . Freud's work was published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 He focused thanatos-the death instinct which carries each of that man's natural aggressive instinct is the death instinct that exists alongside Eros . The death instinct is also known as thanatos, which carries a man's death instinct .
 Stone suggested that the prolonged helpless state of human infancy may be viewed as especially conducive to the mobilization of aggression . Stone: The prolonged helplessity of human infants may be particularly conducive to aggression .
 Waelder argues more forcefully that the drive for mastery is a major motivation and purpose of aggression-part of the self-preservative complex and an ego function .
 Self-psychologists challenge the view that a tendency to kill is deeply rooted in man's psychological make-up and stems from his animal past . Self-Psychologists also challenge the idea that man's animal past is to blame .
 Rochlin says the question is not what makes people aggressive and hateful, but what makes them prone to feeling vulnerable and humiliated . He says people are prone to feel humiliated and humiliated when they feel vulnerable .
 Humbled by others, we are likely to attack them when we ourselves fail . We are often attacked by others when we are ourselves ourselves ourselves .
 A lowering of self-esteem mobilizes aggression in such a way that increased demands are made upon a relationship for relief from the overpowering sense of diminished worth . Self-esteem is a form of aggression that increases the demands made on a relationship .
 Anna Freud documents the way in which the individual engages in ""identification with the aggressor"" as a powerful defense against being a victim . Rochlin declares that aggression plays in enhancing self-esteem, by enabling the individual to overcome threats and injuries to narcissism .
 There are two instances in which we are prone to the most violent aggression, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Interstate Interstate Highway 51 is known for a combination of the wounded narcissism of decision-makers and the behavior of foreigners to unleash hostility . The U.S. has a history of hostility in the region, especially toward foreigners .
 A study of some of the great classics of literature documents the relationship between aggression and injured narcissism .
 In the Cuban missile embroglio, the characters of John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev also provide us with clear and painful evidence of these same lessons . In the great classic of the international crisis literature, the . Cuban missile embroglio also provides us with . clear
 A study of the Cuban missile crisis allows us to explore the context in which Khrushchev and Kennedy each experienced narcissistic injury and humiliation at each other's hands . Each then attempted to repair his wounded self-esteem using the power of his respective state as an instrument of aggression .
 Orthodox interpretations of Khrushchev's decision to place missiles in Cuba have tended to ignore psychological variables instead on Soviet calculations of costs and benefits- a rational actor model .
 Three principal explanations emerged to explain the Soviet emplacement of the Soviet Union . From this perspective, three main explanations emerged .
 The first and most widely accepted was that the Soviet Union was fearful of the political implications of the unfavorable shift in the global balance of power that was taking place . The second and third most accepted theory is that the U.S. was afraid of political implications .
 Soviet leaders knew that their oft-proclaimed assertion of strategic missile superiority was bluff, argument says . Soviet leaders, according to this argument, knew that they were bluffing . This argument was based on the fact that the Soviet leaders had no nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet leadership decided to place mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba in order to give themselves a ""quick-fix,"" a way of compensating in the short term for Soviet strategic inferiority . In response to growing American strategic superiority, the Soviet leadership .
 Allison analyzes the Soviet missile emplacement and the American imposition of a blockade using a rational actor model . She also analyzes two other models-bureaucratic politics and organizational processes-to demonstrate the limitations of the rational actor .
 Other analysts who studied the missile crisis using alternative models include Janis , using group dynamics, Steinbruner , cybernetics, and Snyder , cognition .
 According to the orthodox interpreters, the weapons systems introduce also weakened Khrushchev's justification for his actions . The weapons systems also weakened his justification for the actions, they say .
 The medium-ra ballistic missiles had a range of 1100 miles . The intermediate-range ballistic missiles were twice that distance . They were launched by the South Korean state of Korea in 2007 .
 Between the they could target almost any important population center or military installat in the United States. Between the U.S. and the Taliban, they could attack almost any major population center in the country .
 If all that Khrushchev sought was the defense of Cuba less formidable strategic force-one capable of hitting only parts of the sout eastern United States-would have been preferable . It would have helped allay American anxieties .
 At least two Western analysts accepted Khrushchev's explanation at face value . The Soviets could have attained this capability with a lim 9 lim 9 .
 Stuart Chase commented that it was impossible that Soviet willingness to withdraw their missiles from Cuba was part of a plan to sec a pledge against invasion . Stuart Chase said it was n impossible that it would be impossible to believe that Soviet willing to withdraw its missiles would be part of the plan .
 These explanations of Soviet behavior focus p and political considerations and presume that they engaged in purposeful behavio benefit and cost-risk calculations . So that is that the Soviets engaged in . purposeful . behavior .
 Lebow is al assumption and comments that it is curious why convince himself in the face of all indications t nedy's carefully worded warnings-that he could siles into Cuba .
 In his view, what seems to have failure to communicate its intentions clearly, bu perception that the American commitment was v rooted less in Kennedy's presumed weakness,' 0 a to achieve specific foreign policy objectives .
 Leb policy leaders may be predisposed to challenge foreign and domestic threats, even when a benefits would dictate otherwise . The benefits of the Leb may dictate otherwise, according to a study .
 A successful Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba would have added twothirds to the total Soviet nuclear arsenal . Having been publicly shamed in this fashio superiority was shot down in flames .
 Its contribution to resolving Soviet strategic inferiority would have been limited, author says . U.S. vulnerability of soft target missiles to conventional and nuclear attacks from the United States, he says .
 A more likely reason for the Soviet attempt to increase their strategic military power was almost certainly a perceived need to prevent the United States from using its growing strategic superiority to compel Soviet concessions on various issues under contention .
 At the very least, they would have complicated the American ability to launch a first strike . They would have enabled the Soviets to avoid having to make humiliating concessions to the Americans .
 Several well-pl Sergei Khrushc ican invasion w vation for the Welch, Welch, 1989, invasion . But what e what e well--pl well-placed well-known well-wishers say is not a revolutionary invasion .
 I'm not su was more an e bases around latsky recount on the Black S ample lunch lunch . I was more of an e-base recount than a recount . The Black S was more a recounting of a lunch with a friend .
 I'm going to stick it to him too-maybe then they'll know what it feels like. Maybe then they will know what they feel like. I'm not going to let them know what I feel like, I say . I'm just not scared of it. I'll stick
 Garthoff reports a similar conversation whose source is also Fedor M Burlatsky . In subsequent correspondence with Lebow, he indicated that he had yet to provide additional confirmation .
 Khrushchev's own memoirs would also seem to support Burlatsky's account . Khrushchevsky's memoirs are also likely to support his account, according to his memoir .
 It's high time America learned what it feels like to have her own land and her own people threatened . And it's time for America to learn how it feels to have its own land threatened .
 It may also explain, in part, why t were in excess of the 14 obsolete Jupiters in Turke to defend Cuba, and yet insufficient to redre balance .
 Khrushchev's behavior vis-at-vis the United States, such emotions also also Kennedy's behavior, writes John Avlon . If the pain of having been humiliated, the fear of future humiliatio wish to retaliate by inflicting humiliation .
 To appreciate the role that shame and humiliation Kennedy's response to the American photoreconnaissance discovery 14, 1962, that Soviet mediumand intermediate-range missiles placed in Cuba, it is important to understand the psychological contex these actions occurred .
 Cuba was an issue on which Kennedy felt particularly vulnerable for a number of reasons . Cuba was one of the issues on Kennedy's list of priorities .
 It began to assume prominence for him as the 1960 presidential campaign entered its final phase . The campaign was the last phase of his presidential campaign .
 The Senate internal security sub-committee, dominated by conservative Democrats, released a report charging that Cuba ""was handed to Castro and the communists by a combination of Americans" (Horowitz, 1965, p.8) Following publication of the report, Kennedy made the Cuban issue a major part
 Ambassador Gardiner and Smith had warned that communism was a moving force in Castro leadership, but that the administration had failed to heed their advice . At the same time he criticized the administration for supporting the Batista dictatorship .
 Neither youth, wealth, nor defeat Kennedy in his race to the White House, had dealt him a humiliating blow . Kennedy's youth, his wealth, and defeat Kennedy's race to White House were dealt a humiliating defeat .
 Ken seen as having ""lost" Cuba, since his optio solution while failing to go far enough, nam adequate U.S. military support to overtise Castro .
 Kennedy's experiences of humiliation at the hands of b shchev produced highly affective responses . Kennedy's experience of humiliation in Russia produced an affective response .
 The discovery of the missiles in Cuba, just over a year later, restored his damaged self-esteem by administering his own Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 The discovery of Soviet intermed medium-range missiles in Cuba on October 14, 1962, raised anew the Moscow's intentions . For many in the White House, the discovery of the missiles raised anew .
 From the outset, discussions in th 23 suggested t its members were concerned with the strictly military-strategic implications of the missiles being rushed to completion in Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara initially, initially, and for two or three days thereafter, Soviet missiles in Cuba made no real difference . McNamara: "Initially, and initially, [McNamara] initially, ... for two and three days afterward, [Soviet missiles] made no difference"
 Paul Nitze argued that the manned bomber force States Strategic Air Command was based largely in the southern part of the United States . Nitze: The bomber force would be very vulnerable .
 In a te indicated his s we we these missiles so because if they we Soviet Union. In the te indicated that if they . we had missiles, they would have been sent to the Soviet Union . In the . 1950s, the missiles were fired at Soviet Union targets in a bid
 Twenty-five crisis which t the president' teners that a warned, with Cuba . But appeared to-and Twenty-25 crisis which . appeared to . appear to . be a crisis which appeared to be a . crisis .
 What was a to the security of the United States, but the hu suffer in the face of Soviet deception and defia drawn . The U.S. suffered in the Soviet deception .
 To be publicly exposed on the eve of a co been duped was bad enough; even worse w powerlessness in this situation . To be . exposed on eve of the . eve of . being duped, it's bad enough. To be exposed is bad enough .
 Even if rational deterrence theory c the removal of the missiles in Cuba and Americ Soviet move against Berlin or elsewhere, it is le the missiles had to be removed in a public confrassment . Career diplomat and Soviet expert Charles Boh tiations first .
 On 17 and 18 October, when the E tactics to secure the removal of the missiles, Bo communicate first with Khrushchev privately and response, on whether a blockade, invasion, or ai . Llewellyn Thompson, another Soviet expert and this course of action, as did
 The ExComm, however, seemed committed to a hardline posture emphasizing a requisite measure of force . It seemed to be committed to the hardline stance .
 The possibility of seeking withdrawal of the missiles by straightforward diplomatic negotiation received some attention with the State Department, it seems scarcely to have been aired .
 Kennedy's insistence upon the use of force may be explicable by the canons of rational deterrence theory . The canons' theory may explain Kennedy's decision to use force may explain his decision to do so .
 Kennedy's emotional reaction to the discovery of the missiles suggests that his response was more than that of a rational actor calculating what would be strategically appropriate . Kennedy's reaction reveals the pain of someone who has been profoundly humiliated and wants a modicum of revenge .
 According to nearly all those close to him, the swift, secret, and deceptive nature of the Soviet move had intensely angered Kennedy . Kennedy was angered by the secret, secret nature of Soviet move .
 Sorensen noted that ""the President had rejected this course [a diplomatic solution] from the outset" Even before any discussion of costs and benefits could take place in the ExComm .
 The opportunity to humiliate the Russians by facing them with a public show of force must have seemed too inviting for Kennedy and some of his advisers to pass up . Kennedy's decision to confront the Russians in a public display of force was made too inviting .
 It would compensate for their earlier Cuban failure, redress the sense of powerlessness over Berlin, and underline the courage and commitment of the administration . It would be a compensation for the failure of the Cuban government in Cuba .
 In Kennedy's broadcast on October 22, announcing the blockade of Cuba, there was a highly personal and affective tone . Kennedy's broadcasts were highly personal, affective .
 If the issue had been solely one of standing up to the Soviet challenge, "it is not self evident why the blockade was preferable to the diplomatic route" since a diplomatic ultimatum did not foreclose imposing a blockade should the former fail to work .
 Bundy may be right that a diplomatic solution would not have worked, but he's right that it was not explored with the same degree of rigor as the blockade and airstrike options . Bundy's argument is that the president opposed it from the outset and that it wasn't explored with a degree
 Bundy could have exp advice as to wh Soviet construction at the missile sites . Bundy could also offer advice on how to build up Soviet missile bases . Bundy's advice: "Build up the Soviet missile sites in the 1960s"
 The deadline can also be explained by Kennedy's fear of further humiliation on the Cuban issue . Kennedy would have been under enormous pressure to decide on early action, but in a far less favorable situation .
 Kennedy was already on public record that the missiles in Cuba were only for defensive purposes . The discovery of ""offensive"" systems would raise serious doubts about Kennedy's credibility before the election .
 Bundy writes that the moment Americans knew what Khrushchev was doing, the overriding question would be what their own government was going to do about it . Bundy: Americans would want to know what the U.S. government was doing about it. Bundy: The question is what the government
 Kennedy would have had to confront the wounded narcissism of the American people and their shame and humiliation at being challenged in a way they did not expect . Had he failed to act forcefully, he would have faced a national embarrassment .
 Kennedy felt that the U.S. people demanded a demonstration of force, given their purported frustration over Cuba . He suggests that Kennedy felt the American people demanded that . Kennedy felt it was necessary to demonstrate force .
 Kennedy opposed testing Khrushchev by a diplomatic exchange before choosing a course of action . He did not want to open communication until he knew what action he would take . Nevertheless, Kennedy's own sense was, as his brother Robert pointed out, that if he did not 28Bundy also
 Whether or not Kennedy really beli matic rather than a military strategy would have le really been the issue . Kennedy's thoughts about impeachm in part, of his deep-seated fear of the humiliation perception of weakness or inaction .
 Kennedy's concern about impeachment as ""the" conciliatory course in the crisis suggests that he w analytic or rational-actor paradigm (Steinbruner, 1 come) would have appeared as a rare limiting case .
 I readily accounts for the existence of firm, categoric the presence of intense uncertainty (Steinbruner, 19) a rational analytic process is the ability to order pr trade-offs . I readily account for the . existence of the existence . of firm . categoric . the presence
 Pursuit of a compellent strategy justified in terms of ""risk war now"" to avoid ""certai 357), thus seeming to satisfy the requirements of the requirements . Pursuit was the need to avoid any further damage to hi suffered a number of humiliating experiences .
 Kennedy attempted to turn "pa from being a humiliated victim to that of the victor" Kennedy turned the tables on Khrushchev . In narcissistic injury, Kennedy tried to turn himself from being humiliated victim .
 By October 16, Kennedy knew the Russians had deployed missiles in Cuba . Kennedy knew by October 16 that the missiles had been deployed in Cuba.
 President Kennedy chose not to confront Soviet Foreign Secretary Gromyko with the evidence . Instead of confronting the evidence, Kennedy chose to listen without comment .
 Kennedy chose to give notice to the Russians in a nationwide TV address . Instead of using private channels to warn the Russians that he knew and intended to act, he chose to use national TV to warn them .
 After that a Soviet withdrawal had to be in public, it almost had to have been a humiliation . After that, the Soviet withdrawal would have to be a public humiliation . The withdrawal was a humiliating humiliation .
 As Nathan comments: ""An agreement would have confounded the issue of will"" - and, by implication, Kennedy's need to stand up to Khrushchev .
 In the final act of the crisis, Kennedy accepted one of two letters sent on two consecutive days by Khrushchev . Kennedy accepted the letters in the letter he accepted .
 The second letter, dated October 27, contained the demand for removal of the Turkish missiles . The first letter did not; the first did not . The letter is dated October 26 .
 Kennedy responded with a public letter to Khrushchev, on October 27, in which he accepted he more favorable terms of the first letter . Kennedy responded to the letter with a letter of his own, accepting the terms .
 The terms of an interchange with another head of state was a considerable departure from diplomacy . But this procedure of publishing the private terms of a diplomatic exchange was a significant departure . It was published in the form of a private exchange with a foreign leader .
 Khrushchev dropped his insistence upon a public American pledge to remove missiles from Turkey . Bundy argues that the administration had little room for maneuver since nei leaders nor the Turks seemed prepared to propose a withdrawal of the missiles .
 Evidence suggests there was a previously unreported meeting between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin in which the importance of the Turkish missiles to the Russians was discussed .
 Kennedy left the room and after consulting with the president by telephone, confirmed the president's intention to remove the missiles from Thrkey . If the overall situation was normalized, he would remove them if the situation was normalized, Kennedy said .
 Robert Kennedy's support for the trade merely repeated the understanding that Robert Kennedy had already conveyed to Dobrynin . Kennedy's decision to support the trade was made in advance of the Kennedy administration .
 Khrushchev's response to the discovery was a public showdown in the form of a blockade of Cuba . The U.S. response to their discovery-a public showdown-further enraged Khrrushchev . The American response to this was a blockade .
 It remains unclear whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or persuaded Khrushchev of it .
 Khrushchev's experience of being humiliated provoked his narcissistic rage and promoted his decision to run the blockade as a way of reducing the damage to his self-esteem .
 Khrushchev seemed to be fully cognizant that the missiles could not remain in Cuba and that his job was to secure the best withdrawal deal possible . Despite his aggressive behavior, he was fully aware of his actions, he said .
 As predicted by rational deterrence theory, he was able to assess the potential costs and benefits of leaving the missiles in Cuba . The humiliation involved in removing the missiles was clearly preferable to the danger that the conflict could escalate .
 It appears increasingly probable that 20 nuclear warheads of the 40 planned had already arrived in Cuba . The other 20 warheads seem to have been en route on the Poltava when their arrival in Cuba was interdicted by the blockade .
 These nuclear-equipped missiles were not under any double-lock system and thus could have been fired by Soviet commanders in Cuba without authorization from Moscow in the event of an American air strike .
 Castro had no control over th message, if, in fact, it did occur, it could have further f shchev's awareness of how easy it was to lose control an out of hand .
 Soviet strategic inferiority in conju iation that this engendered combined to produce a narcisisis . Attempts to repair with a deceptive emplaceme efforts to restore his self-esteem failed .
 Two factors seem of critical im shchev's ego functioning, his ability to engage in reality intact that he understood that once the Americans had decided that the missiles had to go, the result was simply a question of time and the best deal .
 Kennedy had forced Khrushchev to back down and accept the public humiliation of crating up the Soviet missiles and bombers and returning them home . The prospect of a reciprocal American action made it easier to accept the U.S. ultimatum .
 American public pledges not to invade Cuba, and private assurances that the missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn, provided Khrushchev with enough of a psychological fig leaf . The U.S. never invaded Cuba, but the Soviet Union did .
 Khrushchev's ability to absorb the narcissistic injury of being seen as publicly backing down, without escalating the crisis further by a move elsewhere, i.e., against Berlin .
 Khrushchev must have understood that to have allowed his wounded self-esteem further reign could have resulted in a direct Soviet-American confrontation involving nuclear weapons .
 Khrushchev ordered the removal of the missiles, but some of the sense of shame and rage he experienced lingered on . The missiles were removed from the Soviet Union's arsenal of Soviet missiles .
 The Castro story was denied most bluntly by Alexsandr I Alekseyev, who was the Soviet ambassador to Cuba in 1962, and to whom Fidel Castro dictated his telexes to Moscow . Kuznetzov assured Mc34 that the story was true .
 The true story ma have to await the release of classified Soviet documents from that period . It is not known if the true story is true .
 Kennedy was also prepared to offer Khrushchev a public no-invasion pledge of Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles . Kennedy refused to concede publicly to the demands for a Cuba-Turkey missile swap . Kennedy also refused to give a public statement of support for the swap .
 Was the world only a few hours away from an air strike and potential nuclear war because of Kennedy's need to ensure that no one could doubt his courage and commit to a strike?
 Until recently, all that was kno narcissistic needs could only be attained at a pr caust-that he was ultimately unwilling to pay . Until until recently, he was . unable to pay for his narcissistic needs .
 The Cuban missile crisis is, in part, the story of two political lea whom had suffered shame and humiliation at the other's hands, an whom then attempted to humiliate his opponent in order to restore his self-esteem . L ego strength had remained sufficiently intact so potential nuclear disaster
 President Ken Chairman Khrushchev is a story of two individuals whose ego strength and reality testing is intact to allow them to limit the demands for revenge impoition .
 There are a number of important insights that the Cuban missile crisis highlights . There are also important insights about the Cuban crisis .
 The first addresses issues of shame and humiliation as manifested in international crisis . The second and third focus on issues of international crisis prevention and the efficacy of alternative models in explaining deterrence failures .
 Psychoanalytic explanations for shame and humiliation that focus on intrapsychic conflicts involving id-ego or id-superego phenomena could not be evaluated for either Khrushchev or Kennedy .
 Khrushchev's and Kennedy's behavior in the Cuban missile crisis suggests relevance of object-relations approach . The role that feelings of shame and humiliation played, do suggest, however, the relevance of objects-relations .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy experienced an awareness of being weak, not in control of events, and of having their relative lack of power rubbed in their faces by their superpower opponent .
 American threats failed to stop the emplacement of Soviet missiles in Cuba, nor did Soviet commitments to Cuba stop American attempts to overthrow the Castro regime . Their inability to control the opponent's behaviour engendered feelings of shame and humiliation on both sides .
 Object-relations theorists, with their emphasis on the infant's need for and dependency upon the ""other,"" and the 36Rusk expressed the opinion that ""the Andrew Cordier ploy"" would have been attempted on Monday if Khrushchev had not agreed to remove the missiles .
 Psychoanalytic models are very useful in explaining t that the deductive logic of the rational deterrence mode is less successful, however, in generating predictions in behavior .
 Restrictions and transformation of scoptophilia in psychoneu marks on analogous phenomena in folk-psychology . Restrictions on the subject of psychoneurophilia are restricted to only one aspect of the subject .
 George, A., Hall, Hall, D Brown and Co. C Garthoff, R (198 Brookings Institut) George, a. Hall, R . Hall, a., Hall and a. Brown and . Brown and Company .
 Vicissitudes of their infantile cathexis and their influences on ideational and affective development . Vicissitude of infantile catshexis is discussed in detail .
 The meaning of humiliation and its relationship to fluctuations in self-esteem are discussed in the book .