 Get stories that empower and uplift daily from the Monitor Daily . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . Visit CNN.com/Heroes for more information .
 Leaders must avoid that trap again with Iran and other critical issues, says Obama . Leaders must not repeat the trap again, says White House .
 What humans live through in the present – economic struggles, political contests, national crises – drifts to the ground and slowly gets buried under the strata of more recent events . Human struggles and national crises are buried under more recent strata, more recent .
 Graham Allison reviews October 1962 with people under the age of 50 . People under 50 often react with dropped-jaw amazement to October 1962 .
 “It just seems incredible to people who didn’t live through those times,” says Dr. John Defterios . “I’m sure it’s incredible, but it seems incredible” he says .
 The Cuban missile crisis unfolded 50 years ago this week . It was the closest the human race has come to nuclear holocaust . The crisis unfolded in the wake of the Cold War .
 John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev had an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation . The confrontation was often explained as a confrontation between the two men . It is often said to have happened in the 1960s and 1961 .
 Allison Allison: Crisis was a turning point in understanding that even sharpest minds and best teams of advisers are prone to misperception and miscalculation . Allison has spent a career examining strategic decisionmaking .
 Khrushchev was under pressure at home from hard-liners when he sent short-range missiles to Cuba . US leaders didn’t know, for instance, that Mr Khrushchev had been under pressure in Cuba .
 The missiles were meant to be hidden, but Russian technicians had failed to camouflage them . The missiles had been designed to be camouflaged, but were not camouflaged .
 The United States didn’t know that tactical nuclear weapons were already on the island . Soviet commanders were authorized to use them if United States troops landed . The U.S. didn't know that Soviet commander was authorized to do so .
 Kennedy was trying to live down the Bay of Pigs fiasco . There were dozens of other factors – from the inability of Moscow to control Cuba and its leader, Fidel Castro .
 No single leader can master all the complexities or manage all the players, especially during a fast-moving conflict – especially when ultimatums are issued .
 Out of the Cuban crisis came a hot line connecting Washington and Moscow, the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and several generations of strategic arms reduction treaties . A healthy skepticism about military capability, security strategy, and the trustworthiness of intelligence .
 Creativity, compromise, and face-saving might lead to other solutions . But creativity and compromise could lead to more solutions, CNN says .
 Allison says Iran might win the right to enrich uranium in exchange for full transparency and clear verification that it is not moving toward nuclear weapons . Allison: "History shows that we can bury ourselves by misperception and miscalculation"
 My work in Kenya, for example, was heavily influenced by a Christian Science Monitor article I had forced myself to read 10 years earlier . I was forced to read the article 10 years ago, and it was published by the Monitor .
 If you were to come up with a punchline to a joke about the Monitor, that would probably be it . The Monitor is one of the world's most famous landmarks .
 We’re seen as being global, fair, insightful, insightful and perhaps a bit too earnest . We're seen as global and fair, fair and insightful, and perhaps perhaps too earnest. We're also seen as a bit bit too serious .
 The Monitor is a peculiar little publication that’s hard for the world to figure out . It's hard to guess what happened to the Monitor .
 We're run by a church, but we’re not only for church members and we're not about converting people . We're not only church members . We’ve not only been for members of the church, we're also for people who want to be converted .
 We’re known as being fair even as the world becomes as polarized as at any time since the newspaper’s founding in 1908 . We're known as fair even though the world is polarized as it becomes as polarizing as ever since .
 We’re about kicking down the door of thought everywhere and saying, “You are bigger and more capable than you realize," she says .
 If you’re looking for bran muffin journalism, you can subscribe to the Monitor for $15 .
 CNN.com will feature a weekly feature of iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Submit your photos to CNN iReport.com/Travel next week .