 Khrushchev deploys nuclear missiles on the allied socialist island of Cuba where they can reach large parts of the U.S.A. within just a few minutes . Secretary General Khrushche deployed the missiles in the allied Socialist Socialist island .
 For Moscow, it is a question of the atomic and political balance of power . Moscow: For Moscow it is an issue of the nuclear, political balance in power .
 If it had come down to a nuclear exchange between the super powers, the divided Germany and Berlin would have been affected . Berlin and the rest of Germany would be affected .
 Dowling, the American ambassador in Bonn, requested a most urgent meeting with Adenauer . Dowling requested the meeting, which took place in the middle of the day . The U.S. ambassador to Bonn was killed in the fall of the war .
 Adenauer shown close-ups which clearly show that launch pads for rockets armed with nuclear warheads were being erected in Cuba .
 Dowling informed Chancellor Adenauer that aerial reconnaissance had detected 25 Soviet ships that were on their way to Cuba . Dowling also said that the Soviet ships had been detected by aerial reconnaissance . The Soviet ships were believed to be headed to Cuba from the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy announces a naval blockade in a televised speech, but only as a first step . President Kennedy announced the blockade as a "first step"
 If the Soviet ships loaded with more rockets didn't turn around and if the nuclear build-up was not stopped, the U.S. forces were prepared for any countermeasures .
 Chancellor Adenauer recommends the U.S. government show strength . Adenauer says the United States must show strength in order to avoid further embarrassment .
 Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt calls for emergency meetings with his advisor Egon Bahr . Brandt has been in West Berlin for more than a decade . Brandr is the mayor of West Berlin .
 If it is critical there, it will become critical in Berlin, says Berlin's mayor .
 It will become critical in Berlin, because it's the weakest and most geographically isolated point, surrounded by the armed forces of the GDR and the Soviet Union . Berlin will be critical because it will be the weakest, most isolated point in the country .
 In Moscow there are increasing indications that the U.S.A. will not accept nuclear missiles in Cuba . In Moscow, Moscow is increasingly concerned about the possibility of a nuclear strike .
 Khrushchev fears an escalation, offers Kennedy negotiations in personal letter . Kennedy writes personal letter to Khrushnik asking him to speak to Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Khrushchev backs down after the situation threatens to go out of control . The incident occurred during the Second World War II .
 President Kennedy removes Jupiter missiles from Turkey . President Kennedy responds by removing them from Turkey.
 The world was never closer to the verge of nuclear war than in October, 1962 . In 1962, the U.S. was on the brink of a nuclear war .
 Today's Day of the Day will be celebrated on CNN.com Live . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Share your photos of the day with CNN Living .
 Encyclopaedia Britannica is the world's largest encyclopedia of knowledge . It is published by the Encyclopaedic Britannica .
 Britannica's Britannica Britannica is celebrating its 100th anniversary of its publication of the first edition of the book, The Britannica .