 Kennedy asked Nikita S Khrushchev to remove all weapons from the island, and on Oct. 1962, Khrushchchev conceded, halting the standoff . Kennedy asked the Russian Premier to remove weapons from Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s son, visiting professor of Slavic languages at Brown, reflects on diplomatic lessons . “The greatest lesson ... is that you have to negotiate with your enemy," he says . Sergei Khrushchevich: "The greatest lessons ... is ... negotiating with your
 "Today the history of the crisis is more focused not on the confrontation, but on cooperation," he said . The perspective of the . crisis has changed over time and today the history is more . focused on cooperation, he added .
 "Today that is very unusual, because we think we can only negotiate with friends. And today that's very unusual," he says .
 "Nobody surrenders unconditionally until fully defeated," says President Obama . "Today, we impose unconditional surrender," says Obama .
 President Kennedy liked Khrushchev more than President Obama liked the leaders of the Iranian republic, but Kennedy wanted to negotiate with him . President Obama and President Kennedy didn't like each other's leaders, but they did like each of them .
 If we want to resolve the nuclear crisis in the Middle East, we have to sit together, he says . "I hope that in some period of time we will find some resolution to that situation," he adds .
 Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba not because he wanted to change the balance of power . He wanted to infiltrate southern America, not change the power balance, he says . He says .
 President Castro officially declared in 1961 that he joined the Soviet Bloc . The Soviets had an obligation to protect all their allies, he says .
 Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba as a signal to President Kennedy that no one could invade the island . The missiles were sent to Cuba in response to a threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev needed assurance that America and its allies wouldn’t invade Cuba . The U.S. and allies wouldn't invade Cuba, Khrushchevitch said .
 President Kennedy agreed to this so there was no need for the missiles’ presence in Cuba . The missiles were removed from Cuba in 1961 . The U.S. agreed to remove them from Cuba .
 Americans thought Russians and Europeans would kill each other through nuclear exchange . Americans thought that Russia and Europe would die through nukes . Americans were shocked when they thought that they would die .
 Khrushchev, like Kennedy, used the nuclear weapons as a political tool, says historian . "Khrrushchev used nuclear weapons like a weapon of war," he says . "It was a political weapon, not a weapon, it was a weapon," he adds .
 President Kennedy used his wisdom and opposed all of these people, thanking them for their advice but deciding the opposite, deciding to negotiate . President Kennedy decided to negotiate with the Soviets .
 "The greatest lesson to come out of this is that you have to negotiate with your enemy," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You must negotiate with the enemy"
 If you negotiate with your enemy, there is a good chance that you will come to some conclusion that will satisfy both sides . Negotiating with the enemy is an easy way to come to an agreement that can be reached .