 The Soviet Union had stationed nuclear missiles in Cuba, which posed a threat to the U.S. and Canada . The United States and Canada were at risk from the Soviet Union .
 On 14 October 1962, an American spy plane took photographs of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles being installed in Cuba . The missiles were installed by the Soviet Union in Cuba in 1962 .
 The missiles could hit targets in the United States and Canada . Equipped with nuclear warheads, the missiles could target the U.S. or Canada .
 US President John F Kennedy was informed of the situation on 16 October . The situation was described as 'unprecedented' by the US President .
 Kennedy rejected calls from his military to launch air strikes against missile sites . Kennedy rejected military's calls for air strikes on missile sites in Syria .
 In international legal terms a naval blockade was an act of war that required a formal declaration of war . Kennedy called it a “quarantine,” since in international terms it was a ‘quarantine’
 He announced the crisis, and the blockade, in a televised address to the American public on 22 October .
 He threatened further action if the Soviet Union did not dismantle the missile sites . He threatened to take further action against the country .
 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker was informed by Kennedy of the U.S. plan shortly before the televised broadcast .
 On the phone with Kennedy, Diefenbaker was skeptical about the Soviet Union’s intentions . The president was skeptical of Soviet intentions, but he was skeptical .
 He asked to see further proof of what was taking place on the ground in Cuba . He asked for more proof of the situation .
 Diefenbaker urged Kennedy to send a team of U.N. inspectors to Cuba to verify what the Soviets were doing there . The U.S. never sent a team to Cuba .
 The main issue for the Canadian government was whether to comply with an American request to move Canadian forces to a higher alert status equivalent to their DEFCON 3 . The Canadian government did not comply with the U.S. request .
 He was angry that the U.S. hadn’t consulted Canada earlier in the crisis . He said the United States had not consulted Canada before .
 He and Canada’s Foreign Minister, Secretary of State for External Affairs Howard Green, were also wary of falling too quickly into line with American demands .
 They were also concerned that placing Canada’s military on alert might provoke the Soviet Union . The Soviets were also worried about placing Canada on alert may provoke them .
 Defence Readiness Condition refers to any one of five levels of American defence readiness . DEFCON is based on the apparent threat to national security . It refers to the level of readiness of the U.S. military .
 DEFCON 3 means an increase in readiness above normal levels, specifically that air forces are ready to deploy in 15 minutes . Air forces will be ready for deployment within 15 minutes of the time .
 Discrete Phase, Ready State, Simple Alert, Reinforced Alert and General Alert are all activated . Simple Alert is the first state of emergency alert .
 Cabinet delayed approval of the move for two days as Cabinet debated the issue . However, formal permission was delayed while Cabinet debated it for the next two days .
 NATO members announced their support for the blockade . But as Soviet ships approached the quarantine zone later in the week, other NATO nations announced support . NATO members have pledged to blockade the Soviet ships .
 On 24 October, the Diefenbaker government authorized the Ready State of Military Vigilance . The Ready State was created .
 Canadian ships and aircraft also participated in patrols to locate Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic . Canadian aircraft and ships participated in the patrols .
 In fact, ships and aircraft of the Royal Canadian Navy and aircraft had been active in antisubmarine operations in the North Atlantic in cooperation with United States forces .
 This was due to a noted increase in Soviet submarine activity in the area . The Soviet Union was responsible for the increase in submarine activity .
 Naval and air force commanders carried out these ASW actions under the authority of long-standing Canada-U.S. bilateral defence agreements .
 After Kennedy’s public address on 22 October, additional Canadian ships were fuelled and provisioned . They sailed on 25 October, once formal authority was received from the Canadian government for the Ready State .
 Canada's hesitant response reflected the government’s desire to preserve the independence of its foreign policy . Canada's hesitation to respond reflected the country's desire to protect its own sovereignty .
 It led to a growing perception that the Diefenbaker government was indecisive . The government was accused of being indecisive in the 1980s .
 Canada's hesitancy worsened already tense relations with the Kennedy administration . Canada’s reluctance to withdraw from the U.S. caused tensions in relations with U.K.
 It fuelled controversy and confusion in Canada over the country’s policy on nuclear weapons . It also fuelled controversy .
 John Diefenbaker was prime minister of Canada from 1957-1963 . He was Canada's first prime minister from 1957 to 1963 .
 The world’s two atomic superpowers came closer than ever to nuclear war . The world's two nuclear superpowers were at risk of nuclear war in the 1950s .
 The stand-off ended on 28 October with the help of United Nations diplomats . U.N. Secretary General U. Thant helped end the standoff .
 Thant offered suggestions to resolve the crisis and continuously relayed messages between the two superpowers . Thant also relayed messages to the U.S. and the Chinese .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle and remove the Soviet missiles, in return for Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba . Kennedy promised to remove missiles from Cuba in exchange for promise to not invade . Kennedy's promise to remove Soviet missiles was made in return to a promise not
 The United States military remained on heightened alert for three more weeks as it monitored the removal of the missiles . Although the crisis had been defused, the U.S. military remained alert for more than three weeks .
 As part of the resolution, Kennedy secretly promised to remove U.S. intermediate-range Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey, which had been a Soviet demand . Kennedy also secretly promised that the missiles would be removed from the country .
 Diefenbaker had won the 1958 election with the biggest landslide in Canadian history . The Canadian Prime Minister won the election with a landslide in 1958 .
 His hesitant response to the Cuban missile crisis led to the downfall of his regime . But his hesitant response led to his downfall of the regime .
 In the wake of the crisis, the U.S. accused the Diefenbaker government of lying and avoiding its military duties . The United States accused the government of avoiding military duty .