 His Finest Hour Now by James A NATHAN . James A. Nathen is the author of the award-winning novel, "His Finest hour Now" Nathenya Ghitis is the creator of a new series, "Harrison Ford"
 New understandings emerge and stand, at least for a while; then comes another tide of re-evaluation . New understandingings emerge, but then they stand again, and again .
 The Kennedy Administration's shimmering hour, the Cuban missile crisis, has just begun to have its luster tarnished by critics . Critics say the crisis was a waste of time for the Kennedy Administration .
 Few have subjected the event to a complex review of its meaning in terms of the assumptions, policy processes, and relationships of the cold war . Yet few have subjected them to a review of the meaning of the Cold War .
 My contention is that the crisis became something of a misleading ""model"" of the foreign policy process . The crisis became a misleading "model" of the Foreign Policy process .
 The international environment is a constant collision of wills that is a surrogate of war and, at the same time, takes place at the doorstep of war . The situation in the world takes place in the same way as war, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Most of the arguments contained in this article appeared in a paper delivered at the 1974 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Chicago, August 29-September 2 .
 Although crises are characteristic of the international system, the domestic system is one of order and consensus, and is insulated from the necessities of international politics . The domestic system, however, is insulated by international politics, says David Cameron .
 Public opinion can be controlled to lend support for a particular foreign policy . But rarely do appurtenances of the domestic sector have their own imperatives, writes David Frum .
 An essential element of crisis management is the ability to reconcile the inherent forward dynamic of violence and threats of violence, and the instruments of violence with negotiation with negotiation .
 Political crises terminate by definition by definition, almost like medical crises . Political crises therefore terminate by . definition of political crises, like those of medical crises, terminate .
 The Soviets seldom negotiate serious matters except under extreme duress . The U.S. rarely negotiates serious matters with the Soviets . The Soviets rarely negotiate seriously except under duress.
 After the Cuban missile crisis, there were the beginnings of detente with the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union and the U.S. became friendly relations in the 1980s .
 The test-ban treaty, the hot line, and a more civil exchange between the two powers are widely believed to stem from the resolution of the missile crisis .
 The model and [ the usual inherent assumptions on the meaning of Cuba can be challenged . Yet the model and . the usual assumptions on Cuba can . be challenged, the author says .
 The Cuban missile crisis stands as a watershed of the cold war and in the history of the contemporary international "" system . Nevertheless, the Cuban missiles crisis remains a watershed in history .
 The most intense experience in East-West relations occurred in October 1962, when the Russians were discovered to have placed fortytwo medium-range missiles in Cuba .
 In Khrushchev's apt description, it was a time when ""a smell of burning hung heavy"" in the air . Khrushvic's description was an apt description of the time .
 Academic and government analysts have viewed Kennedy's response as a highly calibrated dissection of alternatives instead of seeing his actions as largely an intuitive response to a threat to his administration's electoral future, pride, and strategic posture .
 The dominant lesson Americans have drawn from the Cuban experience has been a joyous sense of the United States regaining mastery over history . Nevertheless, the dominant lesson has been that the U.S. has regained mastery of history .
 For many years Americans had felt threatened by the Soviet challenge to world order . The challenge had been reinforced by growing Russian strategic capability .
 After Cuba, fears of precipitate expansion of Soviet-American dispute into a final paroxysm of nuclear dust were dissipated .
 Each rung could be ascended or descended with the proper increment of will and control . Each of the rungs could be descended or ascended with proper will .
 The impression now is not one of all choices having been carefully weighed and considered, court records show . Court chroniclers of the Kennedy Administration have pored over each detail .
 In retrospect, there appears to have been a gripping feeling of uncertainty and pressure . Rather, in retrospect, it appears to be an anxious feeling .
 Tense, fearful, and exhausted men planned and held together U.S. response to Russian missile launch .
 The consensus of most behavioral research is that men operating under such acute stress are scarcely capable of considered judgment . Men operating under acute stress can't be trusted to make decisions, experts say .
 Kennedy's calm public face, discipline, and cool control gave a sense of intellectual engagement in the crisis which yielded no hint of the mute wasteland he was contemplating . Kennedy's cool control was crucial to the success of his administration .
 But his private anxiety is well recorded, and a case can be made that dispassionate analysis or problem-solving was all but precluded by the psychology of the situation . His private anxiety was well recorded .
 The military and the "hawks" were pushing for actions ranging from a ""surgical strike"" to an all-out invasion of Cuba . The military was pushing for a military strike, a military operation, and an invasion .
 Such options would have demanded the stark choice of an even greater Soviet humiliation or a Soviet response in kind . The Soviet response would have been even worse than a Soviet humiliation .
 Ironically, a ""surgical strike"" was not really practical, for there was no guarantee that more than 90 percent of the missiles could be extirpated . Ironically, there were no guarantees that 90 percent could be extracted from the missiles .
 Even after an American air attack, some of the missiles could have survived and been launched . The missiles could still be launched even after the U.S. strike .
 President Kennedy estimated the world's chance of avoiding war at between one out of three and even even . Kennedy estimated that the chance of war was between one and three to avoid .
 The illusion of control derived from the crisis was perniciously misleading, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The illusion of controlling the crisis derived from it was per nigglingly misleading"
 President Kennedy's control was in fact far from complete, historian Schlesinger says . Many Americans believed the Cuban crisis displayed to the world the American leadership was unsurpassed in the responsible management of power .
 The main instrument of pressure was the blockade run by the Navy . For example, the blockade ran by the navy .
 McNamara sensed the Navy's lack of responsiveness to civilian commands . McNamara had gone to the ""Flag Plot,"" or Naval Operations Center, where he could talk to ship commanders directly by voice-scrambled radio .
 McNamara pointed to a map symbol indicating that a ship was in a spot where he had not wanted it . McNamara said he did not want the ship to be found in the spot he wanted .
 Chief of Naval Operations Anderson rose to defend the Navy against any implied slight about Navy procedure . Anderson picked up a Manual of Naval Regulations and defended the Navy . Anderson: "I'm not a Navy official. I'm a Navy officer. I don't believe in that kind of things."
 McNamara retorted, "I don't give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done" McNamara said . McNamara later said he did not give a matter of concern about Jones' actions .
 The voluble Soviet leader was perhaps half-convinced that Wall Street really manipulated American policy, he said .
 He warned that if the U.S. Navy began stopping Soviet ships, the Soviet subs would start sinking American ships . He warned the United States Navy would start to stop Soviet ships .
 Khrushchev explained that the blockade would lead to World War III . Only a little later, the Navy began to force Soviet subs to the surface in order to defend its blockade . Kennedy had authorized contact with surface vessels .
 Abel interviewed the witnesses to this episode, some of whom did not agree as to Anderson's exact words . Abel interviewed some of the witnesses .
 Knox, "Close-up of Khrushchev During a Crisis,"" New Yor\ Times Magazine, November 18, 1962, 128. Knox . Knox,  "Close-ups" were published in November 1962 .
 An American U-2 plane fixed on the wrong star and headed back from the North Pole to Alaska via Siberia . The plane was headed back to Alaska from Siberia via Siberia when the incident occurred .
 Alaskan Air Command sent fighter-bombers to escort the plane home . U.S. fighters and the spy plane met over Soviet territory before proceeding back .
 To survive a Strangelove series of incidents like these, even given the assumptions of the day, can hardly be characterized as more than luck . To survive such an incident like this, it would hardly be considered luck, says the author .
 The answer is found, in part, in one of the unacknowledged necessities in the conduct of U.S. international affairs . Domestic political considerations are the answer to the problem, says President Obama .
 The Kennedy Administration's sense of its own precarious electoral position, the coming of the November mid-term elections, and the place Cuba had occupied in public debate, all augured for an immediate and forceful response . No matter what the strategic reality was of having Russian missiles near American borders,
 The imperatives of American domestic politics during an election year had been building for some time . The imperative of U.S. domestic politics is building up to some time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 On August 27, 1962, for example, Republican Senator Homer E Capehart of Indiana declared, ""It is high time that the American people demand that . President Kennedy quit 'examining the situation' and start protect19 Kennedy .
 Stone despaired in his Weekly that Cuba was a bogey which shook Americans, in the autumn of 1962, even more than thought of war .
 If the missile installations were completed earlier, there would be, arguably, both a strategic and an electoral problem facing the administration .
 To Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, it seemed that "A missile is a missile" to the U.S. Defense Department .
 To Khrushchev, the missiles offered the appearance of what former State Department analyst Roger Hilsman called a ""quick fix" to the Soviet problem of strategic inferiority . To the Soviet leader, the missile missiles offered a 'quick fix'
 Khrushchev was under enormous pressure from the Russian military who rejected his ""goulash communism"" and were pushing for a vast increase in the Soviet arms budget . Khrushchev was under pressure from Russia's military to increase arms spending .
 The Cuban missile ploy was probably Khrushchev's response to the prospect of Russian strategic inferiority which was reported by the Kennedy Administration . Kennedy Administration admitted that the Democratic preelection charge of a ""missile gap"" had not been based on fact .
 American announcement that the ""gap"" had been closed was accompanied by a Defense Department plan, dated October 19, 1961, for production of over one thousand missiles .
 One purpose of the Soviet moves in Cuba was, therefore, to gain 33 per cent of the Cuban population .
 The employment of twenty-four MRBM's and eighteen IRBM's seemed to be a dramatic movement in that direction . The employment of twenty-24 MRBM and eighteen IRMBs seemed to have been a dramatic .
 But such an increase posed no real threat to American retaliatory strength, or to increasing American superiority, he says . Such a rise in U.S. military strength was not a real threat, he adds .
 Henry Kissinger noted that the bases were of only marginal use in a defensive war . Henry Kissinger later noted that they were only of only "marginal use" in a war .
 Kennedy later reflected that they were not "intending to fire them, because if they were going to get into a nuclear struggle, they have their own missiles in the Soviet Union," he said .
 Soviet submarines and tenders began to visit Cuban ports in 1970, beginning in 1970 .
 By 1973, Soviet submarines with Polaris-type missiles were regularly stopping in Cuba . And by 1973, the Soviet Union was regularly stopping Cuba .
 Perhaps he felt that the U.S. people demanded an energetic response, given their purported frustration over Cuba . Perhaps he . felt that . the American people demanded a . energetic response .
 The administration's evaluation '• of the public mood supported the notion that firmness was a requisite ' of policy' of policy .
 The Russians also began to schedule regular stops of long-range aircraft at about the same time . According to the authoritative Aviation Wee\\, the Russians .
 Spontaneous press reports indicate that Soviet nuclear submarines are putting into Cuba up to this day . Nevertheless, sporadic press reports say that Soviet submarines are still putting in Cuba .
 I felt that he had not acquitted himself well on this occasion . He had permitted Khrushchev to say many things which should have been challenged right there on the spot . I felt he had allowed Khrushchets to say things that should be challenged .
 Khrushchev may have been surprised at the forceful reaction of Kennedy . The young President had accepted the Berlin Wall in August 1961 with no military response .
 The fine distinctions between "offensive and defensive" missiles were really a de facto acknowledgment of the Soviet effort in Cuba . Perhaps, as Hilsman has argued, the Soviets assumed that the fine American distinctions between ""offensive and . defensive"" missiles were .
 Khrushchev promised that no initiatives would be taken before the elections . Kennedy understood that this was what led to the promise, and to believe that Kennedy understood it .
 Kennedy's concern about his ""appearance"" and the national appearance of strength kept him from searching very far for Soviet motivation .
 Reston's interpretation was that it was a personal injury to him and his credibility, as well as to Amer44 Reston . Reston: "What Was Killed Was Not Only the President But the Promise,"" New Yor\ Times Magazine, November 15, 1964, 126 .
 What worried him was that Khrushchev might interpret his reluctance to wage nuclear war as a symptom of an American loss of nerve . He worried he might interpret that as an American losing nerve .
 Some day, he said, he would have to run the supreme risk to convince Khrushchev that conciliation did not mean humiliation .
 Gritty American determination had become the respected and expected stance of American statesmen under stress in confrontations with the Soviets from the earliest days of the cold war . U.S. statesmen have been expected to stand firm in the face of Soviet aggression .
 The U.S. must use that language in order that Soviet leaders will realize that our government is determined to uphold the interest of its citizens and the rights of small nations .
 Adam Yarmolinsky, an inside observer of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, says 90 per cent of its time was spent studying alternative uses of troops, bombers and warships . According to Yarmlinsky, the committee spent most of the time studying alternative use of troops
 Yarmolinsky confesses that it is curious that no negotiations were considered . Yarmlinsky: "I'm not surprised that there were no negotiations"
 Foreign policy was never suggested by the foreign affairs bureaucracy . Nor were economic pressures ever suggested by officials, officials said .
 Only a series of military plans emerged, and they varied from a blockade to a preemptive strike . Only a number of military . plans emerged .
 Soviet Foreign Secretary Gromyko was giving the President false assurances that missiles were not being installed . President blandly listened without comment .
 The effect of the charade was an absence of serious negotiations . Whether or not the Russians believed that Kennedy must have known, the effect of it was a failure to negotiate .
 Kennedy chose to give notice to the Russians in a nationwide TV address . Instead of using private channels to warn the Russians that he knew and intended to act, he chose to use the national TV address to warn them .
 The Soviets attempted nonetheless to bargain for a graceful retreat, their path was blocked . When the Soviets attempted to bargain with the U.S. they were blocked . The Soviets tried nonetheless to negotiate for a . graceful retreat .
 He did not want a compromise to be tied to the central issue of what he conceived to be a test of American will and resolve . ""e must stand absolutely firm now," he said .
 "Concessions must come at the end of negotiation, not at the beginning,"" Robert Kennedy cautioned . Kennedy: Concessions should come at end of negotiations .
 In other words, the Soviets had to submit to American strength before any real concessions could take place . The U.S. had to make concessions to the Soviet Union before real concessions were made .
 When Khrushchev offered to exchange the Cuban missiles for the Jupiter missiles stationed in 50 Yarmolinsky, The Military Establishment , 127.1 . Khrushchen offered to swap Cuban missiles with Jupiter missiles .
 Kennedy did not want to appear to yield to Soviet pressure even when he might give little and receive a great deal . Kennedy, however, did not appear to give little or give much to the Soviets .
 One contained the demand for removal of the Turkish missiles; the other did not . One contained a demand that removal of Turkish missiles was met with no response . The other contained the request for removal .
 Khrushchev's second letter began with a long, heartfelt, personal communication and made no mention of a quid pro quo . The second letter was written by the then-Krushchev .
 Kennedy's response was a public letter to Khrushchev, temperate in tone, in which he accepted the more favorable terms he preferred and detailed American conditions . Kennedy's letter was a temperate letter to the Soviet leader .
 Compromise is almost foreclosed by such a device, because any bargaining after the terms have been stated seems to be a retreat which would diminish a statesman's reputation . Compromises are almost precluded by such devices, because they would diminish the reputation of a politician . Comp
 Kennedy's response was hardly more than a polite ultimatum . Since reputation was the stake in Cuba as much as anything else, Kennedy's decision to leave Cuba was not surprising . Kennedy's Cuba response was less than more than an "impossible"
 As a result of the crisis, force and toughness became enshrined as instruments of policy . Force and toughness are now enshrined in the policy of foreign policy in the UK .
 The source of the story, it was widely rumored, was President Kennedy himself . The story was widely believed to have originated with Kennedy .
 The policy of toughness became dogma to such an extent that nonmilitary solutions to political problems were excluded . Nonmilitary solutions were excluded from political problems, the author says .
 A ""moderate" in this circumstance was restricted to suggesting limited violence . A "moderate" would be considered a moderate to suggest limited violence. A 'moderate' would be a "moderate' to suggest violence .
 Time and time again, during the crisis, the military seemed obsessed by the opportunity to demonstrate its potential . The military seems obsessed with demonstrating its potential, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 When the crisis ended on Sunday, October 25th, one of the Joint Chiefs suggested that they go ahead with a massive bombing the following Monday in any case . ""he military are mad," concluded President Kennedy .
 T h e article was by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, ""In Time of Crisis,"" Saturday Evening Post, Dec. 8, 1962 .
 It is reported that President Kennedy roared with laughter upon reading this fictitious account . It is said to have been reported that the president roared in laughter .
 The military was increasingly thought to be rather loutish and ill-prepared . But civilians were starting to rely more and more on military instrumentalities in the application of which, with few exceptions, they were not trained .
 To many observers, as well as to these managers, the ""failures"" of the Cuban missile crisis were not failures of civilian judgment but of organizational responsiveness . Many observers say the failure was not civilian judgment .
 The intelligence establishment, for instance, had not discovered the missiles until the last minute . The missiles were discovered by the intelligence establishment at the last moment .
 U-2 flights were sent near the Soviet Union to ""excite"" Soviet radar at the height of the crisis . Kennedy ordered their dispersal, American fighters and bombers wing to wing on the ground .
 U.S. tactical nuclear weapons and nuclear-tipped IRBM's in Turkey and Italy were discovered to be unlocked and lightly guarded . The weapons were found in Turkey, Italy and Turkey .
 Crisis management demanded the President's organizational dominance and control, experts say . Military and intelligence organizations were inept and their judgment was not reliable or at times sane .
 The fictitious paper, written by James Thompson, also took on the whole Vietnam decision-making team . T h e fictitious paper also took a look at the Vietnam government .
 For a period before the crisis there had been a national reexamination of the country's policies . For a time before the . crisis there was a national . reexamination. for a period .
 There were fears of national decline in the face of startling economic growth in the Soviet Union . There were also fears of a decline in Soviet economic growth .
 Advances in Russian rocketry had led Americans to believe that not only were they in a mortal competition with the Soviets, but that the outcome was uncertain .
 Khrushchev may at one time have believed otherwise, the Cuban crisis demonstrated the limits of the Soviet capabilities . The Cuban crisis was a sign that the Soviet Union was not ready to rely on its military might .
 Actually, Luce had been on record with this message from the age of twenty . Luce was on record as an adult .
 The historic American sense of divine purpose and the almost Jungian need to be the guarantor of global order received a strong fillip from the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis gave the U.S. a strong boost .
 The Soviet Union reached the same conclusion as the United States . A preponderance of military power, ranging across the spectrum of force, was the sine qua non of the successful exercise of political will .
 After Cuba, the Soviet military demanded a higher priority to strategic arms and a cutback on the agricultural and consumer sectors of the Soviet economy . The Soviet military responded to the humiliating U.S. stimulus .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were by then moving toward a detente . Many in the Kremlin saw this as but a breathing spell in which the Chinese might be isolated and Soviet arms could catch up .
 Naval preparations, especially the building of Polaris-type submarines, were intensified . Naval preparations were intensified during the Second World War .
 Soviet amphibian landing capability was revitalized and expanded . The Soviets had shown little interest in amphibian landings before, but expanded it .
 After Cuba, the pace of deployment picked up, bringing the total 69 deployments to the U.S.
 McCloy secured an affirmation from Kuznetzov that the Soviets would indeed observe their part of the agreement to remove missiles and bombers from Cuba . McCloy: "The Soviets will indeed observe the agreement" McCloy says .
 Each time the usable strategic leverage of the United States grew weaker, the U.S. grew weaker . The United States has been in the throes of a crisis in the Middle East .
 The structure of the international system and international stability was shaken in three ways . Thus, the structure was shaken by the collapse of the U.N. system .
 Second, nations, once cowed, are likely to be less timid in the next confrontation . Nations will be less cowed in next confrontation, says CNN's John Defterios .
 The Chinese broadcast their charges of Russian stupidity and weakness to the four corners of the globe . For weeks after the missile crisis, the Chinese broadcast the charges of Russia's stupidity .
 The Chinese labeled Khrushchev an ""adventurist"" as well as a ""capitulationist,"" and therefore not fit for world Communist leadership . The Chinese called him an "adventorist" and a "capituaryist" Khushchev was not
 The charge of who was the most capitulationist, the Chinese or the Russians, grew almost silly . But these puerile exchanges had their own dangers in terms of deterrence . The Chinese or Russians, but the Chinese were not the most capitulationist .
 Third, once a threat is not carried out, the ante is upped just a bit more . Third, even after an appearance of a willingness to carry it out has been demonstrated, the threat is raised .
 Morgenthau described a two-step process in nuclear gamesmanship . The psychological capital of deterrence has been nearly expended and the policy of deterrence will be close to bankruptcy .
 The problem was that nuclear superiority had been useful, but each succeeding threat would necessarily be weaker than the last . Each succeeding threat (since no nuclear threat has ever been carried out) would necessarily have been weaker than last .
 Conventional and limited deployments of force became increasingly necessary as conventional force was considered less forbidding than the nuclear abyss . The U.S. has seen a rise in the use of conventional force to counter nuclear threats .
 "Commitment" was a threat of nuclear holocaust, says George W. Bush . He says it was a way to demonstrate political will through the resurrection of conventional force . Bush: The alternative form was to use conventional force to demonstrate commitment .
 The latter was bound to deteriorate with the advent of a viable Soviet retaliatory capability . The Soviets had collapsed once under a nuclear threat and might not be willing to be passive again .
 Many national security managers found they could navigate between the Scylla of nuclear war and the Charybdis of surrender . Many national managers found it easier to manage between the two worlds of war .
 The assumptions of the planners of limited war were as old as the cold war . Of course, the assumptions were as well as the Cuban crisis, they say .
 They dated from the Truman Doctrine's Manichean presentation of a bipolar global confrontation . A gain to one party necessarily would be a loss to the other, they said . The Truman Doctrine was presented as a bipolar world confrontation .
 A world order of diverse centers of power, with elements of superpower cooperation, would not be so demanding of military remedy . The world order would be less easily demonstrable, with gains and losses less easily demonstrated, writes CNN.com .
 Maneuver and negotiation, in a world of diplomacy, would again become part of diplomacy . Maneuvers and negotiation would again be a key part in diplomacy .
 But such a development was only after the tragic failure of the military remedy had been demonstrated in Vietnam . Such a change was to come about only after such a failure was demonstrated .
 There were other effects related to the exuberant reaction to the Cuban crisis . The Cuban crisis has been a major factor in the economy .
 The role of international law declined precipitously in the Cold War era . As the United States began to feel that power and force were successful solvents to the more sticky problems of the cold war, the role of law declined .
 Our foreign policy has been reflected in our willingness to submit atomic weapons to international law . We support free elections and government by consent, in building factories and dams, power plants and power plants .
 Let these things stand in contrast to a foreign policy directed towards the extension of tyranny and using the big lie, sabotage, suspicion and suspicion, riot and assassination as its tools . Let's hope that this will not be the case of tyranny in the Middle East .
 The great strength of the United States is devoted to the peaceful pursuits of our people and to the decent opinions of mankind, President Obama says .
 Even lawyers began to see law as but another instrumentality of American policy . After the crisis, even lawyers began seeing law as a tool of U.S. policy .
 Peaceful peoples of the world can a n d will m a k e themselves strong enough to insist upon peace . T h e lawbreaker, unfortunately in the nature of things, always has t h e initiative . Peaceful nations must be strong enough for peace .
 Kennedy, "Let Us Call a Truce to Terror,"" address to the General Assembly of the United Nations, September 23, 1961 . Department of State Bulletin, October 16, 1961, 619. Kennedy . Kennedy: "Let us call a truce to Terror"
 Americans, who had so long stroked the talisman of international law, now seem to do so only when their interests are not jeopardized . Americans seemed to be only when they were not jeopardizing their interests . Americans stroked international law only when interests were not threatened .
 Otherwise, law became merely a rhetorical flourish of U.S. policy . Otherwise, it would have been a form of law .
 International law was still a part of the admonition that ""armed aggression"" and ""breaches of the peace"" cease and desist . International law still was still part of an admonition to stop and cease aggression .
 In the back of these legalistic and moralistic injunctions, the armed cop became more and more apparent . But, in back of this, armed cops became more apparent, he says .
 The conclusion that American idealism was but a reflection of the American will to power became almost inescapable after the Cuban crisis . As General de Gaulle had observed earlier, the conclusion was almost inevitable .
 Few obeisances about the need for law in international society disguised the sense that America had abandoned her ancient, liberal inheritance in the zesty pursuit of world order .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were frozen out of a major role in structuring global politics . Another effect of the crisis was to differentiate the ""great powers" from other states .
 The major ""chips"" of big-power poker were simply not accessible to other governments . Even those with modest and nominally independent nuclear forces . After all, the major "chips" of big power poker were not accessible .
 The nuclear trigger was still in the hands of the United States, and so was the final squeeze . But the U.S. still has the right to pull the nuclear pull .
 The weapons of great-power diplomacy are increasingly inaccessible to other states . The other tools of statecraft also receded from the grasp of those with modest resources .
 The spy, for instance, was largely replaced by satellite reconnaissance . The spy has been replaced with satellite reconnaissance.
 Intellectual musings on great-power conflict became separate from other strategic thinking . Intellectual musing on great power conflict became differentiated from other strategy thinking .
 The Soviets and the Americans created a shared idiom of force; and a curious dialogue began between the congressional budget messages of the Secretary of Defense and the periodic revisions of Strategy by Marshal Sokolovsky. Gradually, the Soviets and Americans .
 Allies became mere appurtenances of power whose purpose, in the 87 Schlesinger . 824 . Allies were "appurtenance of power" whose purpose was to protect the nation .
 The OAS was asked to validate the U.S. blockade at the same time the American quarantine was announced .
 Dean Acheson flew to Paris and other European capitals to confer with U.S. allies about the coming confrontation over Cuba . The Cuban crisis is expected to be a major confrontation in the United States .
 De Gaulle raised his hand in a delaying gesture that the long-departed Kings of France might have envied . The French president was speaking at the end of the speech .
 In spite of European gestures of support, the alliance received a shock from which it did not recover . The alliance was not able to recover from the shock from its shock, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The French accelerated their nuclear programs while withdrawing from a military role in the alliance . The French did not debate; they accelerated their programs . They withdrew from the alliance while accelerating their nuclear program . French President Nicolas Sarkozy's government did not discuss the matter .
 On the Soviet side, it was equally apparent that Russian interests would not be sacrificed to sister socialist states . The Soviet Union was equally clear that it would not sacrifice its interests .
 The weak promise tendered by the Kennedy Administration not to invade the island was probably cold comfort . Castro saw his military benefactors beat a hasty retreat from American power .
 Castro began to echo the ""capitulationist"" theme of Chinese broadcasts . Embarrassingly, Castro began repeating the theme of "capitimulationist"
 Castro said he would have beaten Khrushchev to within an inch of his life for what he did . Privately Castro said that if he could, he would've beaten him . Castro: "If he could"
 Soviet Foreign Minister Mikoyan was dispatched to Cuba and stayed there for weeks, not even returning to the bedside of his dying wife . Castro's fury was unabated, but his fury continued unabated .
 Whatever the motive for Khrushchev's moves in Cuba, the Chinese were also enraged . The Chinese were angered by the move, and were outraged by it .
 Krushchev aimed at precluding both Chinese a n d G e r m a n acquisition of nuclear weapons . U l a m ( p p p . 66870), suggested that Krushchets wanted to prevent Chinese nuclear weapons acquisition .
 The United States cultivated the asymmetrical assumptions of the cold war, but the Soviet Union was at least admitted as a junior partner in a duopolistic international system which began to be characterized as detente .
 The relaxation was favorable to Kennedy, who wanted to begin to deal with the Soviets without ideological rancor that had poisoned previous relations . Kennedy had a vision of Soviet ""responsibility"" which was to be enlarged upon by succeeding administrations .
 Given their acknowledged strategic inferiority, they could hardly expect to expect to be successful in another series of confrontations . The US government has acknowledged that they are not capable of defeating the Taliban .
 Russian interest in improved relations with the United States caused intense fears in China of American-Soviet collusion . Moreover, the Chinese began to present formidable ideological and political difficulties for the Russians, the Russians .
 At the same time, the Soviets began to fear a Sino-American agreement that would be detrimental to their interests . The Soviets feared a deal that would harm their interests at the time . At the time, China feared the deal would harm its interests .
 Chinese government makes feverish attempts to improve relations with Britain, France, Japan, West Germany, and Italy . At the same time the Chinese government is making feverish efforts to improve ties with Britain .
 American paramountcy had been self-proclaimed; the seeds of detente had been sown by a shared vision of nuclear oblivion . The ingredients for a great-power condominium were becoming clear .
 If it had not been for the war in Vietnam, the present framework of international affairs might have been with us ten years earlier, says David Cameron . "If it had been for ten years ago, we might have had the same framework," he says .
 Tragically and ironically, the ""lessons"" of the Cuban missile crisis — that success in international crisis was largely a matter of national guts, were the lessons of the crisis . Presidential control of force can be ""suitable,"" ""selective" ""swift,""
 The Cuban crisis riveted American expectations to the necessities of the diplomacy of violence . The crisis changed the international environment but riveted Americans .
 Even the language of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was almost identical to that which Kennedy's legal advisors had drawn up for the OAS in October of 1962 . The realization of the equality of the superpowers and of the indications that they could join in a relationship was suppressed until the American