 The option and the ªrst have been exhaustively analyzed over the years by Western scholars . That option and  first have been studied extensively by the West .
 If Castro agrees to end his alliance with Moscow, demand removal of Soviet missiles, he could expect “many changes” in Washington’s policy toward Cuba . That includes an explicit non-invasion pledge and, implicitly, American aid or at least an end to the U
 The Kennedy administration chose to employ the Brazilian government of President João Goulart as an intermediary in this highly sensitive and tightly concealed effort to reach Castro . Castro also would be assured of United States support if the Soviet Union and its hardline allies within the Cuban leadership tried to resist such
 Kennedy at one point had regarded Goulart as a potential “New Frontiersman” and a valuable partner in the Alliance for Progress . U.S. ofªcials increasingly viewed the Brazilian president with irritation, exasperation, and suspicion for mismanagement .
 Some key U.S. officials had disagreed about the merits of the Brazilian proposal . Administration had tentatively decided to endorse it in light of evident tensions in Havana .
 U-2 reconnaissance planes discovered that the Soviet Union was secretly installing nuclear capable missiles in Cuba in mid-October 1962 . President John F Kennedy and his advisers briefly considered sending a message directly to Castro to pressure him into seeking the removal of the Soviet missiles .
 The Kennedy administration’s irritation at Brazil for its refusal to go along with measures to isolate and penalize Cuba exacerbated U.S.-Brazilian relations . Brazil was a major ally of the United States during the Cold War .
 Goulart's attempts to mediate the U.S.-Cuban conflict were notable mainly for the adverse effect they had on ties between Washington and Rio de Janeiro .
 As far back as late 1959 U.S. officials concluded that it would be impossible to live with Fidel Castro’s regime in Cuba . This was true in large measure because as far back in late 1959 United States officials had concluded that . They were intent on getting rid of the
 Eisenhower turned down Brazil’s repeated offers of mediation and “good offices” to help resolve the U.S.-Cuban dispute . That was the case in 1960 .
 The event was further obscured by the Cuban authorities’ refusal to permit correspondents based in Havana to make any reference to Albino’s presence . Cuban authorities refused to allow correspondents to make reference to the event in Havana .
 Even within the U.S. government, some senior officials were puzzled . "Even within the United States government," some said .
 On 5 November, Hilsman wrote to Rusk that “the exact nature of Brazil’s initiative is not known,” and speculated that Goulart's desire to assume the role of mediator had inspired the trip . Today, more than four decades later,
 Over the years, Portuguese-language Brazilian works have alluded to the genesis of the Albino mission, but these sources have had little inºuence on the English-language historiography .
 The mediation had been requested and indeed had been carefully planned by Washington . The mediation was then conveyed to the Brazilian government during the late-night meeting .
 Histiography of Cuban missile crisis has been equally misleading in its references to Brazil . Brazil's handling of the mission did mean that the message was not conveyed precisely as Washington had intended .
 Castro's insistence on an end to the U.S. military presence in Guantánamo prevented any movement toward a deal . Zelikow: The United States plan for mediation was “overtaken by the events” of the following day .
 Goulart's handling of the matter, especially his decision to entrust the mission to Albino rather than Bastian Pinto, further darkened the Kennedy administration’s impression of the Brazilian president and his inconsistent behavior .
 Castro had not previously known about the intended communication . He recalled, “That day we were fighting,” firing at low-level U.S. reconnaissance flights and preparing to resist an invasion .