 Dino Brugioni provides a detailed ‘insider’s’ account that combines memoir and history . Brugionsi‘s Eyeball to Eyebal’ is a detailed account of the events surrounding the World Cup .
 It focuses on the role of aerial intelligence, vital to how the crisis was managed in Washington DC .
 Brugioni’s account provides a representation of events that explores both military/operational aspects and political decision-making in Washington, most importantly that of President John F Kennedy .
 The idea that the crisis marked a notable success for the Central Intelligence Agency is revisited in the light of new information and assessments . Likewise, the idea that it was a major success for CIA remains a question mark .
 The title of Dino Brugioni’s book derives from the remark of U.S. Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, on 24 October 1962 when he learned that Soviet ships en route to Cuba had stopped or turned around .
 In resolving the crisis, the United States, he argues, ‘scored an impressive victory’5 Published some 30 years after the events of October 1962 .
 It is an important contribution to understanding the role of intelligence in American decision-making and thus in the missile crisis as a whole . It is also important to understand the role intelligence in U.S. decision making .
 The book appeared when new sources and perspectives were reinvigorating the study of the crisis . The book was published in 2007 and is now available on Amazon .
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s, new information on American and Soviet aspects of the crisis appeared that rekindled old debates and stirred new controversies . In the 1990s and 2000s, the U.S. and Soviet Union's involvement in the Soviet-Russian crisis was
 The suggestion that the crisis marked a triumph for Kennedy came to be challenged on various fronts .
 Brugioni’s account stands as a cogent exposition of a view of the crisis that had initially been espoused by former officials and historians sympathetic to the Kennedy presidency . The account therefore stands as an exposition of the view that had been initially espoused in the Kennedy administration
 Graham Allison’s Essence of Decision explored both elite-level rational actor models and decision-making paradigms . Allison focused on operational process as well as bureaucratic politics .
 Eyeball to Eyeeball does not proffer systematic scrutiny of political and organisational dimensions but provides a narrative that takes the reader from the concerns and actions of the President and his senior advisers to the people flying the aircraft, sailing the ships .
 Brugioni portrays personalities and personality clashes that helped shape events . The book is published in Italy, Germany, Italy and France .
 The result is an absorbing and compelling narrative that provides insight and understanding of events at various levels . The result of the book is a compelling and absorbing narrative .
 Brugioni provides a detailed account of American intelligence during the crisis . He details the role of photo-intelligence and the U-2 high-altitude aircraft in the U.S.
 The author had worked in the Central Intelligence Agency since 1948 . He was in at the creation of the National Photographic Intelligence Center in 1961 .
 He is able to provide extensive details of the technologies, processes and organisation of American photointerpretation .
 One central theme in Brugioni’s work is the importance of aerial photography in the crisis .
 Brugioni argues that without the U-2, ‘there may have been no crisis – only an accomplished fact’ This article assesses the work 20 years after it was published .
 Discussion focuses on the decision-making of President Kennedy and the role of intelligence . Discussion includes discussion of Kennedy's decision to use intelligence to make decisions .
 Over the last two decades, new information and interpretations have appeared that enable reassessments of Brugioni’s account and his arguments . Over the past 20 years, the author's account has been reassessed by experts .
 Brugioni had joined the CIA as a member of a unit responsible for creating the agency's industrial register of foreign-production facilities . He became an expert on Soviet industrial installations that drew upon wartime Luftwaffe reconnaissance photography .
 His expertise in photo-intelligence developed during the Second World War . He worked on photo-analysis, including on allied air photography of the Nazi concentration camp at Auschwitz–Birkenau .
 In October 1962, Brugioni was ‘chief of a unit responsible for providing all-source collateral information to the photo-interpreters as well as managing collation and processing of intelligence data . Afterwards, he received a citation from President Kennedy .
 Brugioni was intimately involved in the procedures whereby the film from the U-2s was processed, analysed and distributed . The film was processed and distributed by the Italian government .
 Seeing no earthly way out of this conflict except war and complete destruction, I told my wife, that she should take our two children, get in the car and head for my parent’s home in Jefferson City, Missouri .
 Eisenhower, the CIA and Cold War Aerial Espionage, appeared just short of his 90th birthday . Eisenhower and the CIA were involved in the Cold War aerial espionage .
 He has written a large number of articles on photo-intelligence for a wide variety of journals . He has engaged in public discussion of his work and the role intelligence plays in politico-military decisionmaking .
 The History and Techniques of Photographic Deception and Manipulation explained techniques of photographic deception . Photographic deception is a form of deception that can be used in photography .
 This is of note as it belies the commonplace that photographs cannot lie . This is despite the fact that photos cannot lie. This is not the case.
 The role of intelligence in the missile crisis was that so much was taken on trust . Arguably, one of the ironies of the . role of the role of . intelligence in . the . missile crisis is that much of the trust was placed on the intelligence .
 Low-level photography from U.S. Air Force and United States Navy jet reconnaissance aircraft could be understood by non-experts . The high level photography required sophisticated analytical techniques .
 High-level photography is little more understandable to the layperson than encrypted communication intercepts would have been . High-tech photography was little more common than encrypted communications intercepts .
 Robert Kennedy later commented on the work of the photo-analysts that, ‘I for one, had to take their word for it.’ Robert Kennedy .
 Either the untrained eyes of those present were seeing things that were not on the photography or Bobby had forgotten those things that had been pointed out by Lundahl to him and the President .
 Soviet and Cuban officials tried to dismiss the photo-intelligence, despite attempts to dismiss it . Yet when it was made public, the veracity of the photos was rarely challenged .
 Only a handful of Photo Interpreters knew what it was they were looking at . Never have so many taken so much on the say-so of so few .
 We now have published transcripts of these meetings, which the President had secretly recorded at the White House . President Obama secretly recorded the meetings, and the transcripts were published .
 These have clarified various issues though debates remain about U.S. decision-making . Debate remains about American decision making, however .
 The accuracy of the transcripts themselves has been a source of dispute . Indeed, the accuracy of some of the transcript transcripts has been disputed .
 Declassification of American documents was also gathering momentum as the book was being produced . Several valuable collections of documents appeared in the book .
 Operation Mongoose details attempts by the U.S. to destabilise and subvert the Cuban government . The programme was part of the covert action programme known as Operation 'Mongoose'
 Brugioni's examination of CIA’s covert action is mainly through the debates within the administration and the often charged arguments between the key officials, in particular, involving the Attorney-General .
 Eyeball circumnavigates more controversial and nefarious CIA activities, including assassination planning against Castro . The CIA attempted to engage the American mafia in this task .
 CIA saboteurs were given photography from the U-2s when mounting their attacks in Cuba . Brugioni was involved in assessing the effectiveness of these attacks . He frequently fails to reference his information .
 The context usually suggests that the source is a participant in the room, to whom the author had access . The context of this article is that the author has access to the source of the story .
 Kennedy held a bad-tempered meeting with Congressional leaders on the eve of his televised address to the nation on 22 October .
 Brugioni provides detailed exchanges between the President and the Congressmen . The President and Congressmen exchange exchanges .
 Eyebal to Eyeball does, however, accurately convey the hostile reaction of senior senators to the blockade . It does not accurately convey that senior senators are unhappy with the blockade, however .
 William Fulbright, the Democratic Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, opposed the quarantine and supported military action . Richard Russell was the Democratic chairman of the House Armed Services Committee . Fulbright and Russell were both opposed to quarantine .
 Accounts of the exchanges between Kennedy and Morgan and Wiley are nowhere to be found in the transcripts or accounts in May and Zelikow’s Kennedy Tapes . This inevitably calls into doubt the reliability of the source evidence, although alternative explanation is that the discussion occurred after Kennedy turned off
 The photographic technologies at the heart of the enterprise reflected ‘breathtaking technological advances’ including the first use of computers in the production of highly sophisticated camera lenses with higher resolution optics than before .
 Details of preparations of Major Richard Heyser before his flight over Cuba on 14 October . Details include his high-protein low bulk breakfast (for which he was charged 40 cents) and crucial cockpit procedures . Details also provided of the preparations of the .
 Photos show the attention to detail in all aspects of the photo-analytical process . Such details add authenticity to the narrative but, more importantly, show the care of detail .
 Brugioni writes about people he knew, along with assessments of their strengths and weaknesses . He also assesses people's strengths, weaknesses .
 General Marshall Carter’s indulgence in practical jokes and the predisposition of the CIA's William Harvey towards alcohol and aggression . For example, the reader learns of the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, General Marshall .
 A drunken Harvey held a gun to the head of an Italian policeman who stopped him for speeding . Harvey was arrested for speeding in Italy . Harvey held the gun to an Italian police officer's head during a drunken encounter .
 Aerial photography disproved claims about success in various covert missions . Aerial photography proved to disprove claims that success was achieved in covert operations .
 Brugioni attributes to personal relationships . Such vignettes also reflect the importance of personal relationships, he says .
 Eyeball-to-eyeball weaves domestic politics into the narrative and specifically members of Congress . The show focuses on members of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 "I think that such bases would substantially alter the balance of power in the world today," he says . "I don't think that any bases would significantly alter the world's balance, today. Nor do I think that . such bases ... would substantially . alter the . balance of the
 Fulbright argued that the blockade was the, ‘worst of the alternatives’ and made clear he wanted an invasion, and an all-out one, and as quickly as possible’ Senator Kenneth Keating declared in August 1962 that Soviet surface-to-surface missiles had been
 The Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, went to lengths to reassure the Senator and briefed him on aerial photography prepared by Lundahl . Lundahl is a member of the U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee .
 When McCone showed Keating the photographs, he invited the Senator to disclose his information . Keating has been accused of lying to the Senator .
 The MRBMs did not arrive until mid-September . Whatever the source, it is clear that Keating was, for whatever reason, in error .
 Administration officials were economical with the truth during the crisis and beyond . One interesting theme is how administration officials are economical with truth .
 Both McNamara and Rusk lied to Congress over whether the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were in any way involved in the resolution of the crisis . The Jupiter missiles were used in the crisis in Turkey .
 When questioned about the absence of direct U-2 overflights between 5 September and 14 October, John McCone attributed this to bad weather (which had indeed prevented some overflights) rather than to decisions of the Committee on Overheard Reconnaissance . Bundy later observed, ‘we misled
 The U-2 was a military reconnaissance aircraft but pioneered and developed by the CIA, a civilian agency . The U.2 was the first U.S. reconnaissance aircraft to be developed by a government agency .
 Brugioni provides insights into the CIA's procurement process . He attributes particular importance to the role of Richard Bissell, the CIA Deputy Director of Plans .
 The suggestion is that CIA outmanoeuvred the USAF, though the CIA’s own history of the programme emphasises the importance of CIA–USAF partnership . The CIA's own history .
 Eisenhower’s concern that uniformed personnel flying over USSR would be an act of war . At the heart of CIA U-2 operations was CIA U.2 operations . Eisenhower was concerned uniformed people flying over Soviet Union would be a war act .
 British reconnaissance missions over USSR and Warsaw Pact were flown by Royal Air Force pilots . This was in contrast to the British missions over the USSR and the Warsaw Pact which were flown in the RAF .
 Fred Kaplan argues that a key factor in the ‘bomber gap’ was the mistaken assumptions of American analysts about bomber production based on captured Luftwaffe aerial photography .
 This was an area of Brugioni’s own expertise, though curiously he provides no discussion of this aspect . This was the area of his own expertise .
 There is again nothing on aerial photography of Soviet bomber factories . Eyes in the Sky has more detail on the role of the U-2 .
 The ‘missile gap’ generated American fears of Soviet nuclear superiority . It provoked reactions from Washington that in turn accelerated the arms race . The 'Missile gap' generated fears that the Soviet had superior capabilities .
 The Discover satellite was launched in August 1960 . Brugioni claims the launch was decisive in changing U.S. estimates .
 Declassification of key National Intelligence Estimates reveals that the original satellite missions did not provide adequate coverage . National Intelligence estimates show that satellite missions were not adequate .
 In fact, when the Defense Secretary met the Pentagon press corps for a background briefing in February 1961, his statement that ‘there is no missile gap’ was a faux pas .
 The briefing took place 6 months before the U.S. agreed an NIE that buried the ‘missile gap’ and which led to a public declaration by the Pentagon in October that America now recognised the Soviets did not possess superiority .
 The U.S. had ‘a second strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the Soviets can deliver by striking first’ From Moscow, this could readily be taken as an American first-strike capability .
 In Eyes in the Sky, Brugioni suggests that it was the mission flown by the third successful Corona satellite in June 1961 that changed the view of the American intelligence community . The June NIE concluded that the ‘United States strategic forces were clearly superior to those of the Soviets
 Brugioni’s account of one of the crucial encounters between intelligence and policy is surprisingly weak . He says it was a crucial encounter between intelligence, policy .
 Eyeball-to-eyeball examines military activities and preparations for an assault on Cuba . One of the strengths of the program is that it focuses on more than what is happening in Washington .
 As America confronted the possibility of nuclear war, there was panic buying of various goods, including cars and atomic shelters . One of the lighter moments is an amphibious assault training exercise on Hollywood Beach .
 Brugioni’s account of refrigerators, television sets and dishwashers being purchased in huge quantities is rather curious .
 One of the weaknesses of Eyeball is the lack of attention given to the other side of the hill, says Simon Cowell .
 Much was emerging of Moscow’s views in the late 1980s and early 1990s . In the updated version of Eyeball, reference is made to the 1992 conference in Havana when revelations were made .
 In general, however, the book provides limited analysis of the view from Moscow . The book was published in Moscow, Russia, in 2007 .
 Subsequent revelations enable assessments of Soviet behaviour and have informed debates about why Khrushchev deployed the missiles, and why he withdrew them .
 Brugioni suggests that Anastas Mikoyan was one of the four key supporters of the adventure . Opposition in Moscow to the deployment of the missiles was limited, though .
 It is now clear that Khrushchev’s deputy opposed deployment55 and later in the crisis objected to military action that risked conflict . It was later clear that the deputy objected to the deployment of troops .
 Brugioni also suggests that there were ‘conservative marshalls’ who had opposed the venture .
 No evidence has emerged of opposition from the Soviet General Staff or other senior military figures . No evidence of opposition has emerged from senior Soviet figures .
 Deployment in Cuba marked an opportunity to mitigate Soviet weakness . For those who were aware of U.S. strategic nuclear superiority, deployments in Cuba was an opportunity .
 American military looms larger in Eyeball to Eyebal . The Joint Chiefs are the Joint Chiefs of the Armed Forces .
 Brugioni devotes a chapter to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, providing a lively account of their personalities and personality clashes . The book also includes a chapter on the Joint chiefs of Staff .
 General Maxwell Taylor is presented as ‘haughty, urbane, intelligent, and eloquent’58 As Kennedy’s trusted military adviser, his role reflected sensitivity to the President’�s concerns .
 Eyebal to Eyeball provides other episodes of relations between military and civilian leaders . The series focuses on relations between the military and the public .
 There have been very differing accounts of the exchanges between Defense Secretary McNamara and the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral George Anderson, on the blockade .
 Brugioni’s portrayal is sympathetic to Anderson and shows him bettering the Defense Secretary . Anderson is portrayed as a sympathetic character .
 May and Zelikow identify LeMay as the person who says ‘You're in a pretty bad fix Mr President’ which the President laughs off . LeMay was the President's spokesman .
 Eyeball's portrayal of the U.S. military leadership’s attitude to war is significant . Most significant is the portrayal of American military leaders' attitudes to war .
 Joint Chiefs did not believe the blockade would succeed and favoured military action . The Joint Chiefs, Brugioni explains, did not want the blockade to succeed . He says military action was favoured by the Joint Chiefs .
 He defends them against the charge that they were ‘war-mongers or hawks during the Crisis pressing for an invasion and air strikes which is not true. He nevertheless defends them from the charge .
 It was, however, their duty to make contingency plans for the various developments’.64 Certainly, military contingency planning was important and its exact significance informs key debates .
 On 1 October, McNamara instructed the Joint Chiefs to prepare contingency plans for an attack on Cuba . The Joint Chiefs prepared contingency plans to attack Cuba .
 He later maintained that this did not indicate any intent on Kennedy’s part to launch an attack . He later said this didn’t indicate any intention on Kennedy to attack .
 He claimed that American preparations for an invasion after the discovery of the missiles were preparations but not indicators of immediate intent . Likewise, he claimed that the American . preparations for . an invasion . after the . discovery of . the . missiles were . preparations .
 McNamara believed that had Khrushchev not announced withdrawal of the missiles on 28 October, Kennedy would have pursued other diplomatic avenues .
 The distinction between contingency planning and advocacy of war is unconvincing . An American invasion, while a possibility, was ‘highly unlikely’ Brugioni said .
 Kennedy kept the Joint Chiefs at arm’s length during the crisis, using Taylor to represent their views and interests on ExComm . Kennedy kept them at arm's length during crisis .
 Taylor had been initially cautious about the use of force but moved behind invasion upon the discovery of the intermediate-range ballistic missile base on 18 October . Taylor had initially been cautious but moved to invasion after the discovery .
 President met the Joint Chiefs on 19 October to discuss the blockade and military action . He was left in no doubt about their attitude to the blockade .
 LeMay told him there was no ‘choice except direct military action’ The air force chief declared, ‘will lead right into war'
 Kennedy’s father had been Ambassador in London in the 1930s when he supported Chamberlain's policy of appeasement . This is almost as bad as the appeasment at Munich,' he said .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff remained consistent in recommending the use of military force against Cuba during and after the 13-day period .
 Major Rudolf Anderson’s U-2 was shot down by a surface-toair missile on 27 October . The pilot was killed by the missile . Anderson was the pilot of the U.2 when it was downed .
 Joint Chiefs argued that unless there was ‘irrefutable evidence’ that the missiles were being dismantled, the U.S. should proceed with air strikes .
 Maxwell Taylor, who had otherwise supported an invasion, distanced himself from this recommendation . Maxwell Taylor had supported the invasion .
 Eyebal to Eyeball rarely mentions the prospect of nuclear war with the Soviets and how it would be waged . Yet one aspect of the crisis rarely mentions (like most accounts of it) is the prospect .
 In none of the ExComm meetings, nor in any other declassified record, is there discussion of how America might launch nuclear attacks on the Soviet Union . The President threatened a ‘full retaliatory response’ threatened by the President in his televised speech .
 Brugioni’s depiction of LeMay provides chilling reminders of a man who had opposed atomic bombing Japan on the grounds that his B-29s could finish the job just as effectively . In October 1961, Kennedy had taken a close interest in how a nuclear first strike on
 At the time in the Cold War when likelihood of nuclear war was greatest, there is no evidence it was discussed at the highest echelons of government . Yet, curiously, at the moment in the . Cold War, there was no evidence that this was discussed .
 Whether it needed to bark, and how and why Khrushchev chose to draw back from the brink, remain crucial in understanding the outcome of the crisis in 1962 .
 Brugioni’s account cannot tell us much here for the reason that Eyeball to Eyebal is an American view of the U.S. crisis .
 Much recent work on the Soviet side emerged only after the publication of Eyeball to Eyeballs . Much of the work on Soviet work emerged in the 1980s .
 The resolution of the crisis provides an opportunity to explore Brugioni’s method and analysis . Nevertheless, the resolution of this crisis provides a chance to explore the methods of analysis .
 Khrushchev’s public demand to include the Jupiter IRBMs in Turkey in any deal . In Washington, 27 October, marked the climax of events, as ExComm wrestled with Khrushche's various messages .
 Major Anderson’s U-2 had been shot down by the U.S. Air Force . Major Anderson's U.2 was shot down .
 In 1989, Theodore Sorensen admitted that he deliberately falsified Thirteen Days to preserve the idea that President Kennedy and his brother had not traded the missiles in Cuba for American missiles in Turkey .
 Brugioni alludes to this ‘unpublished deal’ that went ‘above and beyond the “no invasion of Cuba” pledge’,79 which in his preface, he condemns as ‘completely gratuitous'
 He emphasises the importance of the ‘ultimatum’ Robert Kennedy delivered to the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, on the evening of 27 October .
 Evidence from Soviet records includes the telegram Dobrynin sent to Moscow explaining what Robert Kennedy said to him . The telegram was sent to Soviet records from the Soviet Union in 1960s and 1960s .
 The Attorney-General made clear the missiles would be removed from Turkey only if the undertaking remained secret . This accords with Sorenson’s confession and explains that the Attorney General made clear .
 Dobrynin reported that the AttorneyGeneral had indeed said that the U.S. government was determined to get rid of the bases even, ‘up to, in the extreme case, of bombing them’
 Historians remain divided over whether Robert Kennedy delivered an ultimatum to Anatoly Dobrynin, and with what effect . Historians say Kennedy delivered the message, but not with what was intended .
 The story of U.S. intelligence and the missile crisis has emerged as the story of the crisis itself has taken shape through reflection, revelation and debate .
 In 2003, James Blight and David Welch provided the most comprehensive assessment of the role of intelligence . Raymond Garthoff also provided an authoritative and forensic analysis of American intelligence by Raymond GarThoff .
 The then existing literature on intelligence in the crisis was ‘fascinating and important’ but ‘overwhelmingly narrow and technical’ Brugioni’s ‘Eyeball to Eyeball’ provided the ‘best and most detailed treatment
 In 1964, Roger Hilsman, Director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, published an account of intelligence and foreign policy under Kennedy that provided an early evaluation of U.S. intelligence .
 There was a concern in Washington that Moscow might believe the aircraft was flying reconnaissance ahead of a U.S. first strike (as American nuclear war planning envisaged)
 The moment was described by Hilsman as the ‘Strangelove incident’ (after Stanley Kubrik’s then recently released black comedy).
 This episode focuses on the U-2 missions of the U.S. Air Force . The U.2 missiles were carrying air-to-air missiles with low-yield nuclear warheads . This episode contains nothing of note on this episode .
 Mention is made of the USS Oxford, the electronic surveillance vessel operating off Cuba in international waters . Mention also made of USS Oxford .
 Brugioni does examine human intelligence and agents and refugees whose reports were processed at the CIA-military station at Opa-Locka in Florida . Otherwise, signal intelligence remains hidden from view .
 After the crisis, John McCone reported to the President that of 3500 agent and refugee reports, ‘only eight were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the deployment of offensive missiles to Cuba’95 Nevertheless, several of these were of great importance in identifying the San Cristobal site
 Brugioni is dismissive of claims that trapezoidal configuration of U-2s at San Cristobal alerted the intelligence community to the MRBM deployment .
 The most significant humint involved Oleg Penkovsky, an agent run by the British Secret Intelligence Service and the CIA from within Soviet Military Intelligence . He was one of the most important humint agents in history .
 Brugioni describes this as ‘one of the most productive intelligence operations in history’ The operation provided information on Soviet weapons and strategy .
 Penkovsky provided no warning of Soviet deployment and was arrested on 22 October in Moscow . He was arrested in Moscow, thus precluding any possible involvement as the crisis went public .
 Brugioni makes clear Penkovsky’s information assisted identification of the R-12 (SS-4 North Atlantic Treaty Organization designation) though the principal source for the photo-interpreters was the collection of photos taken at military parades .
 Work by Schechter and Deriabin argued the crucial importance of Penkovsky’s espionage during the missile crisis .
 Richard Helms, then CIA Deputy Director for Plans, provided intelligence that enabled accurate assessments of when the MRBMs were ready to fire . This, it was argued, was crucial to Kennedy's decision-making .
 Hilsman’s early account is incomplete, but it successfully identifies key aspects in the relationship between intelligence and decision-making . While early accounts are incomplete, it successfully identified key aspects of the relationship .
 Hilsman’s 1996 book is a more systematic and reflective account of the crisis . It emphasised the role of intelligence, which emphasised intelligence, he says .
 Many aspects of American intelligence did not need to wait for declassification . Other former officials also contributed to understanding and debate .
 Much was publicly known at the time, most importantly about the aerial photography . Much of the time was spent in the U.S. Navy .
 This was made famous in the confrontation between Adlai Stevenson and Valerian Zorin in the U.N. Security Council on 25 October . The confrontation between U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations and his Soviet counterpart was famous .
 American photographs of the Soviet missiles were brought into the Security Council and displayed on large boards . U.S. photographs of Soviet missiles brought into Security Council . American photographs were brought in by the United States .
 Photographs had already been released to media in London as a result of a breakdown of communication with the embassy . Photographs were already released to the media in the UK .
 Defense Secretary McNamara’s previous refusal to release them on grounds of national security . They were then made available to the American media despite the defense secretary's previous refusal .
 Revealing sources and methods in intelligence is generally regarded as anathema . Revealing methods and methods is generally considered taboo in the U.S.
 The United States chose to put political presentation of its case above an axiom of intelligence practice . Yet the U.S. chose to go political, not intelligence practice, to present its case .
 The Soviets obtained details of the U-2’s photographic capabilities when Gary Powers’ plane was shot down in May 1960 and its cameras seized . The Soviets had obtained information when Powers' plane was killed .
 It remained a mystery why, given their awareness of the U-2s, the Soviet military were so inept at camouflaging the missiles in Cuba .
 The American decision to publish the source of their intelligence reflected understanding of the potential impact on public opinion . The U.S. decision to do so reflected understanding the impact of the public opinion on the intelligence, the author says .
 It reflects a very different attitude to sharing secret intelligence with opinion-formers outside government . It also reflected the government's view of sharing secret information with opinion formers .
 Brugioni recounts how when Powers’ U-2 was shot down, and the four-power Paris summit in May 1960 was abandoned, there was a hostile reaction in Congress . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a panel of experts on the U.N
 Allen Dulles decided that Lundahl would brief the Senate on the U-2 programme . On other occasions, Congressional figures were shown aerial photography, and some was shown to the press .
 The National Security Agency made no attempt to brief or inform the Congressional leadership on its activities . This attitude to disclosure was in stark contrast to that of the NSA, which made no effort to brief the Congressional leaders .
 Brugioni also explains that when Powers’ plane was shot down, General de Gaulle was briefed . Brugioi also says that when the plane was hit down, Powers was briefed by de Gaulles .
 Brugioni’s account traces the development of the U-2 programme and its role in overflights over the Soviet Union and Cuba . Kennedy despatched emissaries to his four principal NATO allies who on 22 October showed them the photographs of the missiles .
 The first U-2 mission in August 1956 was flown over the Middle-East, where Britain and France were soon conspiring with Israel to attack Egypt .
 Brugioni thus provides an interesting example of allies ‘spying’ on each other . The former Italian Prime Minister of the Republic was assassinated in 1998 .
 In the case of the British, the Americans were ‘spying’ on an ally who enjoyed close collaboration in signal intelligence, and on occasions humint .
 RAF pilots trained to fly U-2s over the Soviet Union . U.2 operations were mounted from British bases, says Brugioni .
 Any accusation of duplicity against the Eisenhower administration should be set in context of the more intricate web of intrigue and deceit that underpinned British, French and Israeli efforts to disguise their joint conspiracy to attack Egypt, it should be added .
 The concept of intelligence failure is a pervasive way of exploring intelligence, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The Cuban missile crisis appears to be an example of both intelligence failure and intelligence success . The U.S. intelligence community failed to prepare for the crisis, the author says .
 The failure to predict Khrushchev’s deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba was contained in a Special National Intelligence Estimate of 19 September 1962, completed a matter of days after the Soviet MRBMs arrived in Cuba .
 Brugioni provides interesting insights, including that the Chairman of the Board of National Estimates, Sherman Kent, apparently told his staff that if he had to go back and do it all again, he would reach the same conclusion . The chairman of the board of national estimates said he would
 One factor in Kent's error was the assumption that the Soviet embassy in Washington was providing sound advice back to Moscow on the likely U.S. reaction .
 The embassy contained some of the best Soviet intelligence officers, Kent believed . Kent believed the embassy contained the best intelligence officers .
 Dobrynin knew nothing of Operation Anadyr until he learned of the missiles from Dean Rusk on 22 October . In fact, it is now accepted that Dobrynins knew nothing about the missiles . He learned about the operation from Rusk, who said it was a secret operation
 Fursenko and Naftali provide a picture of Soviet decision-making under Khrushchev in which the KGB played virtually no role in advising the Kremlin on Soviet-American affairs . The success lay in the widely held view that CIA had a good crisis .
 Brugioni's account prior to the discovery of the missiles focuses more on the U-2s than on Kent’s analysts . The Kennedy administration was divided about overflights .
 John McCone spent nearly a month on honeymoon in France . The argument took place in the absence of McCone who had chosen to spend a month there .
 The U-2s discovered six MRBM and two IRBM sites in Cuba . Brugioni argued that, ‘It wasn’t the weather but rather the dereliction, bumbling, and intransigence of Rusk and Bundy that kept the U-
 The US intelligence community remained exercised about the whereabouts of the missile warheads . US intelligence officials remain exercised about where the warheads are located .
 Brugioni recounts discussions about whether warheads could be flown into Cuba on long-range Soviet aircraft or transported in submarines . McNamara argued that the absence of a fence at the missile site indicated that the warheads had not arrived .
 The United States intelligence community hunted for nuclear warhead storage bunkers . The U.S. intelligence community subsequently hunted for bunkers in the area .
 Re-analysis of the 14 October mission provided evidence of nuclear warhead storage vans, says Brugioni . The mission was only after the crisis, he says .
 Michael Dobbs provided a series of revelations about Soviet nuclear warheads . Dobbs depicts failures on the part of CIA as failures . The central nuclear storage bunker was near Bejucal .
 CIA initially identified as best candidate for nuclear storage but later dismissed . This was initially identified by the CIA as the best candidate to have nuclear storage .
 The absence of stringent security disguised the site, Dobbs says . Dobbs maintains the identification of nuclear storage vans should have alerted the photo-interpreters . The site is located in a nuclear storage van near the site of a nuclear reactor in the Midwest .
 The Director of Central Intelligence reported to the President on the operational condition of the MRBMs . Brugioni explains that it was assumed the warheads were under control of the KGB .
 Initially, for some, including McNamara, this was crucial in any decision to attack them . McNamara: 'Initially, for many, this is crucial in deciding whether to attack the U.S. government'
 McNamara suggested the risk of attack under attack precluded a preemptive strike . Once they were ready to fire, McNamara said, the risk was too high to strike .
 By 20 October, the Director of the CIA told ExComm that the first eight launchers had at least limited operational readiness . The CIA director said that by 20 October the first 8 launchers were ready for operational use .
 Whether decision-makers understood operational readiness in the same terms as the CIA is unclear .
 Disclosure in 1992 that tactical nuclear warheads had been deployed in Cuba came as a shock to many officials, including Robert McNamara, including McNamara .
 The Ilyushin-28 medium-range jet bombers were first identified on 28 September . They were en route at sea to Cuba in crates . The bombers are believed to be Russian military aircraft .
 Kennedy was prepared to live with the nuclear-capable U.S. military aircraft . Kennedy prepared to take them in and live with them in Florida . They were understood to be able to reach Florida .
 American insistence on their removal arose only after Khrushchev’s announcement of the withdrawal of the MRBMs on 28 October . The U.S. insisted on the removal of their removal from the Soviet Union in October .
 This was a political decision by Kennedy that did not reflect an intelligence reappraisal of whether they were armed with nuclear weapons . This was the political decision, Kennedy said .
 The nine maritime strike aircraft configured to carry free-fall nuclear bombs did not leave their crates on Holguin airbase . The GLCMs also arrived in crates .
 Brugioni provides what Garthoff calls the best account of U.S. intelligence’s identification of Soviet cruise missiles . Report to the President in September that coastal defence cruise missiles were being deployed .
 It is now clear that while the Soviets had sent Sopka (SSC-2 NATO designation) coastal defence missiles that did not have a nuclear capability, they had also despatched FKR-1 GLCMs .
 Brugioni makes reference to Soviet tactical ballistic missiles – the Lunas (NATO designation FROG) - whose deployment in Cuba was first publicly revealed in 1992 . Some of these were forward-deployed with warheads mounted to missiles, as they moved to prepared firing positions in
 It has been suggested that U.S. intelligence failed to recognise the battlefield nuclear missiles . David Coleman has argued that American military and political leaders were aware of them .
 The Luna was dualcapable, and the President was briefed the following day . The Luna is the first of its kind to carry out the mission .
 CIA and U.S. intelligence community failed to predict the deployment of the MRBMs . CIA had no bearing on the search for Soviet missiles, it has been argued .
 The weapons played no significant role in the crisis or its resolution . The weapons were used during the crisis .
 Khrushchev took the decision in December to withdraw the FKR-1s and Lunas as quietly as they had been deployed . The decision was made quietly as the two were withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 The suggestion that the intelligence failure was significant rests on the possibility that Kennedy considered (or might have considered) invasion . The suggestion is that the failure to anticipate invasion is significant .
 Even then, an American invasion would not necessarily have led to nuclear war . An American invasion of North Korea would not have necessarily led to war .
 Khrushchev had given orders that no nuclear weapons were to be used without his authorisation . The orders were carried out without the authorisation of any nuclear weapons being used .
 Whether those orders would have been obeyed in battle remains an unanswerable question . Whether they would have obeyed is an unanswered question .
 Whether Soviet nuclear weapons or their crews would have survived an American attack remains unanswerable . Whether Soviet weapons or crews would've survived a U.S. attack also remains unansweredable .
 Each of the four Type641 boats was carrying a nuclear-armed torpedo alongside their conventional armaments . The Type641s were carrying nuclear-armoured torpedoes .
 The 40th anniversary of the missile crisis saw the testimonies of Soviet submariners that on at least one boat, the captain was close to firing the nuclear weapon at the U.S. warship that was dropping explosive devices .
 Brugioni provides important information on what some might consider a potentially disastrous American intelligence failure . The U.S. intelligence failure may be a potential disastrous intelligence failure, some say .
 The Foxtrots had been assessed to be capable of firing a nuclear torpedo . He notes that the Foxtrot had been able to fire a nuclear bomb .
 He correctly explains, contrary to various accounts, that Soviet submarines surfaced because of ‘foul air and uncharged batteries’ rather than American naval action .
 No evidence has emerged of any assessment that the submarines being depth-charged might be armed with nuclear weapons that commanders might have authority to fire .
 There was no intimation of such scenarios in ExComm on 24 October when the improvised procedures for enforcing the blockade were the subject of lively debate . ‘When we were eyeball to eyeball, the other fellow winked’, quipped Curtis LeMay .
 General exercised over stalled attempts to negotiate removal of Soviet nuclear forces from Cuba . The General was exercised over attempts to remove Soviet forces including the Ilyushin-28 bombers .
 He was far more than exercised at the outcome of the crisis as a whole, he said . He said: 'I'm not surprised by the outcome, but I'm very pleased with it'
 For LeMay and other hawks, the crisis was a lost opportunity to deal with Castro and strike a decisive blow against communism in Latin America . LeMay: "For LeMay, the loss of this opportunity was a wasted opportunity to strike against communism"
 Brugioni does not agree with Kennedy’s ‘no invasion pledge’ or the negotiation of a discrete withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey . He does not share this belligerent view .
 Kennedy’s principal achievement was getting missiles out of Cuba without a war, says Brugioni . Nevertheless, neither aspect detracts from Kennedy's principal achievement, he says .
 Eyebal to Eyeball is an American book about the American Cold War . Like many American books on the Cold War, it is written in the U.S. It was written by an American journalist .
 Unlike many such books, it is not exclusively about political leaders and their decisions . Unlike many other books, the book is not about politics and the decisions of political leaders .
 It is also a pioneering account of photo-intelligence under Eisenhower and Kennedy . The book is also an early look at photo intelligence .
 The insider’s story provides much intrinsically fascinating detail about a form of intelligence that the United States sought to perfect and whose value in October 1962 was literally there for everyone to see .
 In places, the insight comes without perspective or rather without insight into other perspectives . In some places, it comes without insight or without insight from other perspectives.
 Some of this reflects unwillingness to engage more systematically with the literature (a tendency with many insiders), which admittedly was burgeoning as an avalanche of publications and revelations about the crisis was forthcoming . Some of that may be a result of a lack of understanding of the crisis, some say .
 Eyeball to Eyebal remains a highly readable account of the crisis and the organisation of photo-intelligence, its procedures, technologies and challenges .
 Khrushchev blinked while Kennedy remained resolute, the suggestion remains open to question . Yet the suggestion that Khushchev blinked remains open-question .
 Both sides winked when the Jupiter IRBMs were removed from Turkey and Italy in 1963, and Khrushchev kept his silence . Both sides also winked at each other when they removed the Jupiter missiles .
 Michael Dobbs argues that when Rusk spoke Khrushchev had already decided that his ships would avoid confrontation . Dobbs says this image represents a myth because it was a myth .
 The publication of the revised and expanded second edition – discussed in this article – is given as 1991, though there are references in the text to events in 1992 .
 Neither Stern’s list of identified participants nor that of May and Zelikow refers to the presence of either . Neither Stern's list nor May's of May nor Zelikows refers to their presence .
 Food and distilled water were the more predictable source of panic buying, as were hand-guns and rifles . Radio radios, hand-gun guns and rifles were the most common items to panic buying .
 Kent’s remarks are in quotation, though no indication of his source is given . Kent: “I’m not sure what I’ve heard from the source of the remarks .
 Max Holland, ‘The “Photo Gap” that Delayed the Discovery of Missiles’, Studies in Intelligence, 49, 2005 . For a thorough analysis, see Max Holland .