 Robert McNamara was the United States Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1968 . McNamara invented the American nuclear defense system in the 'sixties .
 His hawk-like positions in the Vietnam war gained him notoriety, but his clear cut view did not lack that dose of realism . He made Lyndon Johnson understand that the U.S. would perhaps never win that war .
 McNamara pointed out the dangers of nuclear proliferation and of a deterrence that makes an alibi of rearmament . At a time in which this far sighted politics of disarmament does not find many followers, McNamara .
 Today the number of nuclear warheads produced is less than in the past, the risk of an atomic clash between the two great Cold War powers is limited . The West is more preoccupied by the “average nuclear powers”, open to the nuclear hypothesis of resolving regional controversies or of
 Not even at the last summit of the Chiefs of State and of Government for the sixtieth anniversary of the U.N. was it possible to mention in the final text a committment, even generic, to non proliferation . Meanwhile, not even at last summit, the last
 We pledged to work in good faith toward the eventual elimination of nuclear arsenals when we negotiated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968 .
 The U.S. was focused on persuading North Korea to rejoin the treaty and on negotiating deeper constraints on Iran’s nuclear ambitions . The United States was focused, for understandable reasons, on negotiating with North Korea .
 Many nations, including potential new nuclear weapons states, were focused on the U.S. But the attention of many nations, was also focused upon the United States .
 Keeping such large numbers of weapons, and maintaining them on hair-trigger alert, are potent signs that the U.S. is not seriously working toward the elimination of its arsenal . It raises troubling questions as to why any other state should restrain its own nuclear ambitions .
 The failure of the last NPT review conference has been sad and evident. Indeed, the failure of this NPT conference was sad, evident. The failure is evident, and it is sad, that the failure has been evident .
 The five declared nuclear states stated that if nations that did not possess nuclear weapons agreed not to acquire them, they would give up theirs . Five declared nuclear countries said they would do the same if nations did not acquire nuclear weapons .
 The five declared nuclear states have not moved to give up theirs . And of course, the five declare nuclear states are not moving to give them up .
 Declared nuclear powers with strong conventional forces say that they need nuclear forces to safeguard their nations . But that nations without nuclear forces are not to be allowed to get them . And other nations are reluctant therefore to be told that they should do so .
 That violates the basic agreement that underlay the non-proliferation treaty, the U.S. says . The U.N. Security Council says it will not allow nuclear weapons to be used in nuclear weapons .
 The State Department says the NPT is still alive, despite the substantial failure of the Conference . The Conference failed to reach an agreement, the State Department said . The NPT has a history of success, but the Conference failed .
 This administration is committed to keeping the U.S. nuclear arsenal as a mainstay of its military power . This commitment is simultaneously eroding the international norms that have limited the spread of nuclear weapons and fissile materials for 50 years .
 Former U.S. Secretary of Defense says nuclear disarmament of North Korea is unlikely . Kim Jong-won: "It’s surprising to hear a former United States secretary of defense making such an assessment"
 Geneva Conventions have represented an agreement by nations that the application of military force will conform to principles, it will be proportional . If a nation applies military force against another nation, it won't be exceeding the relation in regard to what that opponent has applied or intends to apply, the Geneva
 It will be discriminatory, meaning that it will exclude civilians from the application of military force . It will also be discriminatory . And it will be exclusionary, meaning civilians will not be able to use military force.
 Nuclear weapons initiated by a nuclear power cannot meet either one of those conditions, and therefore it’s both immoral and I say illegal . Clearly nuclear weapons . cannot meet both the conditions .
 I don't believe that the United States in using nuclear weapons intended to target civilians, but certainly the U.S. should have anticipated that civilians would be killed in large numbers, says author .
 The U.S. should have anticipated the death of large numbers of civilians, the author says . So whether you call it targeting civilians or not, it's clear that in advance the United States should have foreseen the deaths, he says .
 By the time the nuclear bomb was used of course, the killing of civilians by bombing in World War II had been undertaken by all of the major powers . The British attack on Dresden, for example, was seen as the British .
 General LeMay, commander of the B29s, initiated the fire bomb raids on Guam, in March 1945 . LeMay took the planes from high altitude bombing to low altitude bombing, using fire bombs .
 I was there that night in March ’45 – I think about 80,000 civilians were killed. And in the first attack on Tokyo – I was . I was in Tokyo that night . And in . March ‘45,’45, he was there . I think
 As a matter of fact what could raise a very important question is whether it was militarily necessary to use the nuclear bombs to prevent the necessity of U.S. land invasion of Japan’s major islands, in view of the fact that so much of Japan had already been destroyed
 Today, the United States deploys approximately 4,500 strategic, offensive nuclear warheads . The U.S. deploys about 4,000 nuclear warheads in the U.K.
 The “average” United States warhead has a destructive power up to 20 times that of the Hiroshima bomb . The average U.S. warhead is 20 times the destructive power of a nuclear bomb .
 We have been, and remain, prepared to initiate the use of nuclear weapons—on the decision of one person, the President—against either a nuclear or non-nuclear enemy whenever we believe it is in our interest to do so .
 This has been and (as long as we face a nuclear-armed, potential adversary) must continue to be the foundation of our nuclear deterrent . This must continue as long as it faces a potential adversary, potential adversaries .
 During the Cold War there has been a sort of ‘theological anticommunism” and some people, not only in the United States administration, were eager to use the nuclear leverage to solve international disputes . Some people in the U.S. administration, including in the
 I didn't use the term ‘apocalypse’ because it has a certain religious connotation. I didn’t use it as a reference to the apocalypse, but I used it because it’s not a religious term. ‘Apocalyptic’ is a
 I used it because of a rather common usage applying to terrible events . It is not the first time I've used it, but it's a common common usage .
 There is a great danger today of inadvertent or accidental use of nuclear weapons . This would be an apocalyptic event in my terms, without any religious connotations .
 There are religious factors that should be considered, says CNN's John Sutter . By the way, there are however, religious factors, he says .
 The Catholic bishops of the US, you are probably aware of this, published a report, I don’t remember exactly, in the late 1980s . The report was published by the Catholic bishops in the US .
 The report states that for the first time since Genesis the human race has the capability of destroying itself . It was prepared by a Catholic priest from Massachusetts, still alive, and it’s the best statement by civilians that I’ve ever read on the moral and human problems associated
 We must avoid that and I strongly agree that that . that’s where we should begin thinking about, talking about, proliferation; it . It's absolutely contrary to all moral principles. We need to avoid that, says President Obama .
 There is no military utility for nuclear weapons today by any nation other than to deter one’s opponents from their use, says President Obama . "There is no nuclear utility whatsoever," he says .
 There’s no possible justification for initiating their use against a nuclear State; it would be suicidal . That's the first point; the second point is that even if one's opponent has nuclear weapons, there's no justification for using them against one's enemy .
 There's no possible justification for using them against a non-nuclear State, it would be morally reprehensible and politically indefensible . And there’s no possible . justification for such a use of the weapons would be moral reprehensible .
 So the nuclear powers have to think through their justification for their nuclear weapons completely . The nuclear powers need to think very carefully about justifying their use of nuclear weapons .
 I think they would arrive at the same conclusion as I have, that we should eliminate, or nearly eliminate, all nuclear weapons . If they were to do so, they would find out, he says .
 After retiring from public service I decided to go public with some information that I knew would be controversial, but that I felt was needed to inject reality into these increasingly unreal discussions about the military utility of nuclear weapons .
 According to the 2002 Nuclear Posture Review, the U.S. government is authorized to do more research, more nuclear experiments, to make more warheads . The 2002 report says the United States has been authorized to research and make more nuclear warheads .
 This is absolutely correct, and the Posture Review in my opinion is absolutely wrong in its conclusions and judgments . This is an example of how the U.S. military has dealt with the world's most pressing issues, such as the Iraq War .
 It promotes the possibility of the spread of nuclear weapons, more deployable, more simple to use, more . Use of nuclear arms more easily and more quickly, says the author .
 I think they proposed at least two new nuclear weapons, one a deep penetrating weapon and the other a new tactical nuclear weapon . "I think they propose two new weapons. One of them is a deep- penetrating weapon," he says .
 I think that would be a wrong judgment, wrong to go ahead with it, and I’m very hopeful that Congress will not authorize it,’s very hopeful . I think it would be the wrong judgment .
 The attacks on September 11 don’t affect judgments about ‘whether’ the U.S. needs nuclear weapons at all . There’s no link at all to this, no reality to this whatsoever, says CNN's John Sutter .
 September 11 in a sense established a new potential terrorist opponent, says George W. Bush . Terrorists would wish to use nuclear weapons or the fissile material, he says . We ought therefore to be doing everything we can to constrain the further development of nuclear weapons and fiss
 If the U.S. continues its current nuclear stance, over time, substantial proliferation of nuclear weapons will almost certainly follow . If the United States continues to pursue nuclear arms proliferation, the proliferation will also follow .
 If mistakes were to affect decisions relating to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no ‘learning curve’ and entire nations would be destroyed . However, if mistakes were made there would have been no "learning curve"
 Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs are very, very dangerous, says CNN's John Sutter . Iran and North Korea's nuclear programs, he says, are very dangerous . Sutter: Iran's nuclear program is very dangerous and dangerous .
 For the U.S. to attack North Korea would be disastrous because North Koreans could wipe out Seoul and large numbers of United States troops there . For the United States to attack Iran today under these circumstances, – we don’t have enough troops in Iraq, – is absurd .
 "Diplomatic diplomacy so far has been relatively ineffective," says Obama . "So we must depend on diplomacy to resolve those two situations," he says .
 Diplomacy must address the problems which have led North Korea and Iran to develop nuclear weapons . One of those problems is their fear that the U.S. will move toward regime change . But diplomacy must address those fears .
 They heard President Bush link Iraq, North Korea and Iran together as “evil” They saw the United States undertake regime change in Iraq . They heard Bush link North Korea, Iran and North Korea together as an evil axis .
 Some in North Korea and Iran fear regime change there, so we must engage in bi-lateral negotiations to remove this fear . I’m sure that there are some in Iran and North Korea that fear regime changes .
 Some nations as Egypt, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Taiwan will very likely initiate nuclear weapons programs . The risk of the use of the weapons and the diversion of fissile materials into the hands of rogue states or terrorists is high .
 World Bank chief says he had the chance to see close up what poverty means, and who the poor are . He says the world's poorest are the poorest in the world .