 This groundbreaking study shows why five central arguments promoting nuclear weapons are, in essence, myths . The study shows that five of the main arguments promoting nukes are myths . It also shows that the argument for nuclear weapons is a myth .
 This book will be widely read and discussed by everyone who cares about war, peace, foreign policy, and security in the twenty-first century . This book is about how to deal with the world's wars and security .
 Uranium enrichment has played a relatively quiet but important role in the history of efforts by a number of nations to acquire nuclear weapons and by many others to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 For many years the uranium enrichment industry was dominated by a single method, gaseous diffusion, which was technically complex, capital-intensive, and highly inefficient in its use of energy . The method is technically complex and capital intensive, but highly inefficient .
 As long as this remained true, only the richest and most technically advanced nations could afford to pursue the enrichment route to weapon acquisition . Only the richest nations can afford to take this route to weapons .
 Several new and far more accessible enrichment techniques were developed, stimulated by the anticipation of a rapidly growing demand for enrichment services by the world-wide nuclear power industry .
 This proliferation of new techniques, coupled with the subsequent contraction of the commercial market for enriched uranium, has created a situation in which uranium enrichment technology might well become the most important contributor to further nuclear weapon proliferation . The proliferation of such new techniques could be the most significant contributor to nuclear weapons proliferation
 A technical analysis of the most important enrichment techniques in a form that is relevant to analysis of proliferation risks . A detailed projection of the world demand for uranium enrichment services . A summary and critique of present institutional non-proliferation arrangements in the world enrichment industry . An identification of the states
 The author examines the choices facing India from New Delhi's point of view in order to discern which future courses of action appear most appealing to Indian security managers . The author concludes that India's security managers are not satisfied with the choices they face .
 The cold war ended more than two decades ago, and with its end came a reduction in the threat of nuclear weapons . The luxury that we can no longer indulge is no longer a luxury, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The complexion of power politics is changing because of the reemergence of nuclear weapons as a vital element of statecraft and power politics . It's not just the threat of Iran getting the bomb or North Korea doing something rash; the whole complexion of global power politics has changed .
 He draws on his years of experience analyzing defense strategy to make the case that the U.S. needs to start thinking seriously about these issues again . New countries acquire nuclear capabilities, he says .
 He walks us through war-game scenarios that are all too realistic, to show how nuclear weapons are changing the calculus of power politics . He offers an incisive tour of the Middle East, South Asia, and East Asia .
 The Second Nuclear Age is the essential guide to the new rules of international politics . Frank in its tone and farsighted in its analysis, it is essential to the book's success .
 Nearly thirty years after the end of the Cold War, today’s world leaders are abandoning disarmament treaties, building up their nuclear arsenals, and exchanging threats of nuclear strikes . Nearly 30 years after end of Cold War leaders are building up arsenals .
 Serhii Plokhy’s Nuclear Folly traces the tortuous decision-making that produced and then resolved it . John Kennedy and his advisers, Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro, and their commanders on the ground, involved .
 In breathtaking detail, Plokhy vividly recounts the young JFK being played by the canny Khrushchev . The book details the hair-raising near misses at sea that nearly caused a Soviet nuclear-armed submarine to fire its weapons .
 More often than not, the Americans and Soviets misread each other, operated under false information, and came perilously close to nuclear catastrophe . More often not, not only, but the U.S. and Soviet Union came dangerously close to a nuclear disaster .
 Lifton says climate change is "the most demanding and unique psychological task ever required of humankind" Now he shifts to climate change, he says, which may be the most demanding task of humankind .
 A large swathe of humanity has numbed themselves to the reality of climate change . The power of corporate-funded climate denialists and the fact that . ""with its slower, incremental sequence, lends itself less to the apocalyptic drama,"" a large swat of humanity .
 Lifton draws a message of hope from the Paris climate meeting of 2015 where representatives of virtually all nations joined in the recognition that we are a single species in deep trouble .
 Lifton suggests in this lucid and moving book that recalls Rachel Carson and Jonathan Schell, that we might call upon the human mind to translate a growing species awareness—or ""climate swerve" into action to sustain our habitat and civilization .
 Most military thinkers in the years leading up to World War II saw the airplane as an afterthought . The airplane was an important part of the military's plans to use it in the war .
 The bombing of Tokyo on the deadliest night of the war was the brainchild of General Curtis LeMay . LeMay's brutal tactics in Japan cost thousands of civilian lives, but may have spared even more by averting a planned U.S. invasion .
 LeMay’s predecessor, General Haywood Hansell, remained in charge . Things might have gone differently had General Hansell had remained in command .
 The Bomber Mafia is a riveting tale of persistence, innovation, and the incalculable wages of war . It is the story of the Bomber Mafia, a story of persistence and innovation .
 After two or more decades of construction of nuclear power stations, this ceased in many countries, largely as a result of concerns for the environment and human health . Many countries are concerned about the environment, human health and the environment .
 Many countries are planning extensive new programmes of construction of nuclear power stations . The pressing need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is leading many countries to plan extensive new projects .
 Known issues of nuclear accidents, the legacy of contaminated land and low level waste, and the decommissioning of nuclear sites are considered together with a more forward look at the deep geological disposal of high level waste and the pathways of radioactive substances in the environment .
 This topical work will be of interest to scientists and policy makers working within this field or related areas as well as advanced students .
 State Department opposed those scientists who advocated international cooperation on nuclear matters . But this policy failed utterly in the 1948 Berlin crisis, and at home it failed utterly .
 These editions preserve the original texts of these important books while presenting them in durable paperback and hardcover editions . The original texts are preserved in these editions . They are presented in durable paper and hard cover editions .
 Kaplan’s historical research and deep reporting will stand as the permanent record of politics . Kaplan: “I’m not just a reporter but a historian. I’ve been here for more than 30 years. This is the first time I've seen this kind of
 Kaplan presents the unthinkable in terms of mass destruction . Discusses theories that have dominated nightmare scenarios from Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Kaplan demonstrates how the nuclear war reality will not go away .
 Area 51 has captivated imaginations for decades . Located a mere seventy-five miles outside of Las Vegas in Nevada's desert, Area 51 is never acknowledged by the U.S. government .
 Myths and hypotheses about Area 51 have long abounded, thanks to the intense secrecy enveloping it . Area 51 has been shrouded in secrecy for decades .
 Some claim it is home to aliens, underground tunnel systems, and nuclear facilities . Some say it is also home to underground tunnels, underground tunnels and underground tunnels .
 The prevalence of these rumors stems from the fact that no credible insider has ever divulged the truth about his time inside the base . No credible sources have ever revealed the truth .
 In Area 51, Jacobsen shows us what has really gone on in the Nevada desert, from testing nuclear weapons to building super-secret, supersonic jets to pursuing the War on Terror . Jacobsen: Area 51 is the most secretive military facility in the world's history .
 This is the first book based on interviews with eye witnesses to Area 51 history, which makes it the seminal work on the subject . The book is based on the interviews with eyewitness accounts of Area 51 events .
 Area 51 weaves the mysterious activities of the top-secret base into a gripping narrative . The book is filled with formerly classified information that has never been accurately decoded for the public .
 It killed a third of the population instantly, and the survivors would be affected by the life-altering medical conditions for the rest of their lives . The survivors, or hibakusha, would not be able to leave the country for free .
 They were marked with the stigma of exposure to radiation, and fears of the consequences for their children . They were also marked with stigma of their exposure .
 Nagasaki follows the previously unknown stories of five survivors and their families, from 1945 to the present day . Nagasaki is the first time Nagasaki has been shown to be shown in a new documentary series .
 It captures the full range of pain, fear, bravery and compassion unleashed by the destruction of a city . The film was shot in New York City in 2012 .
 Susan Southard has interviewed the hibakusha over many years and her intimate portraits of their lives show the consequences of nuclear war . Southard interviews the survivors of the war .
 Nagasaki tells the neglected story of life after nuclear war . The film will help shape public debate over one of the most controversial wartime acts in history . Nagasaki will be the first attempt to tell the story of the atomic bomb .
 First study based on eye-witness accounts of Nagasaki in the style of John Hersey's Hiroshima . Published for 70th anniversary of Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs .
 A 5-tonne plutonium bomb was dropped on August 9th, 1945, three days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima . Three days after Hiroshima, Nagasaki was bombed by the Japanese army .
 The explosion destroyed factories, shops and homes and killed 74,000 people . Another 75,000 were injured in the blast .
 Susan Southard has spent a decade interviewing and researching the lives of the hibakusha . The only people in history who have lived through a nuclear attack and its aftermath are the only survivors of the attack .
 Following five teenage survivors from 1945 to the present day Southard unveils the lives they have led . Their injuries in the annihilation of the bomb, the dozens of radiation-related cancers and illnesses they have suffered, the humiliating and frightening choices about marriage .
 The power of Nagasaki lies in the detail of the survivors' stories, as deaths continued for decades because of the radiation contamination . Radiation contamination caused various forms of cancer .
 Nagasaki reveals the censorship that kept the suffering endured by the hibakusha hidden around the world . Intimate and compassionate, while being grounded in historical research Nagasaki .
 For years after the bombings news reports and scientific research were censored by U.S. occupation forces . The United States government led an efficient campaign to justify the necessity and morality of dropping the bombs .
 As we pass the seventieth anniversary of the only atomic bomb attacks in history Susan Southard captures the full range of pain, fear, bravery and compassion unleashed by the destruction .
 Personal stories of those who survived beneath the mushroom clouds will transform the abstract perception of nuclear war into a visceral human experience . The personal stories of the people who survived will be revealed in a new documentary .
 Nagasaki tells the neglected story of life after nuclear war . The film will help shape public discussion and debate over one of the most controversial wartime acts in history .
 It is an account of where those weapons came from, how the technology surprisingly and covertly spread, and who is likely to acquire those weapons next and most importantly why . It is also a look at where the technology came from and how it has been spread .
 The authors’ examination of post Cold War national and geopolitical issues regarding nuclear proliferation and the effects of Chinese sponsorship of the Pakistani program is eye opening . The authors examine the impact of post-Cold War nuclear proliferation .
 Pakistan exporting of technology by Pakistan is truly chilling, as is the on-again off-again North Korean nuclear weapons program . The reckless “nuclear weapons programs for sale” export of technology is chilling . Pakistan exporting technology is a chilling example .
 Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward Teller are the scientists responsible for the advent of weapons of mass destruction . They were the three most responsible for developing nuclear weapons . Their story is the story of the human conflict between the three men responsible for nuclear weapons.
 The story of these three men, builders of the bombs, is fundamentally about loyalty-to country, to science, and to each other-and about the wrenching choices that had to be made .
 Gregg Herken gives us the behind-the-scenes account based upon a decade of research, interviews, and newly released Freedom of Information Act and Russian documents . Herken: "Behind the scenes" is behind the scenes from the White House .
 Brotherhood of the Bomb is a vital slice of American history told authoritatively-and grippingly-for the first time . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 Yuriko was happy growing up in Hiroshima when it was just her and Papa . She was happy when she and Papa were together again .
 The world beyond their doors is even more unpredictable, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 World War II is coming to an end, and since the Japanese newspapers don’t report lost battles, the Japanese people are not entirely certain of where Japan stands . The Japanese people don't know where they stand .
 Yuriko is used to the sirens and the air-raid drills, but things start to feel more real when the neighbors who have left to fight stop coming home . The story is a new series of American Horror Horror Horror Stories .
 Through Yuriko’s twelve-year-old eyes, we witness the devastation and horror of Hiroshima . This is the first time we've seen the bombs hit Hiroshima, Japan .
 This is a story that offers young readers insight into how children lived during the war . It also introduces them to Japanese culture . This is the first time children have been told how they lived in Japan .
 Based loosely on author Kathleen Burkinshaw's mother’s firsthand experience surviving the atomic bombing of Hiroshima . The Last Cherry Blossom hopes to warn readers of the immense damage nuclear war can bring, while reminding them that the “enemy” in any war is often not so different
 Hasegawa for the first time puts the last months of the war into international perspective . By fully integrating the three key actors in the story -- the United States, the Soviet Union, and Japan -- it's the U.S. and Japan .
 Hasegawa brings to light the real reasons Japan surrendered to the Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Pact . From April 1945 to the final Soviet military actions against Japan, Japan surrendered .
 Truman and Stalin sought to outmaneuver each other in forcing Japan's surrender . Stalin dangled mediation offers to Japan while secretly preparing to fight in the Pacific . Tokyo peace advocates desperately tried to stave off a war party determined to mount a last-ditch defense . The Americans
 Racing the Enemy puts the final days of World War II into a whole new light . Authoritative and engrossing, Racing The Enemy is an excellent book . Racing the enemy is the best way to tell the story of the war .
 RAND authors lend a farsighted perspective to the national dialogue on 9/11's legacy . RAND: "9/11 legacy" is a series of essays by RAND authors .
 The essays assess the implications of U.S. policymaking since 9/11 . They assess the military, political, fiscal, social, social and cultural, cultural, psychological, and even moral implications of policymaking .
 Under threat of death, Vemork’s engineers pushed production into overdrive . Under threat to death, they pushed production to overdrive. The team is currently working on a new version of the game .
 If the Allies could not destroy the plant, they feared the Nazis would soon be in possession of the most dangerous weapon the world had ever seen . The Allies feared the Nazi might soon be holding on to the world's most dangerous weapons .
 The Winter Fortress is an arresting chronicle of a brilliant scientist, a band of spies on skis, and a last-minute operation that would alter the course of the war . Based on a trove of top-secret documents and never-before-seen diaries and letters .
 Daniel Ellsberg reveals his shocking firsthand account of America's nuclear program in the 1960s . The former high-level defense analyst reveals his account to the first time .
 Ellsberg shows that the legacy of this most dangerous arms buildup in the history of civilization--and its proposed renewal under the Trump administration--threatens our very survival .
 No other insider with high-level access has written so candidly of the nuclear strategy of the late Eisenhower and early Kennedy years . Nothing has fundamentally changed since that era, and nothing has changed since then .
 This gripping exposé reads like a thriller and offers feasible steps we can take to dismantle the existing ""doomsday machine" and avoid nuclear catastrophe . Framed as a memoir--a chronicle of madness in which Ellsberg acknowledges participating--this gripping expoé reads as a
 "Dr. Strangelove" is an important book about the future of the U.S. and the world . It's a hopeful, hopeful story about not just our country, but our future .
 D.C. Post reporter Michael Dobbs chronicles the tense days of World War II . Dobbs reveals just how close we came to Armageddon . Watch the full transcript of Dobbs' hour-by-hour chronicle .
 Khrushchev's plan to destroy the U.S. naval base at Guantánamo is revealed for the first time . The story of a U-2 spy plane that got lost over Russia at the peak of the crisis is told in new book .
 One Minute to Midnight is an exhaustively researched account of what Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. called “the most dangerous moment in human history,” and the definitive book on the Cuban missile crisis .
 For all the effort to reduce nuclear stockpiles to zero, it seems that the Bomb is here to stay . The Bomb is not going to go away .
 The issues are set against a backdrop of the changing international landscape, from the Cold War to the present-day controversy of George W Bush's National Missile Defence, and the threat and role of nuclear weapons in the so-called Age of Terror .
 Joseph M Siracusa provides a comprehensive, accessible, and at times chilling overview of the most deadly weapon ever invented . He provides an accessible and often chilling overview .
 These pocket-sized books are the perfect way to get ahead in a new subject quickly . They are the best way to learn quickly and learn quickly .
 Expert authors combine facts, analysis, perspective, new ideas, and enthusiasm to make interesting and challenging topics highly readable . Authors combine facts with perspective, perspective and enthusiasm .
 The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is a road map to nuclear zero, but it is a rudimentary one . It says nothing about the kind of zero to aim for, and it doesn't say what kind to aim at .
 This would be a world where the inhibitions against reversal are strong enough to make it stably non-nuclear . Preferably, this would be the world where it would be in a world of no nuclear power .
 The literature on nuclear disarmament has paid little attention to this question, says David Frum . Frum says the literature on disarmament should have been more focused on the issue .
 This book seeks to fill a lacuna by examining the requirements of stable zero and their implications for the road map to that goal, starting from the vision to the present day . This book is based on the vision of the world's first stable zero, and the implications of that goal .
 The volume highlights that a clear conception of the goal not only is important in itself, but can shed light on what kind of disarmament process to promote, it says .
 It offers an accessible overview of the concept of nuclear weapons . It outlines how thinking about these weapons has developed and considers how nuclear threats can continue to be managed in the future .
 Coverage of nuclear testing, proliferation, strategy, global actors and disarmament . Includes coverage of nuclear tests, proliferation and strategy .
 Annotated further reading lists help students locate sources for essays and assignments . The author of this article provides an annotated version of each of these lists .
 The author will be providing regular updates to his suggested web resources . Summaries, study questions and a glossary of key terms are available .
 The Politics of Nuclear Weapons is essential reading for both undergraduate and postgraduate students taking courses in Nuclear Politics . It is also essential reading to students taking Nuclear Politics courses .
 Although the world’s attention has shifted to drone-controlled bombing and cyberwarfare, the threat of nuclear war still exists . The threat of nukes still exists, according to experts .
 There are now 14,000 nuclear weapons in the hands of the nine declared nuclear powers .
 Even though the world survived the Cold War, we need to understand what it means to live with nuclear weapons . The world needs to understand how to live without nuclear weapons, CNN.com reports .
 Mark Wolverton offers a primer on nuclear weapons, from the science of fission and fusion to the pursuit of mutual assured destruction, the SALT and START agreements, and the Bomb in pop culture . In this volume in the MIT Press Essential Knowledge series, Wolverton explains the science behind
 Wolverton offers a nuanced view of the unique political, social, and moral dilemmas posed by nuclear weapons . Wolverton explains the basic scientific facts and offers historical perspective .
 He describes the birth of the Bomb in 1945 and its use against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . He recounts episodes when the world came close to waging nuclear war, including the Cuban missile crisis .
 The book addresses the challenge of nuclear weapons in three parts . Following an introduction to the current nuclear state of play, the book explores the challenges posed by nuclear weapons .
 In the third and final part, the chapters discuss regional nuclear-weapon-free zones and NPT anomalies . The chapters discuss the global governance architecture of nuclear security in light of the three Nuclear Security Summits between 2010 and 2014 .
 The concluding chapter argues for moving towards a world of progressively reduced nuclear weapons in numbers, reduced salience of nuclear weapons . The book argues for a denuclearized world .
 This book will be of much interest to students of nuclear proliferation, global governance, international organisations, diplomacy and security studies .
 Marie Curie, Enrico Fermi, and Edward Teller forged the science of radioactivity . They began a revolution that ran from the nineteenth century through World War II and the Cold War to our current confrontation with nuclear power and proliferation .
 Radiation’s invisible powers can trigger cancer and cellular mayhem . While nuclear science improves our lives, radiation can also trigger cancer . Radiation can trigger cellular mayhem and can lead to cancer .
 Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, J Robert Oppenheimer, Curtis LeMay, John F Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Ronald Reagan, and Mikhail Gorbachev among others .
 He reveals how Jewish scientists fleeing Hitler transformed America from a nation that created light bulbs into one that split atoms . Alfred Nobel’s dream of global peace; and how, in our time, emergency workers and utility employees fought to contain life-threatening nuclear reactors .
 Nelson traces our complicated relationship with the dangerous energy we unleashed . Nelson discusses how atomic power and radiation are indivisible from our everyday lives .
 The Age of Radiance provides a new understanding of a misunderstood epoch in history and restores the forgotten heroes and heroines who have changed all of our lives for better and for worse .
 World in Chains is a collection of essays from experts from well-reputed experts . The essays deliver engaging and analytical critiques of nuclear warfare .
 "I want those who come after my generation to know that, yes, we do know of the dangers of nuclear war, of climate chaos, of environmental destruction," she says . "Yes, yes," she tells the world .
 They need to be discussed in the pub, at the school gates and over the kitchen sink so that people are aware of the issues involved and have had the opportunity to think them through . The issues should be discussed at the pub and school gates .
 The nine nuclear weapon states are extending their commitments to nuclear 'deterrence' well into the second half of this century . Despite treaty obligations and an 'unequivocal undertaking' to disarm, they are extending commitments .
 The United States alone is expecting to spend up to $1 trillion upgrading its nuclear weapons over the next 30 years . The U.S. alone is expected to spend $1 billion upgrading its weapons .
 With around 15,000 nuclear weapons stockpiled worldwide, the risk of one going off by accident or design is increasing every day . The risk of a nuclear bomb going off is increasing each day .
 Timmon Milne Wallis explores the arguments in favour of nuclear weapons with a critical eye . He cuts through the rhetoric and obfuscation to get to the real truth about these weapons . Wallis is the author of the book, The Nuclear Bomb .
 It examines the legacy of nuclear weapons on U.S. thinking about some concepts of strategy and geopolitics, namely deterrence, extended deterrence, alliances, and arms control . The book explores the impact on the United States on its strategy .
 The purpose of this is to demonstrate just how fundamentally nuclear weapons have influenced U.S. thinking about these concepts, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is to show just how fundamental nuclear weapons are influenced American thinking"
 It argues that, given the extent of nuclear weapons' influence on these concepts, further reductions beyond current Strategic Arms Reduction Talks levels, may not necessarily be prudent ideas . It argues .
 Nuclear weapons have contributed to the avoidance of major war between states . They have made alliances more credible and last longer, and made arms control relatively easier to conceptualize and manage .
 These concepts may become even more difficult to manage in a world where nuclear weapons are marginalized . As such, the author argues .
 Renewed calls for a nuclear weapons-free world have sparked a wide academic debate . Academic debate on both the attainability of such goal and the steps that should be taken .
 Less attention has been paid to theoretically informed considerations of the consequences of nuclear abolition . Comparably less attention is paid to theoretical considerations of consequences of the abolition .
 This collection discusses the fundamental theoretical and conceptual foundations of nuclear disarmament and tries to assess its hypothetical impact in global and regional contexts . Comprising essays from leading scholars and experts within the field .
 The varied methodological approach of the contributors aims to advance a multi-theoretical and multi-perspectival view of the issue . The varied approach aims to advanced a multi theoretical, multi-phenomenal view .
 As a whole, the volume provides a detailed, complex overview of the risks and opportunities that are embedded in the vision of a nuclear weapon-free world .
 This book will be of great interest to students of nuclear proliferation, arms control, war and conflict studies and international relations studies .
 Recent events show that ridicule and stigmatization of nuclear weapons and their possessors is on the rise . Nuclear deterrence has long been dominant in debates about war and peace . It starts from the observation that .
 The idea of non-nuclear peace has been around since the beginning of the nuclear revolution, but it may be staging a return . It may be a return to the nuclear age of nuclear power .
 The first part reconstructs the criticism of nuclear peace, both past and present, with a particular emphasis on technology . The second part of this week's book is a look at the history of nuclear weapons .
 The Humanitarian Initiative and the resulting Nuclear Ban Treaty allows imagining non-nuclear peace anew . The second part focuses on the most revolutionary change since the beginning of the nuclear revolution .
 The third and last part explores the practical and institutional prospects of a peace order without nuclear weapons . The last part of this series explores the prospect of a nuclear power-freezing world .
 If non-nuclear peace advocates want to convince skeptics, they have to come up with practical solutions in the realm of global governance or world government . Non-nuclear advocates need to come to terms with the idea of world government, says Peter Bergen .
 Shampa Biswas says well-intentioned efforts to halt spread of nuclear weapons deflect attention from a hierarchical global nuclear order dominated by powerful states and capitalist interests .
 In Nuclear Desire, Biswas proposes that pursuit and production of nuclear power is sustained by this unequal global order . He says the harmful effects of the order are experienced by some of the most vulnerable bodies around the world .
 In the end, the nonproliferation regime maintains a hierarchy of haves and have-nots, one that reinforces inequalities that run counter to the NPT’s broader goal . The NPT's broader goal is to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons .
 Nuclear Desire moves beyond conventional critiques to give scholars and students of international relations new insights into how a more secure world might simultaneously be peaceful and just .
 Each chapter is a newly commissioned piece covering a range of opinions and perspectives . Approaching the subject in a sensitive, inclusive and respectful way, each chapter is commissioned piece by CNN.com .
 The volume is global in scope, something of increasing importance in the study of genocide . The volume of genocide victims is increasing in the world .
 This book is a wide-ranging and in-depth view of the field that will be valuable for all those interested in the historical context of genocide . Presenting genocide as an extremely diverse phenomenon, this book presents genocide as a diverse phenomenon . The book is available now on Amazon.com
 Mastering the Emerging World of Connectivity, picks up where Malcolm Gladwell’s Tipping Point left off . The new book is based on Gladwell's book, which he wrote about the Internet . The book is available now on Amazon .
 It is a how-to book for businesses, leaders, organizations, activists, and individuals, cracking wide-open humankind’s biggest trend in seven million years . The book is available now on Amazon.com .
 By understanding the roots and implications of “bottom up” and “top down” you’ll be better able to tap the incredible power of this trend . The billionaire founders of Google, Facebook, Craigslist and Twitter have done the same .
 Beginning with the 1st-century Sicari, it examines the commonalities that link apocalypticism, revolution, and terrorism occurring in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam past and present .
 It is divided into two sections, 'This was Then' and 'This is Now', which examine the cultural and religious history of oppositional violence from the time of Jesus to the aftermath of the 2016 U.S. election .
 The historical focus centers on how movements, leaders and revolutionaries from earlier times are interpreted today through the lenses of historical memory and popular culture . The focus of the historical focus is how the movements, . leaders and . revolutionaries from . earlier times were interpreted today as . interpreted today .
 The radical right is the primary but not exclusive focus of the second part of the book . The radical left is the main but not exclusively focus of this book .
 At the same time, the work is intensely personal, in that it incorporates the author's experiences in the worlds of communist Eastern Europe, in the Iranian Revolution, and in the uprisings and wars in the Middle East and East Africa .
 This book will be of much interest to students of religious and political violence, religious studies, history, and security studies . This book is available in the U.S.
 Armageddon and Paranoia unfolds the full history of nuclear weapons that began with the arms race between the U.S. and the Soviet Union and now extends worldwide . The book is based on the history of the nuclear arms race that began in the United States .
 For decades, an apocalypse seemed imminent, staved off only by the certainty that if one side launched these missiles the other would launch an equally catastrophic counterstrike . The U.S. and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 Neither side actively wanted to plunge the world into nuclear wasteland . Still, the possibility of war by misjudgment or mistake meant fears could never be entirely assuaged .
 Armageddon and Paranoia comes at a time when tensions surrounding nuclear armament have begun mounting once more . Both an exploration of Deterrence and the long history of superpower nuclear policy, Armageddon and . Paranoia .
 No book until this one has offered so comprehensive a history of the topic that has guided--at times dominated--the world in which we live .
 Mahmoud Musa: Perils of a World War and Preventive Measures . Author: Dr. Dr. Musa .
 "They remodeled the world map amongst themselves and affirmed that they will be guarantors of the international status-quo," says President Obama . They remodeled a world map among themselves .
 Those who pledged to conserve peace are now breaking it, leading the planet to the edge of clash . The planet is now on the brink of war .
 Potentially risky world war scenarios; Dialogue between the West and Islam; New emerging superpowers; New Emerging superpowers . Psychological and Cyber Ware fare; Preventive mechanisms such as early-warning and preparedness operations .
 It began with plutonium, the first element ever manufactured in quantity by humans . It was the first material ever made of a large quantity of plutonium . It is now the world's first atomic bomb .
 The U.S. marshaled brilliant minds and seemingly inexhaustible bodies to find a way to create a nuclear chain reaction . Fearing that the Germans would be the first to weaponize the atom, the United States marshalled brilliant minds .
 Hanford nuclear facility was built to produce and weaponize the enigmatic new material that would fuel atomic bombs . Hanford was built in a matter of months .
 Glenn Seaborg, Enrico Fermi, and many thousands of others made plutonium for the bomb dropped on Nagasaki, and for the bombs in the current American nuclear arsenal .
 Steve Olson asks why Hanford has been largely overlooked in histories of the Manhattan Project and the Cold War . With his characteristic blend of scientific clarity and storytelling, Olson explains the history of Hanford .
 Hanford's B Reactor is at the core of the most destructive weapons ever created . It was built in Hanford, Washington, and was built just twenty miles from Hanford’s site .
 The Apocalypse Factory offers a new generation this dramatic story of human achievement and, ultimately, of lethal hubris . "The Apocalypse Factory" is set to be released in theaters on November 28 .
 Since then, the world has undergone a transition, both in terms of power dynamics and military warfare . The U.S. has been involved in several wars since the fall of the Cold War .
 The emergence of New Nuclear and Threshold states has transformed the traditional military warfare, making it more asymmetric . New Nuclear states have transformed the way military warfare has been played .
 Asian countries still consider nuclear weapons as an important strategy in combating conventional weaknesses . Though the concept of nuclear deterrence in the American strategic thought has diminished .
 This altered strategic space has created problems in the civilian and the military domains, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The emergence of economically strong China aiming for military modernization, is making Asia edgy . China aims to achieve global reach through precision missiles, says CNN's John Defterios .
 A nuclear Pakistan which is constantly increasing its nuclear stockpile is creating stability-instability paradoxes in Asia . Pakistan has a history of instability in the region, especially in South Asia .
 India which is also emerging as a powerful state needs to approach this dynamic shift in a holistic manner . India needs to be aware of the dynamic shift, says Ravi Agrawal .
 A strategic churning has begun in Asia and whether this will be in India's favour depends on the strategic choices that India adopts . India's strategic choices will depend on what strategic choices it adopts in Asia .
 China has revolutionized its Second Artillery through a process of “Informationization and Modernisation” and is diversifying the military technology which is having a cascading effect in Asia . China is having an effect on Asia's military technology, having an impact on Asia .
 Pakistan through its nuclear policy of ‘First Use’, its alleged use of “Tactical Nuclear Weapons” is making South Asia vulnerable to nuclear terrorism . Pakistan's 'Tactical nuclear weapons’ are making S.A. vulnerable to terrorism .
 These are a few questions along with others which this book will try to unravel . This book will attempt to unravel the history of the world's most powerful man .