 Blog offers insights, analysis, and facts about recent events . Building on the book, this blog offers insights and facts .
 Gore said he feels 'very good' about the situation in Orlando, Florida . Gore said: 'I feel very good about it' Gore said .
 Many posts have discussed opposition research in campaigns . Many of these posts have been on the topic of opposition research .
 One element of oppo consists of sending ""trackers" to take video of what a candidate says and does . Another element is sending 'trackers' to take videos of the candidate's speech .
 Democratic tracker Will Urquhart writes that tracking is tedious work, requiring a great deal of patience .
 You truly never know when a seemingly innocuous statement will eventually emerge as a major issue . One thing I’ve learned is that you truly never you know when you’re looking for a reason .
 In July 2011, Bachmann recorded an event in South Carolina with Michele Bachmann . Bachmann is a conservative Republican who has been criticized for his views .
 Bachmann included a new talking point in her stump speech claiming that 47 percent of Americans paid no taxes . Bachmann suggested that everyone should pay something .
 The 47 percent talking point from the GOP is back in the news because of Mitt Romney . But more than a year later, that 47 percent talk point is still a talking point .
 It's a tracker’s job to make sure we have it on tape, so that four weeks, or four months, or . four years from now, if we need it, if . we have, we will have it, we have to have it . It’
 A transcript of a candidate's statements is posted on CNN.com . We spend a lot of time driving, waiting around and typing up a transcript of what a candidate just said .
 In that way, a tracker’s job is similar to how it has been in previous election cycles . The tracker's job is like it was in previous elections cycles, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The new technology means high-quality video instead of grainy cell phone footage . That means that if someone wants to put the footage we shoot in a TV ad, it’s high quality video . The technology is being developed in the United States .
 We can do in hours what used to take days. Then, when something noteworthy happens, we can do it in hours . We can't wait for a long time to get to the same level of detail. We need to be ready for the next few days.
 Just a few years ago, a tracker would have to actually physically mail their tapes back to headquarters . But now, the tracker has been able to track them down to the top of the world .
 With the U.S. presidential election too close to call, hundreds of thousands of Americans living in Europe have been posting their absentee ballots .
 Most expats rallied behind Obama after two terms of George W Bush, whom many thought had tarnished the U.S. image abroad . The emotional temperature is several degrees lower than four years ago, though most expats are now backing Obama .
 Both the Republicans and Democrats have courted the expat vote since 1988, when absentee ballots reversed the outcome of a Senate race in Florida, allowing Connie Mack to pip Democrat Buddy MacKay .
 Absentee ballots also made the difference in another Senate race in 2008 . Absentee votes also made a difference in 2008 Senate race .
 The tightness of the presidential race has made the expat vote arguably more important than ever . A Reuters/Ipsos tracking poll shows a dead heat between the presidential candidates .
 Both Republicans Abroad and Democrats Abroad organisations have gone all out to get Americans registered and voting in their home states . Both organisations are encouraging Americans to vote in their states .
 Colorado's ballot request totals for military absentee ballot requests surpasses 2008 totals . The western swing state has eight days to go until November's election .
 Early ballot request totals in a number of states showed an even more depressed military voting turnout than in 2008 . A Department of Defense Inspector General report found that half of the new voting offices were unreachable by telephone or email .
 Colorado is proving that low military voting does not have to be the status quo . Colorado is showing it's not just a matter of voting in the military voting .
 19,055 military and overseas ballot requests had been received, 2,804 more than in 2008 . Secretary of State Scott Gessler announced the requests were received . The office of Gessler said 19,054 military and abroad ballot requests were made .
 The 8,320 completed ballots the state has already received from these voters amounts to a return rate 80 percent higher than in the 2010 election . The return rate is 80 percent more than in 2010 election.
 Overseas voters receive next-day ballots via email and mail them back at their convenience . The improvement in numbers is attributed to a statewide project launched in 2010 .
 In 2009, the federal government passed the Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act . The act was passed in 2009 .
 The legislation led 47 states, including Virginia, to pass similar laws increasing enfranchisement of overseas voters .
 Under the legislation, voters are no longer required to have absentee ballots notarized . The legislation was passed last year .
 States are required to send absentee ballots to registered overseas voters at least 45 days prior to the election . States must also send absentee ballot to overseas voters 45 days before election .
 Electronic absentee ballots and registration applications must be made available online by each state in case hard copies don’t arrive, the law states . Each state must make the applications available online in place of hard copies of absentee ballots .
 Currently, 13 states allow online voter registration, according to the Pew Center on the States . Virginia is not one of those states .
 Overseas Vote Foundation spearheaded trend toward electronic registration in 2008 . Overseas vote Foundation spearheaded the trend .
 Nearly 5 million people accessed the OVF webpage in 2008, including nearly 2 million in the October before the election . Youth Vote Overseas is an offshoot of the foundation, to target students going abroad . Nearly 2 million people used the website in 2008 .
 The goal is to encourage students to register to vote before going abroad . Youth Vote Overseas outreach program director Marina Mecl says students should register to register .
 Contact with partner universities overseas helps YVO’s cause, Mecl said . YVO is based in traditional hubs for exchange students in traditional universities .
 Between July and October, the organization tallied its highest number of registrations abroad from the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy and France . Four of the top five study abroad destinations from 2008 to 2010 were UK, Spain and Italy .
 About three out of four voters registering on the site are between 18 and 24 . About three of four registered voters registering are between the ages of 18 to 24 .
 Previous posts have discussed the possibility of a split between the popular and electoral vote . Sandy and a split election outcome would be the first time in Colorado history .
 Property damage amounts to billion of dollars, and millions of people may not get electricity back for several days .
 Recovering from the disaster will be tough and time-consuming . These problems could affect turnout in several ways, including turnout .
 People will have to repair their homes, restock refrigerators full of spoiled food, and make up for lost work . People will also have to restock their refrigerators, make up with lost work and repair homes .
 Downballot campaigns and local party organizations were planning on door-to-door contact and electronic communication to mobilize supporters . Neither presidential campaign is putting resources into either state .
 The hurricane will cost these efforts several days that they can't get back, they say . The hurricane is expected to take several days to prepare for .
 If similar numbers were headed for the polls this year, and if the hurricane depressed turnout by just one percent, that's a drop of 115,000 votes, of which about 65,000 would probably go to Obama . Obama would probably have won the White House if he lost .
 In this scenario, he would still carry the two states, but in an extremely close election, his national popular-vote total might dip below Romney's . Romney's national popular vote total could dip below that of Romney's.
 Bush set aside a planned weekend at his seaside home in Kennebunkport, Maine . Bush flew to the White House from Camp David, Md., for a high-profile meeting with aides .
 With cameras rolling, Bush stepped off his helicopter on the South Lawn . He strode to the Cabinet Room for talks with Transportation Secretary Andrew Card, Deputy Defense Secretary .
 The number of federal troops assisting in South Florida will be doubled to 14,000 . Earlier in the day, the Defense Department announced that the number of troops assisting would be doubled .
 Hurricane Andrew victims say government was slow to respond to their massive loss of homes and businesses . The president was showered with criticism from victims of Hurricane Andrew last week . President Obama has been criticized for his response to the storm .
 Newsweek poll shows 54 percent of Americans think Bush has done a good job handling relief efforts . Newsweek poll: 54 percent say Bush has handled relief efforts well . 54 percent think Bush is a good leader, poll shows .
 57 percent said they think Bush is more concerned about matters in Iraq and Bosnia-Hercegovina than those in Florida and Louisiana . At the same time, 57 percent think Bush should be more concerned with matters in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
 Bill Clinton said an effort should be made to ""look into"" why problems have plagued the hurricane relief effort in Florida and Louisiana . Clinton: "Look into" why problems are plaguing the disaster relief effort .
 "I don't want to get into assessing the blame there because I don't know what the facts were," he says . But he says he doesn't know if the facts are true .
 The Bush Administration has been hit by complaints that it moved ineptly and too slowly to aid victims of Hurricane Andrew .
 Bush campaign says Clinton is jumping on criticisms of relief for political advantage . Bush campaign: Clinton jumping on criticism for political gain .
 With a few deft words, President Bush threw the full weight of incumbency behind Florida's hurricane victims today . Bush showed in the process why even Presidents who lag in the polls are electoral forces .
 Mr Bush flew Air Force One to the site of the worst storm damage and opened the Federal treasury to residents of South Florida .
 He committed the entire cost of rebuilding the region's shattered schools, bridges, hospitals, roads and other public facilities . The tab is likely to run double that of the $1.1. billion spent after Hurricane Hugo struck South Carolina .
 Some experts had concluded that if the judgment was based on military need, the base might never be reopened . He also pledged to rebuild Homestead Air Force Base, at a cost that could reach $500 million .
 By day's end it was clear that this normally budget-conscious President would spare nothing when it came to helping Florida's hurricane victims . By day, it had become clear that the normally budget conscious President had spared nothing .
 Though he lost the general election to Clinton, Bush won Florida by 1.5 percent . Bush won the state by just 1.6 percent .
 We should have one Secretary of Business, instead of nine different departments that deal with things like getting loans to SBA or helping companies with exports, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the U.S. House of Representatives . Obama says the country should be open to gays and lesbians, but that's not the case .
 Congress talking a good game about streamlining government, but protective about giving up jurisdiction over various pieces of government . It has something to do with Congress talking good game, but giving up their jurisdiction . Congress wants to streamline government but give up jurisdiction .
 The president spoke about reorganization in his 2011 State of the Union . A year later, he did propose legislation enhancing the president's ability to reorganize the government .
 President spoke about it at a January meeting of his Council on Jobs and Competitiveness . He said very little about it afterward .
 The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the United States . Article II, Section 1, clause 4, states that Congress can determine the Day of Election Day for the Elect
 Eight years ago, the Congressional Research Service addressed the question . Eight years later, the question was still unanswered .
 The Constitution does not provide in express language any current authority for a federal official or institution to “postpone” an election for federal office . The U.S. Constitution doesn’t provide an authority for an official to postpone an election .
 A handful of States have provided in State law express authority to postpone or reschedule elections within their jurisdictions based on certain emergency contingencies . The results of elections to federal office are initially adjudicated in the States, with the results adjudicated .
 States’ authority within the U.S. Constitution appears to be sufficient to enact legislation to deal with emergency and exigent circumstances concerning federal elections . States can enact laws that do not conflict with federal law enacted under Congress’ superceding constitutional authority .
 Failure to make choice on prescribed day means the electors may be appointed on a subsequent day . Electors can be appointed in such a manner as the legislature of such a State may direct .
 In such cases, the State had clearly “held an election,” but a choice was not necessarily made because the State has determined that the results could not fairly be ascertained . The State has decided that the election was held, but not fairly, could not be determined .
 There are no clear and definitive authority on this question, nor do there appear to be specific legal precedents bearing upon this issue . There is no clear authority on the question .
 A previous post noted that the military does not abandon the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier even in harsh weather such as Hurricane Sandy .
 Although a number of news sites identified it as a current picture, it turns out to be one from September . The picture was taken in September, but is actually a September photo .
 BBC World Service opinion poll finds higher approval ratings for U.S. President Barack Obama than Mitt Romney . Obama's approval ratings are higher than Republican challenger Mitt Romney's .
 An average of 50% favoured Mr Obama, with 9% for Mr Romney, in the survey of 21,797 people in 21 countries .
 Only Pakistan's respondents said they would prefer to see Mr Romney win November's election .
 GlobeScan/PIPA conducted the survey between 3 July and 3 September . The survey was conducted by GlobeScan and PIPA .
 The 11th annual Transatlantic Trends survey out today reveals that transatlantic majorities still approve of U.S. President Barack Obama’s foreign policy . Mitt Romney is largely an unknown in Europe .
 Transatlantic Trends 2012 shows 82% of Europeans said they had a favorable opinion of the U.S. president . 82% said they were favorable of Barack Obama .
 President Obama is not as popular at home as he is in Europe . A majority of Americans said their overall view of the president was favorable, 40% unfavorable .
 If Europeans could vote in the U.S. election, 75% of EU residents would vote for Obama . Only 8% of those who voted for Romney would vote in Romney's election, according to CNN .
 The Republican candidate leads Obama 57 percent to 22 percent, the organizations' Peace Index for October found . Obama leads the Republican candidate by 57 percent, according to the survey .
 Obama gets three times more support from Arab Israelis, 45 percent versus 15 percent . The gap is especially marked among self-described right-wingers .
 The ad may not fall afoul of the tax code because it does not name any individual or party . The ad does not mention any individuals or parties .
 Case illustrates the complex relationship of religion and politics, as well as the unique circumstances of the 2012 election . This case illustrates the complexity of the relationship between politics and religion .
 Billy Graham has endorsed Mitt Romney, the first Mormon presidential nominee of a major party . Graham: Romney is first Mormon nominee of major party in major party to be elected .
 We've seen zombies in political protests, campaign ads, and information from the Centers for Disease Control .
 An untold number of so-called zombies are coming to a counterterrorism summit attended by hundreds of Marines, Navy special operations forces, soldiers, police, firefighters and others . The event is designed to prepare them for their worst nightmares .
 Hundreds of military, law enforcement and medical personnel will observe the Hollywood-style production of a zombie attack as part of their emergency response training .
 In the scenario, a VIP and his personal detail are trapped in a village, surrounded by zombies when a bomb explodes . The scenario is based on a scenario where a VIP is trapped in the village .
 The VIP is wounded and his team must move through the town while dodging bullets and shooting back at the invading zombies . The VIP team must dodge bullets and shoot back at invading zombies.
 At one point, some members of the team are bitten by zombies and must be taken to a field medical facility for decontamination and treatment . Some members are taken to the facility for treatment .
 Franklin County Department of Emergency Services used a zombie apocalypse theme for an emergency preparedness drill Saturday .
 "If you've been bitten by a zombie, you are going through and getting medication, which is M&M's,"" said Meghan O'Brien, Assistant Director for the Franklin County Department of Emergency Services .
 Volunteers would tell those affected what kind of medication they would need and how to take it . Depending on what it is, volunteers would then tell them what medication they need . Volunteers would then be able to help those affected .
 It is hard to believe, but all three old men would outlive the youthful chief executive . All three men would be outliving the youthful CEO .
 It's just possible for Romney to win without Ohio or Virginia, says CNN's John Sutter .
 An independent poll finds that Obama and Romney are in a statistical tie in Minnesota . The poll is a statistical statistical tie .
 If he can carry that state, along with Iowa and Wisconsin, then Romney could get the minimum 270 . Romney could carry Iowa, Wisconsin and Iowa, if he wins .
 Washington promised not to invade the Communist island, while pledging to dismantle its own missiles in Italy and Turkey . The U.S. also pledged not to destroy its own missile bases in Turkey and Italy .
 Kennedy called former presidents Hoover, Truman, and Eisenhower . Confident that the crisis was headed to a peaceful and satisfactory conclusion, Kennedy called Hoover and Truman .
 Joe Mathews writes about California Governor Jerry Brown's efforts to win voter approval of a tax increase .
 Brown asked employees at a cafe in San Diego's Gaslamp Quarter whether they had heard of Proposition 30 . The cafe is located in the shadow of the Gaslamps Quarter, San Diego .
 His concern about being overexposed seems genuine, and it's charming in an old-fashioned sort of way . The actor's concern about overexposure seems genuine .
 The world and California are much bigger places, the media universe is more crowded . The world is much bigger and California is much larger than California . The media world is bigger and more crowded.
 The occasional statement, or a big push late in campaign season, isn't enough to get the word out in this environment . It's not enough to push the message out in an environment like this, it's not always enough .
 A governor who isn't constantly trying to cut through the clutter and get out a consistent message is, quite simple, a governor isn't doing his whole job . Gov. Rick Perry should be careful not to get bogged down in details, says Perry . Perry: "A governor who
 Air Force troop carrier squadrons are ordered to active duty in case an invasion is required . Air Force troops are deployed in support of the U.S. President Barack Obama's election to the White House .
 Robert Kennedy meets with Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin in secret . Robert Kennedy later meets with Dobrynins' ambassador in secret meeting . Kennedy meets later that night with ambassador .
 The U.S. agrees to eventually remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . In an additional secret understanding, the United States also agrees to remove the missiles .
 If that’s the count when the electors cast their ballots on December 17, then the newly-elected House of Representatives will pick the winner in January .
 Republicans currently have a majority of representatives from 33 states . This election probably won't change that number very much .
 A tie on election night doesn’t necessarily mean a tie on December 17 . But a tie in November's election night could mean a victory in December . The winner of the 2016 presidential election will be announced on December 18 .
 Supporters of President Obama might try to get some GOP electors to change their votes . A deadlocked electoral college would send the decision to a GOP House of Representatives .
 Twenty-one states do not bind their electors to vote for the candidates to whom they are pledged . The electors must vote for their chosen candidates .
 Twenty-nine states and the District of Columbia do have such requirements . But there is serious doubt that the courts would uphold them .
 A pair of students at Claremont McKenna College started a Website to persuade Republican electors to vote for Al Gore .
 Democratic political professionals were focusing on the vote count in Florida . Although they attracted a lot of publicity, they got little support from Democrats . Democrats focused on Florida .
 Democrats are still seething about the 2000 result . Things would be different this time, in part because of Democrats still angry about it .
 If the impetus for a vote-switching effort didn’t come directly from the Obama campaign or the Democratic National Committee, it would surely come from outside-spending groups or the progressive side of Twitterverse .
 In most states, people get to be electors because of long service to their party, so it would be hard to switch many of them . People in most states are electors because they are loyal to their parties .
 In case of a tie, it would only take a single defection to decide the election . A single defector would be enough to win the Senate seat .
 If a Republican elector or two seemed to be wavering, the Romney campaign would probably try to flip Democratic electors the other way . The Romney campaign has a history of trying to flip electors from Republicans to Democrats .
 Both sides have contingency plans for an electoral-college whip operation, including contact information for every elector . One would guess, then, that both sides have a contingency plan .
 I don't know if this scenario would be good for the country, but it would be fascinating to watch. I don’t know if it would have been good for America, but would be interesting to watch .
 In June of this year, the Federal Election Commission for the first time allowed political campaigns to accept campaign contributions via text message . Both of the major presidential candidates now allow supporters to contribute directly to their campaign using a phone .
 In two surveys fielded in late September, we asked a series of questions aimed at determining how this new contribution model is fitting into Americans' political giving habits .
 Democrats are more likely to contribute online or directly from their cell phone . Republicans are more than likely to donate in person, by phone call, or via regular mail . Democrats are most likely to make contributions online or via phone call .
 State Department Spokesman Lincoln White, and Press Secretary to the President Pierre Salinger. State Department spokesman Lincoln White. White. Salinger . Salinger: State Department officials. White, White, Salinger, White.
 Mitt Romney is a Mormon and Paul Ryan is a Catholic . Romney and Ryan are Mormon and Ryan is Catholic .
 The Republican ticket is the first in the history of either party not to include a Protestant . It's the first time the GOP has included a Protestant candidate in its history .
 Faith and Freedom Coalition has set an ambitious goal of reaching out to 17 million evangelical households in 12 battleground states to push them to vote . The group has set out to reach out to evangelical households across the U.S. in 12 states .
 Obama campaign also has outreach effort to rally religious voters . Not all evangelicals are conservative, and the Obama campaign has outreach efforts .
 Polls suggest that the president will not do as well among white evangelicals as he did in 2008 . But polls suggest that he will not fare well among evangelicals as well as white evangelicals .
 Obama has also lost support among some evangelicals for his support of same-sex marriage . The president's healthcare plan would require some religious institutions to provide contraceptive services to employees .
 National Archives sets out key dates: November 6, 2012—Election Day - registered voters cast their votes for President and Vice President . Thursday, October 25, 2012 -- Election Day . November 5, 2012: Election Day - Registered voters vote for President .
 By doing so, they also help choose the electors who will represent their state in the Electoral College . By choosing their state's electors, they help choose who they want to represent .
 After the presidential election, the governor of your state prepares seven Certificates of Ascertainment . Mid-November through December 17, 2012 - After the election, your state's governor prepares seven certificates of certainty .
 Certificates of Ascertainment should be sent to the Archivist no later than the meeting of the electors on December 17, 2012 .
 The remaining six Certificates of Ascertainment are held for use at the meeting of the Electors on December 17, 2012 . The remaining remaining six certificates are held .
 December 11, 2012 - States must make final decisions in any controversies over the appointment of their electors at least six days before the meeting of the Electors on December 17, 2012 . States must decide final decisions six days prior to the meeting .
 This is so their electoral votes will be presumed valid when presented to Congress . This is the first time they have been allowed to vote in the US Congress .
 Decisions by states’ courts are conclusive, if decided under laws enacted before Election Day, November 6, 2012 . Decisions are conclusive if decided in laws passed before November 6th .
 December 17, 2012 - The Electors meet in their state and vote for President and Vice President on separate ballots . The election is held in each state and takes place on December 17 .
 The electors record their votes on six “Certificates of Vote,” which are paired with the six remaining Certificate of Ascertainment . The electors are also paired with six other Certificates that they can choose between .
 The deadline for receipt of the electoral votes by the President of the Senate and the Archivist is December 26, 2012 . The deadline is December 27 .
 If votes are lost or delayed, the Archivist may take extraordinary measures to retrieve duplicate originals . The Archivist will take extraordinary steps to retrieve duplicated originals .
 The Archivist and/or representatives from the Office of the Federal Register meet with the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House in late December or early January .
 January 6, 2013 - The Congress meets in joint session to count the electoral votes on January 6 . The Congress met in a joint session in Washington, D.C.
 Vice President, as President of the Senate, presides over the count and announces the results of the Electoral College vote . The Vice President is responsible for the count .
 The President of the Senate then declares which persons, if any, have been elected President and Vice President . The President then declares the winner of the election .
 If a State submits conflicting sets of electoral votes to Congress, the two Houses acting concurrently may accept or reject the votes . The two Houses of Congress acting concurrently can reject or reject those votes .
 If they do not concur, the votes of the electors certified by the Governor of the State on the Certificate of Ascertainment would be counted in Congress . If they don't concur they would vote in Congress, their votes would go to the Governor .
 If necessary the House would elect the President by majority vote . The House would choose from the three candidates who received the greatest number of electoral votes . If necessary, the President would be chosen from three candidates .
 If necessary, the Senate would elect the Vice President by majority vote . The Senate would choose from the two candidates who received the greatest number of electoral votes . The Vice President would be chosen by the Senate .
 If any objections to the Electoral College vote are made, they must be submitted in writing and be signed by at least one member of the House and one Senator . The vote must be made in writing .
 If objections are presented, the House and Senate withdraw to their respective chambers to consider their merits under procedures set out in federal law . If objections were presented, they will be heard in the House or Senate .
 Much public debate between the U.S. and the Soviet Union took place in the halls of the United Nations . Much of the debate took place between the two countries .
 The normally courteous U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson aggresivously confronted his Soviet counterpart Valerian Zorin with photographic evidence of the missiles in Cuba . During the debate in the Security Council, the normally polite U.N. ambassador confronted his Russian counterpart
 ABC News reports: The most memorable line of Monday night’s debate was President Obama's "horses and bayonets" jab at Mitt Romney for questioning what Romney said was a shrinking U.S. Navy .
 Obama responded that Romney “hasn’t spent enough time looking at how our military works.” Obama said Romney has “n” spent too much time looking into how the military works .
 Horses and bayonets quickly became a Twitter punchline . The Pentagon still owns a hefty arsenal of bayonet charges .
 The Marine Corps has another 195,334 bayonets that it bought in 2004 . It plans to buy 175,061 more bayonet this year . The Corps has more than 200,000 more bayonetry .
 A Marine official says it's not accurate to add the two totals together as the new ones will include replacements for ones already in service as well as additional stocks . The new ones are expected to be replaced with new stocks .
 At The Wall Street Journal, Julian E Barnes writes: "In 1916, Army and Marine Corps forces were relatively small, the World War I buildup having not begun"
 It implied that U.S. and Soviet ships were in close proximity if not actually steaming straight for each other . It implied the ships were steaming together .
 McCone recorded a note later in the day that a U.S. Navy vessel had confronted a Soviet ship . The men gathered around JFK on the morning of October 24 certainly thought that was the case .
 The two closest Soviet ships were more than five hundred nautical miles from the quarantine line and headed back to the Soviet Union . In fact, the two closest ships were over five hundred miles from quarantine line .
 Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson lays the matter before the U.N. Security Council . Stevenson: U.S. President Barack Obama has been accused of being in violation of the law .
 President Kennedy asks Khrushchev to halt any Russian ships heading toward Cuba . Organization of American States endorsed quarantine, President Kennedy says .
 The president's greatest concern is that a U.S. Navy vessel would otherwise be forced to fire upon a Russian vessel, possibly igniting war between the superpowers .
 Previous posts have discussed ways in which Facebook may influence users' behavior .
 Facebook ads are a popular way for candidates to connect with voters . But a recent academic study suggests they aren't actually that effective . Facebook ads aren't that effective, according to the study .
 Voters were more likely to have a favorable impression of the candidate or vote for the candidate . Nor were more like to have an unfavorable impression of either candidate or to vote for them .
 "This still could be the most cost-effective campaign tactic out there,"" he said. "This could still be the best campaign tactic," he said .
 President Obama reaffirmed the decision to impose a blockade on Cuba . He met with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
 Walter Sweeney is the head of the U.S. Air Force Tactical Air Command . Sweeney is a member of the United States Air Force . Sweeney has been in the Air Force for more than 20 years .
 Some working Soviet missiles could still be pointed at the U.S. So when the planes returned home, some worked Soviet missiles . The missiles were sent back to the United States .
 The group went line-by-line through the speech Ted Sorensen had drafted for the president to give to the nation the next night . The group weighed the political and diplomatic consequences of every sentence .
 Stopping ships on the high seas would constitute an act of war under international law regardless of what Washington called it . Rusk: “The legal meaning of the two words is identical”
 He preferred calling what the U.S. was about to do a “quarantine,” however, because it would allow the administration to avoid unflattering comparisons to the blockade imposed on Berlin in 1948 and 1949 .
 Kennedy accepted Rusk’s point and directed that the term “quarantine” be used . Kennedy accepted the term "quarantine" was used .
 Earlier this year, unions tried to recall Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker over efforts to limit public-sector collective bargaining .
 California lawmakers are fighting a measure to limit their ability to gather political money . Now they're fighting a bill to limit the amount of money they can spend on campaigns .
 Mariel served as a major port of entry for Soviet goods and as a Cuban naval base . Mariel, on the northwestern coast of Cuba, is a Cuban city of about 500,000 people .
 NPIC analysts monitored imagery of the port to gauge whether additional Soviet materials were brought in to add to the already growing threat . NPIC: Analysts monitored imagery to see if additional Soviet material was brought in .
 The Soviets attempted to send four ‘Foxtrot’ diesel submarines to Cuba during the crisis . The Soviets tried to send the submarines to the island during the war with Cuba .
 The U.S. Navy successfully forced three subs to the surface before turning them around . The fourth turned back in mid-journey, still submerged, still underwater .
 Use of social media is becoming a feature of political and civic engagement for many Americans . The Pew Internet and American Life Project reports: The use of social networking is becoming an important part of social life .
 Some 60% of American adults use either social networking sites like Facebook or Twitter . Pew Research Center: 66% of those social media users have done at least one of seven civic or political activities .
 There are mixed partisan and ideological patterns among social media users . Overall, there are mixed partisanship and ideology among social networking users .
 Social media users who talk about politics on a regular basis are the most likely to use social media for civic or political purposes . The social media users are likely to post political content on social media .
 Social media users who have firmer party and ideological ties are more likely to use social media for these purposes . Liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans are among the most likely to post on social media . Moderates in both parties often use their social media to post about their views .
 Some of these activities are more likely to be pursued by younger social media users than those who are ages 50 or older .
 Younger users are more likely to post their own thoughts about issues, post links to political material, encourage others to take political action, belong to a political group on a social networking site, follow elected officials on social media, and like or promote political material .
 Gromyko told Kennedy Soviet aid to Cuba was meant only for defensive capabilities . Kennedy and Soviet foreign minister met for two hours in the Oval Office in Springfield, Illinois .
 The White House thought that having Kennedy stay on his normal schedule would create the impression nothing was amiss . Despite intense discussions and strategy sessions with his civilian and military advisors on how to respond to the situation, the White House decided to keep Kennedy on his schedule .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Kennedy to respond with military force, including an airstrike . Joint chiefs of Staff: "An airstrike would be appropriate"
 The day after he was in Springfield the president’s press secretary announced that Kennedy suffered from an “upper respiratory infection” and abruptly cancelled the rest of his trip . The president's press secretary said the president's trip was cancelled because of an illness .
 On October 19, the CIA reported the construction of twelve SS-5 launch pads, likely to be operational in December, and more importantly, three SS-4 sites with four launchers each . Two sites of the launch pads were reported to be already operational .
 Our textbook stresses the importance of religion in American politics . Cuba, Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, intelligence, military, nuclear weapons, political science .
 Latinos are divided by religion in their preferences in the upcoming presidential election, according to the latest survey . The survey was conducted by the Pew Hispanic Center and the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, both projects of the Pew Research Center .
 Three-quarters of Latino Catholics and eight-in-ten religiously unaffiliated Latinos support President Barack Obama’s re-election . Eight in ten religiously-unaffiliated Latinos also support Obama's election .
 Among Latino evangelical Protestants, who account for 16% of all Latino registered voters, just 50% prefer Obama . 39% support Republican challenger Mitt Romney, while 50% support Obama .
 As the presidential election approaches, many Hispanic churchgoers say they are hearing from their clergy about various political issues and candidates and elections .
 Roughly half of Latinos who attend religious services at least once a month say they have heard their clergy speak out about abortion . 43% have heard from the pulpit about immigration, and 38% say their clergy have spoken out about homosexuality .
 A smaller proportion, roughly three-in-ten, report hearing from their clergy about candidates and elections . Three in ten say they have heard from clergy about elections .
 United States intelligence had already spotted offensive missiles in Cuba . The U.S. intelligence was already aware of the missile threat .
 Earlier, he was exempted form resolutions restoring the rights of other officials in the Confederacy . He was exempt from the resolution .
 He had served the U.S. long and honorably as a soldier, Member of the United States House and Senate, and as Secretary of War . He had also served in Congress and served in the Senate .
 It is fitting that Jefferson Davis should no longer be singled out for punishment . Davis should not have been punished for his role in the Civil War .
 Our people need to turn their attention to the important tasks that still lie before us in establishing those principles for all people. Our people must turn their . attention to those important tasks still before us .