 269,000 people live in 269 countries around the world . CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes . Submit your best photos of your favorite destinations to CNN iReport
 409 lives in 409 locations across the U.S. and the world's largest city, Washington, D.C. is home to 1.6 million people .
 139 books have been published in the U.S. House of Representatives, including one of the world's most famous libraries . 139 books were published in 2007, including a number of titles that were later released in 2008 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com/Travel next week at 9 p.m. ET .
 204 people died in 204 U.S. cities in 2012, including Washington, D.C. and New York . 204 people were killed in Washington, DC, in 2012 . President Barack Obama was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 179 people died in the U.S. during World War II . 179 people have been killed in the Iraq war .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 196 people died in 196 U.S. incidents, including 9/11 bombings, were killed in 1996 . 196 people have been killed in 196 incidents, according to CNN.com .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 139 books have been published in the U.S. House of Representatives, including one of the world's most famous libraries . 139 books were published in 2007, including a number of titles that were later released in 2008 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters in New York City . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots of the day for next week's gallery of iReporters.com photos of your favorite destinations in the gallery.
 175,000 people live in 175 countries around the world each year . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a series of events in Washington, D.C. for the first time ever .
 166 people have been killed in Iraq and Afghanistan . 166 people died in Iraq in 2003 . Iraq's war with the Taliban was declared an act of terrorism .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of America's top 100 most recent destinations . Visit www.cnn.com/travel to see
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit www.cnn.com/travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Visit http://www.dailymailonline.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 most recent snapshots of the world's most beautiful landscapes . Visit CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday for a
 139 books have been published in the U.S. House of Representatives, including one of the world's most famous libraries . 139 books were published in 2007, including a number of titles that were later released in 2008 .
 131 episodes of American Sniper film "Sputputch" were released in December . The film was released in October 2013 and has been shown to the public for the first time .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of snapshots of your favorite destinations in the U.S. Call the National Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1-800-273-8255 .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters' top 10 best shots of the day . Submit photos of your favorite destinations in the gallery at CNN iReport.com .
 207 people died in 207 U.S. during World War II . 207 people were killed in Afghanistan . The U.N. killed more than 1,000 people in Afghanistan than Afghanistan .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots for next week's gallery of iReporters on CNN iReport.com/Travel .
 212 212 212 Westfield Road, New York, is located in the U.S. suburbs of New York City . It is located on the East Side of Manhattan, New Jersey, and has a reputation for being a low-key city .