 See above in Speeches for several audio and text files of John F Kennedy press conferences from Presidential Audio-Video Archive . Kennedy at The American Presidency Project .
 All press conference transcripts are available from Presidential News Conferences by The American Presidency Project . Transcripts are available for use in the U.S. and abroad .
 JFK LINK contains numerous speeches on the debates and the surrounding campaign with numerous speeches . JFK LINK contents_joint_jfk_rmn from JFK LINK . Also see JFK LINK Contents of the debates .
 JFK's speeches are published in JFK's Fare Fare Fareal Fareal Address . JFK was JFK's first President of the U.S. President . JFK died at the age of 92 . JFK's funeral was held in New York City on November 11, 1963 .
 This list covers one 1946 oration and then his senatorial ""remarks"" for 1953-1960 . This list includes one oration from 1946 to 1960 . The list also includes one from 1953 to 1960.
 One can use a search protocol through citing dates and subjects from Search John F Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . One can also use the search protocol .
 Results are discouraging, even when one knows the subject and date of a speech . But results are discouraging even when you know the subject or date of the speech .
 John F Kennedy Presidential Library has print transcripts of the 64 Kennedy press conferences dating from January 25, 1961 to November 14, 1963 . JFK Presidential Library's Press Conferences of President Kennedy have print transcripts .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy had 39 Kennedy speeches from 1960 through 1963 . JFK had 39 speeches between 1960 and 1963 .
 John F Kennedy Speeches transcripts are audio transcripts of 18 major speeches in chronological order with running time, running time and brief descriptions of each speech . The transcripts are published by the Miller Center of Public Affairs John F. Kennedy Speech .
 The Presidential Audio-Video Archive John F Kennedy by The American Presidency Project has many audio and video excerpts from the Kennedy presidency, including the 1960 Democratic Convention acceptance speech . The project is based on the American President John Kennedy .
 The Nixon Kennedy Debates Video Page Streaming RealVideo of the four Nixon Kennedy presidential debates has the four debates in full video . EarthStation1.com The Sights & Sounds of History.com .
 Text transcripts are mostly text transcripts of daily statements issued by the President or in the President's name . They also cover some important public addresses . Text transcripts cover some of the most significant public addresses of the President .
 The John F Kennedy Quote Page is a collection of quotes from the former President of the United States . It includes excerpts from JFK's most famous statements .