 On the evening of Friday 26 October 1962 General Issa Pliyev, Commander of Soviet Forces in Cuba, sent a report to his superiors in Moscow .
 Pliyev was expecting U.S. aircraft to launch a massive bombing campaign at dawn the next day . Pliyeva was expecting American aircraft to attack the next morning .
 He ordered the radar systems at Surface to Air Missile sites around the island to be switched on for the first time . The radar systems are being switched on by the government .
 Nuclear warheads have been moved from two central stores and deployed with their missile regiments . Nuclear warheads were moved from central stores to deploy with their military regiments.
 Three FKR cruise-missile launchers were moved to their firing position, ready to launch a nuclear attack on the United States base at Guantanamo Bay . The U.S. base is based in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba .
 The R-12 sites had been spotted by US reconnaissance planes on 15 October . The sites are believed to have been the first to be spotted by the US military .
 The aerial photographs had been displayed at the United Nations and flashed around the world . The aerial photos had been shown at the U.N.
 U.S. intelligence identified several Luna battlefield missiles on 26 October . The missiles are believed to have been launched by Luna .
 The CIA were unable to detect any signs that the Luna missiles were nuclear-armed, but they were . The CIA was unable to find any signs of the missiles being armed . The Luna missiles are now being used by the U.S. State Department .
 Half of Pliyev’s nuclear arsenal were for FKR cruise missiles . 80 warheads, half of the nuclear arsenal, were for cruise missiles, according to the Russian president .
 American spy planes had spotted only one of the FKR sites and they thought this was a conventional facility . Despite frequent overflights, the U.S. spy planes thought it was an ordinary facility .
 Intelligence analysts also failed to correctly identify the two central stores where most of the nuclear weapons were held . Intelligence analysts failed to identify the central stores of most nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. military planners grossly underestimated the number of nuclear weapons on the island, particularly the tactical nuclear weapons . In summary, the United States military planners vastly underestimated the nuclear weapons in the island .
 The one American aircraft which flew over Cuba on the morning of Saturday 27th October was not a bomber, but a U-2 reconnaissance plane . The one aircraft that flew over the island was not an American aircraft .
 Moscow had replied to Pliyev’s report by saying that his soldiers could open fire on U.S. aircraft, but only in self-defence . Moscow had said that its soldiers could fire on United States aircraft .
 Russian officers thought that the U-2 was identifying targets which would be bombed a few hours later . Russian officers in the Cuban command post thought that they were identifying targets . The U.2 was identified as targets for the U.S. attack on Cuba .
 The Cuban government ordered that the plane be attacked by two missiles before it left Cuban airspace . So they ordered that two missiles be fired at the plane . The attack was ordered by the government .
 The downing of this aircraft and the death of the pilot, Rudolf Anderson, brought the crisis to a new level . Rudolf was the pilot of the plane which was shot down by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 American defence Secretary, Robert McNamara, had for days held at bay his generals, who had from the start been advocating a massive airstrike . U.S. defence Secretary McNamara had held his generals at bay for days .
 Even McNamara was proposing a counter-attack, at least against the SAM site which had downed Anderson’s U-2 . Now even McNamara had proposed a counter attack on the SAM .
 United States forces were ready to strike Air Defence targets within 2 hours, to launch an all-out bombing campaign within 12 hours and to invade the island within 7 days . U.S. forces were prepared to strike .
 U.S. nuclear forces had been moved onto Defence Condition 3 when President Kennedy addressed the nation on Tuesday 22nd October . United States nuclear forces were moved onto defence Condition 3 .
 The following day Strategic Air Command took its forces up to DEFCON 2 . Strategic Air . Command took their forces up . The following . day . The . following day .
 For 24 hours each day there were 65 B-52 nuclear bombers in the air, circling over the far North of America and the Mediterranean . They were waiting for instructions to proceed to targets in the Soviet Union .
 Over 1,000 other U.S. nuclear bombers were ready for take-off at airfields across the globe . The U.N. nuclear bomber was ready to take off from a base in Alaska .
 In England the RAF had 72 V-bombers loaded with 3 FKR Frontovaya Krylataya Raketa Frontline Cruise Missile . The RAF also had 72 V-bombs loaded with 3 frozen weapons .
 In 1962 United States intelligence did not realise that this type of missile had a nuclear capability . In 1962 the U.S. intelligence didn't realise that the missile could be a nuclear weapon .
 Thor nuclear missiles, under dual Anglo-American control, were prepared for action in East Anglia . Thor nuclear missile missiles were prepared to launch . Thor missiles were also prepared to carry out the attack . Thor missile missiles would be used to launch a nuclear strike on Britain .
 The United States Air Force was under the command of General Curtis Le May, architect of the fire-bombing of Tokyo in 1945 . General Le May was the architect for the fire bombing of Tokyo, Japan .
 Le May was the model for the character General Jack D Ripper in Stanley Kubrick’s film Dr Strangelove . Le May is also the inspiration for the role of General Jack Ripper .
 General Thomas Power, head of Strategic Air Command, was even more militant than Le May . Power was head of the Air Force Command in the 1960s .
 Power’s attitude was that if a nuclear war resulted in two Americans surviving and only one Russian, then the U.S. had won . Power's attitude was if two Americans survived and one Russian died, then it had won, she said .
 Power had covertly been bringing his nuclear forces to a very high state of alert since 20th October . Power's nuclear forces have been brought to a state of high alert .
 The crisis on Saturday 27 October deepened further because of an event far from the Caribbean . The crisis was deepened because of a crisis in the Caribbean far away from the island .
 Russia and U.S. tested nuclear weapons in the 1950s and 1960s . Russia and America tested their nuclear weapons at the height of the Cold War . Both tested nuclear tests in the 1960s and 1980s .
 The Russians detonated a nuclear bomb over Novaya Zemlya on 26 October . The bomb was detonated over the Russian city in a controlled area of the city . The blast was the first of its kind to hit the city in decades .
 Hours later an American U-2 plane was sent to the North Pole to monitor for radiation . Hours later a U.2 plane from the U.S. was sent there to monitor radiation .
 He lost his bearings because of the confusing coloured lights of the Aurora Borealis . He was unable to find his bearings due to the confusing colours of the night sky .
 He finally realised his error as he heard Russian folk music over his radio . He realised his mistake when he heard folk music on the radio .
 In Russian minds this flight could easily have been making a final check of targets for the bombers circling over Alaska . In Russia, the flight could have been carrying out final check on the bombers .
 Six MIG-16 fighters were scrambled to intercept Maultsby, but they couldn't fly high enough to shoot him down . Six planes were scrambled but were unable to shoot down .
 Two U.S. F-106 fighters were sent to escort him as he turned back towards Alaska .
 F106s had been armed with nuclear Air-to-Air missiles when the alert state was raised to DEFCON 3 . Like many others, they were armed with missile missiles when it was raised .
 The United States Navy had devised a procedure whereby they would signal that a submarine should surface by dropping several stun grenades in the water . The U.S. Navy would then signal a submarine to surface .
 The Soviet Navy refused to acknowledge the message and did not pass it on to their vessels at sea . They had informed Moscow of this procedure, but the Soviet Navy did not acknowledge it .
 The crew of B-59 were stressed, exhausted and living in stifling conditions . The crew were stressed and exhausted and lived in conditions .
 The submariners heard the repeated thumping of practice depth charges detonating close to their hull . Practice depth charges were heard repeatedly by the submariners .
 The U.S. Navy officers who were launching these small bombs had no idea that the diesel-powered submarine was carrying one nuclear torpedo .
 He agreed with his political officer that the nuclear torpedo should be prepared for action . He agreed to be prepared to take part in the attack .
 He felt that if his submarine was to be sunk, at least he would take an American warship down with him . He felt he would also take down a U.S. warship with him.
 Savistky held the same rank as another senior officer on the submarine . Fortunately, he was not the only senior officer to be killed in the attack on the Russian submarine .
 Captain Vasili Arkhipov refused to go along with his colleagues and he vetoed the order to prepare the nuclear torpedo . He vetoed the decision to use the torpedo .
 Arkhipov was hailed as the man who stopped World War Three . Decades later, when this story first became public, he was hailed . The story was first published in the 1980s .
 As this drama unfolded, McNamara was leaving his office in Washington, D.C. McNamara left his office for the day .
 He turned to an aide and said that he wasn’t sure that he would live to see another Saturday night .
 McNamara met with key figures from Russia and Cuba who had been involved in the crisis . Four decades later McNamara had the chance to meet with key leaders from both countries . McNamara: "It's been a long way since the crisis"
 He was horrified to learn that the world had come closer to nuclear Armageddon than he or anyone else had realised at the time . Now he has learned that he was horrified at the threat of nuclear Armageddon .
 On Tuesday 16th October, when the Chiefs of Staff had first proposed an immediate attack on Cuba, their information on the nuclear weapons in Cuba was very limited . The information on Cuba's nuclear weapons had been very limited.
 There were no electronic safeguards preventing the launch of the Russian nuclear weapons in Cuba, or most American nuclear weapons . The U.S. nuclear weapons were launched without electronic safeguards .
 Khrushchev’s instructions for the tactical nuclear weapons were inconsistent . Moscow retained authority over the long-range R-12 missiles .
 First he delegated authority over the weapons to Pliyev, then he said that the weapons should not be used without permission from Moscow .
 Khrushchev also toyed with the idea of saying that he would hand these tactical nuclear weapons over to Cuban control if the island was invaded by the Soviet Union .
 Syria's crisis shows how distant leaders can lose control over a conflict . Not only did it mark a serious escalation in the crisis, but it also showed how far away leaders could lose control .
 Soviet officers in Cuba were waiting for American bombs to fall, attacking the spy plane was a reasonable operational decision . For the Soviets in Cuba, the decision was made to attack the plane as a precautionary measure .
 OPLAN 312, an all-out air attack on Cuba, followed by an invasion of the islands, would have shown restraint as their comrades were killed by U.S. bombs . Russia had practical control over individual nuclear weapons, particularly tactical weapons .
 Khrushchev mistakenly thought that Kennedy was going to make a broadcast to the nation at 9 am, Washington time, saying that the bombing campaign had started . Kennedy thought that he was making a broadcast saying that bombing had started in the U.S.
 Soviet leaders agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey . Shortly before this, the Soviet leadership met outside Moscow and agreed to pull missiles out of Cuba . The Soviet leadership also agreed to withdraw missiles from the U.S. from Cuba .
 In one way the world is closer to the nuclear apocalypse today than it was on the 27th October 1962 . Living in the shadow of the Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Then most of the nuclear weapons were bombs which would be dropped by aircraft . The bombs were dropped by planes and dropped by helicopters .
 The total number of nuclear warheads from missiles that could hit targets in the U.S. and Soviet Union was 315 . The total nuclear warheads could hit the USA and the Soviet Union .
 All of these missiles had to be fuelled with liquid fuel before they could be launched .
 The U.S. and Russia have 1,700 nuclear warheads on missiles which are on high alert . The United States and Russia between them have 1.7 nuclear warheads . Russia and the U.K. have more than 1,000 nuclear warheads in total .
 Stanislav Petrov sat in Serpukhov-15, the Russian early warning centre, watching as one, two, then ten dots appeared on his screen . On 26 September 1983, Petrov watched as one of the dots appeared in his computer .
 Each represented a missile fired from the U.S. towards the Soviet Union . The missiles were fired at Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 Standing Orders said Petrov should immediately inform the General Staff Central Command Post at Chekhov-3. Petrov must also inform the general Staff central Command Post . Petrov was ordered to inform the Russian General Staff about the situation .
 Chekhov-3 was able to launch Russia’s entire arsenal of ICBMs by remote control, and it can still do this today . Chekhova-3 launched Russia's entire ICBM arsenal of missiles by remote .
 Only then was he able to confirm that the dots were due to a computer failure . Only then he was able to identify the dots .
 The Soviet Union misinterpreted a NATO nuclear exercise, Able Archer, as the final preparations for a real attack . Able Archer was a NATO exercise, a nuclear weapons exercise .
 In 1995 President Yeltsin was on the verge of authorising a nuclear strike, when a Norwegian weather rocket was mistaken for a Trident missile .
 Since 1962, the world’s nuclear arsenals rely heavily on complex computer software . Since then, the nuclear arsenal has been heavily developed by computer scientists . The technology has changed dramatically since 1962 .
 Cyber attacks, and false warnings of cyber attacks, are a greater danger than ever . Cyber attacks are more likely to be a bigger problem than ever, experts say . The U.S. government has been warned that cyber attacks are a growing problem .
 The attack was initially interpreted as an act of sabotage, presaging a Soviet assault . The attack on the U.S. was first interpreted as a sabotage . It was also thought to have been a Soviet attack .
 Preparations were made to scramble as many jets as possible, so they weren’t caught on the ground . Preparation was made for the incident .
 Today the danger is from virtual bears, malevolent or misplaced bytes which could spiral the world into nuclear war by accident . The danger is not only from the internet, but also from the Internet .
 In 1962 all five of the US Navy’s new Polaris nuclear submarines were based in the Holy Loch .
 The force had been deployed to the Clyde one year earlier in the face of vigorous protests from across Scotland . The force was deployed in 2012 to protect the Clyde from flooding .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that remaining two submarines be sent to sea . Joint chiefs of Staff recommended that the remaining two subs should be sent out to sea.
 On 22nd October President Kennedy placed all nuclear forces on DEFCON 3 . President Kennedy ordered the US military to prepare for nuclear war with the West .
 The two submarines in Holy Loch were rushed out to sea within 24 hours . The two submarches were rushed into the sea within a day .
 Their support ship, USS Proteus, also sailed down the Clyde estuary and headed to the North of Scotland . The support ship also made its way to Scotland .
 The American fleet has left the Holy Loch, but today there are British submarines, carrying American Trident missiles, based at Faslane .
 There are always 40 nuclear warheads deployed on one Trident submarine at sea at sea, 24-7 .
 If there was a major crisis, then one, and possibly two, other Trident submarines would be quickly sent to sea, as in 1962 . In 1962, the Trident submarines were quickly dispatched to sea as a precautionary measure .
 Five decades later, we have become like villagers living under a volcano, complacent about the risk of sudden catastrophic destruction . Five decades after the war, we are complacent and complacent, the country has become complacent .