 A surprise attack would erode if not destroy the moral position of the U.S. throughout the world, says President Obama .
 The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are--but it is the one most consistent with our character and courage as a nation and our commitments around the world . But the greatest danger of all would be to do nothing, he says .
 Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right- not peace at the expense of freedom . And one path we shall never choose, and that is the path of surrender or submission, he says .
 President John F Kennedy on the Cubam Missile Crisis . President Kennedy was President of the United States during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 .
 I repeat, we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves, I repeat . We have indeed our inevitable weapons, the weapons, which we would have preferred not to acquire, and which we do not wish to employ, he says .
 The Soviet Union will move on to ever more flagrant violations of the requirements for international peace and freedom, until we will be left with no other options but complete capitulation or the outbreak of a nuclear holocaust . Otherwise, the Soviet Union would continue to violate the requirements of international peace
 It is, therefore, understandable that it deeply displeases the conscience of the Brazilian people any form of intervention in an American State, inspired by the allegation of incompatibility with its political regime, to impose on it .
 "The indefinite combination of human fallibility and nuclear weapons will destroy nations," says Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Human fallibility is the result of nuclear weapons and human stupidity is to destroy nations"
 Pentagon leaders urged Kennedy to attack Cuba - a possibly dangerous move that could have triggered a nuclear war with Moscow . Robert McNamara, The Fog of War .
 As many as 18,500 U.S. casualties were expected in first 10 days of Cuban invasion, memo says . Pentagon memo: Planers expected 18,000 casualties within 10 days . Cuban invasion could see up to 18,600 casualties in 10 days, memo reveals .
 The idea of a surprise U.S. attack on Cuba didn't sit well with some of the President's advisers, including his brother . The President's brother says the idea of an attack on the island is not what he wants .