 SG Hammarskjöld proposed the idea of preventive diplomacy during the Cold War . The idea was a branch of diplomacy still in use today .
 Non-Official Diplomacy or Track II Diplomacy was first presented by the United States Department of State employee, Joseph V Montville, in 1961 .
 Montville spoke about a second kind of diplomacy, rather than the usual communication between appointed officials . He named it Track II Diplomacy . Montville has a new approach to diplomacy, which he named Track II diplomacy .
 Montville, together with another DoS employee, published a book entitled ""Foreign Policy According to Freud,"" in which the idea behind Non-Official diplomacy was discussed . Montville published the book in which he and another employee discussed the idea of non-official diplomacy .
 Montville and Davidson mention what that new kind of negotiation is and how governments should use it . However, they did not mention if there could be any problems with it . The book was published in the summer of 2013 .
 These two kinds of diplomacy both have a common goal, conflict resolution, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Diplomatic diplomacy is a form of conflict resolution .
 Both were created in order to do something that negotiation sometimes failed to. Both created to try and do something different than negotiate .
 Diplomats, and even Heads of States, hoped that such alternative ways of discussion could deliver results that would satisfy all parties involved . Diplomats and even heads of states hoped that alternative ways would deliver results .
 Both preventive and non-official diplomacy have shown some challenges during the use of them that have made the government question if they are as effective today as they used to be fifty years ago .
 The UN has conducted multiple research projects and drafted reports in order to ensure that preventive diplomacy reaches the level of success expected by UN officials .
 Track II diplomacy involves almost entirely unofficial contacts . “Track II diplomacy’s ‘unofficial contacts’ are ‘almost all unofficial contacts.’
 Merriam-Webster: Diplomacy is a form of language used to refer to diplomacy . The dictionary is based on the definition of the word diplomacy .
 The Free Dictionary, Farlex, www.thefreedictionary.com/preventive+diplomacy . Farlex is based on the Free Dictionary .
 The Balance Careers, www.thebalancecareers.com/conflict-resolutions-skills, shares conflict resolution skills .
 The UN has been interested in the idea of preventive diplomacy since the moment it was presented by SG Hammarskjöld, a little more than fifty years ago . Preventive diplomacy is a form of diplomacy that aims to prevent the spread of terrorism .
 According to Article 99 of the UN Charter, preventive diplomacy was enforced . The UN says preventive diplomacy is enforced in Syria .
 The article allowed the UN SG to present before the Security Council potential threats to international peace as well as security . The UN SG presented the article to the UN Security Council .
 Preventive diplomacy was first put in use during the Cold War, as an alternative to diplomacy . Preventive diplomatic diplomacy was put in place during Cold War as alternative was discussed between state representatives .
 Dag Hammarskjöld used this kind in order to discuss any clash of interest the then superpower might have had and try to resolve it . The then superpower tried to resolve any potential conflict of interest they might have with the then superpowers .
 At the same time, he stated that he would use any opportunities that might arise in order to resolve conflicts between other countries not involved in the Cold War .
 He would try to prevent the rise of any other conflicts and issues with the potential to affect global politics and peace negatively . He would also try to stop the rise .
 The Secretariat-cabinet of Hammarskjöld is the one that has set the very own fundamentals of preventive diplomacy . Most of them are still in use today . The Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been a key figure in the world's most successful diplomacy .
 Hammarskjöld was the one to decide whether or not preventive diplomacy was a success, UN officials never confirmed such allegations . Even though it is suspected he was one of the ones to decide, UN never confirmed it .
 In order for the SG not to publicly appear, representatives of his office undertook special positions when discussing it . The SG not publicly appeared in order to avoid making public statements .
 Non-governmental Organisations are non-governmental organizations . Investopedia: What is not a government organization is a non-profit organization .
 Hammarskjöld had in mind the creation of a global ring of representatives working around the establishment of his idea as a means of negotiations .
 The vision of Hammarskjöld was not put in use as a means of negotiation until the 3rd SG, U Thant of Burma, moved forward with it . The vision was not used as a negotiating tool by the 3th SG of Burma .
 The Cuban Nuclear Confrontation is among the most successful outcomes of using preventive diplomacy and, at the same time, one of its first-ever achievements . The Cuban nuclear confrontation was one of the first steps taken in preventive diplomacy, says President Obama .
 Preventive diplomacy began being used regularly during times of crisis . Preventive diplomatic diplomacy was first used in the 1980s and 1990s .
 SG Javier Pérez de Cuéllar established communication between the SecretaryGeneral and the Clerk of the Security Council in an effort to regenerate the presentation of international threats .
 In January 1992, the first-ever summit meeting of the SC took place, and the then SG Boutros Boutros-Ghali was asked to draft a report regarding the future of the UN and how preventive diplomacy could contribute to conflict resolution .
 The most recent examples of the use of preventive diplomacy by the UN are during the chairmanship of the Secretariat by Ban Ki-Moon . Ban Ki Moon is currently chair of the UN Secretariat .
 Reports drafted by Ki-Moon were mostly about climate change and how this kind of diplomacy could help solve that issue .
 SG Ki-Moon explained some of the United Nations’ accomplishments achieved with the use of preventive diplomacy . The United Nations used preventive diplomacy to achieve success .
 In 1981 a DoS employee introduced a new way of negotiations to the diplomatic corps named Track II Diplomacy . A variant of the usual kind of discussion, known to people up until that year, was introduced .
 In the book, the writers introduce to the people the creation of a new discussion method, Track II Diplomacy . The writers also introduce the people . The book also introduces to the readers the creation .
 The book contains the definitions of Track I and II in order for the people to fully understand what each one should do and the differences between the two of them . The book is written in order to help people understand what Track II should do .
 Track I is being explained as the usual way of negotiating, where formal discussions between appointed diplomats occur . Track I has been explained as a normal way of dealing with the world's top diplomats . Track II is a formal way of talking, where diplomats hold formal discussions .
 Track II refers to efforts towards conflict resolution done by not officially appointed diplomats, but on the contrary NonGovernmental Organizations representatives and theorists . Track II is being referred to as efforts to solve conflict by non-official diplomats .
 Track Two Diplomacy" is a look at how the system works and if it is functional as it should . It was a debate on how diplomacy is supposed to work in the United States .
 The United States DoS denied the book's publication for eighteen months as executives didn't want the people to know the US's techniques regarding conflict resolution and negotiation .
 The book mentioned that the US Government promotes Track II Diplomacy as a means of negotiation and that it was wellfunded . The book said that the book was written by the US government .
 Government analysts should understand how history, society, culture, and psychology interact with each other to improve their abilities . Also, government analysts should know how history and society interact, society and psychology .
 Negotiations began between the two parties and a Norwegian scholar, in the role of a mediator . The two parties have been involved in a dispute over ownership of the land .
 The negotiations changed from Track II to Track I when the two sides decided to start having meetings with UN diplomats . The two sides have been in talks since November .
 William Davidson, William D. Davidson, and Joseph V Montville. Montville . Montville, 9 Davidson and 9 Davidson . 9 Davidson were the closest men to have ever been to the closest to mankind in history . The 13th day of the longest daylight daylight daylight hours was September
 At the same time, it is considered the most significant success of preventive diplomacy . "It was considered a significant success, but it was also considered a failure," says President Obama .
 In 1961, the Soviet Union came to an agreement with Cuba to place nuclear weapons on the island to protect the island nation if a threat was to appear . The Soviet Union agreed to place the weapons on Cuba in 1961 to protect Cuba .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy called for a meeting of the National Security Council and five extra members . President Kennedy was informed about the situation and called for the meeting .
 The U.S. Navy will create a blockade by the United States Navy in order for more missiles not to reach Cuba . After discussions, the Council concluded to the creation of the blockade .
 President Kennedy also stated that the Council demands the immediate removal of the nuclear weapons from Cuba . President Kennedy said that the Cuban nuclear weapons should be removed from the country .
 UN SG Thant believed that the UN had to take quick measures in order for the crisis to not further escalate . UN Secretary General Thant said that the crisis had to be dealt with quickly and not escalate .
 SG Thant stated that the fate of mankind is at stake as war was about to begin next to a nuclear facility . He said that the future of mankind was at stake next to the facility .
 He called for negotiations to begin immediately to resolve the matter at hand . He called on the government to begin negotiations immediately .
 Invitations were sent to all directly affected parties accompanied by some urgent appeals . Invitations sent to those directly affected party accompanied by urgent appeals. Invitations have been sent out to all .
 Soviet Union was to stop any shipments made to Cuba while the United States had to ban the blockade in the area completely . U.S. had to stop all shipments to Cuba .
 Both parties agreed to the appeals, and the UN Secretariat was informed . Both parties were informed of the appeals .
 Following that event, Thant called Castro and instructed him to suspend any action taken to create a nuclear facility . Thant also instructed Castro not to create any nuclear facilities .
 Following the diplomatic success, Thant traveled to Cuba a week later and met with the island nation's politicians . Thant met with Cuban politicians .
 He believed that it was an excellent opportunity to mitigate tension and, at the same time, get to know local leaders after such an averted crisis . He said it was a great opportunity to meet local leaders .
 UNPREDEP was created to monitor and report any developments that occurred in the region and maintain stability there . UNPEDEP is a non-governmental body that monitors the region .
 One of the tasks was to prevent any kind of conflicts from happening by using the method of preventive diplomacy . Also, one of the task was to . prevent any of the . kind of conflict from happening using the . method of . preventive diplomacy, says President Obama .
 It is considered one of the most successful cases of the use of preventive diplomacy to prevent instability and violence towards the country's population . 6 Costeas-Geitonas School Model United Nations 2020 is considered a successful case .
 The force was shut down on February 28th, 1999, after it was last extended with SC Resolution 1186 . China vetoed its renewal at the end of 1999 because FYROM recognized Taiwan, then a part of China, as an independent nation .
 The conflict of Kashmir is a territorial dispute between the Republic of India and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan . The People's Republic of China has an observatory role during the discussions .
 The dispute first started in 1947 when British India gained its independence from the British Empire . Both India and Pakistan claimed an area then known as the Princely State of Jammu and Kashmir .
 China came into the conflict when, in 1963, an agreement was signed between Pakistan and China, establishing the border between the two nations . The agreement established the border with Pakistan in 1963 . In 1963, China signed an agreement to establish the border .
 The Agreement is not recognized by India, which claims sovereignty over a part of the land mentioned in it . India is not recognizing the Agreement .
 The bond between China and Pakistan became stronger during the Cold War when Pakistan and the US’s relationship stopped being a friendly one . Thus, the bond between the two countries became stronger .
 India and Pakistan decided to try negotiations via using Track II Diplomacy . The two countries are having a conflict over the sovereignty of the Kashmir region .
 Stakeholders and entrepreneurs were brought to discuss with each other the economic prospects of the region . The region was brought together to discuss economic prospects for the first time .
 The use of non-official diplomacy had a good outcome at the time and became an important example of the good this kind of diplomacy can provide the society, says the author of the book .
 People believe that tensions will escalate again and believe that non-official diplomacy will, for once more, help find a solution .
 It is also believed that a good outcome might occur if the negotiations were to take place in the areas of conflict .
 The UN and countries have come across a number of challenges while trying to negotiate by using preventive diplomacy . Preventive diplomacy is a form of diplomacy that can be used to negotiate with countries .
 There are two main areas of concern when discussing if preventive diplomacy functions as it should . Preventive diplomacy is a major concern for the U.S. State Department .
 Diplomats should find out this idea will still be useful in the long-term, and if preventive diplomacy has the necessary requirements to respond immediately to a crisis, it will be useful .
 One of the challenges is that attention is most of the time being given to "highly visible emergencies, actual war, and violence," says the author . The author says attention should be given to highly visible emergencies and actual war .
 The UN or governments might face the sometimes limited access to intelligence . Another important challenge that the UN faces might face is the often limited access of intelligence .
 The situation has early warnings not being sent and analysis not being done on the time needed . As a result of this, early warnings are not sent, and analysis is not being carried out on time . This has led to a lack of early warnings and analysis being delayed .
 The government of the People's Republic of China often uses Non-Official Diplomacy as a means of Diplomacy .
 When Track II is being used, there is always an appointed diplomat close by to monitor the discussions . The link between these two is the fact that when Track II has been used, it is always monitored by a diplomat . Track II will be used in the United States for the first time
 Republic of China is one of the countries that have taken the idea of alternative ways of negotiation very seriously . The Republic of the China has a history of using alternative negotiating methods .
 Taiwan has created a unique way to use NonOfficial Diplomacy, think tanks . Taiwan has been using think tanks for years to develop nonofficial diplomatic ties .
 Citizens of Taiwan (that applied to participate) have the opportunity to interact with appointed diplomats or politicians . During these think tanks, citizens of Taiwan will discuss various topics that affect their country . The think tanks are held in Taiwan .
 United States of America is known for using alternative ways of discussion when possible . The USA has a long history of using alternative methods of discussion .
 The Federal Government of the United States decided to discuss a crisis while practicing preventive diplomacy . Not a few times, the government of the U.S. has decided to talk about a crisis .
 The country mainly tries to prevent a crisis from growing bigger after it has already begun while aiming to stop it . The country's main aim is to prevent the crisis growing bigger than it already began .
 UN has been very much in favor of using alternative ways of discussion when trying to resolve a conflict . UN has a long history of trying to use alternative methods of discussion to resolve conflicts .
 No principal organ of the organization has passed any resolution neither about preventive nor non-official diplomacy . Nonetheless, no principal organ has passed a resolution about preventive diplomacy . The U.N. has not passed any resolutions either about preventive or non-Official diplomacy .
 Many SGs and especially Ki-Moon have drafted reports that talked about the effectiveness of diplomacy kinds . However, many SGs have drafted a report that said such diplomacy was effective .
 This promotion can target countries inviting them to adopt these two kinds of diplomacy and making them official means of negotiation when discussing conflicts and trying to find solutions . It can be used as a way of negotiating when discussing conflict and finding solutions .
 The UNGA and SC could pass some binding resolutions, which would instruct member-states to adopt two kinds of diplomacy in order to have more ways of discussion . General Assembly and Security Council Resolutions could be binding resolutions .
 These resolutions shall include how the aforementioned types of diplomacy should be adopted and used within the diplomatic system of every government . These resolutions will include how these types of diplomatic should be used .
 The resolutions should include the advantages and disadvantages that the representatives of the member-states believe these two types will end up having, in order for the governments to be informed about everything regarding them .
 Up to date Intelligence Countries should be equipped with modern technology in order for them not to have intelligence collection problems . Countries should have modern technology to avoid intelligence collection difficulties .
 Analysis of information will become easy as well as communications between nations . Ensuring good intelligence will become easier and easier to use .
 Some Task Forces should be created to establish good communication and cooperation . Task Forces will help countries not put all of their attention on the highly visible emergencies .
 Diplomats believe that if non-official diplomacy was to put in use more groups (such as NGOs), than just the parties affected by the dispute, it could be included in the negotiations .
 These groups should include people with knowledge on the matter at hand in order to be able to deliver solutions but, at the same time, not be appointed diplomats . These groups must include people who can deliver solutions to the problem .
 Diplomats have stated that moving negotiations from government buildings, NGO offices, or embassies might help them run smoother and provide a better outcome than expected . Negotiations in areas of conflict may run smoother than expected.
 It is widely believed that discussing the issue where everything is happening might be proven worthy of the solution of the issue discussed every time . It is believed that the solution to the issue is the solution .
 Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 30 Nov. 2019, www.en.org/wiki/United_Nations_Preventive_Deployment_Force .