 Gannett’s USA Today began publishing its daily newspapers in Washington, D.C., and I have always been proud of the publication and have praised it .
 I believed it was one of the finest newspapers in the United States, if not the world; and I have been pleased with its success. I have never been happier than ever .
 I have encouraged friends, business associates, and acquaintances to read it because of what I believed was objective reporting, or certainly very close to it . I've encouraged friends and business associates to read the book because of its objective reporting .
 I was rudely awakened by its recent series of articles about John F Kennedy and his family, which were a travesty and a lie . However, I was . rudely . awakened by the articles . which were about John . F Kennedy's family, the Kennedy family, were
 Sadly, USA Today has become a participant in the deliberate distortion of history . Sadly, the country has become an unwitting victim of the distortion of memory .
 There was not merely one isolated article about the Kennedys, but it was an unprecedented series . The series made matters far worse and even more irresponsible, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "Wholesale distortions of history by a mainstream publication such as this one warrant and, in fact, demand nothing less," says the author .
 When he died, his ‘image’ was frozen in time, but the truth is grotesque, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: When he dies, his "image" was frozen .
 USA Today has reached new lows by publishing this series about Kennedy . This is the moral equivalent of running a praiseworthy series of articles about Hitler or Joseph Stalin .
 USA Today failed to mention that John F Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history . Kennedy came tragically close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world .
 USA Today’s entire series would fall like a “house of cards” if the truth about Kennedy and his family had been told, instead of repeating the factual distortions that have been spun since he was assassinated in Dallas in Dallas .
 First published in 1997, Hersh’s book is a companion to Reeves’ equally fine book, which was published in the same year . Hersh and Reeves' equally fine books were published in same year, 1997 . Reeves and Hersh's book was first published .
 To have two truly outstanding books introduced at the same time, on the same subject, is interesting unto itself . To have a truly outstanding book introduced at such a time is interesting to itself .
 Kennedy family is surely the most dysfunctional family ever to achieve significant political power in American history . The Kennedy family and its sycophants have attempted to perpetrate that myth since the day Kennedy was shot .
 After reading both books, one wonders whether there was anything decent or moral about the family, certainly the male Kennedys . Indeed, after reading both, one . wondered whether there were any decency or moral in the family .
 Unlike Reeves, Hersh does not mention Ted Kennedy’s culpability in the tragic death of Mary Jo Kopechne in 1969, and the ensuing Kennedy cover-up . Ted Kennedy's culpability is not mentioned in the interview .
 Hersh makes scant mention of Marilyn Monroe, with whom both JFK and Bobby Kennedy had affairs . Hersh also discusses the possibility that Marilyn Monroe was murdered .
 JFK’s long-time relationship with Judith Campbell Exner, as well as his affair with an East German “prostitute” by the name of Ellen Rometsch . JFK also had an affair with a German prostitute by the time of his first marriage .
 Kennedy’s reckless affairs with women were only outdone by his dangerous relationships with mobsters such as Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana . Kennedy was married to a woman who had affairs with other women .
 Both Kennedy and Giancana had sexual liaisons with Exner, who was used as their go-between . Exner was the go-by-between between the two characters in the book .
 Giancana claimed credit for Kennedy's success in Illinois and West Virginia . He says it's doubtful whether Kennedy would have become the president-elect in 1960 if the Mob helped him in 1960 .
 Kennedy was the son of a bootlegger, and the apple did not fall far from the tree, with respect to all three Kennedy brothers who entered national politics .
 The thread that runs through the writing of Reeves and Hersh, and through JFK’s life, is utter recklessness . It not only endangered his life, but the lives of those with whom he came into contact, and every American. Every American.
 Those who believed in JFK, as yours truly did, were deceived and disillusioned with respect to almost every issue . Those Americans who believe in JFK were deceived by almost every aspect .
 "The public perception bears almost no relationship to the actual facts," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The public perception of the Iraq War is "almost no relationship" with the facts .
 Thirty-four years after JFK's death, the American people finally learned the truth about JFK from these two books and other sources .
 Kennedy operatives may have destroyed large amounts of historically-important documents, Hersh says . Even then, as Hersh describes in considerable detail, Kennedy operatives could have destroyed huge amounts of documents .
 Vast numbers of documents are still held by the Kennedy Library with respect to both JFK and Bobby, which have never been made available to the public . Vast number of documents still held at the library, including those of Bobby Kennedy .
 Medical records about JFK’s health have only been reviewed by a handful of Kennedy “sycophant-like” writers . Not the least of these are medical records that have been reviewed .
 Almost 50 years after Kennedy’s death, the full extent of his life-long medical problems is still being withheld from the American people and conservative scholars . Reeves recounts many of those problems, including Kennedy's medical problems .
 The failed “Bay of Pigs” invasion of Cuba led to almost 50 years of enslavement for the Cuban people . Attempts by the Kennedy brothers to have Castro assassinated led to repeated attempts by the two brothers .
 The Kennedy brothers trashed what was sacred in their Catholic religion, such as the sanctity of marriages . Indeed, the three Kennedy brothers, Jack, Bobby and Ted, trashed everything sacred in the Catholic religion .
 Jackie Kennedy’s travels were carefully monitored so that she would not return to find the president and women “frolicking” in the White House swimming pool or in the family quarters .
 What went on in hotels and private homes, wherever JFK traveled, is described as well as what went on .
 The book also discusses JFK’s venereal disease; and the risks that he and Powers took by cavorting with women who had . been waived through routine Secret Service checks without prior clearances .
 There is no question that Kennedy launched this nation into Vietnam; and his secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, was the architect of that lost war .
 Almost 60,000 brave Americans died, some of whom were my friends . The nation's honor was impaled on the horns of a tragedy that still haunts policy makers and citizens alike .
 President Bush chose to go to war, and to spend the blood of young Americans . Instead of war, he chose to spend his blood on young Americans' lives, he says .
 Hersh describes the constant pressure on CIA operatives to have foreign leaders such as Castro killed . Hersh: CIA operatives were brought by JFK and Bobby to have such leaders killed . He says the CIA was brought into the CIA by JFK .
 Mob operatives were used with Bobby’s knowledge and involvement, even though as the U.S. Attorney General he was ostensibly prosecuting the Mob . Bobby was the Attorney General of the United States when he was in charge .
 Joseph P Kennedy’s ties to the Mob are detailed, as well as his ruthlessness and penchant for women . The Kennedy family patriarch is known for his connections to organized crime .
 JFK’s first marriage to Durie Malcolm is also described, and his father's efforts to expunge the record . JFK's first marriage is described in the book . The book also details JFK's father and his attempts to get his name cleared .
 Hersh discusses how Bobby and Jackie believed JFK was struck down by a ‘domestic conspiracy,” probably involving Mob boss Giancana or others . Hersh: JFK was killed by a domestic conspiracy, probably involving a Mob boss .
 JFK hurt his back cavorting in a West Coast swimming pool . A footnote in history, perhaps, but a very important one is that JFK hurt himself in a pool .
 JFK’s sexual escapades may have contributed to his tragic death . JFK may have had a sexual relationship with many of his lovers .
 Today, Kennedy is not someone to look up to, much less deify, as many thought when he was president . Today, he is not a figure to be looked up to as many people as he was .
 Many Americans have a sense of sadness rather than anger about the Obama administration . That conclusion was reached reluctantly by lots of Americans, years ago .
 The myth about Kennedy and his feet of clay have become clear for all to see with the passage of time . Like the potentate in Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale, “The Emperor's New Clothes,” the myth has become clear in the past .
 Kennedy was a tragic Shakespearean figure who may be forgotten and consigned to the dustheap of history . Both Reeves and Hersh described Kennedy's character brilliantly in their terrific books . Kennedy may never be forgotten .
 USA Today’s series of articles extolling the virtues of Kennedy and his family are shameful, and constitute the gross distortion of history .
 America’s discredited Left is trying to glorify its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be . Indeed, they seem to represent yet another attempt by America's discredited Left . The Left seems to be trying to glamorize its politicians .
 Few young Americans even know who John F Kennedy was—or care about him—because less than a handful of his positive accomplishments had any lasting significance . Few young people even care about his legacy .
 President Kennedy's life and presidency may be all that Americans remember about him 50 years from now . Like former President William McKinley before him, an assassin cut short Kennedy’s life .
 He served as a Captain in the U.S. Army, assigned to the Defense Intelligence Agency at the Pentagon . He received the Joint Service Commendation Medal .
 Mr Naegele is an Independent politically; and he is listed in Who’s Who in America, Who's Who in American Law and Business . He is listed as an Independent .
 I was in the Los Angeles Coliseum and watched while he delivered his acceptance speech at the close of the Democrats’ convention in 1960 . I was not old enough to vote for him, but I was watching in the LA Coliseum .
 Despite growing up in a “devoutly” Republican family, I registered to vote as a Democrat when I was able to do so, largely because of him . Also, despite growing up Republican, she registered to Democrat when she first learned she was a Democrat .
 After law school, he spent two years at the Pentagon and had an excellent offer to return to a law firm in San Francisco . He had worked briefly before entering the Army .
 Kennedy had changed the course of my life, which is why the truth about his life needs to be exposed, not covered up or papered over as USA Today has done so irresponsibly . The truth about Kennedy's life—and the fraud that was “Camelot
 This person covered the Vietnam war and other wars up to and including the present day . This person has lived in Vietnam and has covered Vietnam War .
 "I admire and respect the person’s experience, opinions and judgment greatly," says the author of the book . "I respect the experience and judgment of the person," she says .
 Congress cut off all further military aid to Saigon in Vietnam . Then Congress cut back on aid to Vietnam .
 ARVN saw no point in continuing to fight, stabbed in the back by the U.S. Congress . The United States Congress has passed a bill to fund the fight against the government .
 Giap, in his memoirs, says Hanoi was taken by surprise by what Congress did . He says they thought that taking Saigon would not be within their reach for two more years . Giap says he was surprised by Congress' decision to act .
 I have no reason to believe that this person’s assessment is inaccurate in any respect. I’m not sure why I think this is inaccurate . I'm happy to clarify that this is not the case.
 I will not disclose the person’s identity while he or she is alive, certainly without permission to do so . The identity of the person will not be released while he is alive .
 Timothy Lister says Kennedy was made 'King' when he was president . Lister: "They certainly made Kennedy ‘King’ when they made him president, and they kept the aura after he died"
 Too bad it took this long for the crown to be taken off, but it’s better late than never . The crown has been removed from the ring .
 "I had always been told by the Cubans in Miami that he was a traitor, liar, gangster, and pretty much despicable," she says . "I was always told by [Cubans] that he [Cuban] was a ... traitor, a liar, a gang
 I am no fan of Obama, and I have mentioned before that his announced withdrawal would be a betrayal to the Iraqi and Afghan people who support Democracy, and are willing to die for it, much like our soldiers . I'm not a fan of the Obama administration, but I'm concerned
 Unlike John F Kennedy and Johnson before him, Obama never served in the military . Only actually actually served in Senate for a brief period of time because he was campaigning nonstop for presidency .
 President Obama has ignored the advice of America’s military leaders and fashioned his own Afghan strategy, which is doomed to failure . He is a former ‘community organizer’ who has ignored military leaders’ advice, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He will blame the military and everyone else, or so I believe, even though he will be responsible for the deaths and injuries of countless brave Americans .
 Reagan was guilty of treason by allowing the sale of arms to Iran, at the time, an enemy of the state . Reagan was convicted of treason for allowing arms sales to Iran . However, Reagan was also guilty of selling arms to an enemy, Iran .
 If you can't tell the whole story, you shouldn't say anything at all . Bottom line, if you can’t tell the truth, you should never say anything, says CNN.com .
 The net effect is that JFK was a total fraud and despicable . JFK was the president of the United States from 1963 to 1968 .
 If you bothered to read the article above and the comments beneath it, you would realize the full extent of JFK’s recklessness . Also, if you bothered, read the comments below the article .
 The problem is that most Americans never read the book, nor do they have any conception of what truly motivates him . Most Americans don't know what motivates them, and don't have any idea of what it is .
 The American people want out of the region and rightly so . After three wars there, and the loss of thousands of American lives with others maimed, and trillions of dollars wasted, the U.S. wants out of it .
 I have written about the contrast between Reagan and JFK, so will not repeat it here . Also, I've written about how JFK and Reagan's contrast with Reagan was stark .
 If you read the article and all of the comments beneath it, a “picture” emerges that is not pleasant in the least . It is not the first time I have seen a person in a long-term relationship with a man in a relationship with the president .
 You speak of a deliberate distortion of history concerning JFK . It's a common but effective way to prepare your audience to accept your own distortion .
 While no Josef Goebbels, you have learned the technique of the big lie . You have learned how to tell the public that you are not a Nazi .
 "I would address your rant item by item, but that would be tedious, and you have supplied a surplus of tedium already," says the author . I would address the rant by item but that's tedious, he says .
 I have rarely read such an unbalanced, dis-informative, crudely crafted article. Suffice to say, I have often read such a balanced and dis-balanced article. I have very little respect for the president of the United States.
 "You vilify a man many times your stature, your intelligence, and your courage," he said . You vilify him, he said. You vilified him many times .
 You did not rebut one point contained in the article, because it is impossible to do so . Needless to say, you have engaged in name calling, but you did not ... rebut any point contained .
 Kennedy is the most despicable president in American history, and is without any peers . Kennedy is without peers, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I recently read Hersh’s book and you accurately represent its contents and its import, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "You accurately represent Hersh's book and the import of it"
 Frank Snepp’s Decent Interval also makes clear that we achieved a military victory only to have it stolen by the Democrats, Snepp says .
 Giap apparently persuaded the politburo to allow him to attempt a cross-border operation, from which he assured them he would withdraw if Nixon reacted . Giap also said he would pull out of the operation if Nixon reacts .
 Tom Kennedy: "I have read countless books on the Kennedy’s and the Kennedy Presidency throughout my lifetime. Tom, I’m not sure what I think of the Kennedy presidency . Tom, Tom, says he has read countless . books about the Kennedy . presidency .
 Some of the authors no doubt admired Kennedy by way of a close personal relationship . Others did not admire Kennedy .
 Everything that Mr Naegele has written is true and well documented in other sources . Nonetheless, from my readings and knowledge, everything is true, he says .
 The Kennedy Presidency is one of the best summaries of the Kennedy Presidency that I have read. In fact, it’s a great summary of Kennedy's presidency .
 If you read my article above and all of the comments beneath it, you may realize that JFK was a total fraud . JFK was the president of the United States from 1963 to 1968 .
 JFK's election in 1960 was rigged by the Kennedys, the Democrats and Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana in Chicago and West Virginia . President Kennedy's election as our President was rigged, he says .
 One day I want you to tell me about all those Washington, DC anecdotes you have about Lyndon Johnson, says President Obama . "One day, I want to tell you about your Washington, D.C. anecdotes," says President Johnson .
 JFK was a notorious womanizer . He had few if any scrupples; and like JFK, he was a womanizer. Like JFK, there were no scruzzles; .
 "Lady Bird Johnson was very nice, and she raised their daughters to be that way," she says . "My sense is that Lady Bird Johnson . My sense of her kindness is that she raised her daughters very nice," she adds .
 Lynda Bird Johnson was a well-known friend of the late singer . She was a friend of Lynda's husband, who died in 1995 .
 There were heightened threats against LBJ’s life because the Vietnam War; and the Secret Service protection around the five of us was significant . LBJ's life was at risk because of the Vietnam war; and there was heightened threats .
 Lynda Robb was the only other male in the group, who was a friend of mine and of Lynda’s and her husband Chuck Robb, who wasn’t there that day . I was an Army officer .
 JFK, LBJ, Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama and Joe Biden were and are corrupt . Joe Biden was and is corrupt, says JFK .
 Left attempt to exalt the virtues of its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be, may be . Indeed, they appear to represent yet another attempt by America’s discredited Left .
 Truman sent Military Assistance Advisory Group to assist the French . Truman sent the Military Assistance Group to help French troops .
 In 1960 when Kennedy first took office, he did continue to continue the bi-partisan, anti-communist foreign policies inherited from the administrations of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower . In 1960, Kennedy continued to continue to the anti-Communist foreign policy .
 JFK said to Walter Cronkite that the war may be unwinnable, and that it was ultimately a Vietnamese war, not an American war . JFK said in 1962 that by 1962, JFK said that the Vietnam war may not be a war that could not be won .
 A program be established to train Vietnamese so that essential functions now performed by U.S. military personnel can be carried out by Vietnamese by the end of 1965 . The program was established in 1965 .
 On August 4, 1964, Johnson claimed that the USS Turner Joy had been fired upon by the North Vietnamese . Johnson claimed the incident occurred on August 4 .
 Congress passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution on August 7, 1964 . This prompted retaliatory air strikes, and prompted Congress to pass the resolution . The Gulf War was the first Gulf War to begin in 1964 .
 This resolution gave LBJ authority, without a formal declaration of war by Congress, for the use of military force in Southeast Asia . LBJ's authority gave him authority to use military force without a war declaration by Congress .
 An undated NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed that there was no attack on 4 August . The NSA release of 2005 said that there were no attacks on that day .
 LBJ used this non-incident to gain the power to escalate the war in Vietnam without a declaration of war . LBJ was able to use the power of the U.S. military to get the war to go ahead without declaring war .
 3,500 U.S. Marines were sent to South Vietnam on March 8, 1965 . Marines were deployed to Vietnam in 1965 .
 This was the beginning of the U.S. ground war which eventually caused the death of 60,000 troops . The American ground war was the start of the war which caused the deaths of more than 50,000 .
 This was with the overwhelming support of the American people, who at the time believed in stopping the ‘Domino Effect” of Communism in the area . The American people believed it would stop the "Domino effect" of Communism .
 Kennedy realized we had no business in Vietnam, and he developed an exit plan to be completed by 1965 . But Kennedy realized that he wanted to end the Vietnam war .
 I suspect the cause of your hatred is something you are unwilling to share . I suspect that you are not willing to share your hatred with us .
 I see you served as a Captain in the Army Defense Intelligence Agency at the Pentagon . You were a Captain with the Pentagon's Department of Defense .
 Regardless of why you hate JFK so intensely, you cannot, in good faith, blame him for the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was a national disgrace that was the national disgrace .
 You have only to look at his successor to find the one deserving that distinction . You have to look to find him deserving of the distinction .
 Hersh discusses Vietnam more than Reeves does; however, you might wish to compare your views of history with theirs . Hersh talks Vietnam more about Vietnam than Reeves, but Reeves does .
 It is pure conjecture as what Kennedy might or might not have done if he had been spared an assassin’s bullets . Kennedy might have done more if he'd been spared a bullet .
 Robert McNamara was the architect of that lost war and the enormous suffering that it produced . However, we must never forget that his secretary of defense was architect of the lost war .
 McNamara continued under Johnson, as you know; and together they took the war to new levels . McNamara and Johnson took on the war with the U.S.
 Like many other Americans, I felt betrayed by Kennedy, and still believe strongly that he was a fraud . Like many others, he felt betrayed and still believes strongly that Kennedy was a phony .
 Hitler and Stalin "despicable nature of them as human beings, and the suffering that they produced," he says . Hitler's comments about Stalin and Hitler go to the despicable nature of human beings .
 Kennedy came very close to bringing about a ‘nuclear winter’ because of his recklessness that put the lives of millions of Americans at risk . Kennedy's recklessness might have equaled or surpassed what Hitler and Stalin did, says historian .
 None of my work in intelligence has influenced my views, to the best of my knowledge . None of this has influenced any of our views, he says .
 I was a Kennedy believer who became sadly disillusioned; and this disillusionment has increased over time as more and more of the truth has come out about Kennedy . I was disappointed by the truth, and I was very disappointed with Kennedy .
 He was hated, among the reasons why he didn't run for reelection in 1968 . He did not run for re-election in 1972 .
 You criticized me for offering no rebuttal, yet you have not even challenged any of the above assertions, which if true, prove conclusively that your claim of Kennedy ‘s responsibility for the war is unfounded’
 Hersh’s discussions about Vietnam are discussed in the books mentioned above, and specifically Hersh's discussion about Vietnam . Again, I respectfully suggest that you read the two books .
 There is no point in incorporating those discussions in this blog thread, when its readers can refer to the original sources, as you can . Also, there is a point in this discussion, when readers can reference the original source, as well as the discussion .
 The two Kennedy brothers, Jack and Bobby; McNamara; Johnson; members of Congress; and others . The two brothers, McNamara and others. McNamara .
 There was plenty of culpability to go around—which resulted in the deaths of almost 60,000 Americans, some of whom were my friends . Some of the culpability was to blame for many of the deaths, including some of the victims .
 If JFK was not killed, the U.S. would not have entered Vietnam War, says McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara . McNamara said that if JFK was killed the USA would not enter Vietnam War .
 LBJ told the Joint Chiefs of Staff at their 1963 Christmas party that if you get me elected in 1964 I will you your war in Vietnam . LBJ, by contrast, said in 1964 he would be president if he was elected to Vietnam War .
 I suggest that you read Jim DiEugenio on JFK’s foreign policy which in reality was quite dovish in comparison to his previous Cold War rhetoric . In reality, JFK's foreign policy was actually a very moderate stance .
 LBJ was the hard core war hawk who saw the political damage that ‘losing China’ did to Harry Truman and he swore that would never happen to him . LBJ swore that he would never lose China . Harry Truman saw the damage that losing China did to him as
 55,000 American lives and countless suffering and economic losses have been lost, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "And the loss of 55,00 American lives"
 JFK’s death in Dallas was perhaps the best thing that could have happened to his legacy . JFK's death was perhaps a good thing for his legacy, says historian John Sutter .
 One night on the ferry to Martha’s Vineyard, some fellow tried to push him overboard, which almost succeeded . He almost succeeded, but he says it was a mistake . He says he was pushed overboard by a fellow who tried to throw him overboard .
 LBJ was evil too, but relatively speaking not as evil as JFK and McNamara . McNamara and LBJ were both evil, but not as bad as JFK .
 "I believe, however, that you are somewhat disingenuous in your posture as an unbiased presenter of fact and promoter of honest debate," she said . She said. "I think you are perhaps disingenuous"
 I am sure you are familiar with the concept that morality dictates theology. I'm sure you . I'm not sure if morality dictates the theology of Jesus Christ .
 You base your statements on two books, both of which support your belief that JFK was in fact a degenerate and a scoundrel . John Sutter: JFK made more people proud to be Americans than any other President in recent history .
 I would expect to see plenty of dissent in your blog, given the high esteem in which JFK is held by so many, but all I see are a few brief and ill-reasoned remarks .
 You like to do all the talking and don’t want to be interrupted by questions . Basically, you like to talk to people who ask you questions .
 "In doing so, you do not demonstrate the dignity that your resume suggests," says CNN.com.com . "You don't have the dignity you should have displayed," she says .
 "My reasoning was not based simply on two books, which happen to support my positions. My reasoning was based on the fact that two books ... support my position," he said .
 In fact, when I worked in the United States Senate, our offices were located next to those of Teddy, whom I believed was the best of the Kennedy brothers, notwithstanding his culpability in the tragic death of Mary Jo Kopechne .
 If you differ with them, I respectfully suggest that you take issue with him . If you disagree with him, please take issue of him .
 The author's fine book is extensively researched, and you're free to dispute his sources . Some of which you may agree with ultimately, some of that may not .
 The Kennedy "myth" has been spun for years, and it does Americans an immense disservice to have it continue . The Kennedy ‘myth’ has been spinning for years . It does Americans a disservice by allowing it to continue .
 Documents held by the Kennedy Library should have been released years ago . Among other things, there are documents held by Kennedy Library that should've been released .
 My guess is that John F Kennedy’s ‘legacy’ will only get worse as the years pass, until finally he is largely discredited at least by most scholars . The legacy of JFK will only continue to get worse, until he is discredited by most .
 "Historical truth is often difficult to determine, and sometimes impossible," says author . "I acknowledge that historical truth is sometimes difficult to define," he says .
 You and I will have to agree to disagree on this subject, at least for now, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Maybe I am overly passionate about certain subjects, JFK being one of them . JFK was one of the world's most famous men .
 "I am angry, not so much that JFK was assassinated, even in such a brazen manner," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he is angry at JFK's assassination, but that he is not angry at it .
 I am furious at the total lack of honest investigation into the public murder of an American President, and the farce of the Warren Commission’s findings, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "It leads me to the conclusion that elements of our own government were complicit in his death," he says . "It's a tragedy that we have not been able to prevent it," he adds .
 In Kennedy’s case, so many powerful and ruthless forces were aligned against him . In Kennedy's case, many powerful forces were aligning against him, including the CIA .
 He fired Allen Dulles and was dismantling the CIA, the Mob wanted him to oust Castro so they could get their casinos back . LBJ wanted the Presidency almost as much as he hated Kennedy . He was taking the power of fiat currency from the Federal Reserve .
 If you judge a man by who his enemies are, Kennedy looks like a great President. Kennedy's enemies are his enemies, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If you judge you by who your enemies are"
 JFK might not have died except for the stiff brace that he was wearing, which held him rigid and upright . What is perhaps most profound, as fate would have it, is that JFK might have died without the brace .
 I have been to Dallas and the site; and I was struck by how small it is, says author . "I have been in Dallas and been to ... the site," he says. "It's a small city, but it's a very small city," he adds .
 The series represents another attempt by America’s discredited Left to exalt the virtues of its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be . The series is a series of attempts by the discredited left to ex-exalt the virtue of politicians .
 Here is a list of Gannett businesses and their addresses, as well as a listing of the locations of daily newspapers and TV stations that should be boycotted . The list includes the locations and addresses of the businesses that should not be patronized .
 I found your site via your comments on the Air Craft Carrier providing assistance to the Carnival crippled ship .
 Reeves book was published in 1991 while Hersh book was in 97 as you state . Anyway, just a note here as I went to find the books you have referenced and found that in fact, the Reeves book .
 It doesn't change any conclusions one will draw from the books, but the timing of those conclusions now is suspect . The timing of the books' release is suspect, as is the timing for those conclusions .
 It is not clear whether there were any differences between the two editions . If so, exactly what they were .
 Gannett and USA Today continue to tout the series on the newspaper’s homepage . The series of articles about John F Kennedy distorts history beyond all recognition .
 The series represents a pathetic effort to increase readership, and yet another attempt by America’s discredited Left to glorify its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be . The series is an attempt by the discredited Left .
 Just because they were Presidents when the U.S.R. fell does that mean a thing, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: 'Just because they're Presidents when they're not, doesn't mean that they're presidents'
 The Cold War was won, first and foremost, by the inability of Communism to fundamentally last in an overly Capitalistic world . Communism was not a solution to the Cold War, but it was a failure to last long in overly Capitalist world .
 After that escalation of nuclear threat and backing-down of the two superpowers, it was pretty obvious neither country would “destroy’t the other . Neither country would "destroy” the other.
 By simple logic and knowledge of what is Communism, it was obvious we’d win the war back in the ’60s, not to say we knew it then of course. So by simple logic .
 Please don't take a historical article about one time period and shamelessly plug in completely unrelated nonsense to propagate Republican idols .
 "Even though you easily are a right-wing individual, it definitely portrays yourself as less informative and more close-minded and bigoted," she said .
 I do not know more about JFK than the deified president that I was taught briefly in school . But I did enjoy the rest of the article; I do know more .
 It definitely makes me want to learn more about him -objectively of course -and be able to thoroughly understand your article’s main points,’ says author .
 I do not have time to bring up the articles on this subject for you, but a Google or Wikipedia search might prove beneficial . I will not be able to explain what happened .
 The collapse took place on Bush's watch; and I was in Berlin shortly after it took place . This was Bush's time in Berlin .
 Russian troops were selling their uniforms, and stealing plumbing fixtures from their barracks, which could be sold too . Russian troops stole plumbing fixtures and uniforms from barracks .
 West Germans were going back to “tent cities” in the dead of winter, because there was not adequate housing for them . West Germans paid the Soviet Union “reparations” which may or may not have gone to housing for the refugees . The West Germans
 Communism as an economic and social system was decaying for years, as you point out . Second, communism as a social and economic system, was decaying in years, he says .
 The “Ten Year’s and other plans were fabricated to keep the leaders in power . The ‘Ten Years’ and other . plans were pure nonsense, and fabricated, to keep them in power.
 I am liberal on some issues, and conservative on others, but mostly moderate—or so, I believe . I'm a moderate person, but moderate on some of the issues I care about .
 The Travesties And Tragedies Of The Shameful Kennedys Continue Unabated . The lies and distortions of history continue as members of the Kennedy family work behind the scenes to kill a new eight-part TV miniseries on the History Channel .
 Maria Shriver and Caroline Kennedy are reported to have lobbied hard for the History Channel to pull the plug on the series .
 The move comes after a leaked script was described as ‘vindictive’ and ‘malicious’ by former Kennedy aide Theodore Sorensen . The move came after a leak of the script described as 'vindictive and malicious'
 The series will still be broadcast in Canada on March 6 . It will air in other foreign countries .
 You lost all hope for convincing me here with your first sentence about how usa today is anything but a heap of populist, cotton candy trash . With or without the kennedy article, with or without an article, we're not going to win .
 I respectfully suggest that you read the rest of the article, as well as my comments beneath it; and I believe you will find that I agree with you—to a large extent . I believe that I disagree with you, and I do with you .
 Sarah Palin has shrugged off suggestions that she should tone down her rhetoric by going ahead with her planned sell-out speech at a marquee gun rights event in Reno, Nevada later this month .
 Safari Club International calls itself ‘the leader in protecting the freedom to hunt and promoting wildlife conservation worldwide’ The Safari Club runs the annual conference .
 Fox News host Glenn Beck has already called on Mrs Palin to increase her security in light of the anger against her .
 In an article of mine entitled, “Washington Is Sick And The American People Know It,” I mentioned the vitriolic climate of hate and personal destruction in Washington today, which is far beyond anything that I dealt with when I worked in the United States Senate on Capitol Hill .
 There was a conscious effort to find “dirt” on the people and destroy their reputations to prevent the confirmation process from going forward. There was also an effort, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 It was unseemly when I first encountered it; and it's not the American way . It was not the way it was when I encountered it, and I thought it would be . The American way. Not the way. It's the way .
 The handwriting is on the wall, and the blood is in the water, that he is likely to be a one-term president, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "The handwriting is the wall"
 I believe Obama is leading America in the wrong direction, for all of the reasons that I have discussed in my articles . However, I do not wish him ill in terms of his physical safety or that of his family .
 John F Kennedy has been ‘deified’ since he was assassinated in Dallas just before Thanksgiving in 1963 . People often become martyrs when they are struck down, which is what happened to him .
 People worldwide remember the moments when John Lennon and Yitzhak Rabin were killed too . People around the world remember the moment they were killed . John Lennon was killed too. Yitzak Rabin was killed .
 USA Today has belatedly honored Ronald Reagan as his 100th birthday approaches on February 6, 2011 . After running an entire “special” series of articles for many months, distorting history with respect to John F Kennedy and his dysfunctional family .
 Reagan will be remembered as one of America’s greatest presidents and a man of character . Reagan's legacy will include his legacy as a president of the U.S.
 Kennedy was a tragic Shakespearean figure who may be forgotten and consigned to the dustheap of history . Kennedy may never be forgotten, but he may be remembered for his tragic legacy .
 Perhaps this contrast between Reagan and Kennedy is what separates the men and underscores their differences, and ultimately will define their respective places in history . Perhaps this question of character that Thomas C Reeves described in his terrific book about Kennedy .
 I have to say that I find your writings about Kennedy to be very interesting and no doubt quite factual . Anyhow, I have said that I have been very impressed with your writings on Kennedy .
 Though I’m younger than yourself , I like many others, continue to be fascinated with this period in American history . Though I'm younger than you , I . like many . others, I like . continue to . be fascinated by this period .
 If someone said that I had to decide, I would choose the ‘single-bullet’ theory, he said .
 As to whether Oswald acted alone, I have never reached a definitive conclusion about that either. I have also never found out if he acted alone . Oswald was not the only person to have acted alone in Oswald's life .
 There are still a variety of theories about what caused Alexander the Great's death . It would be easy to “shoot from the hip” and come down on the side of one theory or another, but again I believe we will never know for certain .
 You’re correct in pointing out that so many have now passed who could have shed light on this subject . Not to mention the many documents still being withheld, including autopsy reports, military briefs, etc. etc.
 This is based purely on the laws of motion and physics, as seen in the Zapruder footage . It is based on the physics and laws of film and film .
 We will likely never know the truth, even though future generations one day might . But as you say, we will probably never know what happened . Future generations might one day find out .
 What happened that day happened happened . Nothing we do today will ever change that. Nothing will ever be able to change that, and nothing will change that .
 You’ve also referenced the “decency” of Ronald Reagan . Reagan was then viewed as a hawk, but ultimately proved to be the greatest dove .
 Take care and please know that I’m now reading through your various articles with great interest. Take care of your comments .
 You are correct about the amount of documents that were destroyed already, and those that are still withheld by the Kennedy Library . The library should have its federal funding terminated, the author says .
 2,300 years have passed since Alexander’s death, and we still do not know the truth . Also, as I mentioned above, as well as the truth, we still have no idea what happened to Alexander .
 The passage of time may not clarify the facts surrounding Kennedy’s death at all .
 Thank you for the rest of your comments, with which I agree; and thanks again, thanks again for your very kind remarks . I agree, and thanks to your kind remarks. Thank you, I agree .
 Your argument about Kennedy being responsible for the Vietnam War is bogus, since Lyndon Johnson made up the nonsense about the Gulf of Tonkin . Kennedy was responsible for Vietnam War, but he was not .
 It is the same bogus made-up Weapons of Mass Destruction argument by the bush Administration . The Bush Administration is using this bogus argument .
 It will be a cold day in hell if you can ever convince me of the responsibility of Kennedy for the Vietnam War . Kennedy was president of the United States from 1968 to 1968 .
 This was a country just itching to get into another war–so we made up some bogus reasons just to run our war machine . Just like we did in Iraq, the U.S. made up bogus reasons to run its war machine, he says .
 "It will be difficult to pull the wool over my eyes. You can find plenty of people who might argue that Kennedy was responsible, but I was right there when it happened," he says .
 The books are well written and researched; and the authors’ credentials are impeccable . The authors are well-written and researched, and the books are meticulously researched .
 Kennedy "had a chance in 1961 to disengage from an American involvement in South Vietnam,” but didn’t, he says . Second, as he states, Kennedy had a chance to “disengage” from South Vietnam but didn't .
 Robert McNamara, was the architect of that lost war and the enormous suffering that it produced . McNamara was a war architect and architect of the lost war . The war was over and over, but McNamara is the architect .
 I blamed Johnson, as you do; and I ceased to be a Democrat because of him—and the war . I blamed him, as well, as I did. I stopped being a Democrat, because of the war and the war. I was a Democrat. I ceased being a
 If you are looking for original cause, then you have to go back to Eisenhower and Truman, both supporting the Vietnamese situation . If you want to know more about the Vietnam situation, go to Truman's War Zone .
 "I think you want to put the blame on Kennedy because of your moral judgment of him," she says . "You want to blame Kennedy for his moral judgment," she adds .
 President Barack Obama has been accused of infidelity by some of his former colleagues . The president has been married to more than a dozen women, including his wife . The White House says the president should not be judged for his infidelity .
 Like you, I lost friends in that war, I blame Johnson and McNamara more than I blame Kennedy . "I blame Johnson, McNamara, and I blame them more than Kennedy," he says .
 He had been a leader in the House, and a ‘disciple’ of Speaker Sam Rayburn; and he was its leader in Senate . He was also a "disciple" of Rayburn .
 He was every bit as much of a hard-line, thoroughly-partisan Democrat as Nancy Pelosi is today . Pelosi is now a thoroughly-partisan Democrat, as is Pelosi .
 Next, the article and my comments beneath it summarize my views about Kennedy . Next, I write about Kennedy's treatment of the media .
 He was a fraud and, yes, despicable; and my views do not turn on his infidelities . He was ... despicable, but my views don't turn on him infidelity, I said .
 Kennedy would have NEVER left Vietnam because there were over a million fellow Catholics there . Kennedy would never have left because of the number of Catholics in the country .
 Christina Onassis believed John F Kennedy’s widow Jacqueline brought to the Onassis family when her father Aristotle married the widow . Her father Aristotle Onassis married Jacqueline in 1961 .
 Aristotle's son, Alexander, was killed in a plane crash in 1973 when he was just 24 . Aristotle’s son, Aristotle, was also killed in the plane crash .
 When Alexander died she reportedly convinced Onassis that Jacquie had brought the curse of the Kennedys to their family . Jacquie Kennedy reportedly witnessed John and Robert Kennedy’s assassinations .
 Aristotle died two years after his son's death, Aristotle passed away . Soon after the couple broke up and, two years later, Aristotle died .
 The suspicious death of one of President John F Kennedy’s mistresses just months after his death has sparked numerous conspiracy theories . President Kennedy's mistresses was one of his mistresses .
 A new book alleges that, in her preoccupation with her lover’s assassination and ensuing personal investigation, she may have gotten so close to the ‘truth’ that the CIA found her to be a threat .
 In an interview shortly before his death in 2001, he said that ‘the same sons of b****es that killed John F Kennedy’ killed his ex-wife . He said that the sons of 'b****es' that killed JFK killed his wife .
 Fifty years ago, John F Kennedy celebrated his final Christmas with a mistress in the wings . Instead of joining Jackie and the children at their rented Virginia house, he went to a spectacular weekend orgy organised by his brother-in-law, the Rat Pack actor Peter Lawford .
 Former White House intern Mimi Beardsley, now a 20-year-old college sophomore, flew out to Palm Springs on one of the air force’s ‘back up’ planes .
 She would reveal details of her relationship with Kennedy in a sensational memoir, which was published last year .
 Kennedy then flew to Nassau in the Bahamas to meet Harold Macmillan, the British prime minister . Mimi Beardsley was again in discreet and carefully concealed attendance .
 The luxurious Lyford Cay Club was the location for a vital discussion on nuclear defence . Americans offered the Polaris missile to the Royal Navy for use on specially constructed submarines .
 From Nassau, Kennedy left to join Jackie and his family for a two-week break over Christmas in Palm Beach .
 John F Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history . He came tragically close to bringing about a ‘nuclear winter’ that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world .
 I have read the "Dark Side of Camelot" and I consider it an excellent book . I have also read the “Dark Side Of Camelot’s”
 In sum, Lyndon Johnson and his Texas oil executive inner circle used their CIA/military connections to murder John Kennedy for many reasons both personal & ideological .
 Cuba policy was a major factor in the JFK assassination, much more so than Vietnam . JFK's assassination was the result of Cuba policy, more than Vietnam's .
 JFK, LBJ & Bill Clinton have sex lives of JFK, JFK and LBJ . Bill Clinton had sex with LBJ, Bill Clinton .
 Lyndon Johnson was a depraved man and a murderous psychopath with the exact same mentality and “behavior” as Adoph Hitler and Joseph Stalin . Johnson’s mentality and behavior was similar to that of Hitler and Stalin .
 Eventually I will give you all my files on the JFK assassination and Lyndon Johnson, but I don’t want to overload you right now . I don't want to overload you with all the JFK files, I said .
 LBJ engineered the Israeli attack on the USS LIberty on June 8, 1967 . LBJ also engineered the . Israeli attack . But that is a story .
 JFK endorsed the release of hardened criminals to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro to curb the Communist threat, a new book claims . JFK was a smooth criminal, according to the UK Daily Mail .
 JFK was implicit in the freeing of rapists, drug dealers, and Mafia hitmen through CIA in a bid to recruit ‘untraceable’ spies willing to risk their lives on dangerous missions rather than go back to jail, new book sensationally claims .
 Desperate to remove Castro from power, the president resorted to using dangerous criminals as operatives, it is claimed . It is claimed as they couldn’t be linked back to his administration .
 In one failed plot, an ex con was smuggled into Cuba in 1962 to pose as a waiter in Castro’s favourite restaurant where he would drop poison tablets into the revolutionary leader’�s soup . An ex-con was smuggled in Cuba in one failed attempt to assassinate Castro
 William Deane claims specially-recruited criminals became ‘untouchable’ and were allowed to embark on ‘crime sprees’ in the United States without fear of prosecution . The explosive claims come in a new book by veteran American Journalist and author .
 They also couldn't be officially connected with the CIA so it didn’t matter if they were captured . There was no risk of America’s shady policies being exposed . They also wouldn’ve been officially connected to the CIA .
 The CIA sent him on many missions abroad, including to Cuba to assassinate Castro,’ added Deane .
 RFK, Jr., like his Grandfather Joseph P., His Father Bobby, And His Uncles Jack And Teddy . RFK Jr. was RFK's Grandfather, His Grandfather and Uncles Bobby and Bobby .
 A 2001 diary belonging to Robert F Kennedy Jr. has been unearthed that gives a stunning insight into the number of affairs he carried out during the same year that his wife Mary gave birth to their fourth child .
 Kennedy used a section at the back of his diary, headed ‘cash accounts,’ to list the first names of women he had cavorted with and gave each a mark out of ten . Kennedy gave each of the women a mark of ten out of 10 .
 The list contains the names of 37 women, 16 of whom have the number ten beside them . It is believed to have signified that they had full intercourse . 16 of the 37 women have a number 10 beside them, believed to be the number 10 .
 There are startling admissions of Kennedy's own feelings of guilt and remorse at repeatedly cheating on his wife . Alongside more prosaic details of Kennedy’s political activism and family life .
 Time and again he writes of how he feels tortured by his ‘lust demons’ as he describes them . He writes of his 'lust demons' as they describe them .
 On days when he doesn’t cheat, Kennedy writes ‘victory’ to signify that he resisted sexual temptation . Kennedy writes 'victory' on days that he doesn't cheat .
 The thick, red journal was found by his wife, Mary Richardson Kennedy, who hanged herself in May 2012 . She was distraught over their impending divorce and her husband’s serial philandering .
 Kennedy denied having kept a diary during that year . Kennedy was first met with stunned silence when asked about the diary . Kennedy denied keeping a diary .
 The 59-year-old son of the assassinated U.S. senator announces that his wife is pregnant with their fourth child . At the start of the journal, he announces his wife was pregnant .
 He often writes as if he is the victim of the incidents and uses the word ‘mugged’ as shorthand for being seduced . He often uses the term 'mugging' to refer to being mugged .
 ‘It was tempting but I prayed and God gave me the strength to say no,’ he writes on February 6 .
 On May 21, he wrote that after hosting dinner for Leonardo DiCaprio, he drove the actor into Manhattan and met up with someone . He also wrote that he drove him to New York to meet someone .
 He recorded a 10 with the name of a woman next to it . He noted that he ‘got mugged on my way home,’ recording a 10 . He also recorded that he got mugged .
 'You have not the strength to resist their charms' and to ‘be humble like a monk.’ 'Be humble like monk. You have not . the strength . to resist . their charms’ and to be humble like monks, he said .
 November 2001 was an especially busy month for infidelities . He lists at least one woman’s name on 22 different dates, including on 13 consecutive days .
 Christopher Reeve attended a black-tie fund-raiser at the Waldorf-Astoria for Reeve’s charity .
 Bobby Kennedy’s Love Affair with Jackie Kennedy, post JFK assassination, is one big reason RFK kept quiet about his beliefs on who murdered JFK . Another big reason would be the death threats he kept getting after he would press the FBI and CIA for information .
 Over lunch that afternoon, Smathers asked Bobby why he’d aborted his personal investigation into his brother’s assassination . Bobby's brother was killed by the assassination of his brother, Bobby's sister .
 My using the CIA in conjunction with the Mafia to go after Castro may have led to Jack’s death . Jack's death may have been the result of the CIA's use of the Mafia as a source .
 Smathers firmly believed that it was the CIA – and not the FBI – that had worked with the syndicate to assassinate Kennedy . Despite the FBI director’s disdain for the Kennedys,
 Meyer Lansky and Santos Trafficante controlled Cuba’s hotels, casinos, and nightclubs, creating an exhuberant after-hours atmosphere . While there, they were introduced to crime figures Meyer Lansky .
 It wouldn't have surprised me to learn that we’d been filmed through a one-way guest-room mirror . It wouldn’t have surprised us that we had been filmed in a one way mirror .
 "The opportunity for blackmail, particularly after Jack became president, pointed to the foolishness of our little adventure," the author says .
 His name cropped up in 1963 in connection with the so-called Profumo debacle, in which an international vice ring nearly brought down the government .
 Mary Pinchot Meyer, his last mistress, was murdered in 1964 while walking along the towpath in Georgetown . She was the last mistress to be murdered .
 RFK, long his brother’s bagman, almost certainly knew of the meeting in pre-Castro Cuba between Jack and Trafficante, as well as all the rest of JFK's sordid dealings . JFK's brother was JFK's bagman .
 Bobby's decision to discontinue his investigation into his brother’s assassination probably had less to do with his and Jackie Kennedy's madcap affair following Jack's death . Smathers says Bobby and Jackie had an affair following the death of Jack Kennedy .
 Exposure in the media would have ruined any chance Bobby might have had of following in Jack’s presidential footsteps . Exposure would have been too bad for Bobby to be president .
 Former Federal Bureau of Narcotics agent Howard Diller on Robert Kennedy: His FBN participation, his drug use, his taking advantage of women busted for drugs for sex, his use of hookers . Knocking down doors would become the least madcap of Bobby’s antics .
 Agents who hung out with Bobby would come back with reports of him seizing bags of coke for his own use or distribution among his buddies . Most of the people we busted were drug abusers, in places like Harlem and South Bronx .
 During raids, the men would be taken to one room of the apartment, the women to another . During the raids, women would be moved from one room to another room . The men would have to be moved to another, while the women were in one room .
 It wasn’t uncommon for an agent to indulge in sex with one of the women, sometimes more than one . It wasn't uncommon for agents to have sex with agents .
 In exchange for their sexual favors, the women were often let go and not carted off to jail . The women were given sexual favors in exchange for sexual favors .
 I think he enjoyed the anonymous sex, because that way he really wasn’t cheating on Ethel – or at least that’s how he could it . I think it was how he enjoyed it, because it was anonymous sex . He enjoyed it because he wasn't cheating
 Bobby thought nothing of fondling these women or having intercourse with them . Bobby thought . He was fondling them fondly and having intercourse .
 Nobody has ever mentioned or even written about RFK’s close ties to the Bureau of Narcotics . RFK was a member of the National Crime Council in the 1960s .
 The former FBI director was named attorney general of the U.S. Soon after his secret activities with the bureau was revealed, he was named the top law enforcement officer in the country .
 A man who raped and pillaged and stole, a man who presumably took drugs, is a rapist . Yet here’s a . man who rape and pillag and pillage, he also took drugs . Yet, he is not a rapist and pillager, but a man
 "He struck me as basically schizophrenic, a man capable of great good and, at the same time, incredible evil," he says . He says. "He was able to do great things and evil things, but also great evil"
 He screwed the women for nothing by threatening to run them in if they didn’t come across, and that’s something he did until the day he died, he said .
 He’d also pick up bums on the street and buy meals for them at La Caravelle . His father co-owned the restaurant where he'd pick up meals .
 Langdon Marvin, who had been an aide to JFK, recalled doing the same for Bobby Bobby . Marvin had procured numerous women for his boss . Marvin was JFK's former aide .
 I provided a gaggle of women – airline hostesses, starlets, secretaries, and others . I provided photos of the women at the center of the story .
 RFK had a penchant for nymphettes – underdeveloped women with unformed personalities . RFK was known for his penchant for developing women with underdeveloped personalities .
 "Once, when Bobby stayed at the Carlyle, he sent him three fifteen-year-old private high school girls," he says . "Once he stayed there, Bobby sent three 15-year old private girls," the author says .
 One by one, he dated almost all of the ‘boiler-room’ girls, the entourage of young women who worked for him on the campaign trail . The 'boiler room' girls he dated .
 "Yes, I have heard all of the information before; and it's consistent with what I know," says President Obama . "It's not the first time I've heard this information," says Obama .
 As indicated in my comments about RFK, Jr., immediately above yours, the recklessness continues. As indicated, I said, "as indicated ... that RFK Jr. Jr. is not a man who should have been a hero, but a hero."
 Among other things, perhaps they have death wishes—for themselves and others . Among those wishes: Death wishes for themselves, others .
 Lyndon Johnson was more of a demented freak than all the Kennedys put together . And by the way, he was more demented than all of them put together, he says .
 He and his Vietnam War are the reasons why I ceased to be a Democrat, and have almost never voted for a Democrat since . The Vietnam War is the reason why I stopped being a Democrat and never voted again for a Democratic .
 In an article entitled, “All the president’s women: Virgin interns. Virgin interns” John F Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1961 . Kennedy died in 1968 .
 Jackie Kennedy's grace and dignity defined her in the days following John Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, Texas . Jackie's grace was defined by millions around the world .
 At JFK’s funeral, she held the hands of their two small children . She became an icon, burdened until the day she died with the dreams of millions of strangers .
 British author Sarah Bradford updated her acclaimed biography of Jacqueline Kennedy . It sheds new light on her complex relationship with JFK and her sometimes waspish views of world figures .
 The fashion journal Women’s Wear Daily could have been re-christened What Jackie Wears Daily .
 The balance of power had been tilted subtly towards Jackie, both in the eyes of her husband and the Kennedy entourage . Indeed, the balance of the power had shifted subtly towards her husband .
 If Jack was the Sun King, Jackie was by now most definitely America’s Queen . Jackie was the Queen of America .
 Jack was becoming like Jackie’s idealised father ‘Black’ Jack Bouvier—the dashing womaniser who still came home to envelop his family with love . Jack was like Jackie's idealised dad 'Black' Jack .
 The birth of JFK’s children had awakened a strong paternal streak in him . But he would not, and could not, give up his sexual habits; nor did he feel the least bit guilty about them .
 Jack had anticipated that the Presidency would limit his sexual adventures but, instead, high office meant that he could have virtually any woman he wanted . Jackie’s frequent absences gave him plenty of opportunity .
 Secret Service logs show that Jackie spent a great deal more time away from the White House than at the Whitehouse . Secret Service log shows that she spent more time in Washington than in Washington, DC .
 She spent almost all the steamy summer months out of Washington . She regularly left on Friday afternoon for their rented Virginia horse farm Glen Ora .
 Jackie was a rebel and a free spirit at heart, and the White House seemed claustrophobic . The White House was a free-spirited housewife .
 She could close her eyes to what Jack was up to when she was not with him . Furthermore, she could close eyes to him when she wasn't with her husband .
 "There were about four or five other friends, single girls we knew also," she said . "We had a lot of fun time together"
 One by one, each of us was told, “The President would like to speak to you” and we were led over for about ten minutes . The President would be speaking to us for ten minutes, one by one .
 The next time I saw Jackie was when they asked me to a party at the White House. The next thing I saw her was when she was asked to be at a White House party .
 The day after he was killed and everybody was watching the funeral I had four what you’d call ”widows” in my tiny sitting room—all married—because they couldn’t cry their eyes out in front of their husbands, all of whom thought they
 Every time Jackie walked into a room she must have known that half the women there had slept with him, she knew .
 She was snuck into the White House in the boot of a car, and she was taken down to the swimming pool and he would join her for a swim . She was taken to the pool and would join him for a swimming session .
 People thought that Jackie did not mind Jack’s infidelities because she showed no signs of doing so . People thought she did not show any signs of having an affair .
 The President’s notorious swimming-pool frolics with the two secretaries known as ‘Fiddle’ and 'Faddle’ did not worry her, but his sleeping with her friends and women in her circle, did . Indeed, the President's . notorious swimming
 "I think this woman was put through a very great deal. I mean, it was something that wasn’t talked about," she said . "This woman was putting through a great deal"
 In his way he did, but his love had certain reservations and hers was total . "In his way, but in his way I did," he did .
 If he didn't have sex at least once a day, he had a headache, Harold Macmillan said . He shocked the eminently respectable, self-controlled British Prime Minister by confessing to him that he had headaches .
 According to the Secret Service logs, appointments with women were made through Jack’s old friend and closest personal aide, Dave Powers, whose name appeared in the official record .
 She wrote to the White House requesting an interview with Jackie for her college newspaper . She was a tall, slender and beautiful 19-year-old at Jackie's old school, Miss Porter's, Farmington, when she wrote .
 A year later, Mimi was invited to join the White House staff as an intern . Mimi is now an intern for the President of the United States .
 Like other people who knew JFK, Mimi talked of his ‘genius at compartmentalising’ his life, placing Jackie on a pedestal to keep her apart from all the other women in his life .
 Jackie, however, kept hoping he would calm down, as she confessed to her friend Adlai Stevenson . Jackie kept hoping him would calm up .
 The death of his youngest son, Patrick, in August 1963 was an unbearable blow for Jack . Jack's youngest son died at the age of 18 months .
 He invited me upstairs and we sat outside the balcony in the soft summer evening air . He invited her upstairs and she sat outside on the balcony with him .
 Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history . He came tragically close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world .
 The thread that runs through Kennedy’s life is utter recklessness . Kennedy's recklessness endangered his life, and the lives of those with whom he came into contact, including every American .
 Kennedy’s entourage suggested to the young widow that she should change her blood-stained clothes before the flight back to Washington with the Johnson party already installed on Air Force One . Jacqueline Kennedy fiercely resisted changing her clothes .
 It is very refreshing to read one’s own thoughts about the Kennedys echoed in such a convincing and well informed way . The author's own thoughts are echoed in a convincing way .
 Khrushchev did the sensible thing and withdrew his missiles from Cuba . The actions of the U.S. Navy was tantamount to piracy prior to this event, he says .
 The morals of the Kennedy clan were a disgrace to the U.S. in particular and civilisation in general . Kennedy's morals were an embarrassment to the United States in particular, says author .
 No stable system is ever built upon the serial sexual abuse of women, willing though those women may be . No stable . system is never built on the serial . abuse of . women .
 To take advantage of such women is to display a moral shallowness to the point of total transparency . To take . advantage of . such women, he said .
 The “curse of the Kennedys” began with the old man, Joseph P Kennedy; and it has continued to the present day . The ‘curse’ of the Kennedy family began with his father, Joseph Kennedy .
 They are a “star-crossed’s family, and probably the most dysfunctional family to occupy higher political office in American history . The Clintons are a dysfunctional family, but they are not the only dysfunctional ones to hold office in history .
 The Kennedy Library in Cambridge, Massachusetts refuses to allow conservative scholars access to its records . Many records were destroyed and never reached the library .
 American media is still “lionizing” JFK on the anniversary of his assassination, which I assume will continue until the last of the true Kennedy sycophants is dead and buried .
 Ann Coulter: As long as a Democrat sits in the White House, America will become a much more dangerous place . Coulter: It’s pointless to pay attention to foreign policy when a Democrat is president, unless you enjoy having your stomach in a knot . Coulter says it's pointless
 As long as a Democrat sits in the White House, America will be repeatedly humiliated, the world will become a much more dangerous place . There’s absolutely nothing anybody can do about it. America will continue to be humiliated by a Democrat .
 John F Kennedy was in the White House for less than three years and, if you think he screwed a lot of hookers, just look what he did to our foreign policy . John F. Kennedy was only in office for three years .
 For two days, Khrushchev batted Kennedy around, leaving the president’s own advisers white-faced and shaken . The president's own advisers were left in shock by the events .
 Seeing he was dealing with a naif, Khrushchev promptly sent missiles to Cuba . Seeing that, he sent missiles, he decided to send missiles to the island .
 Russia would never have dared move missiles to Cuba had Khrushchev not realized that JFK was a nincompoop; and it wasn’t a victory . Russia would not have dared to move missiles into Cuba had JFK not realized it was a mistake .
 In exchange for Russia’s laughably empty threats about Cuba, JFK removed our missiles from Turkey, a major retreat . JFK removed the missiles in Turkey from Turkey—a major retreat from Cuba .
 Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon Johnson, famously escalated the war in Vietnam simply to prove that the Democrats could be trusted with national security . Kennedy's successor, LBJ, later escalated the Vietnam war in order to prove he was trusted by the Democrats .
 His most inspired strategic move was to abandon the Shah of Iran, a loyal U.S. ally, which gave rise to the global Islamofascist movement we’re still dealing with today . The Shah was a loyal United States ally, giving rise to Islamofascism .
 By allowing the Shah to be overthrown by the Ayatollah Khomeini in 1979, Carter handed Islamic crazies their first state . The Shah was overthrown in February 1979 .
 The hostages were released only minutes after Ronald Reagan’s inauguration for reasons captured in a Jeff MacNelly cartoon . They were released just minutes after the inauguration . The hostages are released in the cartoon .
 It must be about one of the Americans in the Den of Spies, but I don’t recognize the name . The name of the character is unknown .
 Bill Clinton’s masterful handling of foreign policy was such a catastrophe that he had to deploy his national security adviser, Sandy Berger, to steal classified documents from the National Archives in 2003 to avoid their discovery .
 Twice, when Clinton was president, Sudan had offered to turn over bin Laden to the U.S. But, unfortunately, these offers came in early 1996 while Clinton was busy ejaculating on Monica Lewinsky .
 Clinton was given eight to 10 chances to kill or capture bin Laden, former CIA agent says . Despite bin Laden’s having murdered hundreds of Americans in terrorist attacks around the world, Clinton refused to act .
 When Obama took office, al Qaida had been routed in Iraq—from Fallujah, Sadr City and Basra . Al Qaida was routed from Fallujah to Sadr and Sadr .
 The Iraqis had a democracy, a miracle on the order of flush toilets in Afghanistan . The Iraqis' democracy was a miracle, the author says . The Iraqi democracy is a miracle .
 By Bush’s last year in office, monthly casualties in Iraq were coming in slightly below a weekend with Justin Bieber . By Bush's last year, monthly casualty figures were slightly below that of Justin Bieber's .
 Obama removed every last troop from Iraq as soon as he became president . Despite there being Americans troops deployed in dozens of countries around the world .
 He was busy helping to topple a strong American ally in Egypt and a slavish American minion in Libya . He was helping to install the Muslim Brotherhood in those countries instead .
 Obama has become such an object for Putin’s amusement that the fastest way to get the Russians out of Crimea would be for Obama to call on Putin to invade Ukraine . Obama has also become such a target for Putin's amusement .
 We have been through two wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the American people are “bone tired” of wars . The U.S. people are tired of wars, and rightly so, of the two wars .
 "We have led when no other country in the world was capable of leading," says President Obama . "Our economic and human treasures have been spent in those wars," he says .
 I opposed the war in Iraq because, like so many others, I believed Saddam had WMDs that would be used against our military forces, like he had used them against Iran and the Kurds, he says . "I opposed the Iraq war because I thought Saddam had . WMD
 In Afghanistan, we should have destroyed the poppy crops from Day One, says President Obama . Heroin trafficking that funds the brutal Taliban funds the Taliban, he says .
 What the Taliban have done to women and young girls has been nothing less than savagery, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The Taliban have been brutal in Afghanistan, he says .
 Putin is an ‘old school’ Stalinist who learned his trade well as a KGB operative . Putin is a ‘Stalinist’ who is an old school Stalinist, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 He must be viewed in this context, not as some Westernized Russian democrat, which he is not . He is not a Westernized democrat, he says .
 He only understands raw power; and the niceties of diplomacy are a sign of weakness for him . He only understood raw power, and diplomacy is a sign he only understands .
 Perhaps Putin has misjudged Obama; and finally Obama may rise to the occasion . Perhaps Putin may misjudge Obama, and perhaps he may rise the occasion. Obama may be the man to rise the moment .
 With Additional Sordid Disclosures, The Totally Dysfunctional Kennedy Saga Continues . As if there were not enough evidence above, more disclosures have just come forth .
 Underneath the icy surface was a passionate woman who needed the closeness of men every bit as much as her philandering husband Jack Kennedy needed other women, reveals a blockbuster new biography .
 Teddy was having clandestine trysts with Jackie before and after Bobby Kennedy was murdered in 1963 . Teddy had an affair with Bobby Kennedy following his father's assassination in 1963, now disclosed for the first time .
 Darwin Porter and Danforth Prince, authors of 20 celebrity exposes, to be published by Blood Moon Productions June 7 . Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, A Life Beyond Her Wildest Dreams, is a biography of the late socialite .
 Jackie had a torrid affair with William Holden and Marlon Brando . She also had an affair with Warren Beatty, Peter Lawford, Paul Newman, Gregory Peck, Frank Sinatra .
 In the first draft of Marlon Brando’s 1999 autobiography, Songs My Mother Taught Me, the movie icon wrote that after a night of heavy drinking at the Jockey Club in Washington, D.C. in 1964, the press descended on them, forcing them to
 Jackie danced close to Marlon Marlon ‘pressing her thighs against me’—he wrote in his memoir . Marlon’s memoir: ‘She pressed her thighs on me. She pressed her hips against me.’ Marlon wrote in the memoir .
 Jackie came out to society as ‘Debutante of the Year’ in Newport, Rhode Island in 1947 . The event inspired the Bouvier sisters—Jackie and her younger sister, Lee Bouvierto set out to lure beaux .
 Jackie was hot to follow in the footsteps of her younger sister who had already lost her virginity . Jackie's older sister had already had her own virginity .
 Jackie’s first car, a 1947 black Mercury convertible, spelled freedom for the new debutante . Jackie's first car was a 1947 Mercury convertible .
 Jackie’s entrée into an international arena of dashing, sophisticated European princes, decadent millionaires, occasional politicians, writers, artists and dancers . Jackie's entrée to the world marked her entry into the world's elite society .
 In Paris, Jackie had her ritual daily cocktail at the bar of the Ritz Hotel where Princess Diana spent her last night .
 She was mad for the celebrated novelist and art theorist, Andre Malraux whom she found terribly exciting, and dangerously exhilarating, but for fear of getting pregnant, she would not sleep with him . She was absolutely mad for him .
 Her favorite summer cocktail, part crème de menthe, crèmes de cacao, fresh cream and vodka, is part of the White Elephant cocktail .
 The pair wandered the Left Bank together after tossing back the creamy Grasshoppers and headed back to Marquand’s flat . Marquand and Marquand spent the night out in the pub before heading back to their flat .
 Marquand seduced Jackie in the creaky French elevator . Jackie couldn’t wait to get upstairs inside the apartment and allowed Marquand to seduce her .
 She was in Marquand’s arms, her skirt bunched above her hips, the backs of her thighs pressed against the decorative open grillwork . Marquand: ‘I’m in love with Marquand, I’ll be in love again. I�
 When the elevator jolted to a stop, ‘she was no longer a demi-vierge’, a partial virgin, authors quote biographer Ed Klein .
 The pair played around Europe together during her breaks from school and the affair lasted until Jackie returned to America . Jackie and Jackie had an affair until she returned to the US .
 In June, 1951, the Bouvier sisters, 18-year old Lee, and 22-year-old Jacqueline, took their first European trip together . Lee Bouvier was 18, and Jacqueline was 22, when the sisters first traveled together .
 Janet and Hughdie Auchincloss lived in Merrywood, Virginia, on the banks of the Potomac River . They made the rounds of society parties in Paris, Madrid, Rome and Venice before crossing back to America .
 Waldrop hired Jackie as an inquiring photographer whose duties also included interviewing her subject . Waldrop also hired Jackie to take pictures of her subjects .
 Jackie dated many men before being introduced to John Kennedy, a young Senator at the time . She was introduced to him by a young senator at the age of 50 .
 He put an engagement ring on her finger that she returned later by slyly dropping it in his coat pocket . He put the engagement ring in her coat pocket and she returned it later .
 Husted: ‘She’d taken up with this whore-mongering, red-haired Irish politician from Boston’, Husted stated . Husted said she was dating a ‘red-haired’ Irish politician .
 Another beau at the time was Ormande de Kay, a young American she had walked along the banks of the Seine with in Paris . She had agreed to wed him on his return from the Korean War .
 Jack’s courting of Jackie took place in the back seat of his car, a 1950 two-door Plymouth, according to his close friend, Lem Billing . JFK's car was a 1950 Plymouth .
 One night, a trooper drove up and got out of his patrol car, shining his flashlight into the back seat of a car . The car was parked in the back of the car in the middle of the night . It was the first time the car had been driven by a motorist
 The couple married on September 12 1953, surrounded by three Kennedy brothers . The couple were married in 1953 .
 Three handsome Irish-American brothers were destined to fall in love with Jackie . Jackie is Jackie of the Rock and Roll .
 In very different ways, she would love all three of them’, write Porter and Prince .
 Sparks flew with William Holden when she attended a dinner party at the Los Angeles home of producer Charlie Feldman . Sparks met Holden at the party in Los Angeles .
 Holden invited Jackie to go horseback riding the next day and launched a week-long affair with the future First Lady . The married Holden invited her to horseback ride the following day .
 Jackie’s close friend, artist Bill Walton, said the fling was ‘primarily driven by Jackie's desire to seek revenge on Jack’ for his cheating . According to friend, Bill Walton said Jackie wanted revenge for cheating .
 At first she was very reluctant, but once she got the rhythm of it she couldn’t get enough. She said: ‘Once she got to the rhythm she couldn't get enough’
 Jackie would later tell her sister Lee, ‘I’ve gone to bed with men who have had a problem with hygiene.’ She later told her sister that she had been sleeping with a 'problem with hygiene'
 Marilyn Monroe, Betty Grable, Sophia Loren, Jean Simmons, Lee Remick, Pamela Turnure, Mary Pinchot Meyer were all lovers . Marilyn Monroe was one of the most famous women in the world .
 He wanted a quickie and then he was back on the phone talking with some silly politician. He wanted to be back in the middle of the conversation. He was back talking to some silly politicians .
 "When he did have sex with me, he would turn over and go to sleep right away," she says . "He turned over and went to bed right away when he had sex"
 Her resentment built up to one night in 1957 when Jack came home late to their P Street, Georgetown house after a night of partying . Jack came back late to the house that night . Jack's wife was angry at his late arrival .
 Jack went after her, brought her back inside and promptly called for an ambulance service to drive her to a nearby clinic . Jackie was taken to the Valleyhead Clinic in Carlisle, Massachusetts .
 She was subjected to three barbaric electroshock treatments for depression before being released within the week . She was released within a week after being subjected to the treatment .
 When she returned home to an empty house, she felt more depressed and contemplated suicide . She contemplated suicide after returning home to a house empty house .
 Even if Jack became president, imagine the scandal that would be uncovered about his past life, about me, says Jack . "Imagine the scandal ... about me," he says .
 In November 1957, Jackie gave birth to a baby girl, Caroline and three years later, John . The couple married in November 1957 .
 She still needed to escape from her husband and went off on her own adventures and affairs . She left the children with their nanny, Maude Smith, and left them with the nanny .
 In 1962, the First Lady visited Fiat Czar Gianni Agnelli on the Amalfi Coast for an affair . Marilyn Monroe sang her sexy rendition of ‘happy Birthday Mr President’ to JFK .
 That same year she had a brief fling at her home in the countryside of Virginia with Andre Malraux, the French Minister of Culture .
 It made no difference to Jack who was having not-so-private affairs with movie stars . Jack had affairs with stars, but it was no matter matter to Jack .
 Jack was dead from an assassin’s bullet and Bobby moved in to care for the grieving widow . Bobby moved into the care of the widow after her husband was killed .
 Jackie and Ethel were together at Jackie’s Georgetown house every night . Ethel was left alone with the children at Hickory Hill while Jackie was at Jackie's house . Jackie was left with Ethel at the house while Jackie stayed with the kids .
 'I'm in love with two men at the same time, both Bobby and Teddy,' she allegedly confessed to Capote .
 She set up a meeting to urge the star to shift his political allegiance to Senator Robert Kennedy . The star's political allegiance is to the late Senator Kennedy .
 Newman gave Jackie a porcelain rose and listened to Jackie’s pitch to back Bobby after confessing that she thought Jack had lived, he would not have been re-elected . Newman gave the actress a rose and said that if she had died, he wouldn't have been
 Capote: Jackie told Newman that she had never been able to satisfy her husband sexually . According to Capote, Jackie said she never had a sexual experience with her husband .
 For one night, the former First Lady may have persuaded the actor to switch his political allegiance but by the morning, he was still in McCarthy's camp .
 Bobby would become a moot point because Bobby would be assassinated in LA in June 1968 . Bobby would go on to be assassinated by Bobby Bobby Bobby Kennedy .
 Teddy amped up his sexual relationship with Jackie after Bobby was murdered . Teddy and Jackie had a sexual relationship after Bobby's murder . Teddy was obsessed with Bobby's love for Jackie .
 Gore Vidal claimed Teddy and Jackie 'made a bond sealed not with blood, but with something even more personal … sex' Gore claimed . 'Teddy and Jackie made a bond seal with something more personal - sex'
 Jackie was being courted by Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis too . Jackie's mother was also courting by Greek magnate Aristophon Onassis .
 On the second day of the trip, Teddy and Jackie sailed to an uninhabited offshore island where they found a spot on the white sands of its most secluded cove .
 The guards who were to protect them reported what they had seen back to Onassis . Onassis knew she had an affair with Bobby but this was the first time he learned about her affair with Teddy .
 'Ethel and Bobby were inside the house, Jackie and Teddy were high on daiquiris. One night at Hickory Hill, ‘Ethel’s . ‘The two girls were drinking a daiquiri. One of them were high . Teddy and Ethel
 With the band playing, she was seen dancing close to Teddy, pressing her crotch against his’, Chuck Spalding, JFK’s investment banker friend is quoted .
 Teddy was smitten when JFK first brought Jackie to Hyannis Port in the early 1950s . Teddy was also smitten by JFK's wife, who he said was a great friend .
 In 1961, he noted in a diary his passion for Jackie and his intention to seduce her one day . In 1961 he wrote in his diary that he had planned on seducing her .
 Those diaries were made public in 2010 when the FBI released previously sealed files .
 In 1965, Teddy drove his wife down to Provincetown at the outer tip of Cape Cod . Teddy drove her down to celebrate her 36th birthday at Hyannis Port .
 They stopped for eight hours at Bunny Mellon’s house on the Cape in Osterville, one town over . Bunny Mellon's house is one of the world's most famous houses .
 Gore Vidal thought this was the first time Jackie slept with Teddy and it was payback to Bobby for sleeping with another movie star . Gore Vide thought this is the first . Jackie slept on Teddy and Bobby slept with Bobby . Bobby slept on Jackie's side .
 Staff at the Hyannis Port house first spread rumours about Teddy leaving Jackie’s Cape house at early morning hours . Teddy is believed to have been in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 The couple slipped under the radar from the press from the early years but when Jackie called on him more and more, the rumors gained traction . The couple has been married for more than a decade .
 Jackie realized Teddy was a womanizer and she began secretly dating Aristotle Onassis while still seeing Teddy . She began dating Aristotle onassis and began dating him .
 Jackie married the Greek shipping magnate, Aristotle Onassis, in 1968 and they had an open marriage until his death in 1975 . Jackie married him in 1968, and he died in 1975, aged 85 .
 Jackie moved with the times, doing exactly as she pleased in matters of sex’, British historian Sarah Bradford said .
 Throughout the years, Jackie seduced or was seduced by Charles Addams, the American cartoonist; Dr. Dr. Addams . Jackie's life has been in the news for decades .
 She dated American journalist, novelist Pete Hamill, who was Shirley MacLaine’s boyfriend; Lord Harlech; poet Robert Lowell, FDR Jr. She also dated British journalist, author, poet, poet and writer Robert Lowell . She died at the age of 92 .
 She would show her horses, and compete at times, and I was along for the ride, purely as a friend . "I was a friend," she says. "She would show and compete, and she would compete, but I was just a friend."
 "One day I was walking alone through the crowd, and I came face to face with Jackie," he says . "I came face-to-face with Jackie. One day I walked into the crowd and we were reunited," he recalls .
 I have been around lots of celebrities and famous people, having grown up in the shadow of Hollywood, and then working in Washington, D.C. I have grown up with lots of famous people and worked in Washington. I'm not afraid to be around celebrities, but I've been
 Jackie looked just like she had on the day of JFK’s death . It was as though time had frozen in place .
 She was walking alone too, and had no guards around her . Everyone seemed to be leaving her alone, which is what I did as well, which I did .
 Mr Naegele: I’m enjoying your blog immensely, but for the sake of your own credibility and the edification of your readers, please refrain from citing anything by Darwin Porter .
 He is a pathological liar and his publisher, “Blood Moon,” is his boyfriend. ‘Blood Moon’ is his girlfriend. He is not only a liar, he is also a liar .
 JFK suffered a massive stroke on December 19, 1961, well before JFK’s death . His health deteriorated thereafter until he died . JFK's father suffered a stroke in 1961 .
 In terms of pure evil and personal depravity, Lyndon Johnson was far, far more depraved than John Kennedy . John Kennedy was far more evil than LBJ .
 LBJ orchestrated the Israeli attack on the USS Liberty – read the book Operation Cyanide for that . LBJ also orchestrated the attack on USS Liberty, and LBJ orchestrated it .
 LBJ stole 6 million troy ounces of gold from Victorio Peak in 1969 – first thing he did in retirement . Then there was LBJ stealing 6 million ounce of gold . LBJ took the gold in his retirement .
 Read the Gold House trilogy of books by John Clarence and Tom Whitten for that . The Gold House is a best-selling Gold House series of books .
 LBJ and Bobby Baker were enabling so much “whoring around” that they owned an abortion clinic in Puerto Rico for that – see Roger Stone’s second edition of his “LBJ Did It” book . As far as sexual depravity was concerned,
 Unlike serial rapist and CIA drug smuggler Bill Clinton – I don’t think JFK did anything like that . I don't think JFK was anything like Bill Clinton .
 As for LBJ, his assaults on scores of secretaries were functional rapes . LBJ's assaults on secretaries are functional rapes. LBJ: "I'm not sure what happened to me."
 The author’s original post on the “most despicable president” in U.S. history is not even close . The bottom line is the bottom line, and it's not close .
 It was Lyndon Johnson, with all the other criminals running a second by a country mile, it was Johnson . It was Johnson's 'running a second' by a 'country mile' Johnson said .
 There is no myth about LBJ today, as there is about JFK and the Kennedys . LBJ is the president of the U.S. House of Representatives, the White House says .
 Johnson was and is hated by many for Vietnam, and the American deaths and injuries for which he was responsible . Johnson was responsible for many of the U.S. deaths in Vietnam .
 The myth of ‘Camelot’ still endures in some quarters, despite the true facts . The true facts are sordid to say the least, according to the facts .
 Jackie Kennedy’s marriage to JFK was headed to a divorce when his life was cut short by a bullet in November 1963 . The UK Daily Mail has reported: Jackie Kennedy was headed for a divorce .
 She was about to become the only First Lady to divorce a sitting president . She was divorcing a sitting President .
 A life Beyond Her Wildest Dreams by Darwin Porter and Danforth Prince is published by Blue Moon Productions publisher . Darwin Porter is the author of the book .
 Jackie was fed up with her husband's constant womanizing, and having her own dalliances that fueled the fire of her desire for liberation . Jackie told her confidantes that she wanted out .
 Her anger escalated after Marilyn Monroe’s humiliating ‘Happy Birthday Mr President’ performance . And it wasn’t the first time Jackie threatened to divorce Jack .
 By the late 1950s, Jackie was too demoralized by Jack’s sexual philandering to continue the public charade to continue . Jack was too humiliated to continue his sexual charade .
 Her father-in-law, Joe Kennedy, knew all too well the profound problems and stepped in to warn her . Joe Kennedy stepped in and warned her of the problems she faced .
 Kennedy scion Joe Kennedy offered his daughter-in-law a check for one million dollars to stay in the union . Joe Kennedy is the son of former President George W. Kennedy Jr.
 Jackie allegedly told him that the cost of her staying with JFK would rise to twenty million dollars ‘if he brings home any venereal disease from any of his sluts’
 If Jackie had divorced Jack while he was a U.S. Senator, the old man's dreams of having a son in the White House would have gone unfulfilled .
 He was more concerned about his political ambitions than he was about Jackie being ostracized by the Catholic Church . And he was more worried about those political ambitions then he was concerned about Jackie's Catholic status .
 Jackie didn't know what she was getting into when she first met the dashing Massachusetts senator from Massachusetts .
 Single Jackie returned to Washington, DC in the early 1950s, leaving a string of lovers behind . She was hired as an ‘Inquiring Photographer’ for the now-defunct Washington Times-Herald .
 By night, in her apartment, she was writing a screenplay on Dolley Madison, the 4th United States President’s wife, who reportedly was a snuff tobacco addict . She was also writing a novel about the President's wife .
 No film studio showed interested in Jackie’s writing efforts, so she abandoned that to pursue finding a rich husband .
 Charles Bartlett is credited with setting up a blind date with Jack and Jackie after dating himself . Bartlett started the D.C. newspaper bureau of the Chattanooga Times .
 Before hooking up with Kennedy, Jackie also dated John White, employed by the State Department and once madly in love with Kick Kennedy, Jack’s younger sister who tragically lost her life in a 1948 airplane disaster .
 Jackie confessed she now just wanted to marry a rich and powerful man, and be the power behind the throne . That dream quickly faded .
 'If a Brit, I would want him to look like Prince Philip’, Jackie is quoted as telling White . Jackie was quoted as saying she would want Prince Philip to look more like her .
 Bartlett knew that Jack was a skirt chaser and he also knew he had to settle down if he wanted to become president . Bartlett said that Jack would settle down in order to win the presidency .
 Bartlett said he was 'incompreised enough to walk her out to her car which was parked outside my house’ Bartlett’s house .
 Jackie was secretly dating John Husted, Jr., a stockbroker from a banking family . Jackie's relationship with Husted Jr. was a secret affair .
 Husted knew he wasn't rich enough to fulfill her desires, despite being locked in each other’s arms for months . But Husted knows he wasn’t rich enough for her . Husted: “I'm not a rich man. I'm a good guy
 She surreptitiously slipped the ring in his coat pocket and said good night, goodbye . The ring was placed in his pocket .
 She was rumored to have had a lusty affair with Hitler’s Reichmarschall, Hermann Goring . Goring is rumored to be Hitler's favorite woman .
 It was the first of a long list of Jack Kennedy’s scandalous affairs Jackie would learn about . It was not an auspicious beginning for the couple who married in 1953 .
 On Jackie’s introduction to the Kennedy clan in Hyannis Port, she wrote in her diary, ‘Jack is no Burt Lancaster.’ On Jackie's introduction to her family, she said in her diaries, 'Jackie is no no. Jackie is
 Kennedy friend and Cape Cod neighbor, TV comic, Morton Downey Jr., snuck up on Jack’s car thinking he’d catch Jack and Jackie necking . Downey: "Jack and Jackie were necking. One evening, a Cape Cod friend and neighbor,
 Before they were even married, Jackie confessed in her diary, “Jack and I had a few romantic moments.”
 Jack bought the engagement ring for Jackie at Van Cleef & Arpels in Manhattan . It's a 2 carat, twinned, square cut diamond and emerald band .
 On their wedding night, Jackie slipped into a sexy, see-through French negligee .
 Jack stripped off his clothes and headed into the bathroom where he stayed for a long time . Jack stayed in the bathroom for a very long time before leaving his clothes on the floor .
 He complained of a terrible pain at the base of his spine so she would have to get on top of him . He was finally back in bed .
 The honeymoon in Acapulco wasn’t much better—quick passionate sex finishing early . Quick passionate sex finished early .
 Addison’s disease is a rare, chronic endocrine disorder causing the adrenal glands to produce insufficient steroid hormones resulting in abdominal pain and weakness . Jack told his wife about his Addison's disease in Mexico .
 Kennedy suffered from prostatitis that caused chronic pelvic pain and urinary infections . Kennedy also suffered from chronic pelvic pains . Kennedy was also known for suffering from chronic urinary infections and chronic pain .
 The worst was Chlamydia, a sexually transmitted infection of the urethra that had never been cured . It was never cured of the infection, but it was never fixed .
 The slim possibility that he could transmit it to her was a daunting thought that was a turnoff in bed . And there was the slim possibility he could .
 The following night Jack told her he was meeting with business associates of the Mexican President, he was actually with Merle Oberon, who had starred with Laurence Olivier in Wuthering Heights . Oberon was a glamorous Anglo-Indian screen legend who starred in the film .
 Jack took off and drove to Palm Springs to spend the weekend with Marilyn Monroe . He said he had to meet with business associates of his father . Marilyn Monroe was Marilyn Monroe's daughter .
 Jack was clearly bored and called his brother, Bobby to admit it . Santa Barbara was the couple’s next stop . The couple's next stop was Santa Barbara .
 During dinner, Jack read the Atlantic Monthly while Jackie picked at her food and stared into space . Jack and Jackie sat down in the kitchen to enjoy dinner .
 Paul Fay predicted in a book proposal that Jack would be talking divorce by 1954 . Paul Fay, a buddy of Jack’s from World War II and later Under Secretary of the Navy, predicted the war would be over in a year later . Fay predicted that the war veteran would be
 Jackie was not adapting well to married life . She was not coping well with her new husband's new life .
 She couldn't cook and she hated Jack’s friends just dropping in at any time . She couldn’t cook and hated Jack's friends dropping in any time. She hated Jack .
 He had a habit of leaving her at parties, and his friend, Lem Billings had to drive her home . Lem had to take her home after she was found dead at a party .
 Jackie decided to surprise her husband at his Senate office and take him to lunch . Jackie surprised her husband with a surprise lunch at his office .
 Peggy Ashe tried to sell an expose to Confidential magazine for $500 . Ashe was an office temp employed in the Senate Office Building . Ashe's expose was published in Confidential Magazine . Ashe later sold the expose to the magazine . Ashe is a former Senate temp .
 Orgies in Kennedy’s suite at the Mayflower Hotel continued where he allegedly bedded film stars Audrey Hepburn, Betty Grable and Marlene Dietrich . Kennedy's suite at Mayflower hotel is where Hepburn allegedly had orgies .
 Until Jackie became pregnant in early 1956, she talked about a divorce, write the authors . Jackie was pregnant until she became pregnant .
 Jack was campaigning for Vice President on the Democratic ticket with Adlai Stevenson in 1956 . Jackie was very pregnant and expecting the next month . Jack and Jackie attended the Democratic Convention in Chicago in August 1956 .
 Kennedy took off on a sailing expedition with Teddy with Teddy . He and Stevenson were defeated and an enraged Kennedy went on the expedition . Teddy was killed in the attack .
 Jackie went to stay with her mother in Newport, Rhode Island, and told her that she was still seriously considering a divorce . She told her mother that she would still be considering divorce .
 Jackie collapsed hemorrhaging and was rushed to the hospital in Newport, Rhode Island . Jackie had been in the hospital for two weeks .
 Jack avoided giving Jackie the transatlantic phone number . Jack could not be reached because he had avoided giving her a transatlantic number . Jackie could not reach Jack because Jack had not given her a number .
 While in the hospital, a crazed fellow had planted four sticks of dynamite outside her window of the room that was on the ground floor . The crazed man planted the dynamite in her room .
 A gardener spotted him and hit the would-be assassin over the head with a shovel, knocking him out . He was knocked out by a gardener who saw him .
 Jackie woke up in the hospital to see Bobby Kennedy standing by her bedside, holding her hand . Bobby Kennedy was standing by Jackie's bedside at the time of her death .
 Jackie and Jack had been living at Hickory Hill, the Virginia mansion overlooking the Potomac Rver bought for them by Joe . Joe bought the mansion for Jack and Jackie and Jackie .
 She told her father-in-law that she wasn’t like Ethel knocking out babies . She told him she was not like her and she didn't like football, he said .
 Here he made his famous one million dollar offer to her to stay in the marriage that was reported in Time Magazine .
 He also agreed to get the couple a house in Georgetown and move Ethel and Bobby into Hickory Hill . The couple will also live in Georgetown, Georgetown .
 Jackie ignited a fight that fell out into the street when she arrived home from a hotel . The fight was the result of a fight between Jackie and Jack .
 Jack had her committed to Valleyhead Clinic in Carlisle, Massachusetts where she underwent three barbaric electroshock treatments . Jack had committed her to the clinic where she had three treatments .
 Jack’s required use of cortisone for his Addison's increased his libido and didn’t stop his sexual infidelities . But Jack used it to stop his infidelity . Jack's libido increased after he was diagnosed with the disease .
 He was hanging with Frank Sinatra and Peter Lawford, who basically functioned as his pimps . He was with Sinatra, Lawford and Sinatra .
 Lee Remick was sleeping with Peter Lawford before moving on to Bobby and Jack to follow . Remick starred in Anatomy of a Murder and Days of Wine and Roses .
 Pamela Turnure, a Georgetown dubutante, often received Kennedy late at night at her Washington apartment . Turnure dated Prince Aly Kahn once married to screen goddess Rita Hayworth .
 Jackie selected Turnure as her press secretary when she became First Lady in 1960 so she could keep an eye on her, she told friends . Turnure was Jackie's first press secretary, she said .
 Lem Billings, a school friend of Jack’s from early days at the private boarding Choate School for boys in Connecticut in 1933, described Jack and Jackie as withdrawn, bitter people . Jack and Jack were withdrawn and bitter people, according to Billings' friend .
 She never wanted to confront her husband about his adultery and Jack hated confrontation . She never confronted him about his affair and he hated confrontation. Jack hated confrontations .
 Jack’s brothers were around Jackie more than he was during critical times . Jack's brothers were also around him more during the time of his death .
 During Jack’s campaign for President, ‘Teddy confessed to Jackie that he’d always been in love with her’, the authors write . Teddy confessed to her that he'd always been . in love . with her ever since that day she'd arrived on
 She was in the early stages of her pregnancy with John and had campaigned with Teddy in Wisconsin in Wisconsin .
 The only Kennedy who wasn’t paying her much attention was her own husband . "The only Kennedy was paying attention to his wife was his own husband," she said .
 Feelgood, German-born physician Max Jacobson injected cocktails of steroids and amphetamines that made Jack’s back pain disappear, but also sent him to the moon with soaring energy and sexual desires . Jack's back pain disappeared, but his sexual desires also disappeared . Max Jacob
 Jackie, a chainsmoker all her life, continued the habit out of the public’s eye . She continued to do so to ease her own anxiety over the state of her marriage .
 Initially she told the priest that she wanted to be with her husband in death . Initially she said she would be with him in death, but she later said she wanted her husband to be in death in her own .
 On their last meeting, she stated she was still contemplating suicide but would give it serious thought before making such a rash decision . She said she would give serious thought to consider suicide .
 In fact, the love I’m experiencing now would be called ungodly in the eyes of the Church . The love he’s experiencing would be ‘ungodly’ in the Church,’ he says .
 'I wouldn’t even dare to confess it to you’, she said .
 50 years from now, the fact that an assassin cut short Kennedy’s life and presidency might be all that Americans will remember about him . Like former President William McKinley before him, the assassin may be remembered for his depravity and utter recklessness .
 The Kennedys have been and continue to be America’s most disgusting and immoral family . The family has been and continues to be the most disgusting family in America .
 JFK or RFK actually gave a damn about the USA or its people except for how it served their interest . “social justice” was just cynical pandering to blacks . JFK and RFK were cynical panderers to blacks.
 "I really get sick of the Kennedys portrayed as some sort of Christ-like figures," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he's sick of being portrayed as a Christlike figure .
 Their deaths DID “idealize and enlarge them beyond what they were in life” to paraphrase Teddy . And their deaths DID .
 The only meaning of the word “servant” they knew were the servants that worked in their homes and their sycophantic political staffs filled with young, stupid liberals . The only way they knew the word "servant" was to say “service”
 JFK was a disaster and if RFK had become president, nothing of consequence would have changed for the better . RFK would have been a disaster, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 In fact, he would have been a weak president like his brother with a divided party that was crumbling, he says .
 As I have stated before, I disagree with the premise of this blog post condemning John Kennedy as the most despicable president in U.S. history . John Kennedy was a despicable president, but I disagree .
 LBJ had a personal hitman Malcolm Wallace and he as wiping out folks in Texas long before he became president . Wallace was a hitman for LBJ . Wallace's hitman was Wallace's personal assassin, Malcolm Wallace .
 LBJ orchestrated the murder of Ag official Henry Marshall in June, 1961 while LBJ was vice president . Henry Marshall was killed by LBJ in June 1961 .
 LBJ pushed the escalation button at every step and drove and unwilling nation into Vietnam, something Kennedy was loathe to do . JFK was loath to do so, but LBJ did so and drove the nation to Vietnam .
 Historians have finally come around to the belief that JFK probably would not have gone into Vietnam in the way LBJ did . Most historians believe JFK would have gone to Vietnam without LBJ .
 LBJ also stole 2 million troy ounces of gold from Victorio Peak in spring 1969 after he left office . Read John Clarence’s Gold House for that – read John Clarence's Gold House .
 Roger Stone hates the Kennedys as much as you do and he will tell you Lyndon Johnson was the lowest form of human excrement ever to be in the White House . Stone: "Lyndian Johnson was ... the lowest level of human excrement ever"
 Lee Harvey Oswald was United States intelligence, an FBI informer and he shot no one on 11/22/63 . Oswald was a U.S. intelligence, FBI informant and no one shot on that day . He was a member of the CIA, FBI and FBI .
 LBJ, the Kennedys and Richard Nixon all had deep mob connections . Richard Nixon also had a deep mob connection with the mob . LBJ and LBJ had deep connections with mobsters .
 LBJ was every bit of the deranged man-whore that JFK and Bill Clinton were . JFK and Clinton were all deranged men-whores, but LBJ is every bit the same .
 Lyndon Johnson was a functional lunatic – something John Kennedy was not . McGeorge Bundy, Bill Moyers, Richard Goodwin and the Secret Service have all commented on Lyndon Johnson’s scary mental instabilities .
 Without offering any defense of the Kennedys, I say Lyndon Johnson beats them by a country mile in the depravity department . I say LBJ beats them in depravity .
 I'm satisfied to show that I have an incredibly good uncanny feeling I found out just what I needed. Studying this info So i am satisfied to . show that i have an incredible good uncanny . feeling I have found out what I need to do to get the best .
 JFK gave his life literally to America, the very country which betrayed him and cut him down in such a brutal manner . JFK's life was dedicated to the country that betrayed him .
 Regardless of policies you disliked or actions taken behind closed doors such as the infidelity, he died trying to make your country better . Regardless of the policies you dislike or . actions taken in closed-door meetings such as . infidelity. Regardless of . policies you liked or . disliked,
 He was a man…we all make mistakes bar you bar you of course Naegele it would appear . He was not a man but a man who made a mistake .
 "I have read numerous books both for and against the Kennedys and you can’t deny the facts," says President Obama . "You can't deny the fact. You can, I have read many books ... and I have no idea what happened."
 I am fascinated by history and amazed that the murder of one your best presidents remains covered up by your people/government . I have zero allegiance to the kennedys being British, particularly after joe views on us .
 JFK was a very clever, astute man who threatened all that you appear to stand for based on your attack..profit, profit and more profit . JFK was very clever and astute, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He was making changes which would have changed America for everfor the better might I add . But clearly it couldn’t be allowed. He said .
 You're slating the very man who took on the corrupt ‘morally bankrupt’, institutes of America and paid the ultimate price . No….you’re writing instead about a man who stopped nuclear war by making up his own mind .
 'Your motivation for the utter ‘crap’, you have written is very suspect and quite telling. Your motivation for this was very suspect,’s your motivation for 'crap'
 Like you, I was once a JFK "true believer, but those days are long gone . Like you,. I was a JFK “true believer” but now I’m a Democrat, I'm a Republican .
 He and his presidency were fraudulent and dishonorable, and there is no other way to describe him and it. He and it was fraudulent, dishonorable; and there are no other ways to describe it .
 Please read all of the comments carefully, as I have done; then see if your judgments have changed . Please read them carefully .
 The myth of “Camelot” was created shortly after his death, and it persists in some quarters even to this day . The myth was created after he died .
 As more generations pass, fewer and fewer people around the world have heard his name, much less know anything about him . However, as more generations . Fewer and fewer than ever have heard the name of the legendary explorer .
 The UK’s Daily Mail has an article that describes what the senior Kennedy did to his daughter . Mentally disabled from birth, hidden from the public eye in a series of boarding schools and subjected to a botched lobotomy at age 23 .
 Hidden Kennedy Daughter – shine a spotlight on a tragic life lived in the shadows . The Hidden Kennedy daughter is a daughter of the late President Kennedy . She was born into a family of six children .
 The latest issue of People Magazine, currently out on newsstands, contains excerpts from both books as part of the cover story .
 Rosemary Kennedy passed away January 7, 2005, aged 86, at St Coletta, a Catholic institution for the disabled in Jefferson, Wisconsin, which had been her home for more than five decades .
 Two biographies paint the most complete portrait of the ill-fated Kennedy daughter . Based on Larson’s new historical sources and on information obtained by Koehler-Pentacoff from her aunt .
 On September 13, 1918, Rose Kennedy went into labor at the family’s home in Brookline, Massachusetts, with only a nurse present to assist her . Rose Kennedy gave birth to her first child in 1918 with the help of a nurse .
 An obstetrician was called to supervise the delivery, but he was running late . The nurse made the decision to delay the birth by forcing Mrs Kennedy to keep her legs tightly together .
 Rosemary was left with possible brain damage after the birth canal was forcibly kept in place of her mother's push .
 Growing up, Rosemary was lagging in her development behind other children her age . Rosemary's parents became concerned that she was not being able to reach her potential .
 In her memoir published in 1974, Rose Kennedy wrote that her daughter crawled, stood, walked and uttered her first words late . Rose Kennedy: "I am so proud of my daughter that I am not afraid of her future"
 As time went by, Rosemary was having trouble performing simple tasks like writing, playing sports and steering a sled . Rosemary had to learn how to write, play sports and steer a sled.
 When Rosemary reached school age, her mother sought the advice of experts and was told her daughter was 'retarded' – a catch-all term erroneously used for many years to describe an array of mental disabilities . Rosemary's mother sought advice from experts but was told she was
 The Kennedys tried their hardest to conceal her condition, but as she grew up, it was getting increasingly difficult . She was diagnosed with an undiagnosed birth defect .
 Sister Eunice Kennedy recalled years later witnessing what she believed to be seizures in Rosemary, who was also prone to temper tantrums . The Kennedy sisters were married in 1963 .
 At age 11, Joseph and Rose shipped Rosemary off to the first in a series of boarding schools for special-needs children . Rosemary never went beyond the third or fourth grade in her studies .
 When Rosemary was 19, her father was appointed the United States ambassador to Great Britain . Rosemary's father is now the U.S. ambassador to Britain .
 The large Kennedy clan decamped to London, and Rosemary flourished at a local convent school . But she began putting on weight, which was unacceptable to her strict father . The large family moved to London and she thrived at school .
 As Rosemary reached her early 20s, she blossomed into an attractive and sexually appealing young woman whom her concerned parents now deemed unmanageable . Rosemary's parents considered her to be a sexually attractive young woman who was now unmanaged .
 Rose Kennedy’s niece Ann Gargan told famed historian Doris Kearns Goodwin for her 1987 book The Fitzgeralds and The Kennedys . Rosemary would take off from her Washington DC boarding school and wander the city at night .
 Joseph Kennedy was busy laying the groundwork for his sons’ political careers . He feared that his out-of-control daughter could cause significant damage to the family name by becoming pregnant .
 Kennedy spoke to his wife about an experimental brain surgery known as a lobotomy . Kennedy spoke about the surgery to rein her in, which is known as lobotomies .
 The Kennedy patriarch ignored his daughter’s advice and quickly scheduled the procedure without consulting anyone in his family, including his wife . But the domineering Kennedy patriarch chose not to consult anyone in the family .
 Timothy Shriver, Rosemary’s nephew and the chairman of the Special Olympics, described the ‘chilling’ procedure . Surgeons cut into the brain while the patient was still conscious and only stopping when the patient could no longer communicate .
 She could no longer speak, her mobility was damaged and ‘she lost her independence for the rest of her life,’ he wrote . ‘She could not speak, she was unable to speak, and she was left with a disability . She was also unable to walk and
 His wife Rose would later claim that her husband kept her in the dark about their daughter’s lobotomy for 20 years . Rose would claim that she was kept out of the knowledge of the lobotomy .
 After Joseph Kennedy’s stroke in 1961, his wife finally traveled to Wisconsin to visit her daughter for the first time since the surgery . Joseph Kennedy's stroke was the result of a stroke that left his daughter with a permanent disability .
 At the sight of her mother, Rosemary, who was being escorted by two nuns, broke into a sprint and lunged at the elderly woman, beating her chest and screaming at her . The elderly woman was escorted by nuns, but was not harmed .
 Some believed that seeking privacy, she had moved to the Midwest and worked as a teacher at a school for handicapped children . Others believed that she was seeking privacy .
 Her situation markedly improved in the 1970s as relatives began invite her home for short visits . Her situation improved as relatives invited her back to see relatives .
 Mr Shriver, Rosemary’s nephew, recalled that although her language skills were extremely limited, she took pleasure in taking strolls, swimming and playing cards . Rosemary Shriver's nephew said that although she had limited language skills, she enjoyed playing cards and strolls .
 Rose Kennedy kept mum about her daughter’s lobotomy until her death in 1995, even as she gave speeches about mental retardation . Rose Kennedy was mum about the procedure until she died in 1995 .
 No matter how scummy the Kennedys were, serial murderer and mass murderer, the psychotic LBJ has them all lapped by a country mile . Richard Nixon was a choir boy compared to what LBJ did, says CNN's John Sutter .
 LBJ wins “most despicable” and a baseball game that gets called after the 15 run rule in 3 innings . The game was called after 15 runs in three innings . LBJ: "Most despicable" and a game that got called .
 The Kennedy brothers have clashed over claims that one of America’s foremost political families have been plagued by alcoholism . Patrick Kennedy has written a book that discusses his father Ted's alcoholism . The UK's Daily Mail has a article about Patrick Kennedy's new book .
 Patrick Kennedy revealed his father’s drinking was so out of control that his family were forced to stage an intervention, in his no-holds barred book . Patrick Kennedy is a former congressman who served as a congressman in Washington .
 A Personal Journey Through the Past and Future of Mental Illness and Addiction and Addiction . A personal journey through the past and future of mental illness and addiction. A personal Journey through the Past .
 Their attempts to reach out to their father only ended up driving him further away . But their attempts to try to reach him only led to him moving away .
 He saw his children’s attempt to curb his alcohol intake as an act of betrayal, his son Patrick says . He has fought his own well-publicized battle with drink over the years .
 Patrick, a full-time advocate for addiction prevention, admitted his family were ‘angry’ but the former eight-term Democratic congressman from Rhode Island is no stranger to controversy . Patrick admitted that his family had been 'angry' but he has a long history of controversy
 His own battle with alcoholism has landed him in the headlines on several occasions . The actor has been battling alcoholism for years .
 On an Air Force One flight with President Bill Clinton, he famously got so drunk that he spent the majority of the journey throwing up in the bathroom .
 In 2006, he checked himself into the Mayo Clinic to seek help for an addiction to alcohol and Oxycontin . He checked himself in after a late-night crash into a security barrier outside Congress .
 He maintains the car accident was a result of mixing Ambien with another medication . The driver maintains the accident was caused by the medication mix .
 Patrick has talked candidly about his struggle with alcoholism and has been an advocate of addition charities for years . Patrick has been a strong advocate of the addition charities .
 In Ted Kennedy’s own memoirs, he acknowledged his many boozy benders, but insisted he was not an alcoholic . Ted Kennedy's memoirs: 'I'm not a drinker, but I'm not alcoholic,' he said in his book .
 True Compass only touches on his drinking a handful of times, but most of those involve admissions of excess . "True Compass" airs tonight at 9 p.m. ET .
 His book discussed his battle with brain cancer and ‘self-destructive drinking,’ especially after the 1968 death of his brother Robert . His book also discussed his struggle with 'self destructive drinking'
 The drinking never interfered with his work in Senate or ever got as bad as his ex-wife Joan, he claimed . But none of the drinking ever interfered with Senate work or Joan's alcoholism, he said .
 Ted said he had found it difficult to return to the Senate after his brother’s death – and that even after he did, he was unable to concentrate . Ted said even after returning to work he was 'unable to concentrate'
 The shooting of both his brothers traumatised him, and he flinched at loud noises, and hit the deck when cars backfired . He flinches at loud noise, and hits the deck at cars backfires .
 In his book, Patrick recounts what happened after his father choked when asked why he wanted to be president . Patrick's father famously choked during a 1979 CBS interview .
 The elder Kennedy tried to pretend everything was fine, but kept shaking his head and muttering . The two went sailing, and the elder Kennedy kept muttering.
 Ted's problems with alcohol were affecting his political career again in 1991 . Ted's alcohol problems became clear in 1991 when he ran for office in New York City .
 That year he went drinking in Palm Beach with his son Patrick and his nephew William K Smith . He went drinking with Patrick and William Smith's nephew William .
 The night took a dark turn and Mr Smith wound up being charged with rape . Mr Smith was charged with raping a woman at the scene .
 Kennedy said he was unable to protest the appointment of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court later that year . Kennedy was acquitted of sexual harassment but later acquitted of Thomas's alleged sexual harassment .
 The ‘hard truth’ was that ‘with all the background noise about Palm Beach, I would have been the wrong person’ to raise questions about the 'hard truth' about the Palm Beach lifestyle .
 He always denied the ‘totally false, bizarre and evil’ theories that had appeared in the media against him . He said: ‘Totally false and evil' theories that appeared in media against me .
 Edward Moore Kennedy began a sparkling political career taking over the United States Senate seat once held by JFK in 1962 aged just 30 – the youngest age allowed . Kennedy took over the U.S. Senate seat in 1962 at the age of 30 .
 Kennedy’s legendary drinking began to emerge making him an easy target for his opponents . But tales of Kennedy's legendary drinking made him a target for opponents .
 It would be a fatal crash, where alcohol is thought to have been a factor, which would finally put an end to his presidential ambitions . The crash would be the first time alcohol was thought to be a factor in a presidential bid .
 The Massachusetts senator became embroiled in the Chappaquiddick Incident in 1969 . His pretty, young campaign assistant Mary Jo Kopechne was killed in the incident .
 Senator Kopechne was found dead in the sunken car’s seat ten hours after he accidentally drove off a bridge into a pond . Kopeschne accidentally drove into the pond after accidentally driving off the bridge into it .
 The scandal helped to destroy his first marriage, it effectively destroyed his political ambitions . The scandal also destroyed his first wife's first marriage and his political career .
 Patrick said his father spoke with him only once about the crash – as its one year anniversary approached . Patrick said he spoke with his father just once about it as it approached its one-year anniversary approaching .
 As Ted’s drinking spiraled, one congressional aide, just 16, claimed she was propositioned by Kennedy from the back seat of his limousine in Capitol Hill .
 She testified that he leaned from the window, waved a wine bottle and asked whether she or a friend she was with wanted to join him . She testified he waved a bottle from a window and asked if she and a friend were interested .
 In Washington’s top La Brasserie restaurant, he allegedly threw a waitress over a table in a private room and tried to have sex with her . He allegedly threw her over table in private room, tried to make sexual advances .
 Others whispered around Capitol Hill that the Senator would reek of alcohol by nine and be drunk by four in the afternoon . Others whispered round Capitol Hill .
 Patrick believes his father’s drinking was a way for him to self-medicate . Patrick believes that his father's drinking was part of a way of coping with depression .
 Ted was infuriated by the intervention staged by his eldest son Teddy and daughter Kara alongside Patrick . The intervention came shortly after the rape scandal involving his nephew Smith . Ted was furious at the intervention .
 Patrick’s relationship with Ted deteriorated to such a point that when he decided to run for Congress in 1994, he did not bother to tell him . Patrick did not tell Ted that he was running for Congress .
 President Obama took office in 2009, but the relationship began to repair itself . The relationship between the White House and the U.S. government began to deteriorate in 2010 .
 After his death, Patrick was given a letter that his father had written in 1980 in case he was assassinated during a run for president, reported Irish Central . Patrick's father wrote the letter in 1980 to prepare him for a presidential run .
 Sadly, Patrick was unable to avoid the vice that gripped his father . Sadly, his Patrick was not able to avoid his father's vice . Patrick's father died in 2011 at the age of 50 .
 Even after he took a public avowalal of sobriety in 2006, the congressman continued to booze heavily . Even after his public release, he continued to drink heavily .
 On a congressional trip to Liberia he had to be rushed home after he ran out of Oxycontin . He went into withdrawal after running out of the drug on a trip to Africa .
 He even made plans to move to Australia where he could drink himself to oblivion, free from responsibilities and obligations that waited for him at home .
 Patrick went onto spend years balancing his role as a politician with his addiction . Patrick went on to become a successful politician . Patrick spent years in prison for his addiction addiction .
 He was even called out of rehab on one occasion to vote on a health care reform bill before he was returned back to care . He was returned to rehab after rehab .
 After 16 years in congress, Patrick left the House in 2010 and went into the ‘roughest detox’ he had ever endured . Patrick left Congress in 2010 .
 Patrick Kennedy's cousin Chris Lawford told his wife Amy that he had 'never seen a case worse than’ Patrick’s. Lawford said he had ‘never seen’ a case like that of Kennedy’.
 Three of Bobby Kennedy's 11 children have all had public issues with drugs . Among the other cousins, Bobby Kennedy’s 11 children, three of them have drug issues . Bobby Kennedy is the father of one of the 11 children .
 RFK Jr. was arrested for heroin possession in 1983, and more recently his estranged wife Mary killed herself amid an on-going battle with depression .
 His brother David died of a drug overdose in 1984 while on vacation in Palm Beach, Florida .
 Jean Kennedy’s son William Kennedy Smith was accused of drunkenly raping a woman after returning home from a bar . Smith is accused of returning home after returning from a night out .
 Patrick and Christopher say that their family’s struggles with curbing addiction shows that the disease cannot be won or lost because of money . Patrick says the disease is not a matter of money, but it is a struggle to overcome .
 'The need was so profound and I come from a family that the ethic of public service is really strong,’ Chris explained to Huffington Post Live .
 His mother Joan, who later divorced Ted, has openly admitted she is an alcoholic . Ted's mother, Joan, also admitted she has a history of alcoholism .
 Without PT 109, America Has No President John F Kennedy . PT 109 paved JFK's path to the White House .
 Joseph P Kennedy hyped the story of PT 109 to help his son win a seat in Congress that subsequently led to the Oval Office . But it was only with the marketing strategy of Joseph P . Kennedy, who hyped it up, that his son won a congressional seat .
 An American Epic of War, Survival and the Destiny of John F Kennedy, published by William Morrow, published in William Morrow .
 Kennedy dined with fashion editor Florence Pritchett and Time-Life correspondent John Hersey . Hersey won a Pulitzer Prize the following year for his WWII novel, A Bell for Adano .
 On hearing Kennedy’s account of his adventure in the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific, Hersey saw it as a magazine feature . Hersey wrote Kennedy's account as a feature on his trip to the Solomon islands .
 Life Magazine rejected the story that had gotten publicity the previous year . He wrote about it in a piece, ‘Survival’ and to his surprise, Life . Magazine rejected it .
 Joe Kennedy was dissatisfied with the limited publication that appealed to the American socially elite . Joe Kennedy wanted to find an outlet that would speak ‘to the voting masses capable of propelling a Kennedy into political office, as the elder Kennedy foresaw .
 Joe Kennedy printed up thousands of copies and flooded key election neighborhoods with the account that overshadowed his son’s lack of political experience . Joe Kennedy prints copies of his son's account .
 This was his first step in the dogged pursuit of his eighteen-year dream to have a son in the White House . This was the first step to his dream of having an 18-year White House dream .
 Kennedy slept with actress Marlene Dietrich on the French Riviera in his early twenties . That same year, Kennedy was traveling the world, and had stopped off for a vacation .
 He journeyed to England, Ireland, France, Russia, Moscow, Berlin, Beirut, Damascus, Athens and Turkey . He travelled to France, Germany, Turkey, Lebanon, Greece, Turkey .
 His father served as U.S. ambassador to the United Kingdom . He visited Cuba, Rio, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Peru and Ecuador while his father was ambassador .
 In 1939, John met the King and Queen of England and their 13-year-old daughter, Princess Elizabeth . He quickly chatted up over tea with the Queen and met her over tea .
 In 1941, Kennedy decided to enlist in the military and with his father’s help behind-the-scenes, he was appointed as an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve . In 1941 he enlisted in the U.S. Navy Reserve .
 John loved sailing all his life and had his own personal sloop that he often sailed out of Hyannis Port . He had a sloop named John, which he often used to sail in .
 He was fascinated by a ‘motor torpedo boat’ or PT boat the Navy had put on display in the summer of 1941 at the dock at Edgartown, Massachusetts .
 One of his heroes was Winston Churchill and he wanted to be as heroic as Churchill . He wanted to emulate Churchill and wanted to become a hero .
 Joe Kennedy targeted Lieutenant Commander John Bulkeley, commander of Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron 3 . Bulkeley had staged daring operations in the Philippines . Joe Kennedy wanted to help his son so he targeted Bulkeley .
 After a meeting at the Plaza Hotel in Joe Kennedy’s suite, Bulkeley agreed to his demands . Joe Kennedy agreed to Bulkeley's demands after a meeting with Joe Kennedy .
 Joe wanted to get his son into PT boats for publicity and to get the veteran’s vote after the war . Joe wanted the publicity for the publicity and for the veterans’ vote .
 In February 1943, Kennedy was assigned to a squadron operating in the South Pacific . Bulkeley consented to Kennedy's assignment .
 Food came out of cans – Spam, Vienna sausage, powdered eggs, baked beans . Food came from cans - Spam and Vienna sausage . Spam was the first canned food from the U.S. State Department .
 Aspirin and vitamin A pills were consumed in large doses to aid night vision .
 He promised lobster dinners in Boston in exchange for a case of fresh New Zealand mutton . The deal was made with lobster dinners and fresh mutton in exchange .
 The mission of the PT boats was to move in dangerously close to a Japanese destroyer in the Solomons under the cover of darkness and then attack with missiles . Vintage torpedoes that rarely hit anything when fired .
 The PT crew then were to race away under the cover of the smoke screen produced by a generator on the back of the boat . They then escaped being hit by the enemy’s large destroyer guns .
 Sinking Japanese troop and supply ships as well as shredding airfields, ships and planes was the mission while fighting in the Solomons . Sink Japanese troops, supply ships and airfields were the mission .
 With no radar guidance or radio communication, the massive hull of a Japanese warship was upon him . With no radio communication or radar guidance, he was unable to communicate with the ship .
 Andrew Jackson Kirksey, who had a premonition of death, and Harold William Marney, were never to be seen again . The two men were found dead at the scene .
 They had no food, no water, no radio, no life raft, no medical supplies and most scattered over a wide debris field . Most were scattered over debris field and most were scattered . Most of the survivors had no water or food and no radio .
 They clung to overturned, unburned bow of the boat and on Kennedy’s orders, fully exposed to Japanese pilots or lookouts . They made their way to Plum Pudding Island that appeared not to be inhabited by the Japanese . The island is believed to be Plum P
 Kennedy placed the strap of badly burned McMahon between his teeth and carried him on his back . He swam to the small island three and one half miles away . Kennedy then carried the badly burned victim to the island .
 Exhausted when they finally arrived at the desolate island, they crawled on their hands and knees to take cover in the trees and bushes . The group crawled on hands-and-kills to take shelter .
 There were no land animals to hunt and eat, no nutritional plant life, no fresh water . There were also no nutritional plants and fresh water to eat, and there was no food to eat .
 He undertook an arduous mission but with the currents, ended up right back where he started . He undertook the arduous task but ended up back at the bottom of the river .
 Coastwatchers found eleven lost American sailors starving and dehydrated on Naru and Olasana Islands . Coastwatches found the men on the islands . Coastwatchers found the sailors on the Naru Islands .
 Kennedy was credited with holding his crew together during their post-crash ordeal as well as getting out there every night and swimming to find help . Kennedy is credited with saving his crew from the crash .
 By November 1943, Kennedy was diagnosed with malaria, colitis, and had ‘chronic disc disease of the lower back’, and was severely underweight . Kennedy was also diagnosed with colitis and colitis .
 The White House is a presidential candidate for his second to oldest son . President Barack Obama has a son in Washington, D.C., with a daughter in New York .
 Joe Jr. had been number one son for the office of President until Joe was killed in action during a patrol-bombing mission out of London . Joe Jr.'s father was killed during a bombing mission in London in 1944 .
 John Kennedy grew up in the shadow of his older brother, the leader of the pack of eight children . John Kennedy was born into a family of eight . He was the youngest child of his siblings .
 The Kennedy children were raised in homes devoid of familial warmth while being chauffeur-driven around in Rolls-Royces . The Kennedy family was raised in a home without familial warmth .
 A family friend said the Kennedy children didn’t have their own rooms with pictures on the walls, memorabilia on the shelves . The Kennedy children were raised in New York City, New Jersey .
 When they came home from boarding schools, they took whatever room was available . When they returned from boarding school, they used to take whatever room they could .
 Joe Kennedy was a ‘ruthless businessman and investor who capitalized on his wealth to become perhaps America’s premier social climber’, wrote Jacob Heilbrunn .
 He was a master manipulator of money and people and excelled in games without rules . He was master manipulators of money, people and people .
 John came home, Joe went to work selling the mythology of PT 109 . Joe went on to sell the myth of the PT 109.
 Asked how he became a war hero, Kennedy told a young man, ‘It was easy. It was easy,’ he said .
 In pursuit of his 18-year quest to have a son in the White House that began in ’42 by getting John into PT boat service, Joseph P doggedly went after buying his son that big chair in the oval office .
 'RFK was already a full-blown tyrant. Bobby became campaign manager and according to Franklin D Roosevelt Jr., ‘Bobby became campaign . manager’ Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. Jr. said ‘RFK had already been a tyrant.’ FDR Jr.
 Vice President Nixon had served honorably in the South Pacific . His service was known for his poker-playing skill and management of a hamburger stand rather than combat .
 The film became the basis of a 1963 Hollywood movie starring Cliff Robertson .
 Joe Kennedy personally negotiated that book option contract with Warner Brothers . Joe Kennedy stayed involved in the movie’s development until a stroke incapacitated him in 1961 .
 Jackie wanted Warren Beatty to play her husband, but Beatty thought the project was doomed . Beatty wanted to play his wife, Jackie, but he thought the movie was doomed. Jackie wanted to star in a biopic of Beatty's wife .
 The film came out in June 1963, just five months before President Kennedy was assassinated .
 I was a very young boy when Jack Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1960s . I was very young when JFK was assassinated, I wrote to Naegele .
 "There are a few things I do remember about him and his election, but especially his murder," he says . "There is a lot more to learn about him," he adds .
 It caused a great impact on me and, I guess as you, started admiring him. It caused me to start thinking of him. He said: 'It was a very special moment of my life. It was a great experience'
 Yes his mother made a dysfunction family, yes his criminal father groomed him for the presidency, yes he was involved with the mafia, yes it seems his father recruited the mafia bosses in Chicago to help him win the 1960 election en Illinois and West Virginia . Yes Jack Kennedy may have been
 I do respectfully disagree with you on several political issues during the Kennedy administration . But I do respect your views on several issues during that administration, I do .
 I am not a United States national and today I do not live in the United States. I'm not a U.S. national, I am a citizen of China, not a Chinese national . I'm proud to be a member of the U.N.
 "I was living in San Francisco, California at that time due to a diplomatic position my father held," she says . "I have a different vision and perspective to a citizen of the United States," she adds .
 He did have a very great standoff with the military, the CIA, JCS, NSA, etc etc. for military actions he did not permit in Vietnam, Laos, Cuba and Berlin . He did not allow military actions in those countries .
 JFK and Khrushchev’s stubbornness prevented a war with the Soviets, says JFK . Many great U.S. patriots were Cold Warriors and right wing radicals tried to drive the United States into a war against the Soviets .
 Such a great change that maybe the great nation was not yet ready to make, perhaps it was a mistake . The nation's greatest change may be in the midst of a new era .
 His approach to Latin America with the Alliance for Progress was something Latin Americans had been asking for, for decades . His approach was something the Latin American had asked for for decades, he says .
 Nixon was cheered and loved in every city he visited when only a few years back, Nixon had been spat on and booed . His car was stoned and his car stoned through the streets of Caracas .
 I also agree with you that his early demise turned the man into a myth, but most of all, it gives us the idea of great change taking place, so great that to avoid it, it was necessary to change the government . I agree with your views, but I agree that
 Kennedy was not assassinated because he took up mistresses; he was assassinated because of the policies he pursued . Kennedy was assassinated by the policies that he pursued, not by mistresses . He was assassinated for his policies, not for his mistresses, but for his own life .
 Lee Harvey Oswald assassinated JFK not for any policy reasons, author says . President Kennedy was assassinated by Oswald, not for policy reasons . Kennedy was killed by Oswald in September of 1963 .
 I believe the thread that runs through his life is that of a totally despicable human being. Also, I believe that he is a total human being . Also, he believes that he's a total liar .
 Kennedy’s health was such that he might have died naturally before he could be reelected to a second term . Kennedy's health may have been such ailing that he could have died before he was reelected .
 The Kennedys have destroyed documents, and denied access at the Kennedy Library to conservative scholars and others who might be critical of JFK’s presidency and the man himself . The Kennedy Library has also denied access to conservatives who might have criticized JFK .
 I have not changed my conclusion one iota that he was and is the most despicable president in America’s history. I have continued to say, ‘I have not . changed my . conclusion one . iota’ that . he was . and is . the most
 I do not believe he is worth writing about except as I have done in the article above and my comments beneath it . I have also done the same article below and below .
 The same thing is true of the rest of the Kennedys, who constitute the most dysfunctional prominent family in American history . The family is dysfunctional and dysfunctional, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is not too farfetched to say that they have been a blight on America, which thankfully has run its course, at least until authors like you write your next book .
 Lee was actually standing in the entry to the TSBD when the motorcade passed . Lee was standing there at the time of the event .
 He not only cannot have been ‘the lone gunman’, he must have been one o the shooters, of whom I have identified six, the shots they took and their hits . He has identified six of the shooters as well as the shooter .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the Warren Commission’s lone-assassin-designate, was not among them . Remarkably, he was not included in the commission's final decision . Oswald was not a member of the commission .
 WCR critic/researcher Dr. Dr. Michael Lister talks about the importance of WCR in Santa Barbara . Dr. Lister is a Santa Barbara resident and author of The Santa Barbara Independent . Lister: "WCR is a great place to learn about science
 JFK 5.5″ below the shoulder just to the right of the spinal column . He used a 30.06 to fire a Mannlicher-Carcano bullet fitted with a plastic collar .
 Jack Lawrence, a United States Air Force expert, fired the shot that passed through the windshield and struck JFK in the throat from the south end of the Triple Underpass . Lawrence had worked for the dealership that provided vehicles for the presidential motorcade just a few days before the assassination .
 Nestor Izquierdo, an anti-Castro Cuban recruited by the CIA, fired the shot that hit JFK in the back of the head after the limousine was brought to a halt . The shot was fired by anti-Cuba Cuban Nestor "Tony" Iz
 He fired three shots with two misses using a Mannlicher-Carcano, which were the only unsilenced shots fired, from the Dal-Tex Building, which housed a uranium mining corporation, Dallas Uranium and Oil, that was a CIA front .
 His son discovered his diary, but gave it to the FBI and it has not been seen since . His son subsequently discovered the diary and it was given to them by FBI .
 Fetzer is said to have fired from the north end of the Triple Underpass . Frank Sturgis, later complicit in the Watergate robbery, also appears to have been connected to the CIA . Fetzer fired the shot that entered Kennedy’s right temple .
 Fetzer says there were up to 10 shots fired, three of which missed . Fetzer said “there were shooters at six different locations,” with a total of 10 . shots fired .
 The Warren Commission concluded that a single bullet struck Kennedy in the back, exited through his throat and then wounded Connelly . By contrast, the Warren Commission said a single shot struck Kennedy and exited through the throat .
 Fetzer: Warren Commission's 'magic bullet' theory is provably false . Fetzer says cervical vertebrae intervene, not even anatomically possible . He says the “magic bullet’s” theory is not only false, but provably true .
 Ruth Paine arranged for Oswald to go to work for at book depository "just weeks before the assassination," Fetzer says . Paine appears to have been working for the CIA, according to Fetzer . Oswald was set up as a patsy, Fetzer said .
 Oswald was a paid FBI informant, collecting $200 a month . His W-2 forms have never been released by the government .
 Fetzer says JFK was threatening to shatter CIA into a thousand pieces . Fetzer: Joint Chiefs believed he was soft on communism . Mafia was unhappy because Attorney General Robert Kennedy was cracking down on organized crime .
 Fetzer said Vice President Johnson "was a pivotal player” facilitating the assassination . Fetzer: Johnson forced his way onto the ticket with JFK in Los Angeles to succeed him when he would be taken out .
 LBJ sent his chief administrative assistant, Cliff Carter, down to Dallas to make sure all the arrangements for the assassination were in place . Cliff Carter was LBJ's top administrative assistant .
 Fetzer produced an AP photograph that appears to show Oswald standing in doorway of the book depository at the time JFK was shot . What’s more, Fetzer also produced a photo of Oswald standing at the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald’s photograph taken later that afternoon in Dallas police headquarters . Oswald's photograph may be compared with his photograph taken that afternoon . Oswald was killed in September 1963 .
 Oswald told detective Will Fritz he had been standing with Bill Shelley, one of his supervisors, in front of the building . Oswald said he was standing with Shelley, a Dallas homicide detective, when he was shot .
 Note the missing left shoulder and the figure who is in front of and behind the man in the doorway at the same time, which are obvious indications the photo has been altered . The photo was taken by a man in a doorway in the middle of the night .
 Oswald Innocence Campaign provides proof that Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald . Visit the campaign's website on-line to find out more about the man in the doorway .
 The only other candidates for having been there were not wearing comparable clothing or did not fit the height, weight and build of the man in the doorway .
 "When you consider the totality of the evidence, no alternative explanation is reasonable" "No alternative explanation" is reasonable, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The first thing that I did as a young attorney with the U.S. Senate Banking Committee was to staff a presidential commission . "The first thing" he did was staff the presidential commission, he said. "I'm a very proud member of the United States Banking Committee"
 While it was not a criminal inquiry, much less of the magnitude of the Warren Commission, it was an important undertaking . The inquiry was not criminal, but it was important for the public to know .
 The theories about JFK’s death are almost endless . It is unlikely that the truth will ever be known, much less with certainty, with certainty .
 It is even more bizarre than the theories surrounding the Teamster Jimmy Hoffa’s death .
 Tim: I guess you’re probably right about the Kennedys at the JFK Library . Tim: "I guess you're probably right"
 If he´d been my father or relative, I would also try to keep a lid on the myth. If I had been my dad or relative I would have tried to keep it quiet. If he had been a relative, he would have kept the myth alive .
 Never in U.S. history had the United States government been more admired and respected all over the world . Never in United States history had a higher respect for the government .
 If you believe Lee Harvey Oswald was the crazy, lone assassin, without a motive, you believe there was no conspiracy . You believe in the magic bullet theory and can prove it is factual . You disagree with members John Sherman Cooper, Richard Russel Jr. and Hale Boggs doubts
 With all due respect I must say that, it is one of the great things of living in a democracy. With all the due respect, it's a great thing that democracy is alive in the world, he says .
 With respect to the “cover-up,” among other things it goes to the state of JFK’s health before his death . JFK was in poor health before he died, according to the doctor .
 It has been suggested that he would not have lived to run for reelection . The drugs he was taking and his STDs were major issues unto themselves, according to reports .
 Documents were destroyed that might have shed light on all of the issues discussed in my article above . But even then, countless documents were destroyed . Many documents might shed light to all the issues .
 With respect to the assassination itself, we will never know for certain . We will never be able to determine the circumstances surrounding the assassination .
 I accept the Warren Commission’s findings, but I realize too that other theories may have validity . While I accept Warren Commission's findings, I realize that there may be other theories to be true, he says .
 Americans are insular in their thinking, says President Obama . He says there was a "global love" for the U.S. during his presidency and now .
 Many have never traveled far from where they were born and raised, much less abroad . Many of the world's most famous Americans have never left their homeland .
 In a very real sense, they view the United States as an island bounded by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans . The U.S. is an island in the Atlantic Ocean .
 This explains why Donald Trump is resonating and likely to be our next president . This explains the “America First” doctrine that is embraced by so many, says Julian Zelizer .
 Americans are tired of being the “policeman of the world,” and they want to concentrate on their own towns, states, regions and country . Americans want to live in their own states, cities and regions, and they are tired .
 Two wars for nothing, in Vietnam and Iraq, drove these feelings home in spades . Two wars in Iraq and Vietnam for nothing is not a good idea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Almost 60,000 Americans died in Vietnam, and thousands died in Iraq, while thousands more were maimed for life and trillions of dollars were wasted . Millions of dollars have been wasted .
 Lyndon Johnson was so hated that he could not run for reelection in 1968 . Because of it, he was so unpopular he was not allowed to run for president again .
 The Bushes have fallen in the public’s esteem because of the Iraq War, which many feel was foisted on us by Israel and its “neocon” surrogates . Many feel the war was foist on us and foisted by Israel .
 The United States is the largest energy producer in the world, and essentially energy independent . Today, the U.S. is the world's largest energy-producing power producer .
 Many Americans would vigorously oppose another war in the Middle East, even if Israel’s survival was at stake . Many if not most Americans would oppose another Mideast war .
 Trump tapped into the American “mood,” and his rival Bernie Sanders has too, with his anti-establishment campaign . Trump has tapped into America’s ‘mood’ and Sanders has also tapped into it, says CNN.com's John Sutter
 Both have been riding a wave of rage, which shows no sign of ebbing anytime soon . Both men are riding the wave of anger .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was United States intelligence and he shot NO ONE on 11/22/63 . Oswald was U.S. intelligence and shot NO one on 11-22/13 . Oswald shot no one on that date . Oswald had been a U.K. intelligence operative .
 “Spy Saga: Lee Harvey Oswald and United States Intelligence” book by Philip Melanson 4) “History Will Not Absolve Us” by Martin Schotz . ‘Me and Lee’ book by Judyth Vary Baker 6) ‘Cross
 U.S. military/CIA COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE with a **fake public persona** of a pro-Castro Marxist. The U.N. government has been accused of using a fake public persona to create a ‘fake’ public persona .
 His bosses used him like a pawn on a chessboard, frame him for JFK’s murder, then kill him in 48 hours, then frame him . LBJ-CIA-FBI posthumously frame this guy, then killed him in the next 48 hours .
 The Kennedys were out to destroy Johnson and the CIA/military were enraged over Cuba policy and no U.S. invasion at the Bay of Pigs or during the Cuban Missile crisis . The CIA was enraged over no United States invasion at Bay of the Pigs .
 Bobby’s widow understood the Kennedys better than anyone who wasn’t born into the family, a new biography claims . Bobby's widow was fully aware of what she was getting herself into, the new biography says . Bobby Kennedy's widow understood her husband's family better
 She knew infidelity was the price to pay for being married to a Kennedy man and that she had to keep her mouth shut under an unspoken contract . She knew that infidelity .
 The book says that Ethel loved her husband ‘more completely than she dreamed possible’ – and this meant she was able to look the other way . Ethel’s husband was found murdered in a bungalow in 1963 .
 The Making of A Liberal Icon' by Larry Tye also claims that Bobby suffered what would today be called a nervous breakdown after JFK’s assassination in 1963 .
 Bobby built a shrine to his dead brother in his office with photographs, books and other mementos . Bobby built the shrine in the months following his brother's death .
 He wore his brother’s bomber jacket with the Presidential seal on it . He drove past Arlington cemetery twice a day to ‘visit the President’ as if he were still alive .
 Bobby was seen as the most puritanical of his eight siblings . He was asked to be Attorney General by his brother when he became President . Bobby was the one who was seen to be the one .
 Bobby’s tough, bare knuckle political style was just like their wealthy father Joseph P Kennedy . Bobby's tough and bare-knuckle style is just like his wealthy father .
 Joseph had a mistress, silent film star Gloria Swanson, and flings with numerous other women . Tye says he learned his wandering eye from his father, Joseph .
 He married Ethel in 1950 when she was 22 and the following year the first of their 11 children was born . He married her in 1950 and they had 11 children together .
 Bobby’s list of conquests supposedly included stars like Kim Novak, Lee Remick and Claudine Longet . But outside of his marriage, Bobby allegedly had other conquests . The singer also had a long list of famous women .
 He supposedly was having an affair with Marilyn Monroe too – possibly at the same time as his brother . Marilyn Monroe also had an affair – possibly with his brother – also possibly with her sister .
 Tye interviewed Ethel, who is now 88, extensively for the book . She gave one of the frankest accounts so far of her late husband’s dalliances .
 Bobby was ‘much more selective and limited’ than his brother Jack, according to a friend of Bobby’s who traveled with him extensively . Richard Goodwin said that it was a ‘Kennedy family tradition’ to sleep around .
 The other woman Bobby was rumored to have had an affair with was Jackie Kennedy, his brother’s widow . Jackie Kennedy is rumored to be Bobby Kennedy's brother's widow .
 FBI files have claimed that the two were sleeping together between 1964 and 1968 . FBI files claim that the pair built their relationship on grief and on a long-standing affection .
 FBI files have revealed that Ethel was so concerned that she confronted David Ormsby-Gore, British ambassador to the U.S. during the Kennedy administration .
 She admitted that Jackie may not have been entirely bad for her husband . However looking back she admitted that it may have been she who lifted Bobby from his despair after Jack’s death .
 Hoover delivered the news with his characteristic monotone which made it all the more ghastlyly . Hoover had delivered the . news with . his characteristic monotone which made it . all the . more . ghastfully .
 His hand automatically went to his face, unable to hide his anguish, which Ethel saw from the other side of the pool . Ethel was in the pool at the time of the attack .
 Bobby was told his brother was dead 30 minutes later . Bobby's brother was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head . Bobby was the last person to be killed in the line of duty .
 Lyndon Johnson asked if he had any objections to him being sworn in as President immediately . Another thirty minutes later he received a tone-deaf phone call from Lyndon Johnson . Johnson asked him to be sworn in immediately .
 Bobby made sure he was at Andrews Air Force base to meet Jackie and his brother’s body . Bobby's brother's body was found by the Air Force at the base .
 Bobby was the one who inspected his brother’s casket in the East Room and told them to close the coffin because it did not resemble Jack . Bobby was one of the ones who inspected the casket and closed it .
 Bobby spiraled into what Tye calls a ‘deeper, darker stage of mourning’ in the months later when he would stare out of the window during meetings at the Department of Justice and could not focus on even reading documents .
 Jack’s assassination came after Joe Kennedy Jr died during World War II in 1944 and four years before a plane crash would claim his sister Kathleen . As Tye writes, Jack's assassination came just four years after his older sister Kathleen died in a crash .
 Bobby's sister Rosemary was in an institution in Wisconsin due to failed lobotomy . Bobby's father had had a stroke and was in a wheelchair . Bobby’s sister was also in a institution .
 On June 6 1968 the ‘Curse of the Kennedys’ would claim Bobby too when he was assassinated, just like his brother . Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 There were once nine Kennedy children living under the roof of parents Joseph P and Rose Kennedy, the most prominent family in American politics in the 20th century .
 Jean Kennedy, now 88, is the last living sibling of president John F Kennedy and Robert F Kennedy . Jean Kennedy is now 88 and is the youngest surviving sibling of the Kennedy brothers .
 As second youngest in the family, little did Jean know her siblings would soon occupy major political offices . Jean was second youngest to her siblings to become a politician .
 We would not have been complete if they had stopped at two or four or even six. We would have had to stop at two, four or six, it would have been more successful, says the author .
 'They were the source of my amusement and the objects of my admiration,’ she says .
 Summer began in June when the family headed to the 'big white house' facing the sea in Hyannis Port .
 Joseph, 9, enjoys a horseback ride through cranberry bogs with Teddy, 9 . Teddy is Joseph's first child to join him in the family . Teddy joins Joseph on horseback rides through the cranberry bog .
 Rose began her day driving to St Francis Xavier Church in Hyannis for daily Mass . She drives to the church every day to attend daily Mass in the town .
 Eunice, Bobby or Jean sometimes joined her, and other times they stayed burrowed in their pillows knowing what day was going to bring would be exciting .
 Joe, born in 1936, was baby number one and quickly became first at everything . Dean’s list at Harvard, head of every activity he joined . Joe became first to win a championship trophy in football in football and Harvard .
 The boy who went on to be the president of the United States was sickly with the typical childhood diseases often and spent that time reading – developing a lifelong love of books . The boy – who went before being the president - was sick and spent most of his childhood reading .
 ‘Only as I grew up did I realize that Rosemary had challenges that the rest of us did not have. Rosemary was the third and ‘only as I . grew up, I realized that . Rosemary’s challenges were that the . rest of the .
 The only words the doctors had to describe her condition were ‘mental retardation’‘, Jean writes . Jean writes.
 Kathleen was the second girl and nicknamed ‘Kick’ because she kicked off her covers in the morning . Kathleen was nicknamed 'Kick' because she was nicknamed for kicking off her bed covers . Kathleen is the daughter of two sisters who died in the hospital .
 Kick, like Rosemary, was close to their father, but she traveled in a pack with Joe, John and her girlfriends . Kick traveled with Joe and John and their girlfriends in the wild .
 Eunice came in at number five, and rattled the boys with her competitive sporting abilities . She was ranked five in the top five of the girls' sports events .
 Patricia, 'Pat' was number six and had a great love of the dramatic arts . Patricia, ‘Pat’, was number 6 and had been number six . She was number one and had 'a great love' of the drama .
 Number seven was Bobby who had compassion for everyone and every rabbit, dog, pig, chipmunk, frog, frog . Bobby's compassion was a big part of the story .
 The last baby was Teddy, ‘adored by all’, with chubby cheeks, lovable, carefree, and the happiest on the sea . Teddy was ‘lovable’ and ‘happiest on sea.’
 When Rose had suffered enough antics from one child, she sent them to the closet . She sent them out of the closet.
 Their Irish nanny, Kathleen ‘Kikoo’ Conboy, bellowed at the kids if she didn’t like what they were up to and reported them to Rose, who then sent them to the closet . The children were sent to a closet by their n
 Kikoo aggressively tried to get Bobby to go to sleep by banging his head against the wall, Jean says . Jean says Kikoo was trying to keep Bobby from going to sleep . Jean: "Kikoo was aggressive and aggressive. He was aggressive"
 The kids’ other nurse, Keela Cahill, stepped in and stopped Kikoo’s head banging . But the other nurse stopped the head banging.
 Kikoo lined up all nine every Saturday night to record their heights, marking it on the door’s molding . Kikoo kept the height of the door to record each other's heights .
 Jean Jean viewed Rose’s wardrobe collected from frequent shopping trips stateside and abroad . Jean viewed the wardrobe in the closet .
 One time ‘I stuck my grubby toes into mother’s ivory satin shoes, the ones she had just brought home from Paris. One time she had to stick her toes in the shoes,’ she said .
 So teaching what is right and wrong was left up to the Catholic Church . The Catholic Church was left out of teaching what was right or wrong .
 They were ruled by faith, prayer, the sign of the cross, and a rosary in every pocket when traveling . The family was ruled out of religion by faith and prayer .
 Joseph’s role model was his father and at eight years old, young Joe won an oak bookcase from the Larkin Soap Company by selling the most soap and collecting the coupons inside . Joseph won the bookcase by selling most soap by collecting the coupon inside .
 He sold newspapers to workers on the docks in East Boston and peanuts and candy to passengers on the boats . He also sold newspapers and candy from the passengers on boats .
 He became the youngest bank president when he was 25 years old . He then went on to Harvard and became a Harvard graduate .
 "Because the family was so large, every expense had to be justified," she said . "Because of the family's size, it had to justify every expense," she added .
 Rose loved to play golf and never came home without all the balls she went out with – even if that meant endless searching in the rough for a mis-hit ball . Rose never came back home without any of her golf balls .
 The kids were told there was no slouching on chores and were all forced to get a job . The children were told they had to get to work in order to keep up chores .
 Teddy mucked stables at the barn in Osterville on Cape Cod while Jean volunteered at the hospital in Hyannis making beds, changing bedpans, sweeping floors and helping the nurses . Jean volunteered to make beds, change bed pans and sweeping floors at the Hyannis hospital . Teddy
 He believed that women should be homemakers and not pursue professions traditionally held by men . He believed women should not pursue careers traditionally held in traditionally male roles .
 In the home, the rules were no whining, give back, and use your talents and minds . In the . home, no whining was allowed, and give back . Use your talents, use your . talents, minds and talents .
 Eunice was one of the fiercest competitors at the age of nine . The nine children learned how to compete and found a love of winning . The children were taught to compete on the sea and sailing .
 As a boy, he had no need for a pet dog or cat – One More was his faithful companion . As a child, he was always with him and his family .
 Rose wouldn't admit it but the children believed she had a soft spot for Bobby, the seventh child surrounded by girls . Rose wouldn’t admit it, but she wouldn't say it .
 Jean writes that being encircled by females perhaps made him more sensitive and intuitive . Jean says that being surrounded by females may have helped him become more sensitive .
 Briefly, he was a paperboy but tiring of that early morning ritual, he prevailed upon his father’s chauffeur to drive him along his route .
 Bobby loved all animals and doted on his large pink-and-black spotted pig, Porky . He persuaded the chauffeur to let Porky ride in the back seat with him to school . Porky was Bobby's favorite pet .
 He felt such a deep connection to Saint Francis, who loved every little creature, he asked for Francis to be his middle name . He felt so much of a connection to him that he named him Francis .
 He saved the stamps from his parent’s daily incoming international mail . Another love was his stamp collection .
 Joseph served as president Roosevelt’s first chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . He alerted the president, a stamp collector himself, to Bobby's interest . Bobby's father, Joseph, was Roosevelt's first chairman .
 Rose was always encouraging lessons in piano, golf, sailing, French, painting, ice skating, tennis – even if the activity was of no interest to that child . Rose always encouraged lessons in tennis, piano and golf, even if it was no interest .
 Joseph asked Joseph to send a letter to the other American diplomats around the world asking them to send two dolls dressed in their country’s native dress .
 Teddy fell in love with art at an early age and when headed to Maine one summer, he stopped to visit the home of American painter, Andrew Wyeth . Teddy visited Wyeth's Maine home one summer and visited his favourite painter .
 A friendship evolved and he returned to visit every summer every summer for the rest of his life . A friendship developed and the friendship grew .
 In 1964, he broke his back in a plane crash and for six months was confined in an apparatus that held him motionless in the center of his body . For six months, he was confined to a chair that was attached to his body in a machine .
 While hanging upside down he painted for hours on canvases beneath him . The frame was rotated every few hours and while hanging upside he painted .
 She often went to Tanglewood, the summer home of the Boston Symphony, where she and Joseph went during their early courtship . She and Joseph often went there during their courtship days .
 What began as sport inspired by the times and her husband connected to the Roosevelt administration, became prophetic . The sport was inspired by her husband and became prophetic.
 Dinnertime rituals began at 6.30pm when everyone was to arrive in the parlor, bathed, in a clean outfit, with his or her hair combed .
 At 7.00pm, she ceased playing and announced that dinner was served . Dinner was served and all filed into the dining room .
 Rose loved to walk but turned to the car when she went off to daily Mass . Rose turned to her car at the end of her daily Masses .
 Tiring of that early morning excursion, they decided to pool their money and buy her a small coupe for her birthday .
 Later that afternoon, she announced she would drive herself to Mass but expected to be driven everywhere else . She announced that she would not be driven to Mass or to other events .
 Joseph was appointed by president Roosevelt as U.S. ambassador to the Court of St James in 1938 . He moved the family to London when he was appointed as ambassador to St James .
 It was an exciting time, enrollment at Sacred Heart Convent schools, making their social debut at the Court, an audience with Pope Pius XII . It was until England declared war on Germany in September 1939 and they boarded an ocean liner headed back to the United States .
 Rosemary and Joseph stayed for a while, but he soon decided to send Rosemary home . Joseph and Rosemary stayed together for a time .
 In August 1944, ‘fate determined that our family would never be whole again when the news arrived that Joe had been lost,’ Jean wrote . Jean wrote that Joe's family 'would never be fully whole again'
 A pilot in the Navy, Joe Jr had volunteered for one more flying assignment over Europe when his plane was hit . Joe Jr was a Navy pilot who volunteered to be a pilot in Europe .
 Rosemary's learning disabilities might be helped by a new procedure, a lobotomy . Joseph had decided that Rosemary’s learning disabilities may be helped . Rosemary suffered from learning disabilities . Joseph decided to lobotomate Rosemary in 1941 .
 Joseph thought he had received the best medical advice and connected with the expert, Dr Watts . Dr Watts performed the galling procedure to perform the procedure .
 Rose Williams, sister of playwright Tennessee Williams suffered the same fate at the hands of the butcher doctors . They later learned that Rose Williams was the sister of Tennessee Williams .
 Rosemary was sent off to be cared for by the sisters of St Coletta at the School for Exceptional Children in Wisconsin .
 Her family visited her two to three times a year, and she came east in the summer . Her family also visited her in the U.S.
 Her roommate turned out to be Ethel Skakel and they became fast friends and family when Ethel married Bobby . Ethel and Bobby married Bobby when Bobby married Ethel .
 Kick was killed in a plane crash in France in 1948 . Kick was also killed in the crash in which he was a passenger .
 We lost Dad, our giant and our leader in 1969, following a series of strokes . We lost him to a stroke in 1969 .
 ‘it is impossible to realize that they will not grace the earth and your life again’, Jean concludes .
 You would think you would be able to put your German Presbyterian past behind you and move on . But you can't put it behind you, and it's not easy to do so .
 Your family probably gave money to the Oswald’s through your Presbyterian Church after the JFK assassination just like the Fred Trump family . Fred Trump's family gave $1.5 million to Oswald's family .
 JFK was by far the most despicable president in our history, and that his brother Bobby was equally as bad . JFK was a despicable president, and Bobby was a terrible president .
 There is not one redeeming fact about JFK except his speeches and books, which were ghost written by Ted Sorensen . JFK's books and speeches are ghost-written by Ted . JFK was the only person to have a redeeming moment .
 JFK almost brought about a “nuclear winter,” which might have destroyed the U.S. and parts of the world . JFK was a total fraud, who was sufficiently reckless that he almost brought on a ‘nuclear winter’
 UK’s Daily Mail has reported: The public Jackie Kennedy was soft-spoken, elegant and had great charm and sophistication .
 Behind closed doors, the iconic first lady was aloof and ruthless . She left it to the nanny to deliver the news to little Caroline and John that their father, the president, had been assassinated . But behind closed doors she was ruthless .
 The Kennedys were not what they appeared to be, a new biography reveals . They were not exactly what they looked like, the new biography says . The family was a wealthy family, but they were not wealthy enough .
 Despite her charm and popularity with the American people, Jackie Kennedy struggled with the insecurity of her early family life, which left her closed off and reluctant to share her true self with others .
 Jackie Kennedy – born Jacqueline Bouvier – struggled with her own identity after her parents divorced . She chose to identify with the lifestyle of French aristocrats .
 As first lady, she imagined herself of a noble French heritage and lived accordingly, spending obscene amounts of money on haute couture French fashions . She imagined herself .
 Jackie wanted original designs only for her with no ‘fat little women hopping around’ in them, Oleg Cassini revealed . She wanted no 'fat little little women hopped around' in them . Jackie's favored fashion designer Oleg .
 She often wore a tiara at special events suggesting that she and the president were American royalty . The couple could make Washington the social and cultural capital of the world .
 Together at the White House, John and Jackie hosted raucous and often raunchy parties with friends in the family quarters .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson once fell face down drunk on the floor, the book reveals . Vice President Johnson fell drunk while sitting in the Oval Office, the author says . Johnson was the president of the United States from 1964 to 1968 .
 At a party for the Indian ambassador, Oleg Cassini paraded around in a bathrobe wielding a fireplace poker as his sword . Cassini was a guest at the party for Indian ambassador to India .
 Jackie chose to be away from the White House often and was a jet setter . She preferred socializing with international dignitaries or partying with the international playboy set .
 She smoked habitually and developed an amphetamine habit along with her husband according to the author . She also developed a habit of smoking and taking amphetamine .
 As dedicated as Jackie was depicted to be to their children, it was their English nanny, Maud Shaw, who was the one to inform the children of their father’s death .
 Jackie grew up in socially prominent families with homes in Manhattan, East Hampton, McLean, Virginia and Newport, Rhode Island . She was educated at elite private schools .
 Jackie now spent time with her mother’s second husband, Hugh Auchincloss, a wealthy Wall Street investor . Jackie now spends time with his mother's second husband .
 He was a large, clumsy man who ‘spoke with a stutter, collected pornography’ and pinched every penny . He was also a large-clumsy man who 'collected pornography' and ‘collected porn’
 Jackie kept in touch with her father and remained distant from her mother, Janet Lee Bouvier Auchincloss, ‘an ambitious social climber and society woman who could muster good humor and great charm when necessary'
 She was self conscious about what she considered flaws and tried to disguise them . Highly self-critical of her big feet and hands and eyes set wide apart, she was self-conscious .
 Early on, she felt detached from her mother and stepfather and distanced herself from them, she said . She said she felt disconnected from her family and her mother .
 She became disillusioned when she learned in the late 1950s that her personal family history was fiction . She was disillusioned with her family history when she found out she had no family .
 Her grandfather, John Vernon Bouvier, claimed he had traced both sides of his family back to illustrious French families . Her grandfather said he traced both of his families back to France .
 Jackie was only one-eighth French on her grandfather’s side and her mother was descended from humble Irish immigrants . But in truth, Jackie was actually only one eighth French .
 Jackie imagined herself as being part of something similar to the influential literary salons of Paris in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth century . The false genealogy inspired Jackie to envision herself as a member of the literary salon of Paris . Jackie was inspired by the idea of a similar literary sal
 Jackie spent lavishly on expensive French designer clothing which drew critical media commentary during his 1960 presidential campaign .
 Her wardrobe expenditures had always disturbed Jack so she decided that once they were in the White House, she would send her clothing bills to her father-in-law, Joseph P Kennedy, to hide them .
 She promised to limit herself to one American fashion designer and Oleg Cassini became her choice . Cassini is one of the world's most famous designers .
 Cassini wasn’t an American but rather a Paris-born couturier who had become a U.S. citizen and a popular Hollywood designer . Cassini was born in Paris, France, but later moved to the United States and became a citizen .
 He had many affairs with Hollywood starlets including Grace Kelly . He had a marriage to actress Gene Tierney . He also had affairs with Grace Kelly and was married to Gene Tierneys .
 Jackie only met Cassini when introduced by her father-in-law who shared a mutual love of beautiful young women in Hollywood with Cassini . Cassini was the first woman Jackie had met in Hollywood .
 Jackie’s husband was okay with his father paying for her expensive wardrobe because it fit in with their image of this new generation taking center stage in American political life . Jackie's husband was OKed by his father's decision to pay for her wardrobe .
 Jack was interested enough to choose the dress Jackie wore on that fateful day in Dallas . Jack chose the dress she wore that fateful moment .
 Behind the facade of 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Jack’s debilitating back pain required crutches that the public never witnessed . Jack needed heavy medication to ease the constant pain . The public never saw his back pain, and he was forced to take heavy medication .
 The drugs didn’t abate his sex drive or sexual addictions nor slow him down from chasing women anywhere he could, writes the author .
 He used the White House parties as an occasion to proposition women like Mary Meyer . Meyer was a divorcee from the Georgetown social scene the Kennedys romped in when he was a Senator .
 It was rumored that Meyer brought marijuana and LSD for the couple to consume during their torrid trysts . Meyer and Meyer were rumored to have been using LSD and marijuana .
 Kennedy paid back the press for keeping news of his sexual proclivities out of the papers with invites to uninhibited cavorting in the White House pool with babes .
 All of Jack’s friends knew of the strain in the marriage and the Kennedys cut off relationships with anyone who gossiped about it . All of the friends of Jack and Jack knew of his marriage strain .
 Jackie was able to hide her cigarette smoking and they both slid into amphetamine consumption to keep up the pace . Jackie and Jackie were able to keep their drug consumption low .
 Jackie escaped the White House scene often and her husband’s roving eye and hands – spending days at their home in Virginia hunt country .
 Jackie traveled to Greece in the summer of 1961 and partied with Crown Prince Constantine . Jack was bedridden with crippling back pain at the White House . Jackie traveled with the crown prince in Greece .
 A subsequent jet-setting holiday for the First Lady took her to the famed Amalfi coast of Italy . She stayed with friends and Giovanni Agnelli, the handsome Italian auto manufacturer .
 They sailed on his yacht, danced at a nightclub in Capri and tanned together on the beach . They danced at nightclubs, danced in a nightclub, tanned on beach and sailed on yacht .
 One month before Jack’s assassination in 1963, she vacationed again in Greece with her sister, Lee Radziwell . She sailed the Greek islands on Aristotle Onassis's yacht .
 Rumors of trouble in the marriage and Jack’s extra-marital conquests never ceased circulating in Washington .
 Jackie was spoiled and self-indulgent just like her husband who needed to be the star of the show . Jackie's husband was the star .
 She briefly became that, beginning with the restoration of the White House . The former first lady of Washington, D.C. has been in the spotlight for a decade .
 She wanted a stage equal to any French palace for the performance of her husband’s presidency . She wanted to create a stage equivalent to any other French palace .
 She gave a television tour winning an Emmy . She established the White House Historical Association and wrote a guidebook on 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue .
 She restored the gardens, renovated historic townhouses and Blair House used for the President’s guest house . She launched an aggressive marketing campaign to sell what was the Kennedy image celebrating the superiority of the United States .
 Kennedy’s assassination in 1963 triggered mythical proportions of grief, shock and idealization inspiring Jackie to sweep in and take charge of every detail to assure that the great deception of Kennedy's character continue after his death .
 She had to make sure that his identity be defined less by his achievements than by what he appeared to represent . War hero, loving husband and father, peacemaker and progressive leader .
 She scripted, staged and directed his funeral and embellished his status as an American hero . She created an afterlife that has lasted more than half a century generating more than 40,000 books .
 Jackie’s message was that her husband was a heroic peacemaker who sacrificed his life try to calm an increasingly violent political culture . Jackie's message: ‘I’m a hero peacemaker. I sacrifice my life to calm a growing political culture.’
 She copied Lincoln’s stately funeral down to the famed riderless horse . She wanted Jack's funeral to imitate Lincoln's as well as Lincoln's legacy . Jack's death was the first horse to die in a stately ceremony .
 Ethel Kennedy’s wig was pulled from her head and passed around the room . Bobby Kennedy got into a tiff with Aristotle Onassis making fun of his wealth . Aristotle made fun of the wealth .
 She tried to copyright history and asked everyone who had known her husband not to speak to historians writing books . She also tried to stop historians writing about her husband's life .
 She tried to influence historians to overlook his plot to overthrow Fidel Castro, his early contribution to the global arms race and escalation of Eisenhower’s commitment to Vietnam .
 Revisionists argued that Kennedy had been too conservative, was incompetent with his handling of the Bay of Pigs disaster, risked nuclear war with the Soviets .
 Others concluded Kennedy was the most dangerous leader of the postwar era . Others concluded that Kennedy was most dangerous to the nation .
 Historians have accused him of reading spy novels and not history; winning a Pulitzer thanks to his father – for a book he didn’t write – and associating with the mafia, and consuming drugs — marijuana, LSD and amphetamine — as well flagrantly having orgies
 Kathleen Kennedy addressed the allegations of sexual misconduct surrounding Harvey Weinstein at the 24th annual Elle Women in Hollywood celebration held at the Four Seasons Hotel in Beverly Hills .
 Kennedy praised the women who had come forward to accuse Weinstein and said that this act will embolden other women . Kennedy also said that women will be emboldened to speak out against Weinstein . Kennedy said that she hopes that the women will continue to come forward .
 Kennedy then proposed a bold, industry-led strategy in the form of a commission . Kennedy: "It's time for a commission to take on the issue of the future of the industry"
 The organizations that constitute the American film industry — the studios, the unions the guilds and the talent agencies — should immediately convene a commission of developing new, industry-wide protections against sexual harassment and abuse .
 Commission will be composed of labor and management specialists, lawyers and legal scholars, sociologists, psychologists, psychologists and feminist activists and theorists .
 The goal of this commission would be to transform our industry in regards to sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace,” she said .
 Jennifer Lawrence said she supports Kennedy’s proposition . Fellow honoree Jennifer Lawrence also supports Kennedy's proposal .
 The prolific producer has worked on such films as Schindler’s List, Back to the Future and several films in the Star Wars universe and many others .
 Kennedy also stars on one of the eight Elle November issue covers celebrating women in the entertainment industry . Jennifer Lawrence, Laura Dern, Tessa Thompson, Jessica Chastain, Cicely Tyson, Margot Robbie and Riley Keough are among the cover ladies being honored .
 The evening was hosted by Elle editor-in-chief Nina Garcia and publisher Kevin O’Malley . Elle was presented by presenting sponsors L’Oréal Paris and “Real is Rare”
 A night that is honoring Women in Film, a night that has increasingly gained significance with each passing day . A night honoring women in film has become increasingly important .
 A demand is growing for action to prevent further civil and human rights abuses in the film industry . The stories about sexual harassment and assault have dominated the news this past week .
 Increased awareness of the belittlement, objectification and predation long endured by women who work in film will certainly be one result of the exposure of Harvey Weinstein . Women who are subject to similar criminal treatment in the future will certainly look to the brave women who’ve come forward
 We all hope the ability of corporations, board of directors, and colleagues to cover up and countenance sexual predators will be severely curtailed . The light of public scrutiny will have been strengthened, and we all hope it will be strengthened, we say .
 Predators must come to feel that they can’t count on power or wealth to shield them from the consequences of their actions . Predators must feel they can't count on wealth or fame to shield themselves from consequences . Predators need to come to terms with their actions and not be able to
 Sexual harassment of women and men, predation, rape and the misogyny that is the context for this inhumanity will continue unless there is a decisive, industry-wide, institutional response that legislates change .
 I want to use my few moments of speaking tonight to offer a proposal . For the past few days, I’ve been in discussions with friends and colleagues, and I'm in the process of writing this article .
 The organizations that constitute the American film industry – the studios, unions the guilds and the talent agencies – should convene a commission . The commission should be tasked with developing new, industry-wide protections against sexual harassment .
 The commission should be composed of specialists in labor and management practices, lawyers and legal scholars, sociologists, psychologists, psychologists and feminist activists and theorists, as well as film and television workers .
 The commission should be fully funded by our industry in order to address the task at hand in a thoroughgoing, comprehensive fashion . It should be funded by the industry in a 'comprehensive fashion'
 The goal of this commission would be to transform our industry in regards to sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace . The commission would aim to transform the industry in terms of sexual harassment .
 We must make the film industry an exemplar in this regard, a model for self-regulation that other businesses can emulate . This kind of abuse is epidemic in every sector of industry and throughout our society. We must be an example of self-regarding our industry .
 I believe that, with determination, hard work, it is absolutely possible to protect people from sexual terrorism in their places of employment . I believe with determination and hard work it is possible to prevent sexual terrorism from happening .
 It seems to be that the solution would include zero tolerance policies for abusive behavior . Victims of abuse can report what’s happened to them with a confident expectation that action will be taken . Victims can report abuse without placing their employment, reputations at risk .
 The next goal would be to find a path toward universal compliance with these new standards and practices . The next step is to find out how to comply with the new standards .
 A new system that’s 80% right can change the world for the better . Real-world application of good ideas is more difficult than arriving at the ideas themselves . Any new system will have flaws, but a new system can be right .
 I’ve asked the Board of Governors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science to take the first steps towards creating this commission .
 I am proud to have worked in film my entire adult life and I reject the idea that misogyny is the true heart of this industry . I'm proud to be proud of my work in film and reject misogyny, I say. I'm not a misogynistic person, I'm a proud
 Misogyny is depriving human beings of their humanity, and that’s fundamentally antithetical to the empathic examination of human experience that is, or at least ought to be the core of what film at its best can be, says the film's director .
 People in our industry know that we have our own complicity, hypocrisy and avoidance of this issue to examine and to answer for . We cannot let that necessary work prevent us from immediately doing what needs to be done to build a better industry .
 She must think that the world is stupid not to realize that she knew exactly what happened in Hollywood for young women to get ahead, she said . She said: "I'm not surprised that she knows what happened to young women in Hollywood"
 For her to come forward only now, when the Weinstein saga is front and center in global news, smacks of hypocrisy . For her only now she has come forward, it smacks hypocrisy, she says .
 The Kennedys have been some of the biggest abusers of women in the history of the U.S. history . As my article above and the extensive comments beneath it document, this is not the first time she has been accused of abuse .
 If she knew anything about how Washington works, she would realize that “commissions” are convened to bury issues from scrutiny, and buy time, not to resolve them, not expeditiously . Also, if she knows anything about Washington, she should realize that "commissions
 There is no doubt that the Kennedys were deranged sex freaks, but I would like to point out that Lyndon Johnson would often say that he got more women by accident than JFK got with intention . Lyndon Johnson often said that he had more women than he got by accident .
 Harvey Weinstein has set the bar pretty high, but I don't see how the Kennedys were more evil than Harvey Weinstein or Roman Polanski, who apparently was a serial rapist of children. And I will say I don’t see how . I will also say that I
 Salinger first made the revelation to Cigar Aficionado magazine in 1992 . Salinger made the admission in 1992, when he first made it public .
 Salinger recalled Kennedy summoning him into his office to see if he could provide “some help” in securing “a lot of cigars” by the following morning . Salinger recalls Kennedy asking him to help secure cigars by the next morning .
 Kennedy wanted to stockpile Cuban products before he banned their import . In hindsight, it is evident that Kennedy wanted the Cuban products .
 Kennedy was pleased to learn that Salinger had gotten him 1,200 Cuban cigars . Salinger was successful and had gotten the president's cigar collection .
 Salinger remembers, “He took out a long paper which he immediately signed.” Salinger says . Salinger: "He immediately signed it. He immediately signed."
 The story of Kennedy's cigars reemerged in 2012 as the U.S. rolled into its 50th year of the trade embargo with Cuba .
 This year, the Obama administration moved to ease the Cuban trade embargo allowing U.S. businesses to open up locations in Cuba in September . The Obama administration eased the embargo in September allowing United States businesses to operate in Cuba .
 The party was in full swing, her handsome house near Buckingham Palace spilling over with the cream of London’s wealthy in-crowd . Lee Radziwill couldn’t hide from guests her dismay at events taking place across the Atlantic .
 Lee's sister, Jackie, was about to become the most celebrated First Lady in U.S. history . Lee’s sister is Jackie, a former First Lady of the United States .
 Instead of intense family pride, Lee’s emotions were far from positive . Lee's family was proud of the success of his father's first family .
 Jackie and Lee Bouvier were two of the most glamorous women of their generation . The Bouvier sisters were both famous for their work in Hollywood .
 Truman Capote described them as ‘American geishas’ — women who existed only to captivate the world’s richest and most powerful men . Their conquests included John F Kennedy, Greek shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis and various royals .
 Lee's bitterness over Jackie’s trump card — becoming wife of a U.S. president — made clear . Lee and Jackie weren't the most loyal of siblings . However, they weren't as loyal as their siblings .
 Their fierce and lifelong rivalry — over money, men, success and even their mother’s love — is revealed in a riveting new book . Their fierce rivalry over money and men, men and success is revealed .
 In Jackie, Janet & Lee, veteran Hollywood biographer J Randy Taraborrelli reveals how their formidable and hard-nosed mother, Janet Bouvier Auchincloss, sought to mould her daughters in her own ruthless and social-climbing image .
 Jackie had a love affair with Jack Warnecke, the architect who designed JFK’s tomb and whom she almost married . He also reveals startling new details of a little-known love affair Jackie had with Jack .
 The new book has already upset Lee, now 84, who reportedly feels ‘betrayed’ by relatives who talked to Taraborrelli . Lee reportedly feels 'betrayal' by family members who spoke to him .
 Janet later recalled that while Lee looked appalled by the notion of a loveless match, Jackie, three years older, was perfectly accepting of the idea . Janet recalled how Lee was shocked by the idea of a loveless marriage .
 Janet was only 21 when she married her first husband and the girls’ father, Jack Bouvier, a handsome but heavy-drinking Wall Street stockbroker and socialite . She divorced him 12 years later over his philandering .
 She struggled financially for years, but was determined her daughters should never want for money themselves . She was determined to ensure her daughters never want to want to be poor .
 When Janet married a second time, it was to a much older, rather dull — but very wealthy – investment banker, Hugh Auchincloss .
 Janet tried to instill in Jackie and Lee sisterly support, insisting the girls should never compete with each other . Janet said: 'Jackie and Lee should never be competing'
 Jack Bouvier showed undisguised favouritism towards Jackie . And yet she made that all but impossible by showing it to her side .
 Lee's sister Jackie became the most famous woman in the world . It engendered not only a huge insecurity complex in Lee, but also a lifelong determination to avoid her sister’s shadow .
 Younger sister Lee was more of a rebel, more slender than Jackie and – some thought – even more beautiful . Jackie was more slender and more beautiful than her sister .
 As children, Janet had washed their lustrous brunette hair with raw egg yolk . She would drag them to museums and libraries and quiz them remorselessly on what they had learned . Janet would then quiz them on what she had learned.
 Jackie was 21 when she lost her virginity in a Paris hotel lift to John Marquand Jr, son of a celebrated writer . She was 21 at the time and was in her 20s .
 When Janet discovered he was penniless, she slapped Jackie across the face . Janet discovered that Jackie had been left penniless and slapped her . Jackie was left with a broken heart .
 A shameless snob, Janet steered her to a British-educated stockbroker, John Husted, who was dull but socially connected and – she thought – rich . Janet instead steered her towards a dull, socially connected, rich, dull and socially connected stock broker . Janet was a
 Janet investigated his finances and learnt he earned ‘only’ £12,000 a year . He and Jackie became engaged but Janet vetoed the match . Janet investigated her finances and learned he earned 'only' £12k .
 Jackie simply took her engagement ring off her finger and slipped it into Husted’s jacket pocket when she next saw him .
 Janet had more trouble steering the mercurial Lee away from Michael Canfield . Canfield was the illegitimate brother of the Duke of Kent, it was claimed .
 Lee defied her mother, insisting she would marry for love – and she was determined to beat her sister, then dating a young United States Senator, Jack Kennedy, up the aisle . Lee defied mother's wishes and insisted she would wed Jack Kennedy .
 Lee discovered Canfield couldn’t fund the expensive lifestyle she expected . She was just 19 when they wed, but their marriage struggled from the start . Lee discovered she couldn't afford the lifestyle she had expected .
 Janet had no objections to Jackie’s boyfriend, Jack Kennedy . He was a member of a clan worth at least $500 million . Jack Kennedy's family is worth an estimated $500million .
 Jackie was in thrall to JFK's huge political ambitions and his family’s glamour . She brushed her mother's reservations aside .
 Lee was rumoured to be having a fling with David Somerset, Duke of Beaufort, who owned the 52,0000acre Badminton estate .
 She was also seeing property developer Stanislaw ‘Stash’ Radziwill, a twice divorced former Polish prince, 44 .
 Janet gave Canfield his marching orders while the couple were visiting her in the States . Janet gave him the order while she was in the U.S.
 Canfield claimed Lee boasted to him of having sex with JFK while the two couples were on holiday together . Canfield later claimed Lee had boasted of the affair with JFK during a holiday with JFK .
 Nini Vidal, sister of Gore Vidal and distantly related by marriage to Jackie and Lee, claimed she had made a similar admission to her . Lee was staying with the Kennedys after Jackie had given birth to daughter, Caroline .
 Lee reportedly left her bedroom door open deliberately so Canfield could hear her and JFK making love . Lee left the door open so JFK could hear them making love, according to reports . Lee's bedroom door was reportedly left open deliberately .
 Taraborrelli, a seasoned Kennedy biographer, admits he doesn't know if these stories are true . He says he doesn’t know if they are true, but says he’s not sure .
 Jackie must have heard the rumours from family members, he says . What’s significant is that they were bandied about not by strangers or enemies, but by family members .
 Lee, by then 26, married Radziwill and remained in London, where she insisted on being addressed as ‘Princess’ Lee . Her husband took British nationality in 1951 and she insisted she was 'Princess' Lee .
 She embarked on an affair in 1962 with shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis, one of the richest men in the world . Soon, restless and bored once more, she embarked on a relationship with a wealthy shipping tycoon in 1962 .
 Charming, adventurous but also a chauvinist and rough diamond, he was 27 years older than Lee . Lee was 27 when Lee was assassinated in 1968 .
 Lee was more approachable and entertaining than the rather regal Jackie, friends say . Lee was, according to friends, not only more attractive than Jackie, but also naturally stylish . Jackie needed expert help in becoming a style icon, friends said .
 Lee was also the type of woman who had her maid follow her into the lavatory to drop gardenias into the bowl every time she used it . Yet Lee was the type to have her maid following her in the toilet to drop the gardenias .
 Onassis invited her elder sister to join her and Onassis on a cruise in October 1963 . She was in low spirits after losing her baby son, Patrick, shortly after his birth .
 Lee was overshadowed as Onassis turned his attention to Jackie . Lee's career was overshadowed by Jackie Onassis' success in Jackie .
 The old goat kissed Jackie lingeringly on both cheeks, alarming her Secret Service bodyguard who knew JFK would have ‘had a fit’ had he seen it . JFK's bodyguard said he would have had a fit .
 Onassis tried to ring Jackie on a private number she had given him on November 22, 1963, in the hours after JFK’s assassination . Jackie died in 1963 .
 He then flew to Washington and, at Jackie’s insistence, stayed at the White House .
 A friend of Lee's told Tarrelli that knowing Onassis’s predatory instincts, she had suspected his motives in ‘comforting’ Jackie, even with JFK’�s blood still on her pink Chanel suit . A friend said she had known Onassis
 He was moving in for the ‘real prize’ even as he continued his affair with Lee . He was also moving in on the 'real prize' even though he continued to have an affair .
 After Jack’s death, Jackie was rather more taken with another man . After Jack's death, she was rather taken with someone else .
 Not her brother-in-law Bobby Kennedy, as has been widely reported, but Jack Warnecke, a tall, handsome architect . The architect was married to Bobby Kennedy's wife, who died in 1968 .
 Taraborrelli concedes there was talk she was involved with other men, including Lord Harlech, who was then British ambassador in Washington .
 Warnecke swept her off the feet in those vulnerable months . However, it was Warneke who swept her .
 He wanted to marry her, but her ruinously expensive lifestyle was a problem . He wanted her to marry him, but she lived a 'ruinously expensive life'
 Warnecke’s son told Taraborrelli how his father had once described driving Jackie back from a party . The son said his father once described his father as a man who drove Jackie to a party.
 Unable to keep their hands off each other, they had stopped the car and had sex . Unable to stop the car, the pair had sex in the middle of the road .
 Jackie spent vast sums on clothes, jewellery and furnishings . However, passion came a poor second to money with Jackie .
 Two-and-a-half years into their relationship, Warnecke admitted to Jackie that he was nearly $1 million in debt . He admitted that he had been in debt for nearly two years .
 He'd even spent staff bonuses at his architect’s firm to keep up with her lifestyle, he said . He’d even spent the staff bonus at his . architect's firm .
 Jackie invited Jackie to his private Greek island of Skorpios in the summer of 1967 . Jackie was invited to the island by Onassis, Onassis . Jackie died in 1968 at the age of 92 .
 At dinner each night, she’d unfold her napkin and a huge jewel would fall out, she said . At dinner, she would unfold a napkin each night and she'd unfold it and it would be a jewel .
 Onassis blinded her with his wealth, just as he had her sister years earlier . She was blinded by her wealth, as was her sister . She had been blinded by wealth .
 Even her conniving mother drew the line at a billionaire she knew would divide her daughters . But even her mother drew a line at the billionaire billionaire .
 He and Jackie married in 1968, with Janet whispering that her daughter could still back out even as they walked down the aisle together . Janet whispered that she still feared that she would back out .
 When Jackie returned from honeymoon, they had a vicious row about Onassis which ended with Janet once again slapping her . ‘First on her right cheek with the palm of her hand, then on the left with the back of it — just as she had done when her girls were
 Lee was furious and mortified by Jackie stealing Onassis from her . Years earlier she had turned him down and stuck with Radziwill for fear of causing a scandal for her sister, then the First Lady .
 Janet noted a ‘marked difference’ in the sisters’ relationship . Janet noted the 'marked difference' in her relationship with the sisters . The sisters' relationship has since been described as 'strange'
 Jackie remained married to Onassis until his death in 1975, but the union had soon unravelled . They were estranged when he died, and Jackie remained estranged from him .
 He regarded Jackie as just another ‘acquisition’ and had never ended his affair with Maria Callas . He had regarded her as another 'acquisition' and never ended affair with her .
 A proposed third marriage five years later to a mega-rich property heir, Newton Cope, foundered on the rocks of Bouvier greed . A third marriage to a billionaire property heir foundered in 2007 .
 He refused Jackie and Janet’s insistence that he formally agree to guarantee Lee a whopping $20,000 a month in maintenance . Just an hour before the ceremony, he refused .
 Lee went on to be linked with a string of famous men, including comic Peter Cook, politician Roy Jenkins, and Mark Shand, brother of the Duchess of Cornwall . Lee has been linked to a number of other famous men since then .
 By the Eighties, the sisters were seeing far less of each other, but Janet was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s in 1983 . Janet and Janet were married for more than 40 years .
 Lee became Janet’s avowed favourite, despite barely ringing her mother once a month . Lee barely rang her mother one month but became her favourite . Jackie became her mother's devoted carer, but it was, ironically, Lee's favourite .
 Jackie’s resentment increased when she discovered in 1987 that Janet had given Lee $750,000 – said to be a ‘guilt’ payment for the way she had favoured Jackie when they were younger .
 Lee certainly never matched Jackie when it came to raking in money from her husbands . Lee was married to Jack and Jackie's husband .
 Janet ‘went to her grave’ in 1989 believing her daughters never recovered from their rift over Onassis, says Taraborrelli . Janet believed she and her daughters 'never recovered' from the rift over the Onassis .
 Jackie was diagnosed with cancer in 1994 and declined rapidly . Jackie was by then living with the Belgian-born diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman . Jackie died at the age of 92 .
 'I hope you know it,’ she told her sister, who was too drugged up on morphine to hear her . ‘I'm not going to die,' she said .
 The news that Jackie O. had left nothing to her sister in her will came as a huge shock – to Lee, her social circle and millions of ‘Jackie O’ fans worldwide .
 To those who had known them both, says Taraborrelli, it was no surprise at all . But to those who knew them both they were no surprise, he says .
 On a personal note, I used to attend ‘point-to-point” horse races with a female friend who competed in them, in the Virginia countryside west of Washington, D.C., which is beautiful .
 Jackie Kennedy came face-to-face with Jackie Kennedy in a throng of people . "One day, my friend was preparing for an event and I was walking alone," she says . "I came face to face with Jackie," she recalls .
 What struck me the most about the brief encounter, years after JFK’s assassination, was that it was like a time warp . The encounter took place in the days following JFK's assassination in 1968 .
 Her hair and look were seemingly “frozen in time,” and almost exactly how she looked on that fateful day in Dallas . Her hair was seemingly ‘frozen’ in time .
 "Camelot" had been dead for many years . It was truly bizarre . But then, ‘camelot’ had been there for a long time .
 The fiftieth anniversary of the night Senator Edward Moore Kennedy drove his car into a pond on Chappaquiddick Island in Cape Cod, leaving his companion, Mary Jo Kopechne, in the car to drown . Mystery and questions of what really happened still remain to this
 The fatal incident at Chappaquiddick destroyed all chances of Kennedy becoming president . Kennedy received little more than a slap on the wrist for the death of Kopechne . The incident placed a dark cloud over the cursed Kennedy family .
 In a statement made to police hours after the July 18, 1969, incident, the senator claimed he was on his way to get the ferry back to Edgartown . He said he was unfamiliar with the road, made a wrong turn and his car went off a narrow bridge .
 He claimed he ‘repeatedly dove down to the car in an attempt to see if the passenger was still in the car’ He also claimed he tried to check if he had been inside the car .
 When Kopechne’s body was later retrieved by a diver, she was wearing a blouse, bra, slacks, but no panties . When she was found, she had been wearing a bra, blouse and slacks .
 Ted Kennedy pleaded guilty to a charge of leaving the scene of an accident and causing bodily injury . A week after the accident, on July 25, 1969, he pleaded guilty . Kennedy was convicted a week after his crash .
 Prosecutors agreed with Kennedy’s high-powered attorneys to suspend any jail sentence . Kennedy's attorneys agreed with prosecutors that any jail term would be suspended . Kennedy was charged with assaulting a federal judge in 2010 .
 That evening Kennedy went on national television and offered an extensive mea culpa, claiming he was not under the influence of alcohol . Kennedy said there was ‘no truth whatever to the widely circulated suspicions of immoral conduct’ regarding his behavior and that of Mary Jo’s on
 He concluded by asking the viewers – the people of Massachusetts – whether he should resign his senate seat .
 In January 1970, a secret inquest was held, the results of which were later released . One key finding was that there was ‘probable cause’ that Kennedy had driven his car ‘negligently’
 Kennedy made a payment of $90,904 to Mary Jo’s parents and $50,000 to her insurance company . Mary Jo's parents received an additional $50k from Kennedy's insurance company, $90k to her parents .
 The stress of the incident caused his wife, Joan, who had a drinking problem, to suffer her third miscarriage . He walked away a free man, but his wife suffered a third miscarriage after suffering from a drink problem .
 Today, the handling of the Chappaquiddick case is still viewed as a Kennedy cover-up . Today, it is still considered a Kennedy-era cover up . The handling of this case still is still seen as a cover up for the Kennedy administration .
 Ted's brother Bobby worked in his brother Bobby’s ill-fated presidential campaign, compiling data on how Democratic delegates intended to vote . Ted and Bobby worked together to compile data on Democratic delegates' intentions .
 Mary Jo was devastated when Bobby Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 – just a year before Chappaquiddick . Mary Jo had a close relationship with Bobby, who was devastated .
 After the accident on Chappaquiddick speculation was rampant that 37-year-old Ted was headed for a sexual tryst with pretty Mary Jo, a five-foot-two blue-eyed blonde who was a week away from celebrating her twenty-ninth birthday .
 Ted invited Mary Jo to accompany him to the 46th annual Edgartown Yacht Club Regatta that weekend . Police learned that Ted had actually invited her to the regatta .
 Ted and his people denied there was anything romantic or sexual between him and her that fatal night, or at any other time . Ted's people deny that there was any sexual relationship between them that night or any other .
 Since Mary Jo was dead, it was just Ted’s word, a classic ‘he said, he said’ situation . But since Mary Jo's death, it's just Ted's word, and it's a classic 'he said it' situation .
 Kennedy aides moved quickly to quash growing suspicions about Ted and Mary Jo’s activities at the party, and after . Kennedy aides were aware of Ted's growing reputation as a skirt-chaser, aides say .
 The most virtuous person they could compare Mary Jo to was the senator’s sister-in-law, Ethel . They decided that the best virtuous person to be compared to Mary Jo was Ethel, a senator's sister in-law .
 Wendell Pigman, who had been one of Mary Jo’s supervisors when she worked for Bobby, would later assert that Mary Jo ‘was like Ethel in that she would grimace if anyone said anything that was dirty or tasteless .
 Ted claimed he and Mary Jo were little more than acquaintances, it can now be revealed . It was Bobby who had first taken a more than casual liking to Mary Jo, who somewhat resembled his wife Ethel .
 Like the Kennedys – and especially Ethel – Mary Jo was a staunch catholic . She had attended parochial schools, and had spent a year teaching at the Mission of St. Francis .
 Mary Jo had been a guest at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port for a cookout and sailing .
 Mary Jo hero-worshipped the Kennedys – and especially Bobby, who like Ted, their late brother, the assassinated president John Kennedy, and their father, the patriarch, Joseph P Kennedy, were legendary philanderers .
 With Bobby, Mary Jo was a tireless worker and was totally devoted to him . She dreams of his winning the presidency and her coming to work for him in the White House, she said .
 During his run for the presidency, she stayed up one whole night at the Kennedy home, Hickory Hill, in McLean, Virginia, typing and editing the candidate’s major anti-Vietnam War speech .
 She had not only typed his presidential announcement, but had even made suggestions regarding some of his phrasing . She had also made suggestions about some of the phrasing he used .
 Bobby thought Mary Jo was invaluable as his assistant – someone who was completely trustworthy, a young woman who would keep everything between them confidential . He also was sexually drawn to her – her fresh-faced look, her cute ways, her pert body . Bobby was attracted to her because of her
 "He took advantage of her trust in him, and her being somewhat naïve and not really sophisticated," she said . He took advantage "of her trust," she added .
 It was that typical Kennedy male way with women, and Mary Jo was a convenient, cute target . She was the perfect target for the Kennedy .
 She was a good Catholic girl, and Bobby probably figured he could take advantage of her . Bobby probably thought he was taking advantage of his Catholic daughter . She was Catholic .
 Bobby had often thrown caution to the wind when pursuing women, even at Hickory Hill . It was no surprise to Kennedy insiders that he would 'come on' to Mary Jo Kopechne in the family home .
 Douglas Kiker had been one of the top reporters for NBC News, covering such major stories as the Vietnam War, and the civil rights movement . Kiker was one of Bobby and Ethel’s elite circle .
 Kiker recalled being at Hickory Hill for a cookout when Bobby, the United States Senator, openly flirted with pretty blonde Polly Bussell, who worked on scheduling in Bobby’s Senate office, and who Kiker dated .
 Bobby and Bussell took off on her motorcycle to a nearby wooded area where they were spotted by a McLean police patrol . Both in bathing suits, the couple was spotted by police in a nearby woods .
 Bussell said she had received a number of invitations from Bobby and Ethel to attend parties at Hickory Hill . She said she spent ‘much more time with Robert Kennedy than with Ethel.
 Bobby often told Ethel which women to invite to parties, according to a Hickory Hill insider . Ethel often invited Ethel to parties with Bobby and Ethel at the time .
 When the Chappaquiddick scandal broke, Ethel became one of her brother-in-law Ted Kennedy’s staunchest defenders . Ethel was one of Ted Kennedy's staunchers when the scandal first broke .
 She pulled herself together, and was instructed by Burke Marshall to call friends in Washington who could offer Ted advice and counsel . Burke Marshall had served as assistant attorney general under Bobby, when he was attorney general in his brother John's administration .
 Ethel accompanied Ted and his wife, Joan, to the dreary mining town of Plymouth, Pennsylvania, where Mary Jo had been born . Three days later, Ted and Joan traveled to Plymouth to see Mary Jo's daughter .
 Ted Kennedy had been in seclusion at the Kennedy compound since giving what was a vague statement to police . Ted was wearing a neck brace when he arrived at the compound . Ted had been wearing the brace since the incident .
 The Kennedys were treated like rock stars at St. Vincent’s Church, Plymouth, in Plymouth .
 Nearly fifty years after the incident at Chappaquiddick, Ted Kennedy's death, a film about Mary Jo’s death and the aftermath is opening in theaters across the country on Friday . Mary Jo's death was almost a decade after Ted Kennedy died .
 'Chappaquiddick provides just enough detail to allow us to draw our own conclusions,' says The Washington Post .
 A surviving relative of Mary Jo, a 75-year-old aunt, however, told People ‘For 49 years, people have wanted to know what happened.’
 The one thread that runs through the Kennedys is total corruption and depravity . Indeed, the one thread of the Kennedy family is total depravity and corruption, says CNN's John Sutter .
 LBJ, Bill Clinton, Harvey Weinstein, Roman Polanski, Bill Cosby and Tiger Woods crawled . They set the bar, under which LBJ and Bill Clinton crawled .
 Lessons need to be taught that will reverberate for generations to come . Lessons must be taught, and they should be taught for generations of people .
 Teddy was a killer who was lionized in the corridors of Congress after Mary Jo’s tragic death . Mary Jo was killed by a serial killer in the 1970s . Teddy was the man who killed Mary Jo in the 1990s .
 I know, because our Senate offices were right next to his, and I saw it happen . I know because our . offices are right next door to his . office . "I know, I know," says Sen. John McCain .
 The Despicable Ethel Kennedy Treated Her Immigrant Servants like dogs . Jerry Oppenheimer has written for the UK’s Daily Mail: Wearing a green jacket that read ‘I really do care,’ Ethel. Kennedy celebrated at the annual Hy
 The 90-year-old is participating in a hunger strike to protest President Trump’s immigration policies on the southern border . Just a week before, it was announced that she would be participating in the protest .
 Robert F Kennedy’s widow ‘treated her immigrant servants like dogs,’ according to insiders who worked for her . Ethel’�s protestations may be somewhat hypocritical .
 The Kennedys’ fabled estate in McLean, Virginia became known as ‘Horror Hill’ because of Ethel’s temper tantrums and abusive treatment of the help . Ethel was the sole mistress of Hickory Hill . After RFK’
 She earned a reputation for slapping and berating immigrant household workers, cheating them out of money, and screaming at them like a ‘mad woman’ causing them to flee in tears, sources recalled .
 Sympathetic friends blamed her behavior on the depression and anger brought on by the tragic loss of her husband, father of 11 children, with the last born after he was killed .
 Ethel Skakel Kennedy, an American Drama of Power, Privilege, and Politics, is an American drama of power, privilege, and politics . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Ethel 'couldn't stand it if didn’t speak English well, or understand it' Ethel’s former employees interviewed for the book . Fell, one of a number of former employees, said that Ethel ‘couldn‘t stand it�
 As part of the protest, the Kennedy widow was to make a financial donation in lieu of the food she would have eaten . Her daughter, Kerry Kennedy, heads a nonprofit advocacy group .
 Kennedy in the years following her husband’s murder found ‘no joy’ in working for her, sources stated . Sources said she found 'no joy' working for Kennedy after husband's murder .
 Even an African American woman in her employ suffered verbal racial abuse, recalled Kennedy brother-in-law, Peter Lawford . Lawford: Even a black woman in Kennedy's employ suffered racial abuse . Kennedy's sister was a model for the Kennedy family .
 Ethel voiced a racial slur at a maid who was cleaning, he claimed, and inadvertently tossed an item that Ethel was saving, involving her late husband . The incident occurred in the kitchen of Hickory Hill, where Ethel's husband died .
 Lawford mentioned the scene to his then wife, Patricia Seaton Lawford, who recalled, ‘Peter was very upset.’
 To members of the Kennedy circle, Ethel’s use of a racial slur seemed incomprehensible because she and her late husband – renowned in the civil rights movement – were friends with such celebrated African Americans as Coretta King, widow of Dr. King .
 Martin Luther King, Cesar Chavez, the Mexican-American labor leader and civil rights activist, were assassinated in 1968 . The slain civil rights leader was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1964 .
 Ethel Kennedy's son, Robert Kennedy Jr., would later claim that his mother never used such racist language . Ethel’s son would later say that she never used racist language in her life . Robert Kennedy Sr. was a member of the Kennedy family .
 Ethel could also be physically abusive – especially to South American immigrants with poor language skills – as underscored by an incident witnessed by Fell .
 The servant somehow misunderstood what she had been told and returned with sanitary napkins, rather than face cream . The servant returned to the requested face cream, but returned with napkins .
 The Kennedy widow ‘hit her in the face, just slapped her,’ Fell told me . ‘Just slapped her. Just slapped her,' Fell said .
 The maid ‘was crying and she ran to the basement and said she was going to leave. The maid 'was crying’ and ran out of the basement,’ she said . The maid was crying and then ran away from the scene, police said .
 The maid said, 'I'm never going to work here again. But, according to Fell, she said, ‘I’m never working here again’ Fell said the maid said she was ‘never going to be working again.
 Ethel made a big to-do over her, announcing she would personally drive her to a nearby hospital . A few weeks later she suffered a minor injury at Hickory Hill, and with guests present, Ethel .
 "I remember her saying – and I laughed to myself when I heard it – “I have really valuable people working for me," she said . She said she laughed to herself when she heard that she had 'really valuable people'
 Future employees were warned about working for the Kennedy widow at her five-acre estate . The estate, located across the Potomac River from Washington, D.C., has since been sold .
 RFK's favorite among the help was Ena Bernard, a black woman from Costa Rica . The senator's favorite was the senator’s favorite with the help of the help . RFK: "One of the things that got under her skin was the death of RFK,
 She had begun working for them in the early 50s when then-congressman and future president John F Kennedy secured a green card for her, using the influence of his congressional office .
 President Kennedy's brother Bobby arranged for Ena to accompany President Kennedy on an Alliance for Progress trip to her homeland . Ena was accorded a virtual hero’s welcome in her homeland, where she was greeted with a hero welcome .
 Bobby Kennedy arranged to bring Ena’s daughter, Josefina, to the U.S. from Costa Rica . The Bernards’ hometown of Heredia, Costa Rica, was the Bernards' hometown . Bobby Kennedy also arranged for Ena's daughter,
 Ena, who had a room on the third floor at Hickory Hill, was heartbroken when RFK was murdered . Ena had room on third floor of the hotel, which she lived in .
 Ethel wanted to fire her, apparently always always jealous of her close friendship with RFK . But Ethel, so possessive of RFK, had come to loathe Ena . Ethel was apparently always jealous and had to fire Ena, apparently .
 Ted Kennedy’s personal assistant, Ethel Kennedy, was aware of the war between Ethel and the Costa Rican servant . Ted Kennedy's personal assistant was also aware of Ethel's war with the servant .
 This ignited fights between Ethel and her older children, Kathleen and Joe, who had adored the heavyset woman since they were toddlers . Ethel had come to despise her mother-in-law, Ethel's children said .
 When asked why she took Ethel’s abuse, Ena claimed she stayed because of the Kennedy children . Ena said she stayed with Ethel because of her children .
 Ena gloated when Ethel had one of her tantrums, or did something to embarrass herself, according to Noelle Fell . Ena's mother-in-law, who died at the age of 92, gloats about Ethel .
 She recalls Ena once confiding, ‘The thing I miss most about the senator is that he used to put Ethel in her place. He used to be a good guy,’ she says .
 The ceramic Dalmatian was a gift from Ethel Skakel Kennedy, the one Kennedy woman who wanted to fire her . The dog was the gift from the Kennedy family who wanted her fired .
 If one has any doubts whatsoever, please read my article above and all of the comments beneath it . Please read the comments below to see if you have any doubt whatsoever .
 RFK began an affair with JFK’s widow Jackie; and he had affairs with Marilyn Monroe and others . RFK's affair with Kennedy's widow Jackie led to RFK having affairs with JFK's widow .
 Godfather actor Gianni Russo claims he had affair with Hollywood icon Marilyn Monroe when he was just 16 and knows how she really died . Russo: 'I know how she died'
 The Godfather actor says Monroe didn't die of a barbiturate overdose as her autopsy proclaimed . Russo played Carlo Rizzo in the Godfather . He says Monroe died of an overdose, not an overdose .
 The 75-year-old says that she was killed by none other than Robert Kennedy . He says he didn't want news of his and John F Kennedy’s involvement with the star to go public .
 Russo claims to have shared an on-and-off affair with Monroe for years, starting when he was 16 and the actress was 33 . Russo was 16 when Monroe was 33 and Russo was 33 when the affair began .
 He even has a picture with her just three days before her death on August 5, 1962 .
 In the picture he looks at the star, who dons a scarf on her head and sunglasses, at the CalNeva Lodge, the California-Nevada border .
 Russo said that her death followed soon after that meeting at that lodge because the mob was after them . Russo said she was killed because of the mob's desire to kill her .
 He said the mob and Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana were after Monroe because they wanted to get to the president . He said they were trying to get Monroe to the White House .
 Mobsters flocked to the lodge when Monroe was there with the alleged plan of filming her in a threesome with JFK and Robert Kennedy . Mobsters reportedly planned to film her in the threesesome with Robert Kennedy and JFK .
 They wanted to use the scandalous tape as blackmail to strong-arm the president into invading Cuba and returning the island’s casinos to organized criminals . The tape was intended to blackmail the Cuban president into giving up the casinos .
 JFK failed to show up to the resort as JFK did not show up . The plan never came to fruition . JFK was the last resort resort in the resort .
 Russo says Marilyn learned of the plot and threatened to report the mob to the media . Russo says that Marilyn learned about the plot from Marilyn Russo and threatened the mob . Russo: Marilyn learned the plot, and Marilyn said she would report it to the press .
 Robert Kennedy plotted her death to stop her from going public, actor says . Robert Kennedy caught wind of her plans to go public, according to the actor . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 'She died of an embolism, but it looked like drugs to the coroner,’ Russo said on her death .
 He details Monroe’s death and other experiences rubbing shoulders with celebrities and the mob in his new memoir Hollywood Godfather, out on March 12 .
 Saoirse Kennedy Hill, granddaughter of former U.S. attorney general Robert F Kennedy, has died . The Kennedy Curse Continues, writes Daily Mail's Valerie Edwards .
 Saoirse died from an apparent overdose at her family’s compound on Thursday afternoon . The singer was found dead at the compound of her family's compound in New Jersey .
 Paramedics responding to a call of a suspected overdose just after 2.30pm on Thursday arrived at the scene and found the patient in cardiac arrest . The patient is believed to have suffered a cardiac arrest at the time of the call .
 She was transported to Cape Cod Hospital, where she was pronounced dead .
 It has been 20 years since JFK Jr was killed after his plane crashed off Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts . JFK Jr died in a plane crash off Martha's Vineyard in 1994 .
 The philanthropist Mary Kennedy was interior designer, architect, and philanthropist . Kennedy was an interior designer and architect .
 Her official cause of death was asphyxiation due to hanging, according to autopsy report . Autopsy report: She died after hanging from her bedroom window .
 Mary had an ongoing battle with drugs and alcohol and had several times tried to seek help . Mary had tried to get help several times before .
 The film and television producer Kara was born to Sen Ted Kennedy and Joan Bennett Kennedy in February 1960 . Kara is the daughter of Sen. Ted Kennedy, Sen. Bobby Kennedy and Sen. Joe Kennedy .
 It’s believed that the heart attack may have been brought on by the aggressive cancer treatment she underwent .
 At the time, she was reportedly told that her diagnosis was inoperable . She reportedly told by doctors that she had been diagnosed with cancer .
 Her father helped her find a surgeon at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston . She had part of her right lung removed from her lung . Her father says she is now in good spirits .
 Following her death, her brother, former Rhode Island Rep Patrick Kennedy, said the grueling treatments had left his sister physically weakened .
 JFK’s son, John F Kennedy Jr, was killed in 1999 when his plane crashed into the Atlantic Ocean . The lawyer and journalist JFK's son was killed by a plane crash .
 He died alongside his wife, Carolyn, Carolyn and his sister-in-law Lauren just off the coast of Martha’s Vineyard . He died with his wife Carolyn and her sister, Lauren .
 Carolyn had threatened to skip the nuptials . Carolyn had almost been alone that night after Carolyn threatened to stay home . He had been alone .
 Carolyn had a change of heart at the last second however, and the two set off with her sister Lauren . Carolyn had changed her mind and set off the trip with Lauren .
 JFK Jr had taken off from Essex County Airport in Fairfield, New Jersey, at 8.39pm that night, bound for the airfield in Martha’s Vineyard . JFK Jr was headed for the Martha's Vineyard airfield .
 The air traffic controller at the island airport alerted the regional Federal Aviation Administration office in Connecticut just after 10pm when the plane had failed to arrive . The plane had not arrived at the airport in Connecticut .
 In the end, it was the conditions that evening that evening most likely caused the tragedy . The conditions most likely contributed to the accident .
 On July 21, 1999, five days after the plane went missing, the three bodies were found and removed from the underwater wreckage . Five days later, the bodies of the plane were found .
 The ashes of John, 38, his wife Carolyn, 33, and Lauren, 34, were scattered at sea on July 22 just off of Martha’s Vineyard . Friends and family scattered the ashes at sea .
 Michael Kennedy was in Aspen, Colorado, when he was killed in a skiing accident on December 31, 1997 . Kennedy was a lawyer and activist . He was killed by a ski accident in Colorado .
 Aspiring journalist David Kennedy died from a drug overdose on April 25, 1984 . The aspiring journalist died from an overdose .
 He overdosed in a hotel near a family vacation home in Palm Beach, Florida . The man overdosed on Sunday morning .
 RFK was assassinated during his run for president in 1968, nearly five years after his brother JFK was shot dead in Dallas . The second presidential Kennedy was also known as RFK, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 He was shot following his victory speech in the California primary election in front of his wife, Ethel . The former president was shot in the head following his win over his wife in the primary election .
 Sirhan Sirhan was convicted of shooting RFK while he and a group of people were walking through the pantry at the Ambassador Hotel . RFK was on the way to a news conference when he was shot in the head with a gun .
 His daughter, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, and his son, Robert F Kennedy, Jr, last year called for a new investigation into their father's assassination . They don't believe Sirhan is responsible for his death .
 Kennedy Jr. personally reviewed evidence and visited the convicted killer Sirhan in prison in California . Kennedy, Jr argued that the wrong man was put behind bars . Sirhan was convicted of murder in 2007 .
 JFK was assassinated on November 22, 1963, by Lee Harvey Oswald in Dallas, Texas . JFK was the 35th president of the United States .
 He was born to Joseph P Kennedy Sr and Rose Kennedy on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, outside of Boston in Massachusetts .
 JFK was one of nine children . JFK went on to become the 35th president of the United States .
 The couple had three children, John F Kennedy Jr, Caroline Kennedy and Patrick Bouvier Kennedy . They were married in 1963 .
 Kennedy had furthered U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia while both the Cold War and the Space Race were heating up . That same year Kennedy furthered United States involvement .
 He asked Congress for millions to put a man on the moon before the 1960s ended to beat the Russians, who had their own program . He had asked for millions .
 Kennedy did not get to see Apollo 11 land on the moon on July 20, 1969 . Apollo 11 landed in 1969, but Kennedy was not there to witness .
 The day after JFK was assassinated, the newly sworn-in Lyndon B Johnson issued his first presidential proclamation . Johnson issued the proclamation the day after his inauguration .
 President Kennedy declared November 25, 1963, the day of JFK’s funeral, a national day of mourning . In a statement that was broadcast on both television and radio, he declared that day of funeral a national mourning .
 JFK’s youngest son Patrick was the youngest son of JFK and his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, also known as Jackie O . He was born prematurely on August 7, 1963, and died on August 9, 1963 .
 She died at the age of 28 while on a flight from Paris to the French Riviera with her married lover . She was travelling with her husband on the way to the Riviera .
 Kathleen was the family’s free-spirit whose life was filled with rebellion and cross-continent love . Kathleen was Kathleen's free-spirited life . Kathleen died at the age of 92 .
 Kathleen 'Kick' Kennedy was the only Kennedy to attend her funeral in which her father attended . The only Kennedy attended her funeral was her father .
 She defied her family for love and lost her brother and husband to war . She was known as a rebellious yet charming woman who defied her .
 Kathleen Kennedy's family kept her death quiet because of the scandalous circumstances surrounding her death . Kathleen's death was kept secret because of JFK’s blossoming political career and the circumstances surrounding it .
 The gravestone identifies her as Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington, Hartington . She was the daughter of the Cavendish family . Her gravestone states that she was the wife of the Hartington family .
 He was the eldest child of Joseph and Rose Kennedy and the eldest sibling of John F Kennedy . The WWII pilot was a WWII pilot . He was born in 1945 .
 He was 29 years old when his plane exploded mid-air on August 12, 1944 . The pilot was 29 when he died .
 Edwards 'Ted' Kennedy drove his Oldsmobile sedan off a narrow bridge on Chappaquiddick Island and into a pond . On July 18, 1969, Edwards ‘Ted’ Kennedy killed himself in a car crash .
 The island is located off the famous resort island of Martha’s Vineyard .
 Passenger, 28-year-old Mary Jo Kopechne, drowned in the crash and he was unable to pull her out of the water . His passenger, 28, died in the accident .
 Instead of alerting authorities, Kennedy returned to a party he and Kopechne had attended . He sought out the late Paul Markham, who had recently resigned as U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts .
 Markham remembers the moment he first arrived at the scene at Dike Bridge just after midnight . During his testimony at an inquest months later, Markham said he was shocked by the tragedy .
 Markham later testified that the two dove into the waters numerous times in an unsuccessful attempt to locate Kopechne . Markham was a campaign worker for Kennedy’s older brother, RFK, before his assassination the previous year .
 The following day, Markham went with Kennedy to provide a statement to police on Martha’s Vineyard . Markham was with Kennedy when he was arrested and charged .
 Ted pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an accident and received a suspended sentence of two months in jail . Ted was sentenced to two months jail after pleading guilty .
 Massachusetts senator died on August 25, 2009, at the age of 77 following a yearlong battle with brain cancer . The Massachusetts senator was 77 when he died .
 He said he was afraid and ‘made terrible decisions’ and had to live with the guilt for more than four decades . He said: ‘I made terrible decisions. I made a terrible decision. I was afraid. He said I made horrible decisions.’
 He was accused of raping Patricia Bowman in 1991 in Palm Beach, Florida, after a night of drinking with his uncle, Ted Kennedy . Bowman died of a heart attack in 1994 .
 William's mother Jean Kennedy Smith is a former United States Ambassador to Ireland . William’s mother is also a former U.S. ambassador to Ireland.
 A Florida jury acquitted William of sexual assault and battery on Bowman following a ten-day trial . William was found not guilty of any sexual assault against Bowman .
 Another sexual assault claim levied against William was dismissed in 2004 . An additional claim was settled out of court the following year . William has been accused of sexual assault in the past .
 In 1973, Joseph P Kennedy II was found guilty of driving to endanger after a car accident in Nantucket left Pamela Burkley partially paralyzed . Kennedy II found guilty in 1973 of causing an accident that left her partially paralyzed after she was paralyzed .
 Burkley became paralyzed from the chest down when the vehicle driven by Joseph overturned on a country road . Burkley was paralyzed after the crash in which he became paralyzed .
 Burkley's brother, David Kennedy, and Burkley’s younger sister were injured . Others were also injured, including his brother David Kennedy and his younger sister .
 Burkley decided not to sue Kennedy after getting $668,000 from an insurance settlement . Burkley also received a settlement from insurance company for the incident . Kennedy died at the age of 98 .
 Rosemary Kennedy was the third child and first daughter of Rose and Joseph P Kennedy . The lobotomy was the result of a lobotomy . Rosemary was the first daughter and first child of Kennedy's parents .
 She attended the Edward Devotion public school in Brookline, Massachusetts, for the first two years of kindergarten and was found to be deficient in basic cognitive skills .
 Rosemary didn’t interact well with fellow students although at home, she adored her brothers, Jack and Joe, and they lavished attention on her . At home, Rosemary's brothers lavished her attention .
 At age seven she couldn’t return to Edward Devotion School . With her issues, at age 7 she couldn't return to school .
 In 1941, her father gave his consent for a pre-frontal lobotomy on his 23-year-old daughter . Her father gave consent for the procedure in 1941 .
 Rosemary’s reading, writing, spelling and counting skills never got above a fourth-grade level even though she studied hard . Rosemary was able to add three triple digit numbers .
 She returned to Brookline to be tutored again by specialists as well her mother . Her mother even tried to help develop her physical coordination by playing tennis and catch with her .
 Rosie wanted to go out on her own just like her brothers and younger sisters . Rosie was happy back at home with her family and friends .
 He feared his daughter’s condition could impact his political ambitions for him and his sons . He said he feared his children's condition could affect his political aspirations .
 He read about this new procedure, a pre-frontal lobotomy, that promised to be the definitive treatment . He said he read about the procedure and decided to undergo the procedure . The procedure is now being performed by a team of doctors .
 Unbeknownst to his family, Joe took Rosemary to be examined by Dr. Dr. Joe . In November 1941, he took his daughter to see him and took her to the doctor .
 Dr. James Watts and neurosurgeon James Watts practiced on brains in cadavers . Watts and Watts were both neurosurgeons . Watts is now a partner in a series of neurosurgeries .
 The unseemly pair raided sanitariums and mental institutions for candidates for candidates . If surgery was botched, there was no complaint . If the surgery is botched there were no complaints .
 With what looked like a butter knife, he moved it up and down slicing through brain tissue . He moved the butter knife across the brain tissue with the help of a knife .
 'When Rosemary stopped singing ‘God Bless America’ and became incoherent, they ceased their butchery. When Rosemary . stopped singing 'God Bless . America', they ceased .
 He lied to Rose and said Rosie had become worse and doctors suggested institutionalization with no visitors – but he never said where she was . Rosie's condition worsened and doctors said she needed no visitors .
 Now lethargic, incontinent, she couldn’t talk and relied on grunting, screaming and shrieking . She is now letharged, inconsistent, and used to grunting and screaming .
 The barbaric treatment did not erase her temper tantrums but she became worse and became worse . She was assigned two guards in her living quarters and was assigned to two guards .
 Rosie was moved to Saint Coletta, a home for the mentally retarded in southeastern Jefferson, Wisconsin, in 1949 . Joe had her moved to the home after learning she was being sexually abused at Craig House .
 The Kennedy family is surely the most dysfunctional family ever to achieve significant political power in American history . The “Kennedy Curse’s” has afflicted the Kennedy family .
 Robert F Kennedy Jr is once again making waves after accusing former Lockheed Aircraft employee Thane Eugene Cesar of murdering his father . Cesar worked for Lockheed Aircraft at the time .
 RFK Jr said he landed the job about one week earlier,’ wrote a social media post on Thursday .
 He made the accusation just hours after Cesar passed away in the Philippines, 41 years after he was shot dead .
 RFK Jr also claimed that it was Cesar, unloading his gun from behind as Kennedy fell to the floor after being struck with a bullet from Sirhan’s gun, who fired the fatal shot that night . Sirhan's gun was fired from behind by Cesar .
 RFK Jr is not the first to accuse Cesar of having been involved in the assassination, with some even believing it was his bullet and not Sirhan’s which killed the presidential hopeful . Some even believe it was Cesar's bullet .
 He had been called in to work at the hotel at the last second that night . The plumber at Lockheed also worked security detail part time with a local agency .
 Many have pointed out in the past that Thane had extreme right-wing views and held a deep-seeded hatred for the Kennedy clan .
 His gun was drawn as well at the time, and powder burns were found on his face . The suspect was found with powder burns to his face after the incident .
 The autopsy report found Kennedy died after being fatally struck from behind . His clip-on tie was found by Kennedy’s side, as if he had ripped it off while being shot . Cesar was married at the time of the shooting .
 RFK Jr notes that in his post, which comes just a few months after he made waves with his sudden and staunch stance against mandatory vaccinations . RFK: "I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm glad to say 'yes'
 From under the dog pile, Sirhan emptied his 8 chamber revolver firing 6 more shots in the opposite direction . 5 of the shots struck bystander and one went wild,’ wrote RFK Jr. ‘RFK Jr.
 RFK Jr talks about what Cesar Cesar did with the murder weapon and his motive for the murder . RFK says Cesar's murder weapon was used to carry out the murder of RFK Sr. Cesar was found dead at the scene of his murder .
 RFK Jr. claims Cesar lied to police claiming that he’d disposed of the gun months before the assassination . Cesar told police he had disposed of gun months prior to the assassination, RFK said .
 He then revealed that he had even planned to meet Cesar Cesar last June in the Philippines, but said that the planned sit-down was cancelled at the last second .
 RFK Jr said that it was Cesar’s agent, Dan Moldea, who cancelled the meeting . RFK said it was Moldea's agent that cancelled the event .
 Investigative journalist and author laid out all the evidence in support of the second gunman theory, but then declared Cesar was not guilty of any crime in the book’s final pages .
 Moldea also eulogized Cesar, but in a far different tone than RFK Jr. Moldea . Moldea's funeral was held in New York on Thursday .
 RFK Jr is not the only member of his family who believes Cesar is responsible for his father’s death . RFK has flouted this theory, and not the first time he flouted it .
 Townsend's sister Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, who served as lieutenant governor of Maryland from 1995 to 2003, has also said in the past that police should reopen the investigation into her father's murder .
 The mobster who ran the assassination program for the CIA against Castro was behind the CIA . He ran the CIA's assassination program against the Castro regime .
 Sirhan has claimed this as well multiple times in the past, despite his conviction by a jury one year after the shooting . Sirhan was convicted of multiple counts of attempted murder .
 No other gunman was ever apprehended or charged with playing a role in the assassination . No one was ever arrested or charged in connection with the shooting .
 The investigation was ultimately closed out one year after the shooting in 1969 . Sirhan Sirhan was convicted of the crime .
 He was first sentenced to death, but that was commuted to a life sentence just a few years later in 1972 . He was sentenced to life in prison in 1972, but his sentence was reduced to a death sentence .
 He is 75 and incarcerated at the Richard J Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego .
 Prosecutors were able to present evidence suggesting Sirhan Sirhan was seen at the hotel two nights before the attack . Sirhan has been sentenced to life in prison .
 He was also holding the same gun from which the bullets that killed Kennedy came from, and had eight additional bullets in his hand . He had eight more bullets in hand, including the bullets from which Kennedy was killed .
 RFK Jr’s siblings Joseph and Kerry recently took her brother to task earlier this year following some of his comments about vaccinations . On the opposite side of the debate are RFK Sr. and Sr. Sr. Joseph Jr's siblings .
 This is not because the two do not believe the theory, but rather how they want their father to be remembered by the public . The two say they want the public to know how their father is remembered .
 Kennedy had just won the California primary and his pregnant wife Ethel was by his side when he was shot . Kennedy was shot in the early hours of June 18, 1963 .
 Kennedy was hit with three bullets – one in the head and two in the back – while fourth passed through his jacket . Kennedy was shot by a single bullet, one in head and one in back, while the other in head .
 Sirhan Sirhan is the only person who was charged and tried in the wake of of Robert F Kennedy’s assassination . There is some evidence that does support the theory of a second gunman . Sirhan was only person charged with the assassination .
 One bullet entered through his armpit, one through his back and one through the back of his head behind his right ear . The victim was shot in the head behind the right ear with a bullet in the back .
 Sirhan would have been able to fire no more than eight shots at point black range . Multiple eyewitnesses have said that Sirhan only got off two shoots before he was tackled to the ground .
 Eyewitnesses say paper could be seen in the air after Sirhan fired his bullets, suggesting he was using blanks . Paper could also be seen on the ground suggesting that paper was in the sky after the attack .
 Thane Eugene Cesar died today in the Philippines . RFK JR says Robert Kennedy Jr. 'Kennedy says RFK Jr. killed Cesar'
 On June 5, 1968, Cesar Cesar was moonlighting as a security guard at the Ambassador Hotel in Burbank, California . Cesar worked in classified section of Lockheed’s Burbank facility .
 Cesar waited in the pantry as my father spoke in the ballroom, then grabbed my father by the elbow and guided him toward Sirhan . Sirhan: "Cesar waited for my father to speak to Sirhan, and then grabbed his father's elbow"
 With 77 people in the pantry, every eyewitness said Sirhan was always in front on my father at a 3-6 feet distance . "Every eyewitness said he was in front of Sirhan at the time of the shooting," his son said .
 From under the dog pile, Sirhan emptied his 8 chamber revolver firing 6 more shots in the opposite direction . 5 of the shots struck bystander and one went wild . Sirhan then went wild and shot another bystander .
 By his own account, Cesar was directly behind my dad holding his right elbow with his own gun drawn when my dad fell backwards on top of him . Cesar's account says he was holding his own elbow when his father fell backwards .
 Cesar repeatedly changed his story about exactly when he drew his weapon . Cesar has repeatedly changed the story about when he pulled the gun .
 Thomas Noguchi, all 4 shots that struck my father were “contact” shots fired from behind my dad with the barrel touching or nearly touching his body . All 4 shots were ‘contact’ shots fired . from behind . My dad was struck by four shots fired
 Cesar sold his .22 to a co-worker weeks after the assassination warning him that it had been used in a crime . He sold the gun to a friend weeks after his assassination .
 Cesar was a bigot who hated the Kennedys for their advocacy of Civil Rights for blacks for blacks . Cesar hated the Kennedy family for opposing civil rights .
 Moldea penned a meticulous and compelling indictment of Cesar in a 1995 book . Moldea then suddenly exculpated him by fiat in a bizarre and nonsensical final chapter . Ironically, Moldea wrote a meticulous indictment of the Cesar before exculpating him .
 LAPD unit that investigated my dad’s assassination was run by active CIA operatives . LAPD unit investigated the assassination was 'run by CIA operatives' 'The LAPD unit' was 'rooted by active operatives'
 Sirhans appointed lawyer was Johnny Rosselli’s personal lawyer, Grant Cooper, who was appointed by Johnny Sirhan . Sirhan's lawyer was Grant Cooper .
 Tom Leonard has written for the UK’s Daily Mail: John F Kennedy wasn’t really picky about the women who made up his ‘conga line’ of paramours .
 For the libidinous President it was all about the sex . From Hollywood stars to White House secretaries – including a pair known as Fiddle and Faddle — interns, Mafia molls, strippers and call girls were all about sex .
 Newly uncovered notes from the 1960 election campaign trail reveal just how his sexual appetites weighed on his mind . However, he was not only a prolific womaniser but a prolific scribbler .
 In the scrawled messages to aides, the soon-to-be President fretted that they might cost him the election . In the messages he developed laryngitis and was ordered not to speak .
 JFK's father, a former U.S. ambassador to Britain, instructed his sons to ‘get laid as often as possible’ and he certainly tried to follow that advice . JFK’s father was a former ambassador to the UK .
 The Kennedy White House was far removed from the image of perfect-young-family bliss that he and Jackie tried to project . The Kennedy family was far from the ideal young family image that they tried to portray .
 JFK exploited his wife’s frequent absences from Washington and his own busy travel schedule to cheat on her at every opportunity . JFK — 43 when he became President – exploited wife's frequent absence from Washington .
 His defenders note that no woman ever accused him of rape or sexual assault . But then, nor did many of Harvey Weinstein’s accusers until recently, until recently .
 Kennedy’s charisma, film-star looks and power, together with the very different sexual dynamics of those days, allowed him to get away with behaviour that would cause outrage today . Certainly, Kennedy's charisma, . film star looks and . power, . together with . the very
 He invited her to join him in Palm Springs, California, the following month — adding that his wife wouldn’t be there . The couple has been married for more than 20 years .
 Monroe and Crosby spent a weekend at Bing Crosby’s house and that, according to some sources, was as far as the affair went . Some sources say Monroe was besotted with Crosby, but Monroe was not .
 She reportedly wrote to Jackie telling her that she intended to become First Lady . She reportedly told Jackie that she wanted to become President .
 In September 1963, Kennedy seduced the iconic German actress Marlene Dietrich, a former mistress of his domineering father Joe, who was also a serial philanderer . Dietrich was the daughter of Kennedy's father, Joe Kennedy, who also had affairs with Marlene .
 JFK worked his way through a sizeable chunk of Hollywood’s leading ladies . According to biographer Christopher Andersen, JFK worked through a number of Hollywood's leading ladies.
 Even Audrey Hepburn was reportedly a notch on the Kennedy bedpost during regular White House visits .
 Other actresses to fall for the Kennedy charm included 22-year-old Lee Remick and voluptuous Swede Anita Ekberg .
 Jean Simmons was filming in Boston when JFK 'practically broke down' her hotel room door to demand sex with her, she said .
 Florida senator George Smathers said he initially approached the sultry actress on his friend’s behalf . Sophia Loren, then 24, was then 24 when she starred in the film .
 With most women it was simply sex, but Kennedy apparently fell in love with one of his mistresses . Kennedy fell to love one of the mistresses, according to the papers .
 Swedish socialite Gunilla von Post was 21 and JFK was 36 when they met on the French Riviera . The couple was married at the time .
 They spent the evening flirting, only for him to reveal that he was marrying Jackie in three weeks . The pair spent the night flirting before he revealed he was getting married .
 JFK rang his father to say he wanted to get a divorce and marry Gunilla . JFK was smitten by Gunilla, who he called his father and asked to marry her .
 Joe told him he’d destroy his career if he did, and the affair ended there and then . Joe said he'd destroy career if affair ended, and it did .
 Married socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer, who had first met him at a school dance, visited the White House for trysts with him .
 When she died in a mystery execution-style shooting in 1964, some claimed that officials had ordered her death to stop her influencing the President with her support for pacifism .
 She was introduced to JFK by Frank Sinatra, with whom she was sleeping . She was also sleeping with JFK .
 Exner says she first met Kennedy in 1960 in Las Vegas . Exner went on to be mistress of the Sicilian-American mobster Sam Giancana .
 She also claimed she became the ‘bagwoman’ ferrying money from Kennedy to Giancana to secure election votes . She also said she became a 'bagwoman' ferrying funds to secure votes .
 Her insistence that they had a two-year affair while he was in the White House is supported by phone records and official documents . This has been widely discredited, but she insists they had an affair . This is widely discredited .
 Exner also said she had an abortion, which seems likely given Kennedy kept the details of a doctor who performed terminations — then illegal — in his Rolodex . Exner said Kennedy kept details of an abortion doctor who had performed abortions .
 Exner revealed that JFK had prostitutes brought to the White House for naked pool parties . Exner was JFK's White House pool party host . JFK was known to have had naked parties with prostitutes .
 His brother Bobby, the attorney general, later had her deported, fearing she could harm JFK’s re-election campaign . Bobby's brother Bobby was the Attorney General .
 Blaze Starr waited until 1989 before revealing that JFK had been ‘very quick and very wild’ in the sack . Blaze Starr was dubbed ‘The Hottest Blaze in Burlesque’ by the strip club .
 Starr said she had met JFK in 1954 when he started visiting her Maryland strip club . She didn't get a White House invitation until 1962 . Starr met JFK when he was visiting her strip club in 1954 .
 Prostitutes weren’t the only way Kennedy could have access to women without leaving the White House . Kennedy had access to prostitutes as well as prostitutes .
 Fiddle and Faddle were the cheeky Secret Service codenames for White House secretaries . Priscilla Wear and Jill Cowen were the Secret Service's Secret Service code-names .
 Both did little office work — they couldn’t type — but managed a fair amount of skinny-dipping in the pool with the President .
 If she had known the same was true of Pamela Turnure, JFK’s secretary when he was a senator, Jackie would surely not have agreed to his request to make her own press secretary in the White House .
 During a relationship stretching between 1961 and 1963, Turnure — a 21-year-old — would reportedly sleep with the President when her boss was away . Turnure, then 21, was reportedly a mistress of the President .
 Kennedy liked women who resembled his wife but were, in the words of Parisian brothel-keeper Madame Claude, sexier than Jackie . Madame Claude: "Jackie was a great sexier woman than her husband"
 Claude said she provided him with such a prostitute during the 1961 tour when Jackie wowed Paris and won over President de Gaulle . Claude said it was during Jackie's 1961 tour .
 Mimi Alford, an innocent 19-year-old press office intern, said Kennedy took her virginity in the First Lady's bedroom .
 They had an 18-month affair during which she always called him ‘Mr President’ and even had sex on Air Force One . They had sex in the Oval Office, where she called him Mr President .
 JFK’s worse betrayal of his wife allegedly involved her sister, Lee, Lee . JFK's worse betrayal allegedly involved his wife's sister . Lee's sister was JFK's sister, who he allegedly betrayed .
 According to two people in their inner circle, the two slept with each other one night while their families were holidaying together . Soon after Jackie had given birth to their daughter Caroline, the couple slept together .
 Marilyn made frequent phone calls throughout July to the Justice building in Washington . When Bobby was out of the office, his secretary, Angie Novello, talked with her . Marilyn called the Justice Department in Washington frequently during July .
 Marilyn spent some of her time that disastrous month posing for photographs . Marilyn spent her time posing for photos of Marilyn Monroe .
 She did some nude sessions with Bert Stern, which, following Marilyn’s death, brought him fame on an international scale . Following Marilyn's death, Bert Stern became famous for his famous nude sessions .
 Allen Grant took some candids of her in her home to accompany a long, prophetic, and brilliant interview for Life magazine that would come out in the last week of her life . She was also photographed by Allen Grant, who took the candids .
 She met with Springer and a Life staffer named Dick Meryman at the Savoy Plaza Hotel .
 Meryman had an assistant along who, after a few gin and tonics, came on too strong for Marilyn and who was quickly banished .
 A man wearing only a towel wrapped around his lower parts opened the door to the woman's apartment . He was wearing a towel around his body . The woman was taken to a basement apartment in a bid to meet the woman .
 The man nodded in great confusion, not quite believing his eyes in a perfect double-take . The man said, 'I'm not sure what I'm doing here'
 Marilyn got the giggles over the man’s reaction; it struck her as very funny . Marilyn said she was very impressed with the reaction .
 The man opened his door a crack as we went down the hall . The man sneaked another look as we walked down the hallway .
 Lawford was out of the hotel attending a party that evening . It turned out that Lawford had been attending the party that night .
 The piece was especially successful in mirroring her philosophy— her attitude toward fame and success as well as failure .
 Only the previous month, she had been equally open with another interviewer, Alan Levy, writing for Redbook .
 "I’m looking forward to eventually becoming a marvelous—excuse the word marvelous—character actress," she says .
 "To put it bluntly, I seem to have a whole superstructure with no foundation," he says .
 At least once she kept him waiting for over an hour, but he was unusually patient . "At least once, she kept me waiting for more than an hour," he said .
 Marilyn Jacobs was admitted to Cedars of Lebanon Hospital under an alias . Jacobs office publicists say Marilyn was admitted July 20 under alias . Marilyn Jacobs' office publicist says she was admitted under alias to hospital .
 If Marilyn was really pregnant, her state of mind can only be imagined . Marilyn was not pregnant when she was in her early years .
 She was three months away from her last bedroom encounter with the President and only a few weeks away from his brother . The President's brother is the brother of the President . She was just three months ago in the White House .
 It would be easy to assume that the aborted child was a Kennedy, but she was seeing other men as well that spring and summer . She was also having an affair with other men .
 The cover story given out by the Jacobs office was that she had gone that weekend with the Lawfords to Lake Tahoe . Jacobs' office says she was in Tahoe at the time .
 By the end of July, Marilyn was taking tentative steps toward replacing Mrs. Marilyn . Marilyn took tentative steps to replace Mrs. Martha Washington .
 She had gone to the home of her former black housekeeper, Florence Thomas, and asked her to come back to work for her . She had asked her former housekeeper Florence Thomas to come to work again .
 If she had indeed terminated a pregnancy, we have no way of knowing whether or not she told him . If she did, she would have to tell him if she did .
 'What we do know is that she seems to have plunged into a profound depression. What we do we know are that she seemed to be in a deep depression,' she said .
 Mickey Rudin, Marilyn’s attorney in California, had worked out details for her return to the Fox lot and the completion of Something's Got to Give . Marilyn's attorney said she will return to Fox lot .
 Dean Martin had begun a nightclub tour since the production shut down and would not be free until October . Dean Martin's nightclub tour is scheduled to begin in October .
 She called designer Jean Louis about a dress and asked his fitter to come the next day but then remembered that it was a Saturday and said that Monday would be fine . She then remembered she had to wait until Monday for the dress to be fitted .
 That evening she went out to her favorite restaurant, La Scala, with Pat Newcomb, Peter Lawford, and Bobby Kennedy, according to a source . Bobby Kennedy was then in California with his family when she died .
 Bobby had taken over Ethel's emotional life within a brief two and a half months, but he may well have brought Ethel and his family West to help ease him out of this mistake .
 Marilyn drifted into an unrealistic view of the situation, believing that Bobby was somehow available to her . Marilyn had drifted into a view of Bobby's situation . Marilyn's life had become too much of an obsession with Bobby, she says .
 If she felt that the possibility of a really serious relationship with Bobby was being dismissed—that would certainly help explain her ill temper Friday evening .
 The document says Bobby Kennedy and his family spent the weekend on the Gilroy ranch . He then went to the apartment of Paul Fay, Jr., in the city of San Francisco Sunday night, the document says .
 It says nothing about the tragedy unfolding in Los Angeles that weekend that weekend . "It's not the first time I've seen a person who died in a car crash. It's the first of its kind kind of history," says the author of the book .
 The document served to make it official clear that Kennedy was far away by the time the word of the tragedy was out . But the document also served to show that Kennedy had already left the country .
 Good versus Pure Evil—Bloody Images From Ukraine . Good Versus Pure Evil: Good Versus Evil .