 Kennedy chose to blockade Cuba, deciding to bomb the missile sites only if further action proved necessary . Kennedy chose not to bomb Cuba's missile sites but to bomb them only if necessary .
 President John F Kennedy's options were to attack Cuba using air strikes to destroy the missile sites to get rid of Castro once and for all . The options that President Kennedy have for responding to the Soviet missile deployment were air strikes .
 The second option was to call a Navy blockade to keep Soviet ships from sending any more missiles . The blockade was called after the threat of Soviet missiles .
 Kennedy opted for a naval blockade that would stem flow of missiles entering Cuba . Kennedy opted to stop the flow of Cuban missiles into the country .
 Kennedy responded by placing a naval blockade, which he referred to as a “quarantine,” around Cuba . Kennedy responded to the blockade with a blockade of Cuban territory .
 He also demanded the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the sites .
 From the outset of the crisis, Kennedy and ExComm determined that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable . ExComm: "The presence of the Soviet missiles was unacceptable"
 Kennedy announced a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of more missiles from Cuba . Kennedy demanded that the Soviets dismantle and remove the weapons already in Cuba . The blockade was imposed by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy demanded that the Soviets remove the missiles from Cuba . The U.S. naval blockade around Cuba was created to stop Soviet ships entering .
 Kennedy’s economic development programs, supported by the Peace Corps, were intended to reduce poverty in developing nations so their citizens would be less attracted to Communism . Kennedy's economic development program was intended to help reduce poverty .
 The basis for President Kennedy’s demand that the missiles be removed from Cuba was basically out of fear, he says . President Kennedy's demand for missile removal was based on fear, not fear .
 The United States announced that it would not allow offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba . The U.S. demanded that the Soviets would dismantle the missile bases that were under construction .
 Khrushchev wanted to support the new communist country in ‘Uncle Sam’s backyard’ and ensure that the Americans would not attempt another incident like the Bay of Pigs .
 Kennedy accepted the Soviet offer to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for an end to the quarantine and a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The Soviet offer was part of a deal to end the quarantine in Cuba and end the Cuban quarantine .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy told Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that if the Soviet Union did not remove the missiles the U.S. would do so . The same day Attorney General Kennedy said the United States would remove missiles from the USSR .
 The most important foreign policy event of the Kennedy administration was the signing of a treaty that banned testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1961 .
 It was the most important event because it ended the Cuban missile crisis and stopped both countries from beginning a nuclear war . It was also important because it stopped both sides from starting a nuke war .
 The Berlin Wall was built by the German Democratic Republic during the Cold War to prevent its population from escaping Soviet-controlled East Berlin to West Berlin . West Berlin was controlled by the major Western Allies .
 Kennedy had neutralized and flexible response to the Cold War . Truman supported containment and containment, and Eisenhower supported massive retaliation and brickmanship .
 Kennedy’s establishment of the Peace Corps was aimed towards communist containment by providing aid to the Third World . Kennedy established Peace Corps to provide aid to Third World in order to contain communism .
 Flexible Response gave the president the ability to select from nonmilitary options, as well as military options, when responding to a crisis . It allowed the U.S. to meet each hostile action with a proportional reaction . Flexible response allows the United States to respond to a hostile action
 In terms of the missile crisis, John and Robert Kennedy did provide generally adroit leadership . However, not as flawless as that portrayed in Thirteen Days .
 Soviet missiles out of Cuba and out of Italy and Turkey . U.S. nuclear missiles also taken out of Turkey and Italy . Soviet missiles were sent to Cuba in 1960s .
 In 1963, the U.S., Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed the treaty . The treaty was signed a year after the crisis .
 U.S. President Kennedy demanded removal of Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba . Khrushchev acceded to the United States demands a week later . Kennedy demanded a naval blockade of the island .