 Every organization with a plausible connection to it seems to have done something to commemorate it . If you’re interested in nuclear things you no doubt already know this .
 Even after all this time, there are new things to learn — and things we still don't know . It’s kind of amazing, but there are still things we don’t know .
 United States photo analysts first spotted these tactical nuclear-capable missiles on October 25, 1962 . Only in 1992 did U.S. policymakers learn that nuclear warheads for the Lunas were already in Cuba in 1962 .
 Stan Norris and David Rosenberg gave a talk at the Wilson Center . Stan Norris spoke at a talk by David Rosenberg .
 Stan is the author of the great biography of General Groves . He and Hans Kristensen give us the definitive estimates for how many nuclear weapons there are in the world at any given time . Stan is a frequent contributor to the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists’ “Nuclear Note
 David, for his part, talked about the nuclear war planning that was going on at the time . David also talked about nuclear war plans that were going on during the war .
 "Everybody knows that nuclear war in 1962 would have been, to put it mildly, bad. I mean ... I mean, everybody knows that . Everybody knows . I'm not sure what happened to the world's first nuclear war .
 Thinking through how bad in very concrete terms makes it even more disturbing — it takes it from the realm of “generic existential threat” to images of destroyed American cities . But thinking through how badly it is makes it more disturbing .
 Both were excellent and said far more than I can summarize justly in such a short space, and the audience questions were great . The audience questions are great, and both were excellent .
 The audience had a good dollop of DC nukerati in it — among those who asked questions were Bill Burr of the National Security Archive .
 At the time of the Crisis, the United States could out-nuke the Soviets by a fairly considerable margin . The U.S. was able to out- nuke the Soviet Union by a relatively considerable margin.
 The United States arguably had an advantage of 17-to-1 over the Soviets, though by my reckoning it was probably more like a 10 to 1 advantage in terms of strategic weapons . Depending on how you hash out megatonnage vs. delivery vs. success likelihood and whatnot
 In 1962 the Soviet Union had only 42 long-range ICBMs ready to launch . In 1962, there were only 42 of the world's longest-range missiles ready to go on launch .
 The United States also had several thousands of other nukes stashed around the globe ready to go, as well . Plus, the U.S. also had a stockpile of nukes around the world .
 The Soviets still could have easily killed tens of millions in the U.S. and Europe if it had come to it . But the Soviets could still kill tens of thousands in the United States and in Europe .
 ICBMs are still a pretty big number: 6 of them are wearing 3 megaton warheads . The other 36 are ranging from 3 to 6 megatons, and 36 are in range from 3 megaton warheads .
 Even if the Soviets were being very conservative about those and launching three per target, that’s still 14 American cities you can scratch off the list, ignoring the fallout .
 In the face of this fact, our 1o-to-1 “superiority” looks pretty pointless, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This is discussed a bit in Errol Morris’ Fog of War and I’ve always been a little surprised this hasn’t been more talked about. This is a bit of a bit .
 According to Stan, the total number of Soviet nuclear warheads on Cuba was… wait for it… 158 . Well, Stan, according to Stan. Well, he said the total . number of . Soviet nuclear warms on Cuba was 158 .
 Six to eight SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles were also there, and also at ‘operational” status . Six to 8 SS-3 medium-ranged ballistic missiles also were there, also at "operational" status . The U.S. says the missiles
 SS-4s could have reached as far north as Washington, D.C., with explosive yields of a little over a megaton each . SS-3s were detonated in the early 1950s and could have been detonated at least once each .
 There's still those other ICBMs that Soviets had . And that’s just the “regional” problem — there's still a problem .
 Moscow vigorously asserted its authority in terms of actual nuclear use in the region, but if it had come down to it, there would have been little they could have done to stop a local commander from using one .
 What’s shocking about this is that apparently the Americans had no clue. What's shocking is that they didn’t know about this, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 They knew there might be some tactical nukes in Cuba, but chose to ignore the fact . The U.S. knew there may be some nukes but chose not to ignore it .
 Khrushchev was too afraid of nuclear war, and the Cuba missile base was really only a fraction of what it was meant to be at that point . The Cuban missile base is now a much smaller part of the Soviet Union .
 The period of danger stretched out well into November 1962, and those MRBMs weren’t removed until December 1962 . The period was the longest of danger .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev both realized that they only had limited control when it came to preventing all-out nuclear war . Kennedy realized that he only had control when he came to stopping nuclear war in the 1960s and '60s .
 The military engines were spinning up, and getting them back to a not-hair-trigger state was a non-trivial thing . The military is now in the process of getting it back on track again, says President Obama .
 Wiping out a SAC base within minutes of the start of hostilities might have been more important than hitting a population center, especially with the limited capabilities of the time .
 It’s a great question — the fact that we really don’t know is one of the things that came up .
 In the U.S. case, the main nuclear strategy was based around pre-emption — taking out their nukes first . In the United States case, for example, it was based on pre-empting . The U.N. nuclear strategy is based on taking out the
 It could be dialed up to “destroy their urban/industrial areas” but that was the last of many possibilities . It could also be called “destruction” of the urban and industrial areas .
 Exactly what they would have aimed at, and how close they were to doing any of those things, is still unclear . Exactly what exactly would have been to do?
 Soviet nuclear doctrine favored a pre-emptive strike against the United States, says David Gergen . Gergen: "It was a big salvo, then a strike against Europe and an invasion of Europe"
 The SS-4s would have been targeted in Washington, D.C. But that doesn’t really tell us too much about where they were targeted, other than the obvious, Washington .
 I suppose the Russian government hasn’t released any of those old Soviet records so as not to give anything away about their possible current nuclear doctrine . I suppose they haven't released any old Soviet . records .
 Nice…I’ll cross reference this in my first blog post which mentions the crisis. I’m not sure if this is true .
 My understanding is that it’s not so much that they were “too old” but that they’re planning to be phased out anyway . My understanding of the situation is that they're not too old, but they're being phased out .
 The U.S. got a really great deal out of it — no missiles in Cuba, in exchange for removing missiles they were already going to remove . So in a way, indeed, the United States got a lot of a good deal .
 On the Jupiters, they were seen as obsolete and dangerous and there was a lot of talk about removing them . JFK had not yet approved any plans,mainly for alliance reasons .
 Phil Nash’s book “the Other Missiles of October” is a terrific book on the Jupiter problem . Phil Nash is also a terrific author of the book on Jupiter . The Jupiter problem is a big mystery .
 Kennedy authorized the secret deal involving the Jupiters persuasion . Of course, once Kennedy had authorized the deal, it became a secondary concern . The deal was secondary concern for Kennedy .
 Crisis was still on-going through early December 1962 . Crisis still ongoing through mid-December .
 Norris and Kristensen’s accounting of those nukes in Cuba and elsewhere, see my post here . See my post on the accounting here .
 Alex Wellerstein is a historian of science and nuclear weapons and a professor at the Stevens Institute of Technology . He says the U.S. has been involved in the nuclear weapons program .
 Alex Wellerstein is the author of a new book, "The Daily Beast" and "The Washington Redskins" All text text copyright 2011-2022, unless otherwise specified, is copyright to Alex Welleststein .