 The United States Manhatten Project led to the creation of the first atomic bombs . They were used to bomb the Japanese cities Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 .
 Stalin was determined to follow suit and make the USSR a nuclear power . Stalin wanted to make the Soviet Union a nuclear superpower . The Soviet Union became the first country to have a nuclear arsenal .
 In August 1949, the USSR tested an atomic device, ending the U.S. nuclear monopoly . Following the Soviet test, Truman comissioned the development of the hydrogen bomb .
 Second generation nuclear weapons were based on nuclear fission and therefore known as thermo-nuclear devices . This second generation of nuclear weapons was based on fission . The devices were known as 'thermo nuclear devices'
 The US' Mike Tests in 1952 resulted in a megaton explosion 1000x the explosion at Hiroshima, producing a mushroom cloud which rose 41,000m in 3 minutes . The explosion was 1000x that of the blast at Hiroshima in Hiroshima .
 The USSR was determined to keep up with U.S. technology and produced its own H-Bomb within the year . The USSR produced the H-Bomps in the 1950s .
 The test of Sakharov's Third Idea in 1955 demonstrated that the USSR had developed a bomb as powerful as the United States H-Bombs . Both Superpowers regarded the development of firepower as vital to security .
 Eisenhower developed the strategy of massive retaliation . The number of United States warheads increased from 1000 to 18000 . The first battlefield tactical nuclea weapons were stationed in West Germany .
 He believed a huge nuclear arsenal capable of annihilating the USSR would deter a nuclear attack . He believed that a huge . nuclear arsenal . capable of . annihilating a . USSR would . deter a . nuclear attack, he said .
 Khrushchev announced the successful testing of a 50-megaton bomb in 1961 . In 1961, in an aggressive speech designed to pressure JFK, Khrushche announced the success of the test . In 1962, the Soviet Union tested a 50 megaton bomb .
 It was not a practical military option as it could not be loaded onto any ICBM and could only be used by aircraft in test conditions . Nuclear weapons became central to the development of the military strategy of both superpowers .
 Arms Race increased tension between the Superpowers as they competed for a decisive lead in the arms race . The Arms Race was one of the most intense periods of the decade .
 A balance of terror existed between the Superpowers, detering direct military conflict which could potentially escalate into nuclear war . A balance between the two superpowers was a key factor in the outcome of war .
 The threat of war forced the Superpowers to respect each other's sphere of influence . With the exception of West Berlin, which was Western territory situated within Stalin's zone of influence, West Berlin was within the Soviet sphere .
 The vast cost of developing weapons and the delivery systems put huge strain on the economies of the Superpowers . The world's superpowers are struggling to cope with the cost of weapons development .
 Neither the United States nor the USSR was able to develop enough delivery systems to attack each other directly . Neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union were able to attack directly .
 During the 1950s, both Superpowers had created ever more powerful warheads . Prior to 1960, nuclear tensions focused on Central Europe .
 Neither side had a convicing delivery system capable of targetting the other side directly . Neither side was able to target each other directly in the game .
 Short-range nuclear missiles stationed outside the territory of the Superpowers . The missiles are stationed outside of the territory .
 In 1956, the USSR deployed the TU20 Bear, a long-range bomber which could reach U.S. territory from Soviet airbases . Ballistic missiles fired from submarines were fired from submarine submarines . The Soviets deployed the Bear in 1956 .
 U.S. bombers were slow and could be intercepted by United States fighter planes . However, the bombers could be slow and easily intercepted by the United States .
 The problems inherent in bomber technology led to the development of ICBMs . The first Soviet ICBM test occured in 1957 .
 Later in the year, the launch of Sputnik demonstrated to the world that Soviet missiles were powerful enough to reach space . The launch of the Soviet Union's first satellite satellite in 1961 was a success .
 This caused shock and panic in the United States as it showed that the USSR had the potential to target the U.S. directly . The USSR had also shown that the US could be targeted directly by the Soviet Union .
 The US US ICBM technology lagged behind that of the USSR in the mid-1950s . The United States focused on deploying IRBMs . ICBMs were expensive to produce and thus Khrushchev attempted to find cheaper alternatives .
 IRBMs had a smaller range than ICBMs but could target Soviet territory as they were stationed in Europe and the Middle East . IRB Ms. could target the Soviet Union in Europe or the Middle Eastern region .
 By the early 1960s, the United States had developed ICBMs that were superior to the Soviet equilalents . The U.S. had a decisive lead in the Arms Race . However, by the early 60s, it was clear that the U.K. had
 The Cuban Revolution of 1959 gave Khrushchev the opportunity to achieve nuclear parity . The Cuban revolution of 1959 allowed him to achieve nukes parity .
 Stationing missiles on Cuba, less than 160km from the US, would allow the USSR to target the US without having to use expensive long-range ICBMs .
 Khrushchev planned to send 40 tactical nuclear missiles and 50000 Soviet soldiers to Cuba . The Soviet Union was planning to send the missiles and soldiers to the island .
 The U.S. had attempted to overthrow Castro twice via the CIA-backed invasion of the Bay of Pigs and through Operation Mongoose . The United States had tried to oust Castro twice .
 Khrushchev believed that sending nuclear weapons to Cuba would deter U.S. interference . The Cuban government did not want to use nuclear weapons in the country .
 Kennedy responded to the Soviet build-up with a TV address in which he referd to 'unmistakable evidence of nuclear strike capacity' on Cuba . Kennedy referred to the 'evidence' of Cuba's nuclear capabilities .
 He made it clear that a full retaliatory response would follow if the Soviets didn't abandon their military presence . He made the threat clear that the U.S. wouldn't abandon its military presence.
 Kennedy decided to establish a naval blockade of the Strait of Black Sea . Kennedy ordered immediate military action against the Soviet Union .
 Soviet ships were en route to Cuba . Any ships crossing the line would have to submit to U.S. inspection . The ships would be subject to inspection .
 Khrushchev was relieved that Kennedy did not announce immediate military action . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The first potential flashpoint occured on 24 October, Soviet ships reached the U.S. quarantine line . Soviet ships arrived in the United States quarantine line.
 Stevenson appealed to the 'courtroom of world opinion', producing a photograph of developing Soviet sites . Stevenson's photograph of Soviet sites was produced by the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev proposed a way out of the crisis that would involve a U.S. guarantee not to invade Cuba . The White House recieved a long and rambling telegram from the Soviet Union on 26th October .
 A second message was broadcast on Radio Moscow with a very different tone . The U.S. could not immediately respond to the message .
 Talks led to a compromise, Soviet military withdrawal from Cuba in return for U.S. withdrawal from Turkey . The talks led to the Soviet withdrawal of Cuba in exchange for United States withdrawal .
 The United States also agreed to respect Cuban independence . The Soviets agreed there would be no public announcement about U.S. withdrawal from Turkey . The U.N. also agreed that Cuba would be respected .
 During the Crisis, both leaders had been seeking to avoid war without losing face . Khrushchev's actions had not been designed to cause war .
 He assumed that the U.S. would only discover Soviet missiles on Cuba once they were fully operational . He had assumed the United States would find Soviet missiles once they had been operational .
 His actions were designed to contain the situation without provoking a military response from Khrushchev . His actions would have been designed to prevent a military reaction from the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy knew Khrushchev would only back down if he could do so so with dignity . Kennedy knew that Khrushiev would only backed down if it could be done with dignity, he said .
 The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was designed as a first step towards controlling nuclear arsenals . Kennedy was attempting to reduce Khrushchev's humiliation and minimise tension between the Superpowers .
 The Treaty banned the testing of nuclear weapons as a first step towards arms control . The Treaty was first step to arms control and nuclear disarmament .
 Stockpiling of warheads and future production was allowed . It was made clear that none of the agreements should prevent states taking action in defence of security .
 Both sides agreed to the establishment of a hot line between the United States President and the Soviet Leader . Both sides committed themselves to continued negotiations with a view to nuclear disarmament .
 Crisis contributed to a change in Soviet military policy . This was intended to improve communication and create an effective means for resolving problems .
 Soviet leaders believed that Khrushchev's diplomacy had resulted in a humiliating climb-down . The collapse of the Soviet Union was seen as a humiliation for the country .
 They believed Khrushchev's policies in Cuba had led to a confrontation that the USSR could not win . United States nuclear superiority meant that the Soviet Union had to accept United States terms, they said .
 These years of maximum nuclear daner were caused by the relative weakness of the Soviet nuclear arsenal . These years were during a period of maximum power in Soviet Union .
 US generals advised aggressive policies as they assumed that in the event of war the U.S. would be victorious . US generals assumed that the United States would win the war .
 Khrushchev adopted aggressive policies in order to cover up the Soviet nuclear inferiority, says Soviet leader . He says the policies were designed to hide the Soviet Union's inferiority in nuclear power .
 In this sense, Khrushchev's strident policies were a bluff, designed to make Western leades believe that the Soviet Union was in a stronger position than it really was . In this case, the policies were meant to make the West believe they were stronger than they were .
 The achievement of nuclear parity in the mid-1960s removed the causes of instability . Consquently, the achievement of . nuclear parity . in the . mid-60s removed . the causes for instability .
 Nuclear parity led to the prospect of a war in which both superpowers were utterly annihilated . Equally, nuclear parity could lead to the possibility of a nuclear war between the superpowers .
 The Crisis also changed the fortunes of the two leaders . The achivevement of nuclear parity ended the era of nuclear crisis . In the period of 1964 to 1979 there were no further nuclear crises .
 Kennedy praised for securing peaceful resolution of the crisis without backing down . Kennedy was praised for his role in securing the peaceful resolution . Kennedy is credited with securing a peaceful resolution to the crisis .
 Leading figures in the Soviet government criticised Khrushchev for leading the Soviet Union into an unwinnable confrontation and damaging its prestige and credibility . By contrast, leading officials in the government criticised him for damaging the country .
 Superpower Relations 1944-90 discussion thread . Discussion thread . Edexcel History A, International Relations .