 This includes the causes, The development of the cold war and the cuban missile crisis . This is a look at the history of the Cold War and the Soviet Union .
 I have only used the information to put into note form so its easier to read . The information is from bbcbitesize.com .
 The Communists wanted to wreck Germany, take huge reparations for the damage done during the war . Wanted to set up a buffer of friendly states around Russia to prevent another invasion in the future. Wanted to wreak Germany .
 Communist-led coalition was elected in 1945 elections in Bulgaria . Communists executed the non-Communists . The Communists executed all non-communists .
 In 1949, the West Germans set up a Communist-controlled state called the German Democratic Republic . In 1949 they set up the state, which is now known as Germany .
 In 1945 elections, a Communist-led coalition was elected to power in Romania . In 1947, Romania was the first country to hold elections in the country . Romania was ruled by the Communist Party in 1947 .
 The Communists gradually took over and in 1947 they abolished the monarchy . The Communist Party gradually took control of the country .
 Stalin promised to set up a joint Communist/non-Communist government at Yalta, but then he invited 16 non-Communists to Moscow and arrested them . Stalin had promised to . set up . a joint . Communist-non-communist government . government .
 Thousands of non-Communists were arrested, and the Communists won the 1947 election . Thousands were arrested and thousands were arrested . The Communist Party won the election .
 The non-communists won the 1945 elections with Zoltan Tildy as president . Hungary 1947 . Hungary .
 Communists' leader, Rakosi, took control of the secret police, and executed and arrested his opponents . However, the Communists took control, taking control of secret police . Rakosi took control and executed his opponents, killing them .
 Tildy was forced to resign and Cardinal Mindzenty, head of the Catholic Church, was imprisoned . Cardinal Mindsenty was imprisoned for his crimes . The Pope was imprisoned by the Vatican .
 Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill agreed to split Germany into four zones of occupation and allow free elections in Eastern European countries . Germany was not yet defeated, so there were tensions about Poland .
 Russia promised to join war against Japan when Germany was defeated . Russia was invited to join the U.N. and promised to do so when Germany defeated .
 Germany had been defeated, Roosevelt had died and Churchill had lost the 1945 election so there were open disagreements . Churchill and Roosevelt had open disagreements so there was open disagreements. Germany had defeated Roosevelt and Roosevelt died .
 Truman came away angry about the size of reparations and the fact that a communist government was being set up in Poland . Truman was angry that reparations were being given to Poland .
 Truman did not tell Stalin that he had the atomic bomb . Germany to be split into four zones . Truman didn't tell Stalin he had an atom bomb .
 Russia could take whatever it wanted from the Soviet zone, and 10 per cent of the industrial equipment of the western zones, but Britain and the U.S. thought this was too much .
 A government of 'national unity' to be set up in Poland, comprising both communists and non-communists . The government will be made up of communists and other non-Communists .
 Truman was angry because Stalin had arrested the non-communist leaders of Poland . Truman was angered by Stalin's arrest of non-Communist leaders in Poland .
 This part of the agreement was called the Declaration of Liberated Europe . It was signed by the European Union in 1999 .
 America and Britain were alarmed because communists were coming to power in the countries of Eastern Europe . Britain and America were alarmed by the rise of communism in Eastern Europe in the 1950s .
 Truman dropped the atomic bomb so that Japan would surrender before Russian troops could go into Japan . Truman used the bomb to get Japan to surrender before Russia could enter Japan .
 America had the bomb in July 1945, but Truman did not tell Stalin about it . Truman didn't tell him about it, but he did tell Stalin .
 By 1947, Greece was one of the few countries in Eastern Europe that hadn't turned communist . Truman Doctrine and Marshall plan were the focus of the Marshall plan .
 The Communist rebels in Greece were prevented from taking over by the British Army . The British Army prevented them from taking control of the country .
 America was becoming increasingly alarmed by the growth of Soviet power . The Soviet Union was gaining power in the early 1950s .
 British told Truman they could no longer afford to keep their soldiers in Greece . Truman stepped in to take over after the British told him they couldn't afford to leave their soldiers .
 In March 1947, he told the American Congress it was America's job to stop communism growing any stronger . He said America was the only nation in the world to fight communism .
 Truman advocated containment, but he did not use this word . Many Americans spoke of ""rolling back" communism . It is often said to have been containment .
 In June 1947, General George Marshall made a visit to Europe to see what was needed . General Marshall visited Europe in June 1947 to assess the situation .
 He came away thinking Europe was so poor that the whole of Europe was about to turn Communist . He thought Europe was going to be Communist .
 Marshall and Truman asked Congress for $17 billion to fund the European Recovery Programme nicknamed the Marshall Plan . The plan was designed to get the economy of Europe going again . It was nicknamed the "Marshall Plan"
 Congress at first hesitated, but agreed in March 1948 when Czechoslovakia turned Communist . Congress was reluctant to give up support for the Communist Party . Congress agreed in 1948, but later agreed to give support to the party .
 In 1959 the historian William Appleman Williams was the first to suggest that America was to blame . The Revisionists say that America is to blame for the World War II .
 Revisionists said Truman's use of the atomic bomb without telling Stalin was the start of the Cold War . Truman's decision to use the bomb in the 1950s was the trigger of the war .
 John Lewis Gaddis first published this idea in 1972 . The Post-Revisionists · John Lewis .
 The post-revisionists argued that neither Russia or America was to blame for the Cold War . The Cold War was the result of misunderstandings on both sides, and failure to appreciate each other's fears .
 Allies decided to split Germany into four zones of occupation in 1945 . Berlin Crisis was the Berlin Crisis of the Second World War .
 The USSR took huge reparations from its zone in eastern Germany . Britain, France and America tried to improve conditions in their zones .
 In June 1948, Britain, France and America united their zones into a new country, West Germany . West Germany was formed from West Germany after the war in June 1948 .
 On 23 June 1948, they introduced a new currency, which they said would help trade . The new currency was introduced by the British government in 1948 .
 The next day, Stalin cut off all rail and road links to west Berlin the Berlin Blockade . The Berlin blockade was the first of its kind in the Soviet Union .
 The west saw this as an attempt to starve Berlin into surrender, so they decided to supply west Berlin by air . The west also saw it as a ploy to starve the city into surrender .
 275,000 planes transported 1. million tons of supplies during the war . Plane landed every three minutes at Berlin's Templehof airport . Plane landings every 3 minutes at the airport every day .
 Russia starts to stop western literature being sold in the Soviet zone . January 1948 Russia stopped selling western literature in the zone . Russia banned western literature from being sold into Soviet zone in 1948 .
 Allied transport into the city has to apply for a permit and is inspected . April 1948 Russia imposes a partial blockade of west Berlin . The blockade began in April 1948 .
 June 1948 America, Britain and France announce they wanted to create a new country of West Germany . June 1948 U.S. and Britain announce they want to create West Germany. June 1948 West Germany was formed from West Germany in West Berlin .
 In 1945, Korea was split along the 38th parallel between a communist north led by Kim IL Sung, and a non-communist south led by Syngman Rhee . The north and the south were led by a communist .
 The U.S. developed the 'domino theory' the idea that, if one country fell to communism, others would follow like a row of dominoes . The theory was developed by the United States in the 1930s .
 In 1950, after getting the support of Russia and China, Kim IL Sung invaded South Korea . Kim Il Sung invaded the South Korea in 1950 .
 The USA went to the United Nations and got them to send troops to defend South Korea . The U.N. sent troops to South Korea in order to defend the country .
 The Russians couldn't veto the idea because they were boycotting the UN at the time . The Russians weren't able to veto the proposal because of their boycott of the UN .
 In September, UN troops, led by the United States General MacArthur, landed in Korea and drove the NKPA back . UN troops led to the fall of the Korean peninsula in September .
 Chinese People's Volunteers attacked and drove the Americans back in November 1950 . In November 1950, the Americans were driven back by the Chinese people .
 The Americans landed more troops and drove the Chinese back to the 38th parallel . Truman ordered General MacArthur to stop and sacked him when he disagreed . MacArthur was sacked when he agreed .
 Khrushchev's statement that he wanted to ""de-Stalinise" Eastern Europe led to anti-Soviet rebellions in 1956 in Poland and Hungary, and Khrushche sent in Russian troops to re-establish Soviet control .
 Russia and America competed in every way possible eg in sport, and in the space race . Russia and U.S. competed in sport and space race in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Russia launched the first satellite Sputnik in 1957, and sent the first man into orbit Yuri Gagarin in 1961 . The first man in space went into orbit in 1961, and the first woman into space in 1961.
 Alan Shepard became the first American to fly in space in 1961, and President Kennedy promised to put a man on the moon by 1969 . Alan Shepard was the first man to go to the moon in 1969 .
 This was not just a propaganda war, it was a clash of ideologies as both sides tried to prove that their way was best . Both sides were trying to prove they had the best way to do things best .
 Senator McCarthy led a series of public trials of suspected Communists the so-called witch-hunts . McCarthy led the series of . public trials . of suspected . Communists .
 By the end of the 1950s, there was massive tension in the Cold War . The arms race both sides accepted the need for some kind of Nuclear Test Ban treaty . U2 and Paris conference took place in Paris in 1987 .
 Russians were furious that many East Germans were fleeing to the west through West Berlin . East Berlin was a major hub for the West . West Berlin was one of the most densely populated cities in Europe .
 Cuba the Americans were worried because Fidel Castro, a Communist, had seized power there in 1959 . Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba in 1959, but the U.S. was worried because he was a Communist .
 American U2 spy plane was shot down over Russia 13 days before the summit . Pilot, Gary Powers, was captured in May 1960 .
 The Russians captured Gary Powers alive when they found out he was a spy plane . Powers was captured alive . Powers' plane was a weather plane, but much of it survived .
 Khrushchev demanded that the United States president, Eisenhower, apologise for his actions . The first thing he did was to demand that Eisenhower apologise .
 During October 1956, students, workers and soldiers in Hungary attacked the AVH and Russian soldiers, and smashed a statue of Stalin . In Hungary, students and workers attacked AVH, Russian soldiers and Soviet soldiers .
 Imre Nagy a moderate and a westerniser took over as prime minister in 1956 . Nagy took over from Nagy in October 1956 to be the first prime minister of Hungary .
 Khrushchev agreed and on 28 October 1956, the Russian army pulled out of Budapest . The Russian army was withdrawn from Budapest .
 The new Hungarian government introduced democracy, freedom of speech, and freedom of religion . Hungary's new government has introduced democracy and free speech to Hungary .
 Nagy announced that Hungary was going to leave the Warsaw Pact in November 1956 . Nagy made the announcement on 3 November 1956, 1956 .
 He claimed he had received a letter from Hungarian Communist leaders asking for his help . He said he had been asked to help by the Communist leaders .
 Hungarian people even children fought the Russian troops with machine guns . Even children fought Russian troops using machine guns, says Hungarian people .
 By the 1960s Berlin was still divided the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom in the West . Berlin was divided between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Historians have looked at the Cold War in many different ways over the years . The nature of the war has been debated by historians for decades .
 It became a symbol of division the division of Germany and Europe . Over the following years, it was the symbol of the division between communist East and democratic West . It was also symbol of Germany's division of Europe and the West .
 In September 1961, Castro asked for and Russia publicly promised weapons to defend Cuba against America . Castro asked Russia to send weapons to Cuba in September 1961 .
 These sites brought every town in the U.S. within range of Soviet nuclear missiles . The sites were built in the 1950s and '60s .
 Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba . Events Day is October 22 .
 B52 nuclear bombers are deployed, so that one-eighth of them are airborne all the time . B52s are deployed in the U.S. and around the world .
 Khrushchev sends a second letter, demanding that Kennedy also dismantles American missile bases in Turkey . Saturday 27 October at 11am at 11pm .
 The Origins of The Cold War 1945-55 5. / 5 . / 5 based on 1 rating Teacher recommended Evil empire key words . 5.5 based on 5 .
 Get Revising is one of the trading names of The Student Room Group Ltd. It is a trading name for the Student Room Room Group .