 This crisis is widely believed to be the closest the world has come to nuclear war . The crisis is believed to have been the closest to the brink of nuclear war in history .
 By 1962, the United States of America and the Soviet Union were deep into the Cold War . The U.S. and Soviet Union was deep into a Cold War in 1962 .
 This was not a traditional type of war, instead, the conflict played out in other countries . It was not the first time the conflict had been fought in the Middle East .
 "The goal in this war was to spread one's ideology while preventing the spread of the enemy's ideology," he said . The goal in the war was spreading ideology while protecting the enemy, he added .
 The United States was attempting to prevent the spread of Communist ideology by fighting or funding wars that Communist forces were fighting in . The U.S. was trying to prevent spread of Communism by funding or fighting wars .
 Both countries had Intercontinental missiles, medium-range missiles . Being close to the target was imperative to national interest . Another major aspect of the Cold War was the desire to have nuclear weapons ready for use .
 The U.S. had nuclear weapons placed in Turkey and had Intercontinental missiles that could be launched from the United States. The United States had nuclear arms in Turkey .
 The leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, decided to move nuclear missiles into Cuba . The Soviet Union did not have any nuclear weapons placed close to the United States . The country only had a few missiles capable of launching from Russia and striking inside the U.S.
 From the Russian perspective, this act was simply matching the U.S. presence in Turkey . The Russian military said the act was just matching the United States presence in the country .
 Khrushchev decided to keep the missiles a secret . The U.S. placed nuclear weapons in Turkey and Cuba in Cuba were placed in Cuba .
 Khrushchev was the first leader of the Soviet Union after Stalin . Regardless of when he planned to tell the U.S., an American spy plane captured images of nuclear installations in Cuba .
 The United States was surprised by this action and because the act was secret, American officials worried about Khrushchev's motives . The act was kept secret and American officials were worried about its motives .
 Between October 15th and October 28th of 1962, the U.S. government, led by President John F Kennedy, worked to identify the most appropriate response to the Soviet act .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were the two most powerful countries . This led each to produce as many nuclear weapons as they could . The United States and Soviet Union produced as many weapons as possible .
 The United States had over 18,000 of these weapons by 1960 and the Soviet Union had about 2,000 . The U.S. had 18,500 of the weapons .
 Each country had enough to destroy the world singlehandedly . While the U.S. may have had significantly more, each country had more than enough .
 Each country practiced the policy of M.A.D. as a deterrence strategy . For this reason, each country practiced this policy as a deterrent strategy .
 Mutually Assured Destruction refers to how either country would launch their entire nuclear arsenal if even a single nuclear bomb was launched by the enemy . Mutually assured destruction refers to when a nuclear bomb is launched by an enemy .
 The U.S. was spreading principles of Capitalism and Democracy around the world, while the Soviet Union was spreading Communism .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro managed to overthrow the Cuban government and established a Communist government just 90 miles from Florida . The Cuban government was overthrown by the revolutionary Castro .
 The United States had held influence over the island for 50 years . American businesses were heavily invested by the time this overthrow occurred . U.S. businesses had invested heavily in the island .
 Castro nationalized industries, took control of the factories and pushed the Americans off the island . Castro nationalizes industries and pushed Americans off island .
 Castro overthrew a government that was heavily aligned with U.S. interests . During the Cold War, the United States did not want a Communist government so close . John F Kennedy created a plan to invade Cuba once he became president .
 The C.I.A. recruited and trained Cuban refugees who fled during Castro's takeover; these would be the people invading . C.A.'s agents would be those who trained and trained to carry out the invasion .
 Cuban fighters were going to land in this southern bay and move north towards Havana . This was called the Bay of Pigs invasion because of the Cuban fighters landing in the bay .
 The attempt to overthrow Castro Castro was a complete failure and weakened America's perception abroad . However, the United States military support was so disorganized during the invasion that the U.S. failed .
 Study.com, risk-free, offers unlimited access to over 84,000 lessons in math, English, science, history, and more . Members of the site also get access to more than 80,000 educational lessons .
 Get practice tests, quizzes, and personalized coaching to help you succeed . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport.com .
 It only takes a few minutes to setup and you can cancel any time . Try it risk-free. Try it at home .
 Over 30,000 video lessons & teaching resources&dash;all in one place . Log in here for access Back Resources created by teachers for teachers . Back to the page you came from .
 Video lessons Quizzes & Worksheets Classroom Integration Lesson Plans I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues .
 If the U.S. was not seen as the more powerful and stable of the two superpowers, countries were not going to remain under the American sphere of influence . The United States was seen as a more powerful .
 John F Kennedy was notified about nuclear weapons in Cuba on October 15th, 1962 . He had to act after being notified of the threat .
 Kennedy did not want to humiliate himself again after the Bay of Pigs invasion . After consulting with his advisors, Kennedy decided to quarantine Cuba .
 This meant that the United States would place ships outside Cuban waters and prevent more shipments of nuclear weapons from arriving in Cuba . The U.S. placed ships outside Cuba waters and prevented more shipments from arriving .
 Kennedy contacted Khrushchev and tried to figure out how this conflict could come to a peaceful end . At the same time, Kennedy tried to reach a peaceful solution .
 Kennedy lost the Bay of Pigs invasion and permitting nuclear bombs in Cuba would surely eliminate his chance of re-election . Kennedy lost his chance to re-elected in Cuba .
 Khrushchev had to make sure the Soviet Union was not humiliated in this crisis . Members of the Communist party would likely remove him from office if he withdrew the missiles .
 A week after Khrushchev saw the images, Kennedy's quarantine began to encounter Soviet Ships . Kennedy's quarantined ships began to meet Soviet ships .
 Soviet ships began to approach the quarantine line and construction on Cuba showed no signs of slowing down . Over a dozen Soviet ships were seen approaching the quarantine lines .
 Soviet ships turned around and headed back towards Russia . However, on October 25, 1962, Soviet ships headed back to Russia .
 By the next day, it was clear no more nuclear weapons would be delivered to Cuba . No more nuclear arms were delivered to Havana .
 This solved much of the crisis for Kennedy, however, weapons remained in Cuba . This solved many of the problems for Kennedy .
 Khrushchev agreed to take the last few missiles out of Cuba, and in exchange, he was assured that the missiles would be removed in the succeeding months . The two leaders began to write letters to each other frequently as tension increased .
 Khrushchev kept it secret . Agreement would only be honored if Khrushche kept secret . Khrushchchev signed agreement with Soviet Union in 1956 .
 To the outside world, the Soviet Union was humiliated because not only did they have to stops shipments of weapons, but they had to pull the nuclear missiles out because the U.S. forced them to . The United States forced the Soviets to pull missiles out of the country because of the
 The only concession the Soviet Union received was a U.S. declaration that it would never again invade Cuba . The only public concession was a United States declaration that never again invaded Cuba .
 A U-2 spy plane takes photos of nuclear missile installations in Cuba October 15: President Kennedy is notified October 16: Kennedy and his cabinet decide to proceed with a naval quarantine .
 Khrushchev asserts the missiles are defensive, comparing them to missiles in Turkey . Fidel Castro urges the Soviet leader to launch a nuclear attack on the U.S. October 25: A soviet ship passes the quarantine line but is allowed since it has no nuclear weapons . Khrush
 Diplomats saw themselves slowly losing control of the situation and attempted to find a peaceful compromise before other diplomats or leaders seized control . They saw themselves losing control and saw themselves trying to find peace .
 Nikita Khrushchev knowingly compromised his position by accepting the deal with Kennedy . He was eventually removed from power in 1964 after accepting the agreement .
 The United States removed the nuclear missiles in Turkey during April of 1963 . The U.S. removed the missiles from Turkey in 1963 .
 Castro viewed Khrushchev's actions as a betrayal and relations with relations did not recover for years . Relations with the Soviet Union were never fully recovered from the events .
 Khrushchev sought a non-aggression pact with the U.S. after seeing how close the world came to nuclear war . The pact was reached after a close war between Russia and the United States .
 American officials saw how effective the U.S. military could be when preventing the spread of Soviet power . American officials were impressed by how effective they could be .
 The United States had tried to invade Cuba a year earlier and President Kennedy would have been humiliated again if the missiles were not removed . The missiles were removed from Cuba in 1961 .
 Nikita Khrushchev created this crisis by secretly sending nuclear weapons to Cuba . From his perspective, these missiles were matching the capability of the missiles in Turkey . These missiles matched the capabilities of the missile in Turkey, the author says .
 The U.S. discovered this from a U-2 spy plane as opposed to being publicly notified . American officials felt threatened by this act . Because the United States discovered this, it was not publically notified .
 As a response, Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine to prevent Soviet ships from delivering more nuclear warheads . Kennedy ordered the quarantine to stop the Soviet ships delivering more nukes .
 After a week of mounting tension, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles . The only public concession he received was a U.S. declaration promising never to invade Cuba .
 During the 13 days of the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev both attempted to further their nation's interest . During the war, Kennedy tried to further his nation's interests . The crisis lasted 13 days and lasted 13 months .
 Each leader understood that the safety of the world comes before ambitions . However, each leader agreed that the world would come before them .
 This encouraged Khrushchev and Kennedy to negotiate when others were calling for war . This encouraged them to do so when others called for war, they negotiated . This helped them avoid war .
 It did not end until October 28, 1962, when Nikita Khrushchev agreed to pull the missiles out and stop all further shipments . The missiles were pulled out of the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Nikita Khrushchev took this a step too far when he secretly placed nuclear weapons in Cuba . He placed the weapons on Cuba in order to protect the Cuban people .
 This likely would not have been a crisis if the U.S. had been notified . The United States should have been notified of the situation, CNN says .
 This almost led to war and did not end until the Soviet Union removed all nuclear weapons from Cuba . The Soviet Union did not remove all nuclear arms from Cuba until the 1980s .
 30 million people use Study.com to learn more about education . 30 million students use the site to learn about the subject matter .
 Resources created by teachers for teachers . Over 30,000 video lessons & teaching resources&dash;all in one place .
 Enrolling into a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams . Enrolling in a course is a way to earn progress in the classroom .
 Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community © copyright 2003-2022 Study . Download the app Plans Student Solutions Teacher Solutions Study.com for Schools Working Scholars .
 All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of the respective owners of the content of this article . We are happy to feature in this week's edition of The Daily Mail .