 Thirty-five years ago, on Oct. 14, 1962, a U-2 spy plane discovered Soviet missiles secretly being installed in Cuba . The U.2 plane discovered the missiles in Cuba on a U.S. mission to Cuba .
 Once armed with nuclear warheads, they could kill millions of Americans . The U.S. should be able to use nuclear weapons to kill millions .
 President John F Kennedy had to decide whether to risk World War III over the crisis . President Kennedy decided not to risk war with the Soviet Union over the threat of war .
 "The very fact of doing that makes the military lose all the advantages [of a surprise attackj. On the other hand, the military loses the advantages," says President Obama .
 "That’s the minimum risk to this country we run as a result of advance warning," he says . "And that’ll be a minimum risk," he adds .
 We could just be utterly wrong — but we’ve never really believed that would take on a general nuclear war over Cuba over Cuba . We've never believed that .
 This is a political struggle as much as military. They’ve got enough to blow us up now anyway. They've got enough of it now anyway . This is not only a war, it's a struggle for the U.S. to win back control of the Middle East
 Our principal problem is to try and imaginatively to think what the world would be like if we do this, and what it will be like, if we don’t . We need to think imaginatively about what we would like to see if we did this .
 It's the kind of conduct that one might expect of the Soviet Union — And I have a feeling that this 24 hours to Khrushchev is really indispensable. It’s the kind . one of the . kind of conducts that one . might expect from the Soviet . Union —
 "I think it’s the whole question of, you know, assuming that you do survive all this, . . . The question of surviving all this is what kind of a country we are," she says . "I don’t know how we’re going
 President: We may be attacking the Cubans, and a reprisal may come . President: "We may have attacked Cubans. We may have been attacking Cubans" The President: The President may be trying to protect his country's interests .
 NATO strategic contact [jargon for a Soviet nuclear attack] requires the immediate execution of E.D.P. in such events . They object to sending it out because it, to their view, compromises their standing instructions . The U.S. says it would not send it out
 Before informing tin American people of his plan for a blockade, thi President briefs senior Congressmen . President briefs Congressmen before informing them of the plan .
 Russell: "Oh my God. But it’s a very difficult problem that we’re faced with Russell"
 Joint Chiefs urge an all-out attack, which will start in 36 hours if the Soviets don’t yield . Joint chiefs urge an attack on the Soviet Union if it is not ready to yield .
 I think the one thing, Bobby, we ought to seriously do before we act is be damned sure they understand the consequences . "I think we should seriously do seriously do," he says .
 The President: My guess is, well, everybody sort of figures that, in extremis, that everybody would use nuclear weapons . President: "Everybody sort of ... figures that ... everybody would have used nuclear weapons" President: 'Everybody would use nukes'