 The Sixties: A Decade of Protest & Change . Chapter Objective, Essential Questions, & TEKS . Explain the significance of the turning points in the 1960s .
 JFK brought a new spirit of youthful vigor to the White House . Great Society, Great Society and Great Society were created by Barry Goldwater . Vietnamization, Title IX and the Vietnamization of Vietnamization .
 He supported civil rights, the space program, and freedom around the world . He was a strong supporter of civil rights and freedom .
 Cuban exiles with U.S. support landed at the Bay of Pigs but were defeated . Cuban exilees with United States support landed on the island of Cuba in 1961 .
 U.S. spy planes saw the missile silos and Kennedy ordered a blockade around Cuba . Kennedy ordered the blockade of Cuba and ordered it to stop Cuba .
 Under a compromise the U.S. would not invade Cuba and the missiles were withdrawn . Under the agreement, the United States would not attack Cuba and withdraw missiles .
 In 1963, Kennedy reassured West Berliners when he told them ""lch bin ein Berline1:"" Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Lyndon B Johnson steered civil rights legislation and his Great Society programs through Congress . The new President of the White House was elected in 1964 .
 His program gave aid to cities. fought poverty, and established Medicare . His program . fought poverty . established Medicare.
 Barry Goldwater, who revived conservatism, lost to Johnson in 1964 election . Goldwater lost to LBJ in 1964 .
 Betty Friedan focused on the plight of middle-class suburban housewives . Friedan: "I'm not a woman who doesn't want to be a woman in a suburban housewife"
 During the Women's Liberation Movement. women sought greater socioeconomic opp0rtunities. During the . Women's . Liberation Movement . women sought . greater socioeconomic opportunities. Women’s Liberation . movement .
 Affirmative action programs and Title IX led to gender equality in education . Title IX was a key part of Title IX education reform .
 The Equal Pay Act required equal pay for men and women doing the same job . Equal pay Act was passed in 1973 .
 The Black Power Movement believed African Americans should rely more on themselves . Black Power was founded by the Black Power movement .
 Malcolm X believed that violence might be necessary to achieve equal rights . Malcolm X believes that violence may be necessary in order to achieve equality .
 The Black Panthers demanded equal opportunities and reparations for past oppression . They demanded equal opportunity, reparations and equal opportunities .
 African-American frustration led to rioting in cities after the assassination of Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. African-Americans were angered by his assassination .
 Organizers like Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta fought for the rights of migrant farm workers . Most of them were Mexican Americans, most of whom were Mexican .
 The right to vote to all citizens over 18 years old was given by the Twenty-sixth Amendment . It was given to citizens over the age of 18 by the then-26th Amendment of the Constitution .
 North Vietnam came under Communist control, while South Vietnam had the support of the West . North Vietnam was ruled by the Communist Party and South Vietnam by the South .
 When South Vietnamese leaders decided to oppose elections to re-unify the country, the Vietcong launched a guerilla war to win control of the country . The Vietcong was defeated by South Vietnamese forces in Vietnam's war .
 He bombed the North and began a policy of Vietnamization to give the South Vietnamese a larger stake in the war . The Vietnamization policy was designed to help the South Vietnam become more involved .
 The United States signed an agreement with North Vietnam, withdrawing its forces from Vietnam . The U.S. withdrew its troops from Vietnam in 2003 .
 Fighting continued until the fall of Saigon in 1975, when Vietnam was re-united under Communist rule .
 Beat poets and writers, like Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, were forerunners of this new counter-culture . The Beat beat beat culture was a new counter culture in 1960s and '60s .
 Advances in civil rights spread from African Americans to other minority groups and women . Civil rights in the 1960s and '60s were the focus of civil rights efforts .
 President Johnson dreamt of ending poverty in America . His hopes were derailed when the U.S. became involved in the Vietnam War .
 By the late 1960s, a new generation of young Americans began to question the confom1ity of the 1950s . A new generation began questioning the 'confidentity' of the '50s .
 John F Kennedy narrowly defeated Richard Nixon and became the youngest man ever elected to the Presidency . He narrowly beat Richard Nixon to become the President of the United States .
 Kennedy's New Frontier symbolized the vigor of youth . Kennedy’s Domestic Policy was Kennedy's Domestic Policy . Kennedy's National Security Council was formed in 1963 .
 The President and his wife, Jackie, brought an elegant style to the White House . The first lady of the Obamas was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy sought to use the powers of the federal government to solve the nation's problems . Kennedy sought the power of the government to help solve the problems of the nation .
 He proposed a tax cut to stimulate the economy, the creation of Medicare, civil rights legislation, and increased aid to education . He also proposed a bill to create Medicare and increase Medicare .
 Kennedy did create the Peace Corps, a program in which volunteers went to developing countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America to share their skills .
 Few Americans at that time realized that they were just setting off on a road of exploration and discovery that would greatly improve their lives on Earth . Few Americans in the U.S. realized that the exploration of the Earth would greatly benefit them .
 By 1969, the United States became the first country to land two men, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, on the surface of the moon .
 As a result of space exploration we now have satellites with improved television and radio signals . For example, as a result, space exploration has led to better satellite signals .
 These satellites help us communicate faster, predict the weather and forecast impending tsunamis, cyclones, hurricanes and tornadoes . These satellites are used to communicate faster and forecast the weather .
 Kennedy faced challenges in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida . One of the greatest challenges Kennedy faced was in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro led an uprising to overthrow the brutal Cuban dictator General Batista . In 1959, while Eisenhower was President, Fidel Castro was in charge of the Cuban uprising .
 At first, Americans looked at Castro's revolution as an attempt to introduce democracy into Cuba . Now, Americans look at his revolution as a attempt to bring democracy to Cuba .
 Castro made new agreements with the Soviet Union shortly after taking power . However, shortly after he took power he made new deals with the Soviets .
 Eisenhower reduced the amount of sugar Cuba could sell to the United States . Castro nationalized American businesses in Cuba in Cuba .
 President Obama announced plans to make Cuba a pro-Soviet Communist nation . Then he announced his plans to become Cuba's pro-Russian Communist nation. Then he said he wanted Cuba to be a pro Soviet Communist state .
 This included secretly training a group of Cuban exiles in the U.S. and Guatemala to invade the island . The group also secretly trained a group in Guatemala and the United States .
 When Kennedy became President, he let the plan continue, but he refused to provide air power, which would tie the invasion to the U.S. He refused to give air power .
 The exiles landed in Cuba three months after Kennedy took office, but were quickly defeated by the Cuban military . The Cuban military quickly defeated the exiles .
 Soviet officials began construction of the Berlin Wall a few weeks after that, cutting off access to the West for East Berliners . The Wall was built in the early 1950s and is now a symbol of the West .
 Castro and Khrushchev became aware that the U.S. had been behind the invasion of Cuba . They took steps to protect Cuba, including taking measures to protect it .
 In 1962, U.S. spy planes flying over Cuba discovered that Cuba was secretly preparing silos for missiles with nuclear warheads . Cuba was planning to use silos to build missiles with warheads .
 Soviet missiles still could not reach the U.S. easily from Europe or Asia . At this time, Soviet missiles would not be able to reach the United States easily . Soviet missiles were still being held back in Europe and Asia .
 He encouraged them to consider every option to find a way out of the crisis . He said they should consider every possible solution to the situation .
 In good decisionmaking, one examines all of the alternatives and weighs the pros and cons (advantages and disadvantages) of each option . "Good decisionmaking" is based on a number of factors, such as weighing each option in a decision .
 Kennedy announced a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of any additional Soviet weapons . After a week of intense debate, Kennedy decided to announce a blockade . The blockade was meant to prevent any additional weapons from arriving .
 Kennedy threatened to invade Cuba if the offensive missiles were not withdrawn . Kennedy also threatened to take action against Cuba if it was not withdrawn from Cuba .
 Kennedy put U.S. armed forces at their highest state of alert, while Soviet commanders in Cuba prepared to defend the island .
 Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles for a pledge that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . After several days of extreme tension, the missiles were withdrawn . The missiles were removed in exchange for a promise that the United States would not attack Cuba .
 After the Cuban crisis, U.S. and Soviet leaders set up a special ""hot line"" telephone . The line was set up by the Soviet Union and the United States after the crisis .
 They also agreed to a treaty banning further nuclear testing except underground . The treaty also includes a ban on underground nuclear testing .
 He told its citizens ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" He told them of the U.S. commitment to their safety and freedom . West Germans were reassured of their safety, freedom .
 The nation was shocked when Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . The assassination occurred in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . President Johnson was the president of the United States .
 The post-war McCarren-Walter Act had kept immigration quotas at 1920 levels, favoring Western Europe . Western Europe was the focus of the act .
 Each country was given an identical quota for its number of legal immigrants . Each country's quota for legal immigrants was based on its own quota .
 Preference was given to those with relatives already in the U.S. or with valuable skills . Preference also given to people with relatives or valuable skills in the United States .
 The act also restricted immigration from Latin America for the first time . The act was passed by Congress in 2010 .
 Johnson proposed the most far-ranging program of social legislation since the New Deal . The Great Society was the first major social legislation to be passed by Johnson .
 Johnson proposed federal legislation designed to transform American society . Johnson proposes federal legislation that would transform society .
 Johnson's goal was to turn the nation into a Great Society by opening up opportunities and improving the quality of life for all Americans . Johnson: "I want to open the doors to all Americans. I want to make it a better place to live"
 His Great Society programs included equality of opportunity, enrichment of urban life, restoration of natural beauty, expansion of education, ending poverty, health care for the elderly .
 Goldwater helped revive conservatism at a time when it seemed out of fashion . Goldwater was an icon of conservatism in the '60s .
 He called for a tough stance in dealing with the Soviets, opposing arms-control talks . He also called for tough stance against the Soviets .
 He also attacked Johnson's Great Society programs for extending the reach of the government too far into our lives .
 Goldwater's slogan ""that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice" actually hurt Goldwater in the election .
 Many Americans feared that Goldwater was an "extremist" who might lead the nation into a nuclear war against the Soviet Union . Many Americans believed Goldwater might lead them into a nuke war .
 The cost of the Vietnam War eventually forced Johnson to withdraw much of the funding from these domestic programs .
 Johnson did not seek another term as President in 1968 . Because of the growing divisions in the nation over this war, he did not run for another term .
 One of the most important events of the 1960s was the Women’s Liberation Movement . The Women's Liberation Movement was an important event in the history of American women's rights .
 In the 1950s and early 1960s, most American women had occupied traditional roles as wives and mothers . In the 1960s and '60s, women were still playing traditional roles of wives and mother .
 Working class women worked outside the home, but middle class women were restricted to the household . Middle class women often restricted to work outside of the home .
 Married women who did not conform to the ideal housewife were even regarded as outcasts . Married women were considered 'outcasts' in the 1930s .
 Unlike the earlier Suffrage Movement, the Women's Liberation Movement was directed at achieving greater economic and social equality . Although they could now vote, women still had not achieved full equality either at work or in the home .
 The film challenged the belief that educated suburban housewives were happy doing nothing more than keeping their homes clean and preparing dinner for their families .
 Friedan wrote that women were as capable as men and should be allowed to compete for the same jobs . Friedan said women should be able to compete as well as men in the same roles as men .
 In 1966, Friedan helped form the National Organization of Women . Friedan was the founder of the Women's Movement . The organization was the chief voice of the movement .
 Feminist goals were far-reaching . Women’s Liberation Movement was founded in the 1950s .
 In fact, they had to hire more women faculty quickly because most professors were males . Most women faculty members were male professors at the time .
 Greater gender equality was also achieved in admissions to military academies, law schools, and medical schools .
 Congress passed the Equal Pay Act in 1963, requiring companies to pay women the same wages as men for the same work . The act was passed by Congress in 1963 .
 They opposed sexist language, the use of women as sex objects in advertising, or the idea that men cannot do housework . They oppose sexist language . They opposed use of the word 'sexist language' in advertising .
 Women's leaders opposed sexual discrimination in textbooks that ignored women's contributions . Women's education was a priority for women's education in textbooks .
 They lobbied for more funds to research women's diseases, like breast cancer . They lobbied to more funds for more research .
 Feminists believed that a woman should have the right to decide for herself whether to end her pregnancy . Feminists said that women should be able to choose to end their pregnancy .
 In Roe Wade, the U.S. Supreme Court held that a woman had a constitutional right to privacy . In Roe W, a woman was allowed to have her privacy .
 This gave her the right to end her pregnancy in the first three months if she chose to do so . The decision was made by the Supreme Court in 2012 .
 The decision overturned all those laws prohibiting an abortion in the first three months . The decision overturns all those state laws prohibiting abortion .
 Title IX promoted gender equity by guaranteeing girls in school the same opportunities as boys . Title IX also guaranteed girls the same opportunity as boys in school as girls in the United States .
 By linking enforcement of the act to federal funding, lawmakers created a powerful financial incentive for schools to provide gender equality to keep from losing federal aid .
 Before Title IX, only one in 27 girls played varsity high school sports in high school . Title IX is a federal law that prevents girls from playing varsity sports .
 Title IX helped women pursue higher degrees, compete in sports, enter jobs and educational fields that had previously been dominated by men . Title IX also helped women enter higher degrees and enter sports and enter jobs .
 Before Title IX, the number of women attending colleges was significantly lower than men . Title IX is a federal law allowing women to attend college in all areas .
 The 1960s and early 1970s were a watershed in American history . The '60s and '70s were an era of American civil rights activism .
 Many groups women, African Americans, Mexican Americans, Native American, and the young became more vocal in their demands for a more equal and diverse American society . Women, African American, Mexican, and Native American .
 The Civil Rights Movement had ended public segregation and discrimination in voting . It was the first time public segregation had been allowed to be allowed to vote .
 It did not end private bias or provide equal opportunities for members of those groups that had suffered previous oppression . But it did not stop private bias and provided equal opportunities .
 King's methods of non-violence were not powerful enough to overcome such obstacles . King's non-violent methods were not as powerful as his methods, King says .
 They claimed the right to carry weapons to protect black neighborhoods from the police . They had their own newspaper and claimed to be protecting black neighborhoods . They claimed to have own newspaper .
 Ten-point program demanded greater oppunities and benefits for African Americans, including full-employment, decent housing, education, and freedom to determine their destiny .
 Black Power militants believed in Black Power that African Americans should use their votes to win concessions from government . African Americans believed that they should control their own communities to free themselves from the political domination of whites .
 In the North, African Americans often faced segregation based on residential living patterns rather than on state laws . The Ghettos Erupt, 1968, is the story of the North's most notorious ghettos in the world .
 Homeowners in middle class white communities often refused to sell their homes to African Americans . White homeowners in white communities were often reluctant to sell homes to black Americans .
 Many African Americans were confined to ethnic communities, known as ghettos, in decaying inner cities . Many African American communities were confined in ghetto areas .
 Landlords often fail to maintain their buildings and city officials cut back on inspections . Landlords failed to maintain buildings and many landlords failed to comply with inspections .
 African American frustration erupted in a series of riots that shook Northern cities three summers in a row . The riots were fueled by African-American frustration that erupted in Northern cities .
 Martin Luther King was assassinated by a white supremacist in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1968 . King was a civil rights leader who was assassinated in Memphis .
 King's assassination led to an outpouring of anger among young African Americans, as well as a period of national mourning . King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1968 .
 King's death sparked race riots across the nation that cost dozens of lives, destroyed property, and led to hundreds of millions of dollars in damage . The riots were sparked by the death of King .
 The riots showed that there was still work to be done to eliminate racism and introduce equality of opportunity in America .
 Mexican Americans, also known as Chicanos, often faced discrimination, racism and exploitation in the U.S. Like African Americans, Mexican Americans faced discrimination and exploitation . The Chicano Movement was the first Mexican-American movement .
 Garda noticed that Mexican Americans in his Texas community were barred from restaurants, swimming pools and hospitals . Garda: "Mexican Americans in Texas are barred from eating, drinking and swimming pools" Garda says he hopes to see more Latinos in the United States .
 They faced restrictions on voting, office holding, and employment . They also faced restrictions in voting and office holding .
 Garcia arranged for a highly publicized burial at Arlington National Cemetery for the soldier . Garcia arranged to bury the soldier at Arlington . Garcia's funeral was highly publicized .
 Garcia was the first Mexican American to serve on the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights . Garcia served on the commission . Garcia was a member of the United States Commission of Civil Rights Commission .
 The Chicano Movement was an organizer of farm workers in California . Another leader of the movement was Cesar Chavez, who organized farm workers .
 Migrant farm workers normally perform seasonal farm work, such as planting or harvesting grapes and strawberries . The migrant farm workers usually perform seasonal work, like planting and harvesting grapes .
 Chavez emphasized reliance on reliance on nonviolent means – using strikes, pilgrimages, and fasts to achieve his goal . Chavez emphasized using strikes and pilgrimages to achieve goal .
 Chavez organized nation-wide consumer boycotts of farm products . He asked Americans to support migrant farm workers by refusing to buy certain crops such as grapes .
 He also took part in hunger strikes, refusing to eat until violence against strikers ended and state legislators passed laws to improve the lives of farm workers .
 In the 1960s, she met Chavez and helped him form the National Farm Workers Association . The group later became the United Farm Workers . Chavez is the leader of the U.S. Farm Workers movement .
 She spent her life using strikes, marches, boycotts, and hunger strikes in her campaign for legislation to extend aid to the families of farm workers .
 In the 1980s, Huerta expanded her efforts to include women's rights, environmental protection, and immigration policy .
 In 2012, Huerta was awarded the Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, by President Obama . The award-winning actress is a member of the Air Force Reserve Reserve .
 Mexican Americans also expressed themselves through a greater appreciation of their culture . The Chicano Mural Movement was created by Mexican Americans in the 1970s .
 Mexican-American artists began painting murals in barrios throughout the Southwest in the 1960s . Copying great Mexican muralists of the 1930s like Diego Rivera, Mexican-Americans painted murals .
 Wall murals provided a visual presence to people who often lacked representation in public life, with few voices on city councils or school boards . The murals were created to help people who lacked representation on public life . They include people with little representation on school boards or city councils .
 In El Paso alone, more than a hundred Chicano wall murals were completed . More than 100 Chicano murals have been completed in El Paso .
 American Indians also grew restless in the 1960s . American Indians grew restless during the time of the Civil War .
 The federal government had transferred its responsibility for those American Indians still living on reservations to state governments in 1953 . Back in 1953, the federal government transferred its responsibilities for those still on reservations .
 Lacking funds, many states were unable to provide the same level of services previously provided by the federal government . Lacking sufficient funds, some states have been unable to afford the services .
 Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited discrimination against Native Americans . Native Americans were not subject to discrimination under the act of discrimination in 1964 .
 In 1970, President Nixon announced the federal government would honor its treaty obligations . President Nixon said in 1970 that the government will honor the obligations .
 Many American Indians still felt they were being mistreated . Nevertheless, many American Indians felt they had been mistreated by the government .
 Under the slogan ""Red Power,"" they formed the American Indian Movement to mobilize public opinion in their favor . The movement was formed by the American Indians .
 They introduced the term ""Native American" and protested against textbooks, television shows and movies that showed anti-American Indian bias . The term 'Native American' was introduced by the Native Americans .
 They dramatized the plight of American Indians by temporarily occupying government monuments on Alcatraz Island and at Wounded Knee, South Dakota . They also temporarily occupied government monuments at Alcatsraz Island, Wounded .
 In 1945, some places in California sent Mexican-American children to separate public schools . Mendez Westminster School District in Mendez, California, was one of those schools .
 Mexican-American parents challenged this practice in U.S. district court . Several Mexican-Americans challenged the practice in federal court .
 The district court ruled that this practice violated the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees citizens the right to the ""equal protection'' of the laws . The case was decided by a district court judge .
 Westminster School District appealed to the United States Court of Appeals . Westminster school district appealed to U.S. court of Appeals to overturn decision . School district appeals to the court .
 The latter concluded that the case did not involve a constitutional question . The case is not a constitutional issue, the judge said .
 The court held that separation within a race was not permitted if not required by a specific state law . The court also ruled that separation in a race is not permitted .
 Bastrop ISD separated Mexican-American children from other children of the same race without a specific state law was a violation . Delgado and others sued the school, claiming that separation of Mexican-Americans without a state law violated state law .
 The United States District Court agreed, and ordered the school district to stop the segregation of Mexican-American children . The U.S. District Court ordered the court to stop segregation .
 No Mexican American had served on a jury in the county where Hernandez was tried for more than 25 years . Hernandez was found guilty of attempted murder in 2007 . Hernandez is the first Mexican American to be tried for 25 years in the country .
 Hernandez appealed to the United States Supreme Court, claiming his right to ""equal protection of the law'' under the Fourteenth Amendment had been violated . Hernandez says he was denied equal protection of law .
 Texas argued that Mexican Americans were white and not entitled to any special protection . The case was settled in Texas' decision to protect Mexican Americans from discrimination .
 The Supreme Court ruled that Mexican Americans, formed a separate class that was entitled to protection . The Mexican Americans are a separate group of Americans, the court ruled .
 The way the new plan worked out, Mexican Americans and African Americans in these two districts would have no real chance of being elected . The new plan would allow only Mexican Americans to be elected in two districts .
 The U.S. Supreme Court upheld a district court ruling that the legislature had to make these districts into smaller, one-member districts . MexicanAmerican barrios were able to elect their own candidates .
 Civil rights activists then filed lawsuits in various state courts, based on the provisions of state constitutions . Civil rights groups then filed suits in various states based on those provisions of the constitution .
 A Mexican-American legal group filed a suit against Kirby, the Texas Education Commissioner, on behalf of Edgewood ISD, a poor district with a large Mexican American population . The suit was filed by a group of Mexican-Americans who want to see the school system change .
 The school district claimed that the state method for funding public schools resulted in major differences between the funds available for students in rich and poor districts . School district claimed state method resulted in big differences between students in poor and rich districts .
 This violated the Texas Constitution, which promised a ""fair and efficient"" public school system . This violates the state's constitution, which promises a "fair" and "efficient" public school .
 The Beatles introduced new fashions and long hair for males, which became symbols of the new culture . The Beatles, a rock band from England, introduced long hair to males .
 They adopted new fashions that set them apart from more traditional styles . The women's fashion was inspired by the birth of modern art .
 Some ""hippies“ even left mainstream society altogether and went to live on self-sufficient communes . Some of the hippies even went from mainstream society to self-sustainable communes.
 During the Vietnam War, 18-year-olds were considered old enough to be drafted into military service to fight and die for their country . But they were told they were not old enough for voting and were not allowed to vote .
 The Vietnam War, 1954 – 1973, saw Americans deeply divided over the Vietnam War . The ""decade of change" was a decade of change for Americans .
 Vietnamese nationalists, led by Ho Chi Minh, defeated their French rulers in 1954 . In 1954, Vietnamese nationalists led the country to victory over the French .
 Laos and Cambodia were made into independent states at the Geneva Conference that followed . Laos was made into an independent state of Cambodia in 1961 .
 Ho Chi Minh and the Vietnamese Communists controlled the north, while a pro-Western state was established in the south . Pro-Western states were established in both the north and south of Vietnam .
 After 1954, Ho Chi Minh introduced land reform, ""reeducation,"" and other policies in the North similar to those of Mao in China . The North's policies were similar to that of Mao's in China in the 1950s .
 South Vietnam refused to hold elections for the re-unification of Vietnam, since they feared elections in the North would not be free . South Vietnam feared the elections would be not free .
 South Vietnamese Communists with North Vietnamese support began a guerrilla war against the government of South Vietnam . Soon afterwards, the South Vietnamese Communist Party began to attack the government .
 They assassinated officials and seized control of South Vietnamese villages . They assassinated South Vietnamese officials and took control of villages .
 President Eisenhower had suggested that the fall of French Indochina might create a ""domino"" effect . President Kennedy had suggested the fall could create a 'domino'
 Domino Theory: If South Vietnam fell to Communism, neighboring Southeast Asian countries would also fall to Communism like a row of dominos . According to the theory, neighboring countries would fall to communism like a domino .
 After taking Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, Communists would threaten Thailand to the west and the Strait of Malacca to the south . Communists would then threaten Thailand, Cambodia and Laos . After taking the Vietnamese, the Communists could threaten Thailand .
 Kennedy sent aid and U.S. military advisers to assist South Vietnam in fighting the Vietcong . Kennedy responded to requests for help from the South Vietnamese government for help .
 Kennedy also felt that a successful democracy in South Vietnam might serve as a model for other developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America . Kennedy felt that the success of South Vietnam could be a model .
 Under President Johnson, the United States became even more deeply involved in Vietnam . The U.S. became more involved in the Vietnam War under President Johnson .
 Congress voted to give Johnson full military powers to stop North Vietnam's aggression . Congress voted for Johnson to have full military power to stop aggression .
 Years later, it was revealed that the U.S. ships were actually in North Vietnamese waters in cooperation with South Vietnamese warships that were bombing North Vietnam .
 By 1968, half a million United States soldiers were stationed in South Vietnam . Half a million U.S. soldiers were deployed in Vietnam .
 napalm, a sticky gasoline-based jelly that bums, inflicted great damage on the Vietnamese . Agent Orange destroyed the jungle cover used by the Vietcong to hide .
 In 1968, the Vietcong launched a massive offensive throughout South Vietnam, seizing many major cities, including the capital city of Saigon . The Tet Offensive took place in 1968, seizing the capital and most major cities .
 Once in control, the Vietcong committed brutal acts of terror against South Vietnamese officials . The Vietcong were once in control of the South Vietnamese .
 American forces finally drove the Vietcong from these strongholds . The offensive marked a turning point in the war .
 It disproves the rhetoric of the U.S. government that the Vietcong were weak, under-supplied, disorganized, and low in morale . In addition, it disproved the rhetoric that the Vietnamese were weak and disorganized .
 Benavidez was critically wounded, but he refused to stop gathering survivors . He saved eight men, saving the lives of eight men . Benavidesz was wounded in the attack, but survived .
 At first, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroism . He was later awarded the D.C. Medal of Honor .
 Benavidez was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor by President Ronald Reagan in 1981 . President Reagan awarded the medal in 1981 after the full story became public .
 They were willing to suffer large losses to re-unify their country . They felt they were fighting for their independence . They were also willing to lose large losses .
 The disruptions of the war weakened the government of South Vietnam . On the other hand, the disruptions weakened the South Vietnam government, the government .
 Successive South Vietnamese governments failed to gain popular support in Vietnam . Successive governments failed in Vietnam to gain support for the country .
 American forces were unable to tell who was friendly and who was the enemy . U.S. forces couldn't tell if the enemy was friendly or enemy .
 The jungles of Vietnam provided an ideal cover for guerilla warfare and secret enemy movements . Vietnam provided a cover for guerrilla warfare and enemy movements in the jungle .
 Vietnam's location made it easy for Communists to send a steady flow of supplies through neighboring countries . The country's location was easy for Communist forces to send supplies .
 The media had a great influence in shaping public opinion . The Anti-War Movement was formed by the anti-war movement .
 It was the first time American audiences could watch the destructiveness of the war on their television sets while sitting at home . The war was first time audiences were able to watch it on television sets .
 President Johnson told Americans they were winning the war, but journalists reported otherwise . President Johnson said Americans were winning war in Vietnam .
 Mass anti-war movements occurred throughout the U.S. from 1965 onwards . Mass anti war movements were held throughout the country from 1965 to 1965 .
 Young people burned draft cards, marched on the Pentagon, held rallies, and staged demonstrations . Young people burn their draft cards .
 American ""doves" wanted the United States to withdraw from Vietnam . They saw the contest as a civil war between the North and South Vietnamese . American 'doves' wanted the U.S. to withdraw .
 They believed U.S. leaders were acting immorally by bombing civilians and burning villages . They believed American leaders were . acting . immorality .
 The 'hawks' supported the war, which they saw as an attempt to defend free Vietnamese from Communist repression . The ""hawks" saw the war as a defense of free Vietnamese .
 Violence at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968 led to the election of Republican Richard Nixon as President . Division among Democrats over the war, the assassination of Robert F Kennedy (younger brother of President Kennedy) led to Richard Nixon's election .
 During the campaign, Nixon promised Americans ""peace with honor"" in Vietnam . Nixon, a staunch anti-Communist, promised Americans peace with honor .
 The anti-war movement increased in intensity during the Nixon Presidency . The War Under President Nixon was the focus of the Nixon administration .
 Anti-war protesters were shocked by his escalation of the war with the bombing of Cambodia . The bombing of the Cambodia was the first major escalation in the war .
 In 1969, national guardsmen shot at and killed four student demonstrators at Kent State, Ohio . Four students were killed at the Ohio school .
 College campuses across the nation closed down due to student demonstrations and sit-ins . College campuses in the U.S. were closed due to protests and demonstrations .
 Students engaged in mass marches in Washington, D.C. and other major cities . Students engage in mass protests in Washington D. C. and New York City .
 Sometimes exchanges between anti-war protesters and supporters became violent . Anti-war demonstrators often clashed with supporters of the war .
 The government had tried to stop the publication of these documents, but lost its case in the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Documents showed that several Presidents before Nixon had lied to the American people about Vietnam . Although these Presidents felt they could not win in Vietnam, none of them wanted the disgrace of defeat associated with their Presidency . None of them felt they couldn't win and wanted to avoid a disgrace .
 After President Nixon introduced Vietnamization, American forces were gradually reduced . U.S. forces were reduced in Vietnamization .
 In 1973, U.S. negotiators in Paris, led by Henry Kissinger, worked out a cease-fire agreement with the North Vietnamese . The agreement was reached in 1973, when U.N. and North Vietnam were at odds with each other .
 Nixon agreed to pull out all remaining remaining U.S. troops from Vietnam . North Vietnam agreed to release American prisoners of war .
 The fall of Saigon (today called Ho Chi Minh City) marked the end of the Vietnam War . Saigon is located in Vietnam's capital .
 South Vietnamese government officials, military officers, and soldiers who had supported the American presence in Vietnam were sent to Communist ''re-education camps,"" where they faced torture, disease and malnutrition .
 Over a million Vietnamese were killed, while many more were left homeless . Many more than a million people were killed in the Vietnam War .
 The war demonstrated that government actions can be greatly affected by public opinion . The war showed that public opinion can be affected by the government's actions, says CNN.com .
 Next to the Civil War, the Vietnam War was the most divisive war in U.S. history . Vietnam War is the most divided war in United States history .
 Americans became more aware of the limits of U.S. power and cautious about where they should act abroad . As a result, Americans became aware of limits of the United States power . Americans are now aware of what they can do in the world .
 In 1973, Congress attempted to re-claim its constitutional powers by passing over Nixon's veto, the War Powers Resolution . Nixon vetoed the resolution, but Congress passed it over Nixon .
 This set limits on Presidential power in a conflict without a formal declaration of war by Congress . The limits on President's power were set by the Constitution . This set President Obama's ability to declare war without Congress' approval .
 The act requires the President to inform Congress within 48 hours of sending troops to fight overseas .
 If within 60 days the Congress does not approve of the use of these overseas forces, the President must withdraw them . The President must also withdraw them from the U.S. if he does not .
 American literature has been marked by movements of varying styles and directions . Post-War literature, Art, & Music has been a major focus of American literature .
 Some of the best writing just after World War II dealt with the war experience itself . Norman Mailer's The Naked and the Dead described the capture of an island from the Japanese . James Jones' From Here to Eternity showed army life in Hawaii up to the Pearl Harbor attack .
 They showed a care-free, often reckless and fresh approach to literature . They showed an often reckless approach to literary fiction .
 Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac began giving public readings of their works in the mid-1950s . Ginsberg began giving readings of his works in mid-50s . The two founders of the movement began reading their works .
 Ginsberg's best known poem, Howl, was seized for obscenity . They became even more well-known after Ginsberg was seized .
 The Beats opposed the conventions of the 1950s and saw the solution to the lifeless materialism of the fifties in the heightened sense of freedom and spirituality in their own works .
 Kerouac's novel, On the Road, tells the story of the narrator's adventures crossing the country in a car several times with a character named Dean Moriarty . Moriarty is Moriarty, a character in the novel, who is the narrator of the book .
 From the name ""beat,"" a newspaper columnist coined the term ""beatnik,"" which became associated with artistic lifestyles in the 1950s . Young men wore beards, berets, and sandals, while young women dressed in leotards .
 Beatniks represented an early form of what would later become known as the counter-culture . The beatniks were the first members of the Beatnik movement . Beatnik culture was formed in the early 1960s .
 By the 1960s, the counter-culture was in full swing . Post-War Literature, Art, & Music is the subject of this week's Daily Discussion .
 Joseph Heller's Catch 22 and Kurt Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse-Five challenged mainstream thinking by exposing the absurdity of armed conflict . Two late World War II novels, including Catch 22, were published in the late 1940s .
 In a much later work, Roth dealt with coming to terms with the middle class radicalism of the 1960s . Roth's American Pastoral dealt with the same radicalism in his work . Roth dealt more with the '60s radicalism'
 In the 1950s, African-American gospel music, jazz, blues, and country music were brought together and adopted by artists like Chuck Berry, Little Richard and Elvis Presley to create rock and roll .
 Rock and roll music depended on the invention of the electric guitar, amplifier and microphone, as well as the use of smaller records and radio stations to play them to audiences across the country . Rock and Roll music was invented in the 1920s .
 In the early 1960s, the Motown Sound from Detroit, with African-American artists like the Temptations, the Four Tops, and the Supremes, swept the nation .
 Artist and song writer Bob Dylan brought the influence of folk music to rock and roll . Bob Dylan is credited with bringing folk music and rock to the forefront .
 In 1964, the Beatles launched the ""British invasion,"" followed by such groups as the Rolling Stones and the Who . The Rolling Stones, the Who and the Rolling Stone were also involved .
 By the late 1960s, artists like Jimi Hendrix, Country Joe and the Fish, and Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young became icons of the counter-culture and anti-war movement .
 Many of their songs protested the war in Vietnam or celebrated the psychedelic experience . Many of the songs were written about the experience .
 Andy Warhol was one of the creators of a new kind of art -Pop Art, or popular art . Warhol created the concept of popular art in the 1960s and '60s .
 Warhol used symbols from our mass-produced, massmarketed consumer culture, like a Campbell's soup can or a portrait of Marilyn Monroe . Warhol's work was often repeated multiple times, repeated repeated by Warhol .
 Warhol was also post-modem in producing his own music groups and films . Warhol also had his own own music group and films produced .
 Jasper Johns and Roy Lichtenstein were two other prominent pop artists . Jasper Johns was one of the world's most famous artists .