 Joseph P Kennedy Sr. David Courtney Michael Kerry Michael Kerry . Chris Max Douglas Rory . David Courtney . Michael Kerry.
 He is known for advocating for the civil rights movement, the fight against organized crime and the Mafia . He served as his brother's closest advisor until the 1963 assassination of his brother .
 As attorney general, he authorized the Federal Bureau of Investigation to wiretap Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference on a limited basis . King authorized the FBI to wiretape Martin Luther Luther King and the SCLC on limited basis, he says .
 After his brother's assassination, he remained in office during the Presidency of Lyndon B Johnson for several months . He was assassinated in 1964 .
 He was an advocate for human rights and social justice by traveling abroad to eastern Europe, Latin America, and South Africa . He formed working relationships with Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, and Walter Reuther .
 In 1968, Kennedy became a leading candidate for the Democratic nomination for the presidency . Kennedy appealed to poor, African American, Hispanic, Catholic, and young voters in 1968 .
 Kennedy was mortally wounded shortly after winning the California primary on June 5, 1968 . Sirhan Sirhan, a 24-year-old Palestinian, allegedly shot Kennedy in retaliation for his support of Israel following the 1967 Six-Day War . He was shot with a pistol by Sirhan
 Sirhan was arrested, tried, and convicted of the Kennedy assassination . Kennedy's assassination, like his brother's, continues to be the subject of widespread analysis and conspiracy theories .
 Relationship with parents 2 Naval service 3 Further study, journalism, and marriage 4 Senate committee counsel and political campaigns 4 Senate . Relationship with parent: Naval service, further study, and journalism .
 Assassination of John F Kennedy 6 Vice presidential candidate 7 United States Senate 7 . 1964 election 7. JFK assassination 7. Kennedy assassination 7 .
 Robert Francis Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts, on November 20, 1925 . He was born in November 1925 . Kennedy was married to Robert Kennedy Jr. Jr. and had a daughter .
 Joe Sr. focused his attention on his oldest son, Joseph Jr., expecting that he would enter politics and be elected president . Joseph Sr. was ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1940 . Joseph Jr. was expected to become president in 1945 .
 He urged the younger children to examine and discuss current events in order to propel them to public service . He also urged them to examine current events and discuss them with children .
 After Joseph Jr. was killed during World War II, the senior Kennedy's hopes fell on his second son, John, to become president . The senior Kennedy hopes his son would succeed him in the White House .
 Joseph Sr. had the money and connections to play a central role in the family's political ambitions . Joseph Sr.'s son Joseph Jr. was a prominent figure in the 1930s and '60s .
 Kennedy's older brother John was often bedridden by illness and, as a result, became a voracious reader .
 John made little effort to get to know his younger brother during his childhood . John took him on walks and regaled him with the stories of heroes and adventures he had read . John regaled his brother with stories he'd read .
 One of their favorite authors was John Buchan, who wrote The Thirty-Nine Steps, which influenced both Robert and John . John and Robert were influenced by Buchan's work .
 John sometimes called Robert ""Black Robert" due to his prudishness and disposition . Unlike his older brothers, Robert Kennedy took to heart their mother Rose's agenda for everything to have a purpose .
 Kennedy later said that during childhood he was "going to different schools, always having to make new friends, and that I was very awkward ... nd I was pretty quiet most of the time," he said .
 A teacher at Bronxville public school reflected that he was ""a regular boy"", adding that it seemed hard for him to finish his work sometimes .
 He developed an interest in American history, decorating his bedroom with pictures of U.S. presidents and Civil War volumes . He filled his bookshelves with volumes on the American Civil War .
 In March 1938, Kennedy sailed to London with his mother and four youngest siblings to join his father . He became an avid stamp collector and once received a handwritten letter from Franklin Roosevelt .
 In April 1939, he gave his first public speech at the placing of a cornerstone for a youth club in England . He gave the first public address at a cornerstone in England in April 1939 .
 According to embassy and newspaper reports, his statements were penciled in his own hand and delivered in a ""calm and confident" manner . According to reports, he delivered his statements in a 'calm' manner .
 Bobby returned to the U.S. just before the outbreak of World War II in Europe in Europe . Bobby returned home to the United States .
 In September 1939, Kennedy began eighth grade at St. Paul's and Portsmouth Priory .
 His father favored St. Paul's School, an elite Protestant private preparatory school for boys in Concord, New Hampshire .
 Rose Kennedy unhappy with the school's use of the Protestant Bible . Rose Kennedy was unhappy at the use of a Protestant Bible by the school .
 After two months, she took advantage of her ambassador husband's absence from Boston . She withdrew Kennedy from St. Kennedy's home in St. Louis .
 She enrolled him in Portsmouth Priory School, a Benedictine Catholic boarding school for boys in Portsmouth, Rhode Island . The school held daily morning and evening prayers and Mass three times a week .
 Kennedy attended Portsmouth for eighth through tenth grade . At Portsmouth Priory School, Kennedy was known as "Mrs. Kennedy" at the time .
 Bobby Kennedy introduced his mother to classmates, who made fun of them . Kennedy's little boy Bobby"" was made fun by classmates . Bobby's mother introduced him to classmates after he introduced her .
 He chased a student out of the dormitory after he commented on his mother's appearance . He was defensive of his mother, and said she was a 'beautiful'
 In letters to her son, Rose urged him to read more and to strengthen his vocabulary . Rose urged her son to strengthen vocabulary .
 Rose also expressed disappointment and wrote that she did not expect him to let her down . Rose said she expected him to disappoint her and that she was disappointed .
 Monks at Portsmouth Priory School regarded him as a moody and indifferent student . Monks said he was an indifferent student at the school .
 In September 1942, Kennedy transferred to Milton Academy, in Milton, Massachusetts, for 11th and 12th grades . Kennedy transferred from his third boarding school to the Milton Academy .
 His father wanted him to transfer to Milton, believing it would better prepare him for Harvard . He wanted to move to Milton to prepare for Harvard, but wanted to stay at Harvard .
 Kennedy was impressed when he filled in for a missing altar boy one Sunday . Hackett started accompanying him, and was impressed with his work .
 Hackett admired Kennedy's determination to bypass his shortcomings . He remembered him redoubling his efforts whenever something did not come easy to him .
 Hackett remembered the two of them as ""misfits" and a commonality that drew him to Kennedy, along with an unwillingness to conform to how others acted even if doing so meant not being accepted . Hackett said Kennedy and Hackett were both "misfits"
 One of Kennedy's first relationships was with a girl named Piedy Bailey . Kennedy's grades improved after the relationship .
 The pair were photographed together when he walked her home after chapel on a Sunday night .
 Soon after he transferred to Milton, he pressed his father to allow him to enlist, as he wanted to catch up to his brothers who were both serving in the military . Soon after transferring to Milton he asked his father for permission to enlist .
 Kennedy had arrived at Milton unfamiliar with his peers and made little attempt to know the names of his classmates . He called most of the other boys ""fella"" instead of "fella" Instead of knowing their names .
 Most of the school's students had come in eighth or ninth grade . Cliques had already been formed and clique had already formed .
 Schoolmates would later say the school had no prejudice . Despite this, his schoolmates later said the school was not racist .
 He disliked dirty jokes and bullying, once stepped in when an upperclassman tried bothering a younger student . "He had an early sense of virtue," he said. "He was a good student. He had a sense of . virtue"
 In Kennedy's younger years, his father dubbed him the ""runt" of the family and wrote him off . Kennedy's father also wrote Kennedy off as a child .
 Billings commented that the only similarity between Robert and Joe Sr. was their eye color . Billings said that Robert Sr. had the same eye color as his father .
 As Kennedy grew, his father worried that he was soft on others, conflicting with his ideology . Kennedy's father worried he might be soft on other people .
 In response, Kennedy developed a tough persona that masked his gentle personality, attempting to appease his father . In response to his father's criticism, Kennedy became known for his tough persona .
 Biographer Judie Mills wrote that Joe Sr.'s lack of interest in Robert was evident by the length of time it took for him to decide to transfer him to Milton Academy . Joe Sr. Sr. decided to transfer Robert to Milton .
 Both Joe Jr. and John Jr. attended the exclusive Protestant prep school Choate from their first year . Robert Jr. was already a junior by the time he was enrolled at Milton .
 As a child, Kennedy strove to meet his mother's expectations to become the most dutiful, religious, affectionate, and obedient of the Kennedy children . Despite his father's disdain, Kennedy continued to seek his approval, requesting that Joe Sr. write him a letter about his
 She influenced him heavily and, like her, he became a devout Catholic . Throughout his lifetime, he practiced his religion more seriously than the other boys in the family . He became a devoted Catholic .
 He impressed his parents as a child by taking on a newspaper route, seeking their approval . He wanted to distinguish himself and distinguish himself .
 He had the family chauffeur driving him in a Rolls-Royce so he could make his deliveries . However, he had to use the car to make deliveries .
 Joe Sr. was satisfied with Kennedy as an adult, believing him to have become 'hard as nails' His mother believed he exemplified all she had wanted in a child . His mother discovered this and the deliveries stopped .
 Mills wrote, "His parents' conflicting views would be echoed in the opinions of millions of people throughout Bobby's life" Mills wrote . Mills wrote: "Bobby's parents would be heard in millions of opinions throughout his life"
 Robert Kennedy was a ruthless opportunist who would stop at nothing to attain his ambitions . Robert Kennedy would not be surprised to discover that he had been assassinated in 1968 .
 Kennedy during his time at Bates College, in front of a snow replica of a Navy boat . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. Navy and Navy .
 Six weeks before his 18th birthday in 1943, Kennedy enlisted in the United States Naval Reserve as a seaman apprentice . Kennedy enlisted six weeks before he turned 18 in 1943 . Kennedy was a Navy sailor in the U.S. Naval Reserve .
 He was released from active duty in March 1944 . He left Milton Academy early to report to the V-12 Navy College Training Program at Harvard College .
 He returned to Harvard once again in June 1945 completing his post-training requirements in January 1946 . He returned again to Harvard in January 1945 .
 At Bates he received a specialized V-12-degree along with 15 others . During its Winter Carnival he built a snow replica of a Navy boat .
 While in Maine, he wrote to David Hackett in which he expressed feelings of inadequacy and frustration at being isolated from the action .
 In addition to Hackett, more of his Parker Hall dorm mates went overseas and left him behind . Hackett was serving as a paratrooper . He was left behind by his dorm mates .
 Kennedy Jr. died in August 1944, when his bomber exploded during a volunteer mission known as Operation Aphrodite . He was frustrated with the apparent desire to shirk military responsibility by some of the other students .
 Robert was most affected by his father's reaction to his eldest son's death . Robert's father was shocked by the reaction of his son's passing .
 He appeared completely heartbroken and his peer Fred Garfield commented that Kennedy developed depression and questioned his faith for a short time . Fred Garfield said Kennedy became depressed after his death .
 After his brother's death, Robert gained more attention, moving higher up the family patriarchy . Robert is now a prominent figure in the family .
 On December 15, 1945, the United States Navy commissioned the destroyer USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr., and granted Kennedy's request to be released from naval-officer training to serve aboard Kennedy . Kennedy served aboard Kennedy starting on February 1, 1946, as a seaman apprentice on the ship
 For his service in the Navy, Kennedy was eligible for the American Campaign Medal and the World War II Victory Medal . Kennedy was also eligible for two other medals .
 In September 1946, Kennedy entered Harvard as a junior, having received credit for his time in the V-12 program . Further study, journalism, and marriage were Kennedy's first major studies .
 He worked hard to make the varsity football team as an end . He was a starter and scored a touchdown in the first game of his senior year before breaking his leg in practice . He scored in his first game in practice in his senior season .
 He earned his varsity letter when his coach sent him in wearing a cast during the last minutes of a game against Yale . Coach sent him into the last minute of a match wearing the cast .
 His father spoke positively of him when he served as a blocking back and sometime receiver for the faster Dave Hackett . The faster Hackett played for Hackett in the 1970s .
 Joseph Sr. attended some of Kennedy's practices and saw his son catch a touchdown pass in an early-season rout of Western Maryland . Joseph Sr.'s son caught a touchdown in the rout of the Maryland team .
 Wally Flynn, another player, looked up in the huddle after one play to see him crying after he broke his leg . Wally Flynn was another player who was crying after breaking his leg during a play .
 Kennedy earned two varsity letters over the course of the 1946 and 1947 seasons . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. basketball team . Kennedy played for the University of Maryland .
 Throughout 1946, Kennedy became active in his brother John's campaign for the U.S. Representative seat that was vacated by James Curley . He joined the campaign full-time after his naval discharge .
 Biographer Schlesinger wrote that the election served as an entry into politics for both Robert and John . The election was an entry to politics .
 Robert graduated from Harvard in 1948 with a bachelor's degree in political science . He sailed immediately on the RMS Queen Mary with a college friend for a six-month tour of Europe and the Middle East .
 Four of these stories submitted from Palestine shortly before the end of the British Mandate . Four of the stories provided a first-hand view of the tensions in the land .
 Kennedy was elected president of the Student Legal Forum, where he successfully produced outside speakers including James M Landis, William O Douglas, Arthur Krock, and Joseph McCarthy . Kennedy's family members Joe Sr. and John F Kennedy adapted to this new environment .
 Kennedy's paper on Yalta, written during his senior year, is deposited in the Law Library's Treasure Trove . Kennedy married Ethel Skakel on June 17, 1950 .
 He graduated from law school in June 1951 and flew with Ethel to Greenwich to stay in his father-in-law's guest house . He stayed in the guest house with his wife Ethel .
 The brothers rarely interacted until Kenny O'Donnell contacted Robert to repair the relationship between John and their father during John's Senate campaign . The brothers' relationship has been strained for years until their father contacted Robert .
 In September 1951, he went to San Francisco as a correspondent for the Boston Post to cover the convention that concluded the Treaty of Peace with Japan . As a result of this, Joe Sr. came to view Robert favorably as reliable and ""willing to sacrifice himself"" for the family .
 In October 1951, he embarked on a seven-week Asian trip with his brother John and their sister Patricia to Israel, India, Pakistan, Vietnam, Vietnam and Japan .
 The 25,000-mile trip came at the behest of their father . It was the first time the two brothers had seen each other since they were separated by age .
 On this trip, the brothers met Liaquat Ali Khan just before his assassination, and India's prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru .
 In November 1951, Kennedy moved with his wife and daughter to a townhouse in Georgetown, Washington, D.C., and started work as a lawyer in the Justice Department's Criminal Division .
 On June 6, 1952, he resigned to manage his brother John's U.S. Senate campaign in Massachusetts . He resigned from his job to manage John's Senate campaign .
 JFK's victory was of great importance to the Kennedys, elevating him to national prominence and turning him into a serious potential presidential candidate . JFK's win elevates him to a national prominence .
 In December 1952, at his father's behest, Kennedy was appointed by family friend Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy as assistant counsel of the United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations .
 Kennedy disapproved of McCarthy's aggressive methods of garnering intelligence on suspected communists . McCarthy's methods were used to garner intelligence from suspected communists, Kennedy said .
 The period of July 1953 to January 1954 saw him at ""a professional and personal nadir"", feeling that he was adrift while trying to prove himself to his family . Kennedy declined to consider running for Massachusetts Attorney General in 1954 .
 When Democrats gained a Senate majority in January 1955, Kennedy became chief counsel . Kennedy was a background figure in the Army–McCarthy hearings of 1954 into McCarthy's conduct .
 Kennedy aided Democratic senators in ridiculing Cohn during the hearings . The Moss incident turned Cohn into an enemy, which led to Kennedy assisting Democratic senators . Kennedy helped Democratic senators ridicule Cohn .
 The animosity grew to the point where Cohn had to be restrained after asking RFK if he wanted to fight him . RFK was arrested after Cohn asked him to fight, Cohn said .
 For his work on the McCarthy committee, Kennedy was included in a list of Ten Outstanding Young Men of 1954, created by the United States Junior Chamber of Commerce . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. Junior Chamber .
 Kennedy was admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1955 . In 1955 Kennedy was allowed to practice in the United States Supreme Court .
 In 1956, Kennedy moved his growing family outside Washington to a house called Hickory Hill . Kennedy purchased the house from his brother John Kennedy .
 This enormous 13-bedroom, 13-bath home was situated on 6 acres in McLean, Virginia . The home is situated on a 6-acre estate .
 Kennedy went on to work as an aide to Adlai Stevenson during the 1956 presidential election which helped him learn how national campaigns worked, in preparation for a future run by his brother .
 Stevenson reportedly voted for incumbent Dwight D Eisenhower . Unimpressed with Stevenson, he voted for Eisenhower .
 Kennedy was also a delegate at the 1956 Democratic National Convention . He replaced Tip O'Neil at the request of his brother John . He joined in what was ultimately unsuccessful effort to help JFK get the vice-presidential nomination .
 Following instructions from his father, Kennedy tried to make amends with J Edgar Hoover . Shortly after this, following instructions, he tried to get back in touch with Hoover .
 Kennedy said it was seen as an "elemental political necessity" by Kennedy . There seemed to be some improvement in their interactions, which came to be seen as a political necessity .
 Kennedy squared off with Teamsters Union President Jimmy Hoffa during the antagonistic argument that marked Hoffa's testimony . Kennedy and Hoffa squared off in a famous scene during the infamous argument .
 Hoffa misappropriated $9.9 million in union funds and made corrupt deals with employers . Kennedy was instructed to collect information from Hoffa . Kennedy discovered several financial irregularities .
 Kennedy received criticism from liberal critics for his outburst of impassioned anger and doubts about the innocence of those who invoked the Fifth Amendment . During the hearings, Kennedy was criticized for his doubts about innocence .
 Senators Barry Goldwater and Karl Mundt wrote to each other and complained about ""the Kennedy boys" having hijacked the McClellan Committee by their focus on Hoffa and the Teamsters .
 Kennedy believed Kennedy covered for Walter Reuther and the United Automobile Workers, a union which typically would back Democratic office seekers . The union would typically back Democratic candidates for office .
 Kennedy wrote in his journal that the two senators had ""no guts"" as they never addressed him directly, only through the press . Kennedy wrote that they had 'no guts'
 He left the committee in late 1959 in order to run his brother's presidential campaign . He ran for the Democratic Party in 1959 .
 In 1960 Kennedy published The Enemy Within, a book which described the corrupt practices within the Teamsters and other unions that he had helped investigate . JFK presidential campaign in 1960 .
 Kennedy went to work on the presidential campaign of his brother, John. Kennedy . He worked on his brother's presidential campaign . Kennedy's brother was elected president in 1968 .
 In contrast to his brother's previous campaign eight years prior, Kennedy gave stump speeches throughout the primary season . Kennedy gained confidence as time went on, gaining confidence .
 John Kennedy offered Lyndon Johnson the vice president of the United States . Johnson was the first president to be offered the vice presidency .
 This did not sit well with some Kennedy supporters, and Robert tried unsuccessfully to convince Johnson to turn down the offer . This led him to view Robert with contempt afterward, leading to Robert's contempt for him .
 RFK had already disliked Johnson prior to the presidential campaign . He saw him as a threat to his brother's ambitions . RFK disliked Johnson .
 Kennedy worked toward downplaying his brother's Catholic faith during the primary but took a more aggressive and supportive stance during the general election . Despite Kennedy's attempts, Johnson became Kennedy's running mate .
 JFK said in a speech in September that he was in favor of separation of church and state . JFK said he was against separation of state and church .
 Kennedy was involved in securing the release of civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. from a jail in Atlanta in January . The following month, Kennedy was in Atlanta to secure the release from a prison in Atlanta .
 Kennedy spoke with Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and later Judge Oscar Mitchell . King was sentenced for violating his probation when he protested at a whites-only snack bar .
 Attorney General of the United States Kennedy testifies before the Senate Committee on Government Operations' Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations about organized crime, September 1963 . President-elect John F Kennedy appointed his younger brother attorney general in 1963 .
 Kennedy was hardly a novice as a lawyer, having gained significant experience conducting investigations and questioning witnesses as a Justice Department attorney and Senate committee counsel .
 Baker persuaded the influential Southern senator Richard Russell to allow a voice vote to confirm the president's brother in January 1961 . The deputy and assistant attorneys general Kennedy chose included Byron White and Nicholas Katzenbach . Kennedy would have been lucky to get 40 votes on a roll-call vote .
 Kennedy also played a major role in helping his brother form his cabinet . Kennedy also helped form his brother's cabinet in the 1960s .
 John Kennedy wanted to name Senator J William Fulbright as his secretary of state . Fulbright was a Senator he knew and liked . Kennedy wanted Fulbright to be his Secretary of State of State .
 Fulbright was generally regarded as the Senate's resident foreign policy expert . He also supported segregation and white supremacy in the South . Fulbright supported segregation, white supremacy .
 Robert Kennedy persuaded his brother that having Fulbright as secretary of state would cost the Democrats Afro-American votes . Dean Rusk was nominated instead after John Kennedy decided that his next choice, McGeorge Bundy, was too young .
 Kennedy was also present at the job interview when the CEO of the Ford Motor Company, Robert McNamara, was interviewed by John Kennedy about becoming defense secretary . McNamara was also interviewed by Kennedy when he was defense secretary in 1964 .
 McNamara's self-confidence and belief that he could ""scientifically" solve any problem impressed the Kennedy brothers . McNamara asked if his bestselling book Profiles in Courage was written by a ghost writer .
 Author James W Hilty concludes that Kennedy played an unusual combination of roles—campaign director, attorney general, executive overseer, controller of patronage, chief adviser, and brother protector . Nobody before him had had such power .
 His tenure as attorney general was easily the period of greatest power for the office . No previous U.S. attorney general had enjoyed such clear influence on all areas of policy during an administration .
 President Kennedy sought the advice and counsel of his younger brother, Robert . Robert was the president's closest political adviser .
 He was relied upon as both the president's primary source of administrative information and as a general counsel with whom trust was implicit . The president relied on him as a source of administration information and a lawyer .
 The president once remarked about his brother, "If I want something done and done immediately I rely on the Attorney General," he said . The president also said he relies on his brother to get things done quickly .
 Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . Kennedy was one of the president's closest White House advisers .
 Kennedy's visit with his wife to West Berlin in February 1962 demonstrated U.S. support for the city . The visit helped repair the strained relationship between the administration and its special envoy in Berlin, Lucius D Clay .
 Kennedy and FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover disagree on strategy with Kennedy . Kennedy often disagreed on strategy for organized crime .
 Kennedy worked to shift Hoover's focus away from communism, which Hoover saw as a more serious threat, to organized crime . Hoover saw organized crime as a bigger threat than communism .
 According to James Neff, Kennedy's success in this endeavor was due to his brother's position, giving the attorney general leverage over Hoover . Neff: "The attorney general's position" gave the Kennedy family leverage .
 Biographer Richard Hack concluded that Hoover's dislike for Kennedy came from his being unable to control him . He was relentless in his pursuit of Teamsters Union president Jimmy Hoffa, due to Hoffa's known corruption in financial and electoral matters .
 The enmity between the two men was intense, with accusations of a personal vendetta . Hoffa called it a ""blood feud" between them . The two men exchanged accusations of personal animosity .
 RFK told reporters the government's case against Hoffa had not been changed by what he called ""a small group of teamsters"" supporting him . RFK said the government had not changed the case by a group of Teamsters supporting Hoffa . On July 7, 1961, after
 The following year, it was leaked that Hoffa had claimed to a Teamster local that Kennedy had been ""bodily"" removed from his office . Hoffa claimed Kennedy had only been ejected from the office . Kennedy was later found to have been removed from the position .
 Hoffa was convicted in 1964 of attempted bribery of a grand juror during his 1962 conspiracy trial . He was sentenced to eight years in prison and a $10,000 fine . Hoffa's trial in Nashville, Tennessee, was held in 1964 .
 Kennedy learned of Hoffa's conviction by telephone, congratulating prosecutors . Kennedy issued congratulatory messages to three prosecutors .
 Hoffa was convicted in a second trial held in Chicago, on July 26, 1964, on one count of conspiracy and three counts of mail and wire fraud for improper use of the Teamsters' pension fund . He was sentenced to five years in prison, while on bail .
 Hoffa spent three years unsuccessfully appealing his 1964 convictions . He began serving his aggregate prison sentence of 13 years on March 7, 1967, at the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary in Pennsylvania . Hoffa was sentenced to 13 years in prison .
 "If the orders of the court are circumvented, the Department of Justice will act," Obama says . "In this case, in all cases, I say to you today I say that . In all cases," he says, "I say that if [the] court orders of
 Hoover presented Kennedy with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists . Hoover presented the president with the allegations in February 1962 .
 The FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months . Concerned about the allegations, the FBI sent agents to King .
 King agreed to ask suspected Communist Jack O'Dell to resign from the SCLC, but refused to heed to the request to ask Stanley Levison, whom he regarded as a trusted advisor, to resign . King also refused to ask Levison to resign, saying Levison was
 In October 1963, Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization . King's organization was King's group .
 Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones on a trial basis, for a month or so . Hoover extended the clearance so that his men were ""unshackled"" to look for evidence in any areas they deemed worthy .
 The wiretapping continued through June 1966 and was revealed in 1968, days before Kennedy's death . Kennedy remained committed to civil rights enforcement to such a degree that he commented in 1962 that it seemed to envelop almost every area of his public life .
 Former Attorney General George H.W. Bush was attorney general . He oversaw the most energetic and persistent desegregation of the administration that Capitol Hill had ever experienced .
 He demanded that every area of government begin recruiting realistic levels of black and other ethnic workers . Vice President Johnson was criticized for his failure to desegregate his own office staff .
 Between 1960 and 1963 a great many of the initiatives were the result of an emboldened Robert Kennedy, who, through his rapid education in the realities of Southern racism, underwent a thorough conversion of purpose .
 The president came to share his brother's sense of urgency on the matters at hand . It was at the attorney general's insistence that he made his famous 1963 speech on civil rights .
 He acted after the Anniston bus bombings to protect the Riders in continuing their journey . He sent John Seigenthaler, his administrative assistant, to Alabama to attempt to secure the Riders' safety .
 King later publicly thanked him for dispatching the forces to break up the attack that might otherwise have ended his life . King later thanked the forces for helping him escape the attack .
 Kennedy negotiated safe passage of the Freedom Riders from the First Baptist Church to Jackson, Mississippi, where they were arrested . Kennedy then negotiated the safe passage from the church to the Mississippi jail .
 He offered to bail the Freedom Riders out of jail, but they refused, which upset him . The Freedom Riders refused to go to jail, he said .
 Kennedy's attempts to end the Freedom Rides early were tied to an upcoming summit with Nikita Khrushchev and Charles de Gaulle . Kennedy's attempt to end early Freedom rides was tied to a summit with the Soviet Union .
 He believed the continued international publicity of race riots would tarnish the president heading into international negotiations . He said the continued publicity of the riots will tarnish Obama .
 This attempt to curtail the Freedom Rides alienated many of the civil rights leaders who, at the time, perceived him as intolerant and narrow-minded . Many of the Civil Rights leaders believed him to be intolerant .
 Attorney General had hoped legal means would force Governor Ross Barnett to allow Meredith admission . Meredith's admission to the University of Mississippi was denied by the governor .
 He also was very concerned there might be a 'mini-civil war' between federal troops and armed protesters . He said he was concerned that federal troops might clash with protesters .
 The Office of Civil Rights also hired its first African-American lawyer and began to work cautiously with leaders of the Civil Rights Movement . The office of civil rights in the U.S. was founded in 1964 .
 Kennedy collaborated with presidents Kennedy and Johnson to create the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The act helped bring an end to Jim Crow laws . Kennedy saw voting as the key to racial justice .
 Kennedy expanded the U.S. Department of Justice Civil Rights Division by 60 percent . Between December 1961 and December 1963, Kennedy also expanded the civil rights division . Kennedy expanded civil rights Division in the early 1960s .
 Yale law professor Charles Reich wrote in The New Republic that the Justice Department had violated civil liberties by calling a federal grand jury to indict United States Steel so quickly . The grand jury was disbanded after the price increase did not occur, Reich wrote .
 During the Kennedy administration, the federal government carried out its last pre-Furman federal execution . In 1967 Kennedy expressed his strong willingness to support a bill then under consideration for the abolition of the death penalty .
 Kennedy oversaw the CIA's anti-Castro activities after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . As his brother's brother's confidant, Kennedy oversaw efforts to oust Castro .
 He had initially been among the more hawkish members of the administration on matters concerning Cuban insurrectionist aid .
 His initial strong support for covert actions in Cuba soon changed to a position of removal from further involvement . He became aware of the CIA's tendency to draw out initiatives, and provide itself with almost unchecked authority .
 Allegations that the Kennedys knew of plans by the CIA to kill Fidel Castro have been debated by historians over the years .
 Kennedy was informed of an earlier plot involving the CIA's use of Mafia bosses Santo Trafficante Jr. and John Roselli only during a briefing on May 7, 1962 . Kennedy directed the CIA to halt any existing efforts directed at Castro's assassination . But there is ample evidence to the
 Kennedy served as the president's personal representative in Operation Mongoose, the post-Bay of Pigs covert operations program . The program was established in November 1961 .
 His clandestine meetings with members of the Soviet government continued to provide a key link to Khrushchev during the darkest moments of the crisis . The threat of nuclear strikes was considered very real at the time .
 President Kennedy promised to make a reciprocal visit to Japan in 1962 . Decision to resume atmospheric nuclear testing forced him to postpone such a visit . Bobby sent Bobby in his stead .
 Kennedy and his wife Ethel arrived in Tokyo in February 1962 at a very sensitive time in U.S.-Japan relations, shortly after massive Anpo protests . The massive protests against the US.-Japan Security Treaty had highlighted anti-American grievances .
 Kennedy won over a highly skeptical Japanese public and press with his cheerful, open demeanor, sincerity, and youthful energy . Kennedy won .
 When radical Marxist student activists from Zengakuren attempted to shout him down, he calmly invited one of them on stage and engaged the student in an impromptu debate .
 Kennedy's calmness under fire and willingness to take the student's questions seriously won many admirers in Japan and praise from the Japanese media . His calm under fire won him admirers and praise for himself and his brother .
 RFK was at home with aides from the Justice Department at the time of the assassination . RFK attended the funeral of his brother, President John F Kennedy, November 25, 1963 .
 Kennedy then received a call from Tazewell Shepard, a naval aide to the president, who told him that his brother was dead . Kennedy received a phone call from the president to tell him that he had been killed .
 Kennedy phoned McGeorge Bundy at the White House, instructing him to change the locks on the president's files . Shortly after the call from Hoover, Bundy called the president to ask Bundy to change locks on his files . Bundy was the first president to do so .
 He ordered the Secret Service to dismantle the Oval Office and cabinet room's secret taping systems . The Secret Service has been ordered to dismantle Secret Service's Secret Service systems .
 He scheduled a meeting with CIA director John McCone and asked if the CIA had any involvement in his brother's death . He scheduled the meeting with McCone to discuss the CIA's role in the death .
 Bobby Kennedy received a phone call from Vice President Johnson before he boarded Air Force One . Bobby Kennedy was shot by President Johnson an hour after the president was shot .
 RFK opposed the idea since he felt ""it would be nice"" for President Kennedy's body to return to Washington with the deceased president still being the incumbent . RFK remembered their conversation starting with Johnson demonstrating sympathy before the vice president stated his belief that he should be sworn in .
 Johnson will take the oath of office before returning to Washington . The two concluded that the best course of action would be for Johnson to be sworn in .
 In his 1971 book We Band of Brothers, aide Edwin O Guthman recounted Kennedy admitting to him an hour after receiving word of his brother's death that he thought he would be the one ""they would get"" as opposed to his brother . Kennedy told Guthman that he wanted to be
 In the days following the assassination, he wrote letters to his two eldest children, Kathleen and Joseph, saying that as the oldest Kennedy family members, they had a special responsibility to remember what their uncle had started and to love and serve their country .
 When he was introduced, the crowd, including party bosses, elected officials, and delegates, applauded thunderously and tearfully for a full 22 minutes before they would let him speak .
 When shall die Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night, says the author .
 The ten-month investigation by the Warren Commission of 1963–1964 concluded that the president had been assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald had acted alone . The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had assassinated the president .
 I have been briefed on it and I am completely satisfied that the Commission investigated every lead and examined every piece of evidence . But I have also been briefed by the Commission and I'm not sure what happened .
 Beran assesses the assassination as having moved Kennedy away from reliance on the political system and become more questioning . Beran says Kennedy's assassination moved him away from relying on political system .
 Kennedy with Dubinsky in an undated photo . Vice presidential candidate Kennedy with David Dubinsky . Dubinsky is a married father-of-three .
 In the wake of the assassination of his brother and Lyndon Johnson's ascension to the presidency, with the office of vice president now vacant, Kennedy was viewed favorably as a potential candidate for the position in the 1964 presidential election .
 Several Kennedy partisans called for him to be drafted in tribute to his brother . Polls showed national polling showed that three of four Democrats were in favor of him as Johnson's running mate .
 Democratic organizers supported Kennedy as a write-in candidate in the New Hampshire primary . 25,000 Democrats wrote in Kennedy's name in March 1964, only 3,700 fewer than the number of Democrats who wrote in Johnson's name as their pick for president .
 In his first interview after the assassination Kennedy said he was not considering the vice presidency . Kennedy: "I'm not considering a vice president," he said in first interview since assassination .
 The two disliked one another intensely, with feelings often described as ""mutual contempt"" that went back to their first meeting in 1953, and had only intensified during JFK's presidency . JFK and JFK had a history of animosity that began in 1953 .
 Johnson considered nominating his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver for vice president, but the Kennedy family vetoed that .
 Kennedy aide Kenny O'Donnell told the president that if he wanted a Catholic vice president, the only candidate available was Kennedy . Kennedy was a Catholic Catholic . Kennedy served as a vice president for President Johnson .
 During a post-presidency interview with historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, Johnson claimed that Kennedy acted like he was the custodian of the Kennedy dream . Johnson instead chose Senator Hubert Humphrey instead of JFK .
 President Johnson wanted Kennedy to tell the media that he decided to withdraw his name, but he refused . Kennedy refused, saying the president could do that himself . Kennedy was the president's first choice to withdraw from the nomination .
 Johnson wanted a way to announce that he had refused Kennedy serving as his running mate without appearing to be motivated by malice towards a man he disliked and distrusted . Johnson wanted to announce his refusal to be Kennedy's running mate .
 The Democratic power broker Clark Clifford suggested to Johnson a way to block Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 In response to this statement, angry letters poured in to Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird, expressing disappointment at Kennedy being dropped from the field of potential running mates .
 Johnson ordered the FBI to monitor Kennedy's contacts and actions, and to make sure that he could not speak until after Hubert Humphrey was confirmed as his running mate . Johnson worried that delegates at the convention would draft Kennedy onto the ticket .
 After making his announcement, Johnson boasted about how he had gotten ""that damned albatross off his neck"" as he proceeded to mock what he called Kennedy's ""funny"" voice and mannerisms .
 Kennedy learned of Johnson's performance and demanded an apology, only to have the president deny the story . Though not published in the newspapers, Kennedy quickly learned of the incident and demanded apology .
 In a meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Johnson talked about Kennedy . Johnson: "It's a good thing to say goodbye to Kennedy"
 Senator Henry Jackson advised Kennedy, ""Let them get it out of their system"" as he stood on the stage raising his hand to signal he wanted the crowd to stop cheering . Kennedy raised his hand and said he wanted to stop the cheering .
 Johnson knew instantly that the reference to the ""garish sun"" was to him . Johnson knew immediately that it had been to him.
 He had considered the possibility of running for the seat since early spring, but also giving consideration for governor of Massachusetts or governor . The plane crash and injury of his brother Ted in June, two months earlier, left politics altogether after the crash .
 Kennedy was lauded during trips to Germany and Poland, the denizens of the latter country's greetings to Kennedy being interpreted by Leaming as evaporating the agony he had sustained since his brother's passing .
 Despite their famously difficult relationship, Johnson gave considerable support to Kennedy's campaign . Despite their notoriously difficult relationship Johnson supported Kennedy .
 The main reason Kennedy chose not to run for the U.S. Senate from his native Massachusetts was that his younger brother Ted was running for reelection . Kennedy was elected to the United States Senate in 1964 .
 RFK charged Keating with having ""not done much of anything constructive"" despite his presence in Congress during a September 8 press conference . RFK said Keating had not done anything constructive in Congress despite being in Congress .
 Tenure Kennedy drew attention in Congress early on as the brother of President Kennedy, which set him apart from other senators . Kennedy's brother was also a senator .
 He drew more than 50 senators as spectators when he delivered a speech in the Senate on nuclear proliferation in June 1965 . More than 50 Senators were spectators at the speech .
 He saw a decline in his power, going from the president's most trusted advisor to one of a hundred senators . His impatience with collaborative lawmaking showed, and his impatience showed .
 Robert saw his brother as a guide on managing within the Senate, and the arrangement worked to deepen their relationship . Robert's brother was also a guide to managing in the Senate .
 Harris noted that Kennedy was intense about matters and issues that concerned him . Harris said Kennedy was "intensely" about matters of his life .
 While serving in the Senate, Kennedy advocated gun control . Ted and Robert Kennedy were both in the House of Representatives .
 In May 1965 he co-sponsored S.1592, proposed by President Johnson and sponsored by Senator Thomas J Dodd, that would put federal restrictions on mail-order gun sales .
 Kennedy said, "For too long we dealt with these deadly weapons as if they were harmless toys" Kennedy said: "For too many we dealt . with these weapons as . if they are harmless toys."
 Thousands of deaths each year are caused by the ease of their acquisition and the familiarity of their appearance have led to thousands of deaths . Yet their very presence and ease of acquisition has led to the deaths of thousands each year .
 "With the passage of this bill we will begin to meet our responsibilities," says President Obama . The bill is expected to be signed by the end of the year .
 The bill forbade "mail order sale of guns to the very young, those with criminal records and the insane" The bill was passed in Oregon .
 S.1592 and subsequent bills paved the way for the eventual passage of the Gun Control Act of 1968 . The assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F Kennedy paved the . way for passage of S. 1592 .
 Kennedy and his staff had employed a cautionary ""amendments–only" strategy for his first year in the senate . Kennedy had employed the strategy to avoid making amendments to his first term .
 In 1966 and 1967 they took more direct legislative action, but were met with increasing resistance from the Johnson administration . In 1967 and 1967, they took even more direct action, taking on the President .
 Despite perceptions that the two were hostile in their respective offices to each other, Kennedy's support of the Johnson administration's ""Great Society"" program through his voting record . Kennedy's voting record shows that he supported the program .
 On February 8, 1966, Kennedy urged the United States to pledge that it would not be the first country to use nuclear weapons against countries that did not have them . In June 1966, he visited apartheid-era South Africa accompanied by his wife, Ethel, and a few aides .
 The tour was greeted with international praise at a time when few politicians dared to entangle themselves in the politics of South Africa . The tour of the South African capital was greeted by international praise .
 He spoke out against the oppression of the native population . He was welcomed by the black population as though he were a visiting head of state .
 A questioner declared that few churches allow black Africans to pray with the white . The Bible says that is the way it should be, because God created Negroes to serve, he said .
 On January 28, 1967, Kennedy began a ten-day stay in Europe, meeting Harold Wilson in London . Wilson advised him to tell President Johnson about his belief that the ongoing Vietnam conflict was wrong .
 He was asked if his conversations abroad had negatively impacted American foreign relations . Upon returning to the United States in early February, he was confronted by the press .
 During his years as a senator, he helped to start a successful redevelopment project in poverty-stricken Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn .
 Kennedy had hoped Bedford-Stuyvesant would become an example of self-imposed growth for other impoverished neighborhoods . Schlesinger wrote that Kennedy hoped Bedford would become a model for other poor neighborhoods .
 Kennedy had difficulty securing support from President Johnson . Johnson's administration was charged by Kennedy as having opposed a ""special impact"" program .
 Kennedy confided to journalist Jack Newfield that while he tried collaborating with the administration through courting its members and compromising with the bill, ""They didn't even try to work something out together," Kennedy said in an interview .
 He also visited the Mississippi Delta as a member of the Senate committee reviewing the effectiveness of ""War on Poverty"" programs, particularly that of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 . Pelé and Kennedy shook hands after a game at Maracanã Stadium, Rio .
 Sen. Edelman requested she call on Martin Luther King Jr. to bring the impoverished to Washington, D.C., to make them more visible . Edelman: "The Poor People's Campaign" led to the creation of the campaign . The campaign was created by the senator .
 Kennedy flew out to Delano, California, to investigate the situation . At the request of labor leader Walter Reuther, who had previously marched with and provided money to Chavez, Kennedy investigated .
 Kennedy attended the third hearing in March 1966 for legislation to include farm workers by an amendment of the National Labor Relations Act . Kennedy's attendance at the hearing brought media coverage of the hearings .
 Kennedy was moved after seeing the conditions of the workers, who he deemed were being taken advantage of . Biographer Thomas Thomas wrote that Kennedy was moving after seeing conditions .
 Chavez stressed that migrant workers needed to be recognized as human beings . Chavez stressed to Kennedy that migrant worker needs to be acknowledged as human being .
 As a senator, he was popular among African Americans, other minorities including Native Americans and immigrant groups .
 He spoke forcefully in favor of what he called the ""disaffected"", the impoverished, and ""the excluded"""", thereby aligning himself with leaders of the civil rights struggle and social justice campaigners .
 He supported desegregation busing, integration of all public facilities, Voting Rights Act of 1965 . He supported anti-poverty social programs to increase education, offer opportunities for employment, and provide health care .
 President Kennedy placed increasing emphasis on human rights as a central focus of U.S. foreign policy . Consistent with President Kennedy's Alliance for Progress .
 JFK administration had backed U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia and other parts of the world in the frame of the Cold War . Kennedy was not known to be involved in discussions on the Vietnam War when he was his brother's attorney general .
 According to historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, Kennedy had sought an ambassadorship to South Vietnam . Before choosing to run for the Senate, Kennedy sought ambassadorial post in Vietnam .
 Kennedy initially kept private his disagreements with President Johnson on the war . Kennedy kept his disagreements private until he entered the Senate .
 While Kennedy vigorously supported his brother's earlier efforts, he never publicly advocated commitment of ground troops . He never publicly publicly advocated .
 Kennedy was bothered by the beginning of the bombing of North Vietnam in February 1965 . Kennedy did not wish to appear antipathetic to the president's agenda .
 By April, Kennedy was advocating a halt to the bombing to Johnson, who acknowledged that Kennedy played a part in influencing his decision to temporarily cease bombing . The following month, the bombing was stopped .
 Kennedy cautioned Johnson against sending combat troops as early as 1965 . Johnson chose instead to follow the recommendation of the rest of his predecessor's still intact staff of advisers .
 In July, after Johnson made a large commitment of U.S. ground forces to Vietnam, Kennedy made multiple calls for a settlement through negotiation . Kennedy called for negotiations to end the Vietnam War .
 The next month, John Paul Vann, a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army, wrote that Kennedy ""indicat comprehension of the problems we face" in a letter to the senator . Vann said Kennedy's comprehension of problems was critical .
 In December 1965, Kennedy advised his friend, the Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, that he should counsel Johnson to declare a ceasefire in Vietnam, a bombing pause over North Vietnam, and to take up an offer by Algeria to serve as a ""honest broker"" in peace talks .
 In February 1966, Kennedy released a peace plan that called for preserving South Vietnam while allowing the National Liberation Front, better known as the Viet Cong, to join a coalition government in Saigon . The plan was released by President Kennedy in February 1966 .
 In April 1966, Kennedy had a private meeting with Philip Heymann of the State Department's Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs to discuss efforts to secure the release of American prisoners of war in Vietnam .
 Kennedy wanted to press the Johnson administration to do more . Heymann insisted that the administration believed the ""consequences of sitting down with the Viet Cong"" mattered more than the prisoners they were holding captive .
 On June 29 of that year, Kennedy released a statement disavowing President Johnson's choice to bomb Haiphong . Kennedy avoided criticizing either the war or the president's overall foreign policy, believing that it might harm Democratic candidates in the 1966 elections .
 In August, the International Herald Tribune described Kennedy's popularity as outpacing President Johnson's . In the early part of 1967, Kennedy traveled to Europe, where he had discussions about Vietnam with leaders .
 A story leaked to the State Department that Kennedy was talking about seeking peace while President Johnson was pursuing the war . Kennedy was the president of the United States during the Vietnam War .
 He voiced this during a meeting with Kennedy, who reiterated the interest of the European leaders to pause the bombing while going forward with negotiations . Johnson declined to do so .
 On March 2, Kennedy outlined a three-point plan to end the war which included suspending the United States bombing of North Vietnam, and the eventual withdrawal of American and North Vietnamese soldiers from South Vietnam . This plan was rejected by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who believed North Vietnam would
 On May 15, Kennedy debated Governor of California Ronald Reagan about the war . Kennedy debated Reagan on the war in California .
 On November 26, 1967, during an appearance on Face the Nation, Kennedy asserted that the Johnson administration had deviated from his brother's policies in Vietnam . This was the first time Kennedy had contrasting the two administrations' policies on the war .
 On February 8, 1968, Kennedy delivered an address in Chicago, where he critiqued Saigon's ""government corruption"" and expressed his disagreement with the Johnson administration's stance that the war would determine the future of Asia .
 On March 14, Kennedy met with defense secretary Clark Clifford at the Pentagon regarding the war . Kennedy met Clifford on March 14 to discuss the conflict .
 Clifford's notes indicate that Kennedy was offering not to enter the ongoing Democratic presidential primary if President Johnson would admit publicly to having been wrong in his war policy . Johnson rejected the proposal .
 RFK offered to collaborate with Johnson for national unity, but opted to continue his presidential bid . RFK said the decision was a ""step toward peace"" on April 1, after President Johnson halted bombing of North Vietnam .
 Later that month, Kennedy called the war ""the gravest kind of error"" in a speech in Corvallis, Oregon . Kennedy called it the "gravest error" in his speech .
 In January, Kennedy stated that he would not seek the presidency . Kennedy was widely considered to be an unrealistic race against an incumbent president .
 Kennedy traveled to Delano, California, to meet with civil rights activist César Chávez . The activist was on a 25-day hunger strike showing his commitment to nonviolence . Kennedy met with the activist .
 Kennedy decided he would challenge President Johnson for the presidency . He wanted to get lesser-known Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota to drop out of the presidential race . George McGovern urged Kennedy to wait until after New Hampshire primary to announce candidacy .
 Kennedy declared his candidacy on March 16, 1968, in the Caucus Room of the old Senate office building, the same room where his brother had declared his own candidacy eight years earlier .
 He stated, ""I do not run for the presidency merely to oppose any man, but to propose new policies," he said . He said he would not be opposed to any man .
 McCarthy's surprising result in New Hampshire earned him the mantle of being the anti-war candidate . McCarthy's supporters believed McCarthy had taken the most courageous stand by opposing the sitting president of his own party .
 On March 31, 1968, Johnson stunned the nation by dropping out of the race . Johnson stunned nation by withdrawing from presidential race in 1968 .
 Hubert Humphrey entered the race with the financial backing and critical endorsement of the party establishment . Humphrey was a champion of the labor unions and a long supporter of civil rights .
 With state registration deadlines long past, Humphrey joined the race too late to enter any primaries . Humphrey had the support of the president but had the backing of many states .
 Kennedy, like his brother before him, planned to win the nomination through popular support in the primaries . Kennedy planned to use his brother's support to help him win the presidential nomination .
 Kennedy ran on a platform of racial and economic justice, non-aggression in foreign policy, decentralization of power, and social change . Kennedy ran for office in Los Angeles in 1964 .
 A crucial element of his campaign was an engagement with the young, he said . He identified as being the future of a reinvigorated American society based on partnership and equality .
 His policy objectives did not sit well with the business community, where he was viewed as something of a fiscal liability . The business community opposed as they were to the tax increases necessary to fund social programs .
 It was this intense and frank mode of dialogue with which he was to continue to engage those whom he viewed as not being traditional allies of Democratic ideals or initiatives, he said .
 Kennedy's presidential campaign brought out both ""great enthusiasm"" and anger in people . Kennedy's campaign was a time of 'great enthusiasm' and 'great anger'
 His bid for the presidency saw not only a continuation of the programs he and his brother had undertaken during the president's term in office . Kennedy visited numerous small towns and made himself available to the masses by participating in long motorcades .
 He made urban poverty a chief concern of his campaign, which led to enormous crowds in poor urban areas or rural parts of Appalachia .
 On April 4, 1968, Kennedy learned of the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and gave a heartfelt impromptu speech in Indianapolis's inner city . Kennedy called for a reconciliation between the races .
 Riots broke out in 60 cities in the wake of King's death, but not in Indianapolis . The address was the first time Kennedy spoke publicly about his brother's killing .
 Kennedy addressed the City Club of Cleveland the next day, on April 5, 1968, delivering the famous On the Mindless Menace of Violence speech . Kennedy delivered the speech to the Cleveland City Club .
 Despite Kennedy's high profile and name recognition, McCarthy won most of the early primaries, including Kennedy's native state of Massachusetts . McCarthy won the primary in his native Massachusetts, where Kennedy was born .
 Kennedy won the Indiana Democratic primary on May 7 with 42 percent of the vote . He also won the Nebraska Democratic primary with 52 percent . Kennedy has won three other primaries this year .
 On May 28, Kennedy lost the Oregon primary, marking the first time a Kennedy lost an election . McCarthy was assumed that McCarthy was the preferred choice among the young voters .
 If he could defeat McCarthy in the California primary, the leadership of the campaign thought, he would knock McCarthy out of the race . He would then set up a one-on-one against Vice President Humphrey at the Chicago national convention in August .
 Kennedy scored major victories when he won both the California and South Dakota primaries on June 4 . Kennedy won major victories in both California and S. Dakota .
 He addressed supporters shortly after midnight on June 5, 1968, in a ballroom at The Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles .
 Leaving the ballroom, he went through the hotel kitchen after being told it was a shortcut to a press room . He left the room and went to the press room instead of the hotel's kitchen . The incident happened in a hotel room in the middle of the night .
 He did this despite being advised by his bodyguard, former FBI agent Bill Barry, to avoid the kitchen . He did not comply with his instructions .
 Sirhan Sirhan, 24, opened fire with a .22-caliber revolver in a crowded kitchen passageway . Kennedy shook hands with busboy Juan Romero just as Sirhan opened fire . Kennedy turned to his left to shake hands with Romero just before the shooting .
 George Plimpton, former decathlete Rafer Johnson, and former professional football player Rosey Grier credited with wrestling Sirhan to the ground . Kennedy was hit three times, and five other people were wounded .
 As Kennedy lay mortally wounded, Romero cradled his head and placed a rosary in his hand . Romero held his hand and placed it in the hands of Kennedy .
 After several minutes, medical attendants arrived and lifted the senator onto a stretcher, prompting him to whisper, ""Don't lift me"", which were his last words . The senator whispered, "Don't Lift me" during the stretcher lift .
 He was rushed first to Los Angeles' Central Receiving Hospital, less than 2 miles east of the Ambassador Hotel, and then to Good Samaritan Hospital .
 Kennedy was pronounced dead at 1:44 a.m. on June 6, nearly 26 hours after the shooting . Despite extensive neurosurgery to remove the bullet and bone fragments from his brain, Kennedy died 26 hours later . Kennedy died from a gunshot wound to the head .
 Robert Kennedy's death, like the 1963 assassination of his brother, President John F Kennedy, has been the subject of conspiracy theories . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, along with his brother .
 Funeral Kennedy's body lay in repose at Saint Patrick's Cathedral from approximately 10:00 p.m. until 10 a.m., on June 8 . Kennedy's funeral was held at the Cathedral in New York City, New York .
 My brother need not be idealized, or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life . He was remembered simply as a good and decent man, who saw wrong and tried to right it, saw suffering and . tried to heal it .
 Those who loved him and who take him to his rest today, pray that what he was to us and what he wished for others will some day come to pass for all the world . Those who love him and those who mourned him pray that his legacy will be realized .
 The requiem Mass concluded with the hymn ""The Battle Hymn of the Republic" sung by Andy Williams . Robert F Kennedy was buried in Arlington National Cemetery .
 Kennedy's funeral train was pulled by two Penn Central GG1 electric locomotives . The funeral train pulled by the two engines were pulled by a single locomotive .
 Thousands lined the tracks and stations along the route, paying their respects as the train passed . Thousands of mourners lined the train route to pay their respects .
 An eastbound train on a parallel track to the funeral train hit and killed two spectators and seriously injured four . Eastbound train's engineer had slowed to 30 mph for the normally 55 mph curve, blown his horn continuously and rung his bell through the curve .
 The train was scheduled to arrive at about 4:30 pm, but sticking brakes on the casket-bearing car contributed to delays . The train finally arrived at 9:10 p.m. on June 8, after delays .
 Robert's family believed Robert should be interred in Arlington next to his brother . Robert always maintained that he wished to be buried in Massachusetts .
 The procession left Union Station and passed the New Senate Office Building, where he had his offices . It then proceeded to the Lincoln Memorial, where it paused .
 People lining the roadway spontaneously lit candles to guide the motorcade to the burial site . The 15-minute ceremony began at 10:30 p.m.
 Cardinal Patrick O'Boyle officiated at the graveside service in lieu of Cardinal Richard Cushing of Boston, who fell ill during the trip . Cushing fell ill while on his trip to Washington .
 On behalf of the United States, John Glenn presented the folded flag to Senator Ted Kennedy . Ted Kennedy passed it to Robert Kennedy's eldest son Joe, Joe, who passed it on to Ethel Kennedy . Joe's son Joe passed the flag on to the Kennedy family .
 Kennedy's burial was the only night burial to have taken place at Arlington National Cemetery . The Navy Band played The Navy Hymn .
 After the president was interred in Arlington Cemetery, the two infants were buried next to him on December 5, 1963, in a private ceremony without publicity .
 His brother, Senator Edward M Kennedy, was also buried at night, in 2009 . Senator Kennedy was buried in 2009 at night .
 On June 9, President Lyndon B Johnson assigned security staff to all U.S. presidential candidates . Johnson declared an official national day of mourning .
 After the assassination, the mandate of the United States Secret Service was altered by Congress to include the protection of United States presidential candidates . The mandate was altered to include protection of U.S. presidents .
 On June 17, 1950, Kennedy married socialite socialite Ethel Skakel, the third daughter of businessman George and Ann . John, Robert, and Ted, July 1960 in Cape Cod, Massachusetts . Ethel, Ethel and Ted Kennedy were married in 1950 .
 His widow, Ethel, and their children continued to live at Hickory Hill after his death .
 Kennedy was said to be the gentlest and shyest of the family, as well as the least articulate verbally . Kennedy is said to have been the youngest and gentlest of his family .
 Luella Hennessey, who became the nurse for the Kennedy children when Kennedy was 12, called him ""the most thoughtful and considerate" of his siblings . Kennedy was teased by his siblings, as in their family it was a norm for humor to be displayed in that fashion
 Despite his gentle demeanor, he could be outspoken . He engaged a priest in a public argument that horrified his mother, who later conceded that he had been correct all along .
 Bobby Kennedy maintained the code of personal loyalty that seemed to infuse the life of his family . Joe Kennedy's most ambitious dreams centered around Bobby's older brothers .
 His competitiveness was admired by his father and elder brothers, while his loyalty bound them more affectionately close . His loyalty bound the pair together in an affectionate way .
 A timid child, he was often the target of his father's dominating temperament . He was often a timid child .
 Working on the campaigns of older brother John, he was more involved, passionate, and tenacious than the candidate himself . He was obsessed with detail, fighting out every battle, and taking workers to task .
 He had always been closer to John than the other members of the family . Opponents on Capitol Hill maintained that his collegiate magnanimity was sometimes hindered by a tenacious and somewhat impatient manner .
 Kennedy could be both the most ruthlessly diligent and yet generously adaptable of politicians . Schlesinger: Kennedy could also be both temperamental and forgiving . Kennedy is the most successful politician in history .
 In this he was very much his father's son, lacking truly lasting emotional independence, and yet possessing a great desire to contribute . In this, he was . lacking truly . lasting emotional . independence .
 "I think we all feel that when a witness comes before the United States Senate, he has an obligation to speak frankly and tell the truth," says Sen. John McCain .
 He was blunt to a fault, but his favorite campaign activity was arguing with college students . His favorite thing to do was argue with college student students, he said .
 Kennedy had developed a reputation as the family's attack dog . In his earlier life, Kennedy was known for being a family's dog .
 Bobby Kennedy was an antiwar visionary who tried to outflank LBJ's Great Society from the left . Yet Bobby Kennedy somehow became a liberal icon, an anti-war visionary .
 On Kennedy's ideological development, his brother John once remarked, "He might once have been intolerant of liberals as such because his early experience was with that high-minded, high-speaking kind"
 Kennedy's Catholicism was central to his politics and personal attitude to life and its purpose . He inherited his faith from his family and inherited his Greek philosophy .
 JFK was perhaps the first successful Catholic Radical in American political history . He also found great solace in the playwrights and poets of ancient Greece, especially the writings of Aeschylus .
 Kennedy was the first sibling of a president of the United States to serve as U.S. Attorney General . He was also the second sibling of President John Kennedy to hold the post .
 Walter Isaacson said Kennedy "turned out arguably to be arguably the best attorney general in history" Isaacson praised Kennedy for championing civil rights and other initiatives of the administration .
 Some of his successors have been unfavorably compared to him for not displaying the same level of poise in the profession .
 Kennedy has also been praised for his oratorical abilities and his skill at creating unity . Kennedy has been praised by many for his ability to create unity in the U.S.
 Dolores Huerta and Philip W Johnston say Kennedy was unique in his willingness to take political risks . They say Kennedy took political risks in his speeches and actions .
 Kennedy's oratorical skills lent their support to minorities and other disenfranchised groups who began seeing him as an ally . That blunt sincerity was said to be authentic, associates said by associates .
 Kennedy's assassination was a blow to the optimism for a brighter future that his campaign had brought for many Americans who lived through the turbulent 1960s . The assassination of Kennedy's assassin was a setback to the hope for a better future .
 J. K Rowling, Jim McGreevey, Gavin Newsom, and Ray Mabus have acknowledged Kennedy's influence on them .
 President George W Bush dedicates Justice Department building in honor of Robert Kennedy . Ethel Kennedy looks on at the dedication ceremony . President Bush dedicated the building to the Kennedy family .
 Robert F Kennedy's death was marked by the Kennedy assassination . In the months and years after his death, numerous roads, public schools, and other facilities across the United States have been named in his memory .
 The Robert F Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights was founded in 1968 . The sports stadium in Washington, D.C., was renamed Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in 1969 .
 The Bureau of Engraving and Printing distributed 159,297,600 of the perforated, blue-and-white stamps . It was an unusually-large printing .
 In 1998 the United States Mint released the Robert F Kennedy silver dollar, a special dollar coin that featured Kennedy's image on the obverse . The design was taken from a family photo suggested by Kennedy's wife Ethel .
 On November 20, 2001, President George W Bush and Attorney General John Ashcroft dedicated the Department of Justice headquarters building in Washington, D.C., as Robert F Kennedy . The building was dedicated to Kennedy on what would have been his 76th birthday . Kennedy would have turned 76 on
 Kennedy's eldest son, Joseph, also spoke during the ceremony . Kennedy's mother and father spoke at Kennedy's memorial .
 A small group of private citizens launched the Robert F Kennedy Children's Action Corps in 1969 . The group was dedicated to Kennedy's work helping the disadvantaged .
 On September 20, 2016, the United States Navy announced the renaming of a refueling ship in honor of Kennedy . Personal items and documents from his office in the Justice Department Building are displayed in a permanent exhibit dedicated to him at the John F Kennedy Library and Museum .
 Several public institutions jointly honor Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. Kennedy . Kennedy and King were both assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy was assassinated by a single assassination attempt .
 In 1969, the former Woodrow Wilson Junior College, a two-year institution, was renamed Kennedy–King College . It was a constituent campus of the City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago . The college is now located in downtown Chicago .
 In 1994 the City of Indianapolis erected the Landmark for Peace Memorial in Robert Kennedy's honor near the space made famous by his speech from the back of a pickup truck .
 Memorial Park depicts RFK reaching out from a large metal slab to a sculpture of King . King is part of a similar slab in the park . RFK reached out from the slab to the sculpture of his counterpart .
 This is meant to symbolize their attempts in life to bridge the gaps between the races . This is an attempt that united them even in death, the pair says .
 A nephew of RFK and Indiana U.S. Congresswoman Julia Carson presided over the event . Both speeches were made from the back of a pickup truck .
 The film Bobby is the story of multiple people's lives leading up to RFK's assassination . RFK was assassinated by Bobby Kennedy in 1968 . The film is based on the life of Bobby Kennedy .
 Barry Pepper won an Emmy for his portrayal of Kennedy in The Kennedys . The 8-part miniseries employs stock footage from his presidential campaign .
 McCarthy is rumored to be godfather to Bobby's firstborn, Kathleen . It's unclear where the rumor began about McCarthy being godfather .
 Authors and journalists echoed it enough that they stopped footnoting it . But they continued citing it as the clearest sign of how close Kennedy was to McCarthy .
 Even Kathleen's mother, Ethel, asked recently whether it was true, said, 'He was. He was,' she said . Kathleen's son, Kathleen, was 'a good friend'
 Kathleen knew firsthand the stigma of being associated with Joe McCarthy . She has 'no idea' where the rumor came from but double-checked her christening certificate to confirm it was false .
 "Rationality – Case Histories in International Politics, 5th Edition""". westvalley.edu.com: "Case Histories" in international politics is rationality .
 Hoffa and several others received kickbacks in the form of ""finder's fees"" from developers for securing the money . In return, Hoffa had a 45 percent interest in the project, and he and several other got kickbacks .
 ""NIXON COMMUTES HOFFA SENTENCE,CURBS UNION ROLE"". nytimes.com. ISBN 0-262-193094 .
 "Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Struggle for Power – Federal Bureau of Investigation"""". "King, Jr." and the global struggle for power" was published on August 22, 2016 .
 Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy was the first African-American to be assassinated .
 A History of the United States: Since 1865, Vol., Cengage Learning, 853 .
 9 actors have played John F Kennedy . 9 actors played the late President Kennedy in various roles .
 The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J Edgar Hoover That Transformed America. The historic face-off between the Kennesys and Hoover that Transformed. America. That face-Off. The Kennesesys. The Kennedy assassination .
 RFK's Justice Department show the conservatism of justice, the limits of charisma and the limit of charisma . Argues the policies of RFK show the limits in the legal system to support the status quo .
 The Kennedys, the Freedom Rides, and the Electoral Consequences of a Moral Compromise, are a result of a moral compromise . They are the result of the "Kennedys" and "Freedom Rides"
 This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines . The author of this article's Use of these external links do not reflect the views of others .
 The Vault – Robert F Kennedy at fbi.gov.gov Biography at United States Department of Justice . United States Congress. Congress. The Vault .
 RFK, PBS Text, Audio, and Video of Robert Kennedy's Remarks on the Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. Robert Kennedy spoke on the assassination of MLK . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Joseph P Kennedy Sr. J Kennedy . .mw-parser-output .nobold {font-weight:normal} .
 John F Kennedy Jacqueline Bouvier Rosemary Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy . Eunice Kennedy Sargent Shriver Patricia Kennedy Peter Lawford Robert F Kennedy Ethel Skakel Jean Kennedy .
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver, Bobby Shriver and Maria Shriver all died in the early 1970s . Robert F Kennedy Jr. Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Joseph P Kennedy II, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Jr. and others .
 David A Kennedy Michael LeMoyne Kennedy is the son of Edward Kennedy Jr. Mary Richardson, Cheryl Hines . Kennedy died in June 1963 .
 The Dream Shall Never Die . Joan Bennett Kennedy Victoria Reggie Kennedy . Kara Kennedy Kara Kennedy . Edward M Kennedy Jr. was assassinated in 1968 .
 Incumbent VP nominee: Hubert Humphrey . Hubert was the incumbent VP nominee . Other candidates: Daniel Brewster Pat Brown Robert F Kennedy .
 Barry Goldwater campaign VP nominee: William E Miller . Other candidates: Hiram Fong Walter Judd Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Other candidates were Hiram . William Fong was the Goldwater VP nominee .