 A Creative Commons license is only valid when it is applied by the person or entity that holds rights to the work . The license is a free form of form that allows people to use their own images to create their own artworks .
 Works may contain components to which the rightsholder in the work cannot apply the license . Works may also contain components that are not covered in the license. Works contain components which are not available for use in this work .
 It is ultimately your responsibility to independently evaluate the copyright status of any work or component part of a work you use .
 The Pilot uses cutting-edge publishing technology to produce open access digital editions of high-quality, peer-reviewed monographs from leading university presses . With the generous support of the Andrew W Mellon Foundation, the Pilot produces open access editions .
 Please consult www.creativecommons.org if you have questions about your rights to reuse the material in this book . Use this article to help us understand the content of our book .
 U.S. Air Force personnel and residents of Rio Salud, Colon, Panama, 1952 38 3.1.2.3.4.2 .
 Senator Warren G Magnuson and U.S. military officials discussed nuclear excavation of a second Central American canal, March 12,1964 60 4.1.60 4.60 .
 Equipment delivered via United States Navy tank landing ship for the nuclear Route 17 field studies, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, ca.66 81 .
 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers colonel Alexander Sutton compensating Guna chiefYabiliquina, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, September 20,1966 83 4 .
 Reina Torres de Arauz with Guna, Panamanian, and United States representatives, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, September 20,1966, Panama .
 Lyndon B Johnson and Smithsonian Institution secretary S Dillon Ripley, June 13,1967 93 7.1.2.3.5.7.3 .
 Map of proposed Central American interoceanic canal routes, 1902 18 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.5 . The canal route was proposed in 1902 .
 Map of the routes studied by the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Studies Commission, 1970 19 1.3.5 . Map of routes studied in 1970 .
 Thanks also to the organizers, panelists, and audience members of conference sessions at the American Association of Geographers, American Historical Association .
 Many thanks to Ira Rubinoff, Alan Covich, Wayne Clough, William Newman, and other historical participants for sharing their insights with me .
 Muchas gracias to Noris Herrera, Susan Brewer-Osorio, Ariel Espino, Dan Norman, Stanley Heckadon-Moreno, Egbert Leigh, Rachel Collin, Rachel .
 Many archivists, librarians, and interlibrary loan officers provided crucial sources, for which I am most appreciative .
 Smithsonian Institution Archives Postdoctoral Fellowship Program, National Endowment for the Humanities Summer Stipend Program, Lyndon B Johnson Foundation Moody Research Grant Program . Eisenhower Foundation Abilene Travel Grants Program provided critical funds .
 I am also very grateful to the Rochester Institute of Technology College of Liberal Arts Miller Fellowship and Faculty Research Fellowship programs .
 "Deep thanks to my fantastic high school teachers and college professors for setting high standards of mentorship," says Carole McCann .
 Sonia, Matt, AJ, Greg, Dana, Ethan, Andrew, Samuel, Gabriel, Samuel and Ethan . Ethan's mom, Vera. Vera, Vera, is also his mom .
 Lacey thanks her husband, Darren Lacey, for their support in her book .
 This book dedicated in memory of Jim Keiner, taken too soon from us all by pancreatic cancer . This book is dedicated to Keiner .
 T he atlantic-pacific Central American sea-level canal was a spectacular failure . The Central American Sea-Level Canal and the Environmental History of Unbuilt Megaprojects .
 The famed French engineer of the Suez Canal, Ferdinand de Lesseps, destroyed his career and the lives of twenty-five thousand workers by insisting he could excavate across the mountainous Panamanian isthmus in the 1880s .
 The Americans succeeded in the early 1900s by taming the tropical insect-borne diseases and building an ingenious “bridge of water” with a dam and locks that lift ships eighty-five feet above sea level .
 World-changing Panama Canal appeared more and more obsolescent and vulnerable as ship size and military airpower increased . Operators dust off old plans for a means of connecting the seas without any impediments .
 Nuclear weapons designers thought they had discovered the key to unlocking the canal in the form of peaceful nuclear explosives . The U.S. government spent hundreds of millions of dollars and thirteen years considering the question of atomic excavation .
 The Atlantic-Pacific sea-level canal failed to enter the pantheon of monumental civil engineering works . The canal was a megaproject that failed to make the transition from idea to reality .
 Devoting historical attention to such a nonevent might seem counterproductive . Devoting history to such an event might be counterproductive, it might not be necessary .
 Scholarly studies of the nuclear canal have enriched our understanding of Cold War-era mentalities and geopolitical relations by addressing it in 1 z . Project Plowshare was the 1957-77 United States initiative to apply nuclear energy to earthmoving .
 The sea-level ship canal did not come to pass, as a proposal it served important political and scientific purposes during different eras . As a proposal, the canal was a proposal for the future .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, it enabled three U.S. presidents to address the Panama Canal Zone, the colonialistic enclave surrounding the original waterway . During the 1970s and 1980s, the canal zone offered new visions for dealing with the oil crisis .
 The plan provided opportunities for producing new knowledge to resolve the burning question of whether detonating buried thermonuclear bombs to excavate the “very deep cuts required by an interoceanic canal” was technically feasible .
 The U.S. government’s then lack of legal requirements for assessing environmental impacts, and narrow definition of the kinds of information, expertise, and authoritative capacity deemed most relevant to this task, generated high-profile debates within the scientific community over the project’�s non
 Officials ruled out nuclear construction methods in favor of sea-level canal . Concerns about how the canal might affect the biological integrity of the oceans still resonate today .
 The sea-level canal proposal performed different kinds of work for different historical actors, and vice versa, scholars say . In other words, as science and technology studies scholars would say, as . scholars say, the project performed different . kinds of . work .
 Dismissing it as a failed scheme unworthy of historical attention prevents us from considering the political, cultural, and epistemological processes that went into constructing the seaway as an innovative diplomatic solution, an exciting research opportunity, a superior hydrocarbon highway .
 These processes highlight themes of broader relevance to environmental history and the history of science and technology . The process highlights themes of environmental history .
 Controversy over the nuclear and nonnuclear phases of the Central American Sea-Level Canal 3 sea-level canal signify the disintegration of a powerful technocratic worldview that permeated U.S. environmental management .
 Deep Cut uses the Central American seaway proposal to address specific elements and consequences of this revolutionary shift . Deep Cut also addresses the changing roles of environmental expertise and state-sponsored preliminary environmental impact assessment .
 This book contributes to an emerging literature addressing the environmental, scientific, and political histories and legacies of unbuilt megaprojects . More broadly, this book explores the environmental and political legacies and environmental histories of unplanned mega-build projects .
 One of the first studies of ‘unbuiltism’ appeared over forty years ago . The study was published over 40 years ago in the United States .
 Unbuilt America is a collection of salvaged drawings and descriptions uncovered by two artists from architectural firms, libraries, and private collections in the 1970s .
 Only one other work dealing “exclusively with the unbuilt as a phenomenon” had ever appeared . Unbuilt America focuses on buildings and monuments, but the reasons for their lack of execution apply as well to larger-scale architectural, engineering, and landscape projects .
 Visions of the built environment fail to take form for many reasons, including lack of funding, bureaucratic inertia, technical infeasibility, and community resistance . Visions fail to form due to funding, bureaucracy, and technical problems .
 The book did not unleash a groundswell of academic or popular interest in unbuiltism, but its time has come . It's time for the book to be published, but it's come to an end, says author .
 Curators of the Never Built series hail from the world of architecture, but more deeply contextualized case studies of unrealized large-scale projects have emerged from across the environmental humanities .
 Cultural historian Kathryn Oberdeck coined the phrase ‘unbuilt environment’ in a 1005 essay about the value of archives as conservatories of unrealized urban visions . The phrase was coined by Oberdeck in an essay on archives of the city .
 Analysis of the private and public evidence of grandiose ventures that never came about can shed light on imperialist and modernist attitudes that continued to influence development thinking long afterward . Analysis of evidence sheds light on imperialism and modernism .
 Heffernan's pioneering studies of late nineteenth-century French colonial plans to transform the Sahara Desert into a vast inland sea and railway network that would fuel development of northern Africa .
 Atlantropa was a never-built Eurocentric macroengineering project with rich insights for the history of science, technology, and human-environment relations . The project was based on the idea of a macroeconomic macro-engineering project in the 1970s .
 German architect Herman Sorgel dammed the Mediterranean to generate hydroelectricity and lower the sea enough to create a new continent connecting Europe and Africa . From 1917 until his death in 1952, German architect sought to overcome European fears of energy shortages and cultural decline by damming the Mediterranean .
 In his vision, climate engineering would stave off desertification, thereby ensuring healthful conditions for Atlantropa’s imperialist European communities and industries, he writes .
 The megaproject’s scale, complexity, and cost undermined its feasibility, but its failure was not preordained . The project's scale, cost, and complexity undermined its . feasibility .
 Scott’s influential analysis uses cases such as the Soviet collectivization of agriculture and the Brazilian construction of a new capital city in the Amazon rainforest to demonstrate how high modernists mobilized science and technology to advance progress, yet wound up causing great ecological and social harm .
 The most notorious high-modernist projects have taken place in authoritarian societies . democratic governments have also promoted problematic large-scale agricultural, industrial, and urban development projects despite fierce local resistance .
 The St. Lawrence Seaway is the U.S.-Canadian transportation and hydroelectricity complex that submerged several villages and displaced 6,500 citizens . The Seaway was built in the 1960s and 1970s, when the Seaway began to be built .
 Historian Daniel Macfarlane uses the concept of “negotiated high modernism” to show how U.S. and Canadian officials strategically used the public planning process to The Central American Sea-Level Canal 5 overcome opposition from stakeholders .
 Plowshare officials convinced Congress that investing in PNE feasibility studies would reap huge dividends in the form of cost-effective transportation infrastructure, energy sources, medical breakthroughs and weather modification .
 PNE consisted of a thermonuclear device with a fission trigger with a trigger . The smaller the amount of harmful radionuclides released via the fission process and the deeper the device was buried, the less the radiation hazard .
 Placing a PNE too far underground would reduce its effectiveness for earthmoving purposes . Placing the PNE underground would also reduce the effectiveness of earthmoving . The PNE will be placed underground in a bid to keep it underground .
 Figuring out the optimal combinations of such variables as burial depth, percentage of vented radiation, and the number of explosives needed for a given goal required extensive testing .
 The Atomic Energy Commission conducted twenty-seven experimental explosions for Plowshare from 1961 to 1973 . The explosions were conducted at the Nevada Test Site .
 The Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 banned countries conducting atomic experiments from releasing radioactive debris across national borders . Each one required presidential permission and intensive calculating of political risks, especially in 1963 .
 Federal officials were not required to take what we would now call environmental costs into consideration, which helps explain why for them nuclear excavation appeared much less expensive .
 Teller and his allies argued that atomic excavation would save money and reduce the number of worker injuries and deaths caused by construction projects .
 Like many midcentury Americans, Plowshare’s sponsors in Congress and the executive branch held great faith in the power of science and technology to solve social and political problems .
 At the same time, U.S. decision makers operated in the context of checks and balances, says CNN's John Sutter .
 democratic governing systems provide opportunities for challenge and change . However imperfectly, unevenly, and inconsistently, they provide opportunities to challenge, change . Democracy provides opportunities for change, but imperfectly imperfectly and unevenly .
 Examining how proponents of Plowshare dealt with outsiders asking tough environmental and public health questions shines light on the evolving political role of scientific expertise and dissent vis-a-vis environmental impact assessment .
 Plowshare’s first proposed venture, Project Chariot, aimed to excavate a harbor in northwestern Alaska . The company's first proposed project was to dig into a harbor .
 Livermore’s scientist-administrators tried to exploit the Alaskan tundra for their own purposes, especially to sell the Central American sea-level canal and thereby keep the laboratory running . The United States observed a voluntary moratorium on nuclear weapons testing from 1958-61 .
 Teller and his Livermore associates sought to co-opt the opposition by sponsoring extensive bioenvironmental studies . Indigenous people, local biologists, and citizen conservationists voiced concerns about radiation hazards .
 Barry Commoner, the biologist-activist and originator of the famous quote, “The first law of ecology is that everything is related to everything else,” traced his ecological awakening to the insight that Arctic lichen would absorb radioactive fallout from the atmosphere and contaminate the
 The final official bioenvironmental report, which came out in 1966, four years after the AEC responded to the public uproar by canceling Chariot, has been hailed as a model for the first modern environmental impact statement .
 NEPA changed public works planning in the last three decades of the twentieth century in the U.S. and in other democratic nations .
 By the 1970s, knowledge of complex ecological consequences expanded and gained political legitimacy in democratic societies via laws like NEPA . Engineers and hydro-engineers could no longer exert the same levels of control as had their predecessors .
 Environmental management policies and practices shifted over the middle decades of the twentieth century from conquering nature to implementing less damaging forms of development . This provides another rationale for paying attention to unrealized macroengineering projects and debates they generated .
 Environmental historians have delineated several important controversial proposals beyond the realm of nuclear power that withered in the face of intense, sustained resistance . Toward this end, environmental historians have . .
 Recent studies of large-scale energy production and transportation plans that did not materialize during the 1960s and 1970s emphasize the skillful mobilization of scientific knowledge and new legal tactics by grassroots groups .
 Scripps Island was a planned underwater research facility . Environmentalist opposition and high costs also contributed to the demise of the island .
 The downfall of the oceanographic project shows how rapidly citizens have redefined the appropriate use of marine and coastal resources . It also shows changing attitudes toward the practice and goals of oceanography .
 Recent publications provide a rich foundation for rethinking unbuilt projects . Other recent publications provide an opportunity to rethink unbuilt structures .
 The Stikine region of northwestern Canada is a resource-rich landscape destined for development . Peyton Peyton shows how such failures reinforced rather than weakened perceptions of the region as a resource rich landscape . Peyton: The region has a long history of unsuccessful attempts to industrialize it .
 Previous unsuccessful attempts to mobilize the area’s resources on a grand scale continue to exert influence on contemporary controversies . Current stakeholders must reckon if they are to triumph in the latest round of debate, he says .
 Political, economic, military, technological, scientific, and environmental forces sometimes stymied high-modernist plans . Collectively, the disparate phases of the failed seaway endeavor demonstrate how convergences of unforeseen unforeseen converging forces were often toymied . The seaway project was
 The first chapter of part I sets the scene by providing an alternative “shadow history” of the Panama Canal creation story that foregrounds the role of the sea-level design in the long quest to link the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans .
 Alexander von Humboldt endorsed an interoceanic canal without obstructive locks in the 1850s . The most famous scientist of the century spent decades advocating for an artificial waterway .
 Arguments continued over whether to adopt the lock design that won out in the end . For two years after the U.S. government resumed digging in 1904, arguments continued .
 Despite the opening of the lock canal in 1914, problems predicted by the sea-level advocates soon began to materialize . Despite the triumphant opening, problems continued to occur .
 Chapters 2 and 3 address the growing technological obsolescence of the Panama Canal during the interwar years . They also address the Atomic Age rationales and techniques for excavating a new waterway . Chapters 3 and 4 address the increasing Panamanian resistance against U.S. control of
 The sea-level canal offered a means of driving new discussions over decolonizing the Canal Zone while maintaining U.S. hegemony in the Western Hemisphere . For Johnson and his two predecessors, the sea level canal offered .
 In intriguing ways, the seaway proposal functioned as an instrument of both technological imperialism and the rarer phenomenon of technological <t»A-imperialism . The seaway project functioned in intriguing ways .
 Focusing on civilian appointees of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission, rather than Teller and the Livermore physicists, opens new interpretive pathways on the Panatomic Canal endeavor .
 The commissioners' backgrounds included law, engineering, administration, and the military . They were enthusiastic about PNEs, but not blindly so. The commissioners were enthusiastic, but didn't blindly .
 Declassified meeting transcripts reveal flexibility with which the commissioners strove to complete their complicated mission . However, their declassified meeting transcripts show the flexibility of the commissioners' high-modernist tendencies .
 The Canal Study Commission navigated a difficult course set by Congress and the president to determine the proposed waterway’s nuclear feasibility and optimal location . Toward this end, chapter 4 examines how the canal study commission navigated .
 Commission's workload included overseeing the collection of reams of economic, military, and engineering data and analyses of the seaway’s feasibility . Commission was tasked with looking at the feasibility of a seaway .
 Chairman of the Nevada Test Site tried to persuade reluctant U.S. officials to allow PNE experiments to take place at Nevada Test Sites . At the same time, the chairman said the risk of violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was at risk .
 Commission chairman also led initiative to renegotiate Panama treaty with Panama . Seaway proposal played a large part in renegotiating the treaty .
 Multiple diplomatic contingencies affected the scientific and engineering field studies, and vice versa .
 Chapters 5 and 6 address how the commissioners dealt with scientific and political developments that destabilized the U.S. government’s high hopes for the proposed nuclear seaway . Chapters 4 and 5 address how they dealt with political and scientific developments . Chapter 6 addresses the political, scientific developments
 The engineering feasibility studies took place in the remote Darien portions of eastern Panama and northwestern Colombia . They entailed numerous diplomatic and technical difficulties .
 The research teams struggled to complete their work in the contexts of the tropical climate, which limited operations to the four-month dry season, and the Vietnam War, which diverted needed funds, equipment, and personnel .
 The high-modernist dream of plowsharing the Darien collapsed in a literal and political quagmire . High-modernists dream of sharing Darien fell into a political and literal mess . The Darien is now in a state of limbo .
 A second set of challenges unfolded in a much more public way, as biologists associated with the Smithsonian Institution and several universities called for a share of the engineering feasibility funds to address marine species exchange .
 The issue led to heated debates between biologists and engineers about the oceans’ biological integrity, and among scientists about whether the megaproject represented a research opportunity or environmental threat .
 Biologists cannot take credit for stopping the nuclear canal, but they did contribute to new understandings of the areas of expertise considered relevant for assessing the environmental risks of maritime infrastructure . Biologists are concerned about the risks associated with the development of the canal .
 An Alaskan senator convinced the president that a sea-level channel would facilitate the flow of North Slope oil to the East Coast, Caribbean, and Gulf Coast refineries .
 Carter confounded his environmentalist and diplomatic allies by insisting that the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty included a provision allowing the United States option for a new sea-level waterway . As discussed in chapter 7, Carter insisted on the 1977 Canal Treaty .
 The last-minute addition created new kinds of work for federal agencies required by NEPA to assess the sea-level canal’s likely environmental impacts . Federal agencies required to assess canal's likely environmental impact .
 The treaty clause also rallied environmental advocacy groups, whose influence had grown significantly during the so-called environmental decade inaugurated by Richard Nixon’s signing of the National Environmental Policy Act on January 1, 1970 .
 In this post-NEPA era, as addressed in chapter 8, the sea snake studies of the 1960s acquired a new political significance . In the post-NPA era as addressed by chapter 8 of the book, "Sea snake studies" have become a political issue . The book
 Both conservative opponents of Panama Canal Treaties and professionalized environmentalist organizations mobilized marine invasion ecology to discredit the seaway proposal . The Panama Canal Treaty was signed in 1953 .
 This phase of the sea-level canal controversy signified the dissolution of the technocratic worldview that had underpinned the Panatomic proposal in favor of more democratic and precautionary modes of environmental governance . The proposal was proposed by Panatomic in the 1970s .
 The book concludes with a brief discussion of how Japanese interests revived the seaway idea in the 1980s for importing hydrocarbons .
 By abrogating the 1903 accord, the 1977 canal treaties set the stage for a new diplomatic relationship . Panama transitioned over the course of two decades toward assuming full responsibility for managing the waterway .
 The Central American Sea-Level Canal 13 was modernized by building a wider lane of locks from 2007 to 2016 . The nation’s decision to modernize the canal drew in some ways on the ecological insights of the late 1960s and 1970s debates .
 The canal now features a water-saving mechanism that has so far precluded the need to pump in seawater, which, as biologists warned over four decades ago, would eliminate a crucial freshwater barrier to marine species exchange .
 In 2014, the Nicaraguan government announced that construction had already begun . The $40 billion concession was awarded to a Chinese business magnate eager to develop an alternative lock-based ship channel .
 A panel of international experts found the Nicaraguan government's response to protests was lacking . The government responded to the protests by green-lighting an environmental and social impact assessment .
 The country’s highest court dismissed the last environmentalist challenges in 2017, yet the project remains in limbo . The project is a likely consequence of the Chinese concessionaire's economic downfall and improved China-Panama relations .
 Like the Panama Canal expansion, the Nicaragua plan sheds light on how twenty-first-century Latin American nations weigh development priorities with post-NEPA concepts of statist environmental governance and public input procedures, especially in the context of growing power of Asian energy and maritime shipping interests .
 Tracing such developments, along with challenging entrenched assumptions about the inexorability of historical outcomes and notions of progress, is one of the most important jobs of the historian . Historians challenge entrenched assumptions that historical outcomes are inexorable .
 The sea-level canal '4' story offers a hopeful precedent for challenging narratives of inevitability . Environmental management, like nature itself, evolves along multiple, nonlinear paths and not necessarily toward progressive ends .
 Hundreds of books and articles have honored its visionary engineers, the enormous amounts of dirt removed, the acres of wetlands drained to control tropical diseases, and other superlatives that speak to the monumental transformation of the isthmus .
 Other important parts of the canal story have emerged in recent decades . The canal was built in the 1920s and 1930s . It was the first canal to be built on the banks of the Great Depression .
 Literature centers the working-class people who built the structure amid intense racial injustices, the communities swept aside to create the canal landscape, the maintenance issues that undermined the conquest-of-nature narrative .
 This chapter explores another aspect of the Panama Canal’s history that ebbed from public consciousness as the massive structure took shape . It explores the prolonged controversies over where to site it and how to design it . The Panama Canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The routes he identified in 1811 as most suitable drew attention not only during his long life but also during his life . He identified routes he believed were most suitable .
 Humboldt experienced frustration in his quest to mobilize resources for comprehensive isthmian surveys . He changed his mind about where and how the “water communication” should be built .
 His canal advocacy illustrates the contingent nature of megaproject planning . The canal project is one of the world's most ambitious mega-projects .
 A 190Z map of the Central American isthmus demonstrating 19 possible routes for an interoceanic canal . Humboldt addressed several of these routes during the first half of the nineteenth century . Several of the routes were proposed during the early 19th century .
 The chapter examines the alignment of political, economic, military, and technological forces in favor of the Panama route and against the sea-level design . The chapter then examines the post-Humboldtian alignment of economic, political, and military forces .
 This approach helps us appreciate the central Panamanian lock canal as the product of a specific coalition of stakeholders who seized the right opportunities at the right times, rather than as the expected outcome of strategic geography and U.S. technopolitical superiority .
 Panamanian isthmus became a global route for conveying Peruvian gold and silver to Atlantic ships during the sixteenth century . Those searching for a natural maritime passage had pondered creating an artificial one .
 The Spanish government developed a road-and Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 19 map . Eventually, the Spanish government had to develop a road and canalize .
 The routes investigated by the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Studies Commission . Canal studies Commission: Atlantic Pacific to Atlantic Ocean Canal .
 Humboldt achieved worldwide fame through popular accounts of his travels and studies of geography, geology, astronomy, meteorology, and ecology, among other fields . He became famous through his accounts and studies .
 A large inheritance enabled the thirty-year-old mining inspector to finance his own scientific expedition to the Americas from 1799-1804 . He convinced the king of Spain to issue him and his partner rare passports for his expedition .
 Humboldt’s access to maps, letters, and engineering reports in the archives of the Mexican viceroyalty and other Spanish territories provided crucial information about potential routes for a large artificial waterway . He did not visit any parts of the isthmus south of modern
 In the Political Essay, Humboldt described nine routes or "points" for cutting a canal . The political Essay was written by the German writer in 1807 .
 The route from the Caribbean to the Bay of Panama had ‘occupied every mind’ since Vasco Nunez de Balboa’s crossing in 1513 . Questions remained about the elevation of the cordilleras and whether the oceans on either side were of different levels .
 By that time, most of the Spanish Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 11 colonies in the Americas had gained emancipation . The governments of the newly independent nations spanning the isthmus were beginning to explore the prospects of canal construction .
 An isthmian waterway would revolutionize world trade by precluding the long voyages around Cape Horn and the Cape of Good Hope .
 Central American waterway as agent of globalization and Asia-Pacific transformation was prescient . Nevertheless, framing the Central American . waterway is prescient, framing it as an agent of . globalization and . Asia-pacific .
 The only concern Humboldt conveyed in public regarding the canal was the potential for military conflict . Only concern was that the canal could lead to military conflict in Germany .
 Humboldt returned yet again to the interoceanic transit issue in 1849’s Views of Nature . The views of Nature were published in the summer of that year .
 The discovery of gold in California in California had caused westward traffic to explode around Cape Horn and across Central America, especially in Panama .
 The difficulty of crossing the Panamanian landmass, though only fifty miles long, by canoe and mule reignited interest in more efficient forms of transportation . Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 2-3 is a series of works on the Panama Canal and Canal .
 In the last decade of his life, Humboldt’s hope for a Darien survey seemed on the verge of fulfillment . In the past 10 years, he had hoped for a survey of Darien .
 In 1854, fearing competition from British and French interests, the United States Navy launched the first Darien Exploring Expedition . The expedition was launched by the U.S. Navy .
 Popular accounts of the ninety-seven-day ordeal reified perceptions of the Darien as a dangerous wilderness inhabited only by remnants of Indigenous Guna who had survived Spain's genocidal wars .
 Tropical diseases and famine had also doomed an infamous 1698 colonization effort that bankrupted Scotland . Tropical diseases, famine and disease had doomed the colony .
 Seven expeditions received funds from funds from a Wall Street financier, sea-level canal enthusiast, and a canal concession holder named Frederick Kelley . The Darien Canal concession holder is a former concession holder .
 Kelley credited the writings of ‘the illustrious Humboldt’ and Admiral Robert FitzRoy, who had captained the famed Beagle voyage of Charles Darwin, with sparking his interest in the Darien routes . Kelley credited FitzRoy with sparking interest in Darien . Kelley:
 Not until the 1870s did surveyors return to southeastern Darien sites that had so interested naturalist in his final years .
 In 1869, a decade after Humboldt’s death, the French diplomat and entrepreneur Ferdinand de Lesseps oversaw the completion of a technological sensation . The Contingent World Wonder was completed in 1869 .
 The 12.0-mile-long Suez Canal joined the Mediterranean and Red Seas . It cut 4,300 miles off the voyage between the North Atlantic and northern Indian Ocean . The canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The canal project took ten years and the lives of thousands of workers, many of them enslaved . Funded by the sale of shares in the Suez Canal Company, the project took 10 years .
 The transformation of the desert isthmus into a moneymaking maritime highway cemented France’s reputation for cutting-edge civil engineering, and intensified interest in creating a similar bypass .
 Ulysses S Grant made the isthmian waterway the subject of his first address to Congress after assuming the United States presidency in March 1869 . During his tenure, seven state-sponsored expeditions conducted surveys that built on and refined Humboldt’s routes
 Humboldt was “somewhat misled” as to the actual height of the mountain range near Cupica Bay, the Pacific terminus of one of the Darien sites . For example, as one surveyor, Lieutenant Frederick Collins, tactfully noted, Humb
 The lake’s high elevation would require locks to lift and lower ships by as much as no feet . On the other hand, the high elevation of the lake would mean locks would need to be lowered by no more than a foot .
 Heavy rains magnified the tendency of the clay-streaked soil to collapse on itself . The mountains there were only a third as high as Humboldt had thought, but they were only one third higher than he had thought .
 Outbreak of malaria and yellow fever killed twenty-five thousand workers . Outbreak killed 25,000 people in Haiti .
 By 1889, de Lesseps’s project and career had already imploded . Carving a channel through rainforests and wetlands did not compare to digging in the Egyptian desert .
 U.S. canal fever remained strong in the late 1800s and early 1900s . Another French company tried to salvage the project by resuming work on a smaller scale from 1894 to 1904 .
 The 1890 publication of a book by a Naval War College history professor provided a justification for an Atlantic-Pacific link that transcended Humboldt’s focus on commercial exchange . The book was published in 1890 .
 Alfred Thayer Mahan’s tome The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660-1783 inspired politicians . The influence of sea power on history inspired politicians chastened by the nation's economic downturn and perceptions of the frontier's closure .
 Mahan argued that Americans must extend their military dominion over the oceans to protect and expand their commercial fortunes . He argued that Great Britain had become a world power via naval supremacy, maritime trade, and colonial network .
 Mahan calls for developing naval bases outside United States boundaries . Mahan called for developing bases outside U.S. boundaries. Mahan: "The United States needs to have a strong presence in the world"
 Spain ceded Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines to the U.S. in the Spanish-Cuban-American War of 1898 .
 It took sixty-six days to rush from San Francisco to the Cuban battlefront by way of Cape Horn . An isthmian shortcut would have shaved off eight thousand miles .
 Several political, economic, and technological forces converged in the half decade from 1898 to 1903 to make the U.S.-controlled Panama Canal a reality . The canal was the first to be opened in 1903 .
 As assistant secretary of the navy during the war, he had helped implement Mahanian goals . After becoming president in 1901, he lobbied hard for a canal in Panama .
 The House of Representatives voted for a bill specifying a Nicaraguan route, but the Senate voted against it . Key stakeholders seeking to build on the French project convinced the Senate otherwise . The House had voted for the bill but it was rejected .
 Congress passed a law authorizing the president to purchase the French syndicate’s assets and rights and build an isthmian canal . The law was contingent on the negotiation of a treaty with Nicaragua or Colombia . Panama had long been a province of French territory .
 The Colombian Senate objected to the ensuing U.S.-Colombia treaty on financial grounds . Well-connected insiders encouraged dissatisfied Panamanian elites to revolt .
 Roosevelt deployed battleships to the Caribbean Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 2-7 and Pacific coasts to prevent Colombian troops from suppressing the revolution . Roosevelt deployed the ships to prevent Colombia troops from fighting the revolution.
 No Panamanians took part in the ensuing treaty negotiation . The treaty was led by a French canal agent who benefited from the sale of his company’s assets for $40 million .
 A sea-level waterway would shorten transit times, but Roosevelt did not consider it worth adding too many years and safety risks to the construction process . Roosevelt said it was not worth adding years to the project .
 By sneaking in dynamite via the surrounding forest or blowing up a transiting ship, saboteurs could disable the canal for months .
 A seaway would cost more and take longer to build, the majority stressed that it would “endure for all time” no matter how large ships might become . Construction expenditures must be balanced against those of maintaining and defending a vulnerable locked waterway, they said .
 De Lesseps’s crews had managed to lower the summit from no feet to 193. feet above sea level . The summit had been no feet but is now 193 feet .
 Excavating all the way down, even using the latest technology, would take closer to fifteen years . The canal would take six years longer than a lock with a summit elevation of 85 feet .
 Even a sea-level canal, they argued, would be vulnerable to attack at its tidal-regulating structure . The device needed to account for the different maximum tidal ranges on either side of the isthmus .
 Pacific tides rise and fall twenty feet each day, whereas Caribbean tides move only two feet . Pacific tides move 20 feet a day, the Caribbean tides only 2 feet . Surveyors had quantified several decades previously .
 In a sea-level channel, depending on the time of day, the resulting current flows might compromise navigational safety . The current flows could compromise navigation safety, experts say .
 A tidal-regulating structure at the Pacific terminus would enable engineers to adjust the currents at a given moment to the desired velocity . But not if saboteurs took them out, they wouldn't be able to do so .
 Roosevelt’s question about the mechanics of conversion remained unanswered . He could not have agreed more with the board's minority members . Roosevelt's question about conversion remains unanswered .
 Sanitarians drained swaths of wetlands, installed drinking-water systems in the port cities of Colon and Panama, and sprayed hundreds of thousands of gallons of oil and larvicide . To control the insect-borne diseases that had killed so many of de Lesseps’s
 The 1.5-milelong Gatun Dam channeled the Chagres River into the world’s largest reservoir, Gatun Lake . Closer to the Atlantic side, the Dam was built to provide electricity and water for the canal's water and electricity .
 To move so much soil, crews from Barbados, Jamaica, and many other nations mobilized massive steam shovels and hydraulic rock crushers shipped from factories .
 Three pairs of Pittsburgh-forged locks were installed to lift ships 85 feet above sea level . The locks are each measuring no feet wide by 1,000 feet long . They also installed three pairs of locks to lift ship 85 feet .
 The ingenious “bridge of water” used fifty-two million gallons of fresh water from the Chagres for every transit . The bridge of water was used to transport water from every transit.
 The radical reshaping of central Panama’s human-dominated landscape was not an unavoidable byproduct of canal construction . Panama's canal construction is not a result of the canal project, it's a result .
 The U.S. has been heavily cultivated in the valley of Gatun Lake for more than three centuries . The lake was created in the early 1800s, but the area was heavily cultivated and heavily cultivated . The area was largely cleared in the late 1800s and early 1900s .
 Creating the massive bridge of water and its buffer zone required technological, scientific, and organizational expertise . The bridge and buffer zone were created with jingoistic flair .
 The image of him operating a steam shovel in a white linen suit became a powerful icon of the conquest of nature and other nations .
 Grade school United States history textbooks replicated such heroic representations throughout the twentieth century, reinforcing belief in the project’s inexorableness and righteousness among generations of Americans .
 Publicity regarding the Panama Canal played up its international commercial benefits and the munificent U.S. policy of keeping tolls low rather than trying to recoup the $400 million cost .
 Low tolls functioned as a subsidy for U.S. shippers moving goods from coast to coast . Of course, as later analyses revealed, low tolls were a subsidy .
 The elderly Mahan stressed the incalculable national security benefit of moving the U.S. naval battalion between oceans as needed . Mahan, not surprisingly, stressed the benefits of moving a battalion .
 He had expressed explicit concern about nations fighting to control such a conduit . More broadly, he rejected scientific racism and its allied institution, slavery .
 Despite being the world’s most famous scientist, he failed to convince officials to conduct comprehensive surveys of all the routes he had identified .
 Conducting the scientific reconnaissance work, let alone the large-scale engineering of the actual structure, required favorable political, economic, and technoscientific forces to coalesce at the right moments . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's largest-ever state of
 U.S. senator wrote in 1837 of the southern Atrato River valley . “Nature seems to have designed this for the passage.”
 Panama Canal Company initiated an ambitious expansion in 1939 . Canal Company is responsible for operating and maintaining the waterway . The Panama Canal was founded in 1903 .
 The project stalled in the midst of World War II, and by the time the fighting ended, larger locks no longer appeared a worthwhile investment . The project was abandoned in 1945 .
 Officials sought to bomb-proof the canal at the start of the Atomic Age . Dusting off old blueprints for a low-tech seaway made more sense .
 Decision makers balked when presented with the exorbitant quotes for converting the Panama Canal to sea level or excavating a new channel along one of the previous routes studied in the previous century . Decision makers also balked at the prospect of excavating new channels along a previous route .
 PNE designers worked to harness atomic energy to reshape the environment for the use and convenience of humankind . Rather than weaponizing atomic energy, PNE designed to use it for the future .
 Peaceful nuclear excavation bodes well for resolving two kinds of obsolescence facing the postwar Panama Canal, the technological and the geopolitical . The Panama Canal is a technological and geopolitical problem facing the post-war era .
 Violent demonstrations in 1947,1958, 1959, and 1964 attested to the unsustainability of the status quo . Previous anti-Yankee protests had led to a few concessions .
 By negotiating new agreements that separated the issues of military bases and the canal, the canal could be developed . A sea-level canal would require few people to operate and defend, the author says .
 Pitching a cheap nuclear-excavated seaway to another interested client, such as Colombia or Nicaragua, would provide a potent means of checking Panamanian resistance .
 This chapter examines the technological and diplomatic problems the first two generations of Panama Canal officials faced . This chapter brings the first twentieth-century phase of the sea-level canal proposal out of the historiographic shadows .
 Eisenhower and Kennedy sought to blunt the sharp edges of U.S. imperialism while maintaining control of a strategic region .
 Even as popular writers extolled the almost-completed Panama Canal as a wonder of the modern world, serious challenges remained to be solved . The canal was built in 1881, and the canal was completed in 1883 .
 Despite the immensity of the canal’s water source, the 163.5-square-mile Gatun Lake, it could not store enough water during droughts for the increasing traffic . The lake is the source of water for the canal .
 Gatun Dam cannot control all upstream deluges, forcing occasional canal closures . Nor could the Gatun dam control upstream deluge, forcing canal closures in the past .
 The Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty allowed the U.S. to expropriate land from Panama for canal maintenance and protection . The Madden Dam was built on the mountainous upper Chagres from 1931 . Confronting the Canal’s Obsolescence 35 FIG
 Sea-level canal advocates argued that their design would preclude dangerous blockages caused by landslides, ship collisions, or acts of sabotage .
 The resulting 22-square-mile Alajuela lake provided an additional freshwater supply for operating the locks and generating hydroelectricity . The resulting lake was created to provide a freshwater supply .
 Canal Zone officials flooded out more forests and people and expanded the dominion of Canal zone officials . It also flooded out people and forests .
 In 1929, Congress authorized feasibility studies to determine the cost of expanding the existing waterway and of building a second one in Nicaragua . The United States had signed a canal treaty with Nicaragua in 1914 .
 The original builders were aware that the Canal’s capacity would eventually require enlargement, but not so soon . As a PCC publication announced in June 1941, shortly after excavation began on the New Gatun Locks, “The original builders . were aware . that the canal
 Construction stopped in 1942, but officials focused on preparing for Pearl Harbor-style attack . Officials focused instead on stocking extra lock gates and building new defensive infrastructure .
 After the war, the atom bomb cast doubt on the viability of lock canals . Lock canals were built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 PCC personnel worked closely with the Army Corps of Engineers, who had played a key role in building the Panama Canal, to complete the report . The report, titled Isthmian Canal Studies — 1947, was published in 1947 .
 The investigation included a meta-analysis of historical surveys of thirty possible routes spanning Central America . Eight of those routes now appeared suited to sea-level excavation .
 The report also drew on new geological mapping and exploratory drilling work . Engineers used a half-mile-long hydraulic model to measure the effects of currents and tidal structures .
 The authors consulted with experts in soil mechanics, dynamics, and seismology to determine the effects of nuclear bombing on canal structures . Finally, the authors consulted .
 The 1947 engineering report painted a grim picture of the Panama Canal . In place of the triumphant portrait that had prevailed since the start of the century, the 1947 report was a grim portrait .
 The Gatun Dam would empty into the Caribbean, rendering the waterway unusable for one to two years . Once the dam breached, the canal would be closed for up to a year, leaving operators at the mercy of the rains .
 If hit with a nuclear weapon, another two years at least would be needed for radioactivity to dissipate . Another two years is needed if the radioactivity is dissipated in a nuclear strike .
 It would require special devices to regulate the tidal currents caused by the differences between the tides in the Pacific and Atlantic .
 Flood control dams and spillways would also be needed to control river inflows . Flood-control dams would be needed in order to control inflows of the rivers .
 The loss of the auxiliary structures would not close the canal for too long . Nevertheless, the loss of such auxiliary structures is not likely to be too soon . The canal will be closed for the first time ever .
 Even an atomic attack would shut it down for a matter of weeks rather than years, experts say . Even a nuclear bomb would shut down the nuclear plant for years rather than weeks .
 Converting the existing canal to sea level would take ten years . Removing one billion cubic yards of soil and rock using conventional construction equipment would take 10 years .
 President Harry Truman submitted the report without comment to Congress . The ensuing hearings privileged the testimony of atomic warfare specialists that no canal could be rendered bombproof .
 The development of air power and a two-ocean fleet had undermined the Mahanian rationale for an Atlantic-Pacific link . The navy had begun building aircraft carriers that exceeded the dimensions of the locks and narrow Culebra Cut .
 Jet planes, interstate highway, and dieselized railroads could now transport goods and people across the continental United States more quickly than ever . Jet planes and interstate highways could transport goods across the country more quickly .
 The voracious industrial expansion of California precluded the need to continue exporting its petroleum and other natural resources eastward . And the state's oil and natural resources were exported to the U.S.
 U.S. Air Force personnel interacting with Panamanians in Rio Salud, Colon, Panama, 1952 .
 The presence of thousands of U.S. civilians and soldiers in the Canal Zone sparked violent anti-United States protests in 1947,1958, 1959, and 1964 . The presence in Panama sparked anti-U.S.-Panamanian anti-American protests in the 1950s and
 Two Stanford political scientists called for internationalizing the waterway under the United Nations . The article was published in Foreign Affairs magazine in 1959 .
 Military and civilian transportation alternatives undermined U.S. interests in the canal . The increasing “toll in terms of Latin American resentment” exacted by the Canal Zone, the author says .
 The Zone’s fans celebrated it as a beautifully landscaped enclave of tropical suburbs . United States residents enjoyed subsidized housing, health care, other perks provided by Uncle Sam .
 U.S. officials made some concessions via supplemental treaties in 1936 and 1955 . United States had to make concessions via treaties between 1936 and 1956 .
 Eisenhower-Remon Treaty increased annuity to Panama to $1.93 million, transferred some zone lands, provided for a high bridge to be built across the canal, and guaranteed equal pay for Panamanian and United States employees in the Zone .
 Congress delayed implementing the changes, however, and the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty provisions granting United States control over the Zone remained in place . Congress delayed implementation of the changes .
 A momentous event in July 1956 drew unexpected attention to the Zone’s quasi-colonial status . The Zone is now known as one of the world's most populated areas .
 The Egyptian seizure and nationalization of the Suez Canal intensified U.S. concerns about maintaining control in Panama . Eisenhower administration revisited the seaway proposal as a technopolitical lever .
 Engineers had long since deemed locks necessary for the route through the high-level Lake Nicaragua . Engineers decided locks necessary after engineers deemed it necessary .
 During the late 1950s, the PCC, the House of Representatives Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, and other interested parties, continued to investigate the question of canal modernization .
 Despite its decline as a strategic asset, the waterway remained a useful conduit . The waterway remains a useful channel for the U.S.
 University students planted several dozen Panamanian flags in civilian spaces of the Canal Zone . University students surprised U.S. officials by planting the flags on May 1 .
 White Zonians dismissed the demonstration as a joke, but later in the month, riots broke out . The riots marked the second year in a row of lethal anti-U.S. protests in Panama .
 As gestures of goodwill, the outgoing Eisenhower administration issued an economic aid package and an order that the Panamanian flag be raised beside the Stars and Stripes at a conspicuous site in the Zone bordering Panama City .
 Concessions served only to encourage more acts of “irresponsible political extortion” by Panamanian radicals and Communist agitators . The concessions were made to Panama's government, the government says .
 PNEs would provide an economic boon to the construction industry and diplomatic option for decision makers facing transportation crises like the Suez closure . Nuclear scientists and engineers would have job security if the superpowers succeeded in negotiating treaties mandating disarmament, an important geopolitical development .
 Project Plowshare provided a rationale for the Livermore facility to continue operating while the U.S. observed a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing from November 1958 to September 1961 .
 Canals, harbors, reservoirs, roads, and other such products of ‘geographical engineering” could be quarried at a fraction of the cost of conventional explosives .
 The explosion is used not only to shatter the material, but also to eject it from the cut . The explosion also ejects the material from the open cut .
 Chariot involved a great deal of hubris and miscalculation on the part of the AEC from the project’s start in 1958 until its demise four years later . As discussed by several scholars, several scholars .
 Ecological and anthropological insights would help determine the optimal time of year to detonate the explosives so as to limit exposure to radiation .
 Ideally, the lucrative grants would also provide authoritative endorsements for the nuclear harbor by local scientists . Ideally, they would also include authoritative endorsements from local scientists.
 Alaskan research program represented a priceless opportunity to conduct a predetonation biological survey . John Wolfe is the founding director of the AEC’s new Environmental Sciences Division .
 At Plowshare’s second symposium in 1959, a former professor of botany emphasized the uniqueness of the Arctic ecosystem . At a time when most outsiders considered it a wasteland, the Arctic was considered a wasteland .
 Wolfe argued for applying Leopold’s ethical framework to the sea, long before most biologists expressed concern about oceanic health . Wolfe even argued for application of Leopolds' ethical framework . Wolfe argues for applying the ethical framework of the sea to the ocean .
 Wolfe concluded his Plowshare symposium presentation on an unexpected historical note . Wolfe concludes his presentation with an unexpected history lesson . Wolfe: "Plowshare is a great place to learn and learn from the plowshare community"
 The idea of preliminary biological surveys was nothing new, he argued . It underpinned the famous Lewis and Clark Expedition of the early 1800s, he said .
 President Thomas Jefferson had instructed Captain Meriwether Lewis to collect data on the natural history and Indigenous peoples of the Missouri and Columbia River basins . Thomas Jefferson acquired a vast landscape extending westward from the Mississippi River .
 Wolfe says Jefferson's scientific quest was applicable to the Alaska project . Wolfe conceded that the expedition achieved few of Jefferson’s scientific objectives . Wolfe deemed the expedition to Alaska successful .
 Report: Construction costs of nuclear excavation appeared very favorable . Economic analyses did not include estimates for acquiring land or securing treaty rights .
 The cheapest conventional option, of converting the existing canal to a six-hundred-foot-wide seaway, was $2.-3 billion . Three times as much as the least expensive nuclear sea-level canal, a thousand-foot wide channel to be blasted out .
 The $770 million project appeared feasible and safe, officials say . Thousands of residents were evacuated as a result of the project . The project will require precise meteorological conditions .
 i960 report investigated many aspects of Panama Canal’s long-term viability . i960 was authored by a group of engineers that included General Leslie Groves, former director of the Manhattan Project .
 Engineering consultants called for more research into isthmian sea-level canal routes and new conventional and nuclear methods of canal construction . The engineering consultants call for more .
 Until safe, cheap PNEs could be developed, they recommended making interim improvements to the existing, aging canal as soon as possible . The canal is currently being used to carry passengers and cargo .
 Rep. Flood considered the seaway idea an artifact of postwar hysteria over atomic attacks . Flood: Seaway idea was artifact of post-war hysteria . Flood said the idea was an artifact .
 He argued policy makers should resume the World War II-era expansion project . Now that the even more powerful hydrogen bomb had exposed “the underlying fallacies in the ‘security’ thesis for planning navigational projects, he said .
 John F Kennedy’s administration tried to dissuade President Roberto Chiari of Panama from broaching the subject of treaty reform . Chiari insisted the time had come for abrogating the 1903 pact . The treaty was signed in 1903 .
 The resulting report recommends deferring any decision on a sea-level canal for five years . The report also recommends delaying formal treaty negotiations affecting the existing waterway .
 Working group advised redirecting attention to the sea-level canal studies . Reinterpreting the 1903 treaty “to satisfy Panamanian aspirations which are reasonable and consistent with the basic interests of the U.S.”
 The State Department’s second-highest official, George Ball, issued two warnings to Kennedy . Ball issued the report to Kennedy, the report's author says . Ball also issued a warning to Kennedy that the U.S. should be aware of the report .
 Chiari’s government feared that the new school year would reignite leftist student activism . The timing was critical because Panama's academic year commenced in May .
 Nineteen sixty-two did not constitute the turning point Panamanian treaty reformers had hoped for, but it did result in major changes for Project Plowshare . The treaty was signed by Panama in November 1962 .
 The AEC had acquired the scientific data it sought, but not the concomitant political support . It had acquired scientific data, but the political support it needed, it said .
 The U.S. lifted the ban against testing nuclear weapons in 2010 . The ban was lifted during the same year that the United States lifted the test ban .
 Plowshare administrators wasted no time in conducting thermonuclear cratering experiments at the Nevada Test Site . The site is the site of the first nuclear test to take place in the 1970s .
 95 percent of radioactivity has been contained, AEC says . 95 percent radioactivity was contained within two hours of the shot .
 Elevated levels of iodine-131 soon appeared in milk supplies in Salt Lake City, Utah . Yet elevated levels were found in milk .
 AEC officials assured worried public health officials that everything would be okay once dairy farmers shifted their cows from fallout-contaminated pasture to dry feed . The AEC says everything will be okay when dairy farmers shift their cows .
 Over the next year, high-profile publicity reiterated the agency’s confidence in its ability to develop clean explosives for nuclear excavation .
 Representative Flood demanded an investigative commission independent of the PCC and Army Corps of Engineers . Flood advocated for an adapted version of the suspended third-locks expansion of 1939-42 . Flood called for an independent commission to maintain U.S. territorial rights in the Canal Zone . Flood also advocated
 A key potential user, the shipping industry, sought to keep tolls as low as possible . The shipping industry distrusted claims that a new sea-level waterway would remain as cheap to transit as the Panama Canal .
 Livermore laboratory and AEC had a strong stake in finding new projects as public support increased for nuclear arms control . Public support for arms control increased in the 1980s .
 By that time, U.S. and Soviet physicists had long since developed bombs that dwarfed the explosive power of the ones deployed against Japan .
 The experiment unleashed radioactive fallout over a much wider swath of the Pacific Ocean than expected . It sickened the members of a Japanese fishing boat, generating worldwide outrage . The experiment unleashed radioactive fallout and sickened a fishing boat .
 The U.S., UK and Soviet Union conducted nuclear tests in the 1960s and '90s . Nuclear tests released radioactive isotopes that made their way into human bodies .
 Campaigns to expose the public health effects of radioactive fallout helped drive the diplomatic efforts to decelerate the nuclear arms race during the late 1950s and early 1960s . Campaigns helped drive efforts to stop the arms race .
 The proposed test ban treaty posed an existential threat to PNE projects in smaller nations by banning cross-border releases of radionuclides . While allowing underground tests to continue, the proposed ban treaty was a threat to smaller nations .
 Under proposed treaty, excavation technology experiments could proceed under the proposed treaty . Future nuclear construction projects could take place as long as parties to the treaty agreed to amend it .
 In October 1963, the United States Senate ratified the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . It was a milestone for international arms control, Cold War diplomacy, and environmental health protection . The treaty was ratified in October 1963 .
 Final document, unlike earlier versions, included no exceptions for PNEs, not even on an experimental basis . But it upset advocates of geoengineering because the final document includes no exceptions . The final document was released on Monday .
 Cautious optimism prevailed that agreements could be worked out with the Soviets, who were pursuing their own PNE projects, to allow cratering shots to continue .
 The technical, economic, and military rationales for the sea-level canal appeared ripe for reanalysis . The canal was built in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Midcentury technological and economic innovations reduced U.S. reliance on the Panama Canal as a commercial and military conduit . Panama Canal Zone had become a critical locale for Latin American-focused surveillance, security, and defense infrastructure .
 postwar U.S. officials resisted making fundamental changes to the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1945 and signed by the United States .
 The Panama Canal was founded in 1881, when it was first opened in 1903 . The canal was built in the 1920s and is now under control of the Panama Canal System .
 The proposal for a sea-level canal, especially one constructed with the new technology of PNEs, appeared to address the technopolitical outdatedness of the Panama Canal .
 For Eisenhower and Kennedy, the seaway idea offered a background kind of diplomatic leverage to placate Panamanian dissent indefinitely . For Kennedy and Eisenhower, the idea offered symbolic concessions to appease Panamanians .
 The proposal bought time for Plowshare scientists and engineers to develop safer explosives and build greater public trust . It bought time to improve diplomatic relations with Panama without provoking the many Americans who considered the Canal Zone their own .
 In hindsight, each of these endeavors was riddled with unsustainable, contradictory premises as the Canal Zone system itself . The Canal Zone is as much as the canal system itself.
 The nuclear seaway of the future is a project designed to imbue the Panamanian landscape with multiple forms of modernity . The project was designed to create a 'multimensionary landscape'
 Four days of anti-U.S. violence took place across Panama . The United States is accused of firing on citizens of their host country .
 Panama’s president broke diplomatic ties and refused to resume them without an agreement to abrogate the 1903 accord that granted the northern colossus perpetual control of the waterway and its surrounding zone . Panama is fed up with delays over treaty reform and eyeing an uphill election campaign for his
 President Barack Obama knew the status quo could not endure in the U.S. He was not about to be bullied, but he knew it was wrong .
 Lyndon B Johnson assumed office following the tragic assassination of Kennedy on November 21, 1963 . He assumed office after Kennedy's assassination .
 Plowshare and State Department officials had met to discuss how the nuclear sea-level canal proposal could remain viable in the context of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was signed by Kennedy a month earlier .
 The January Flag Riots, as they became known, led Johnson to resume secret discussions over the political benefits of building a nuclear canal on the cheap in either Panama or another nation .
 He sought to defuse Panamanian demands for treaty reform until after the November 1964 U.S. presidential election . He sought the delay until after November 1964 United States election .
 Johnson had to tread a fine line between managing dissent among frustrated Panamanians and the demands of anticommunist U.S. interests .
 Johnson masterfully used the proposal to contain foreign and domestic opposition during the pivotal year following the Flag Riots . The sea-level canal provided the ideal venue for doing so .
 Permeating these two developments was an intriguing degree of what could be called technological anti-imperialism . The U.S. has been in touch with the world's most powerful state of mind for decades .
 Johnson harnessed the disparate economic, military, and political forces favoring a modern new waterway to nudge forward the cause of Panamanian sovereignty over the Canal Zone .
 Johnson’s two predecessors, Eisenhower and Kennedy, viewed the sea-level canal proposal as a means of dismantling the problematic Canal Zone . Johnson worked to get the feasibility studies going in a much timelier manner .
 Johnson did not employ delay tactics, nor that his vision of a colony-free canal lacked bias . That is not to say that he did not use delay tactics .
 The idea that a simplified seaway would enable its owners to dispense with highly skilled personnel is patronizing . Few if any Panamanians could be trusted or trained to operate complex infrastructure, one of the many points of contention .
 Administration sought to reduce Panamanian leverage over treaty negotiations by calling for the investigation of sea-level canal routes in other countries besides Panama .
 Despite its anticolonialist components, the seaway proposal undermined principles of equity and sovereignty in other ways . The seaway plan was proposed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Johnson treaty negotiators sought separate pacts governing the proposed new seaway and the existing military bases .
 The progressive goal of recognizing Panama’s full sovereignty over its lands via a new sea-level canal treaty must be considered in the context of contemporaneous foreign policy initiatives that exuded technological arrogance .
 Johnson officials funded a secret experimental program to control the weather in India and Pakistan for food production and drought mitigation . The program was funded by Johnson officials to control weather in both countries .
 Much more famously and disastrously, the administration escalated the anticommunist war in Vietnam . Despite intelligence assessments that superior firepower could not overcome the enemy’s resolve .
 Johnson expanded his predecessor’s program of chemical herbicidal warfare . Johnson also expanded his predecessors’ program of . chemical herbicide warfare .
 Johnson embraced science and technology as diplomatic instruments to control and reengineer the physical environment and less technologically advanced nations .
 The major architects of the Vietnam War also championed the nuclear Central American canal . It is no mere coincidence that McNamara and Bundy championed the canal . McNamara, Bundy, Rostow, and Rostow also championed it .
 Anti-Yankee tensions intensified in Panama in 1963 during the U.S. Congress debated the terms of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was signed in 1963 .
 The oligarchic Chiari renewed his public demands for a new treaty . The United States government would commit only to constructing new flagpoles in the Zone to fly the Panamanian standard .
 The Soviets deployed ballistic missiles to Cuba following the failed 1961 U.S. plan to overthrow Fidel Castro . The Soviets had deployed missiles following a failed 1961 United States .
 Balboa High School in Panama City, Panama, had only one flagpole . School leaders took down the banner to avoid violating the order .
 Several Zonian teenagers raised a makeshift replacement on the night ofjanuary 7-8,1964 .
 Panamanian students marched into the Zone on the ninth to raise their own flag, a bloodstained relic of a 1947 riot . Word spread, and outraged Panamanians marched to raise the flag .
 Radio broadcasts of the incident sparked uprisings in Panama City and Colon . Radio broadcasts led to protests in Panama and Panama City . The incident was broadcast on radio broadcasts from Panama .
 In the violence that consumed the country on the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, twenty-one Panamanians and four U.S. soldiers died .
 The United States government has blindly allowed the Canal Zone to turn into a pretty fair imitation of a colony, according to Life magazine . Life magazine editorial in glossy Life magazine said the U.S. government has "unblindly allowed" the Canal zone to turn .
 56 percent of Americans demand that their government make no concessions to Panama . 56 percent want the government to stop negotiating with Panama . Johnson administration officials worked to contain the damage .
 The day after the riots ended, Johnson met with several high-level officials including Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .
 Mann argued for using the threat of building a sea-level canal in Colombia or Nicaragua as a means of leverage with Panama so as to develop a new treaty acceptable to the United States Senate . Mann was a controversial diplomat whom Johnson had appointed .
 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 posed a daunting obstacle . Johnson and officials from the State and Defense Departments and Atomic Energy Commission agreed to the treaty .
 Treaty diluted the threat to Panama of building a nuclear canal in another country . By prohibiting cross-border releases of radioactive debris, the treaty diluted the risk to Panama . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 He suggested advance surveying work could begin while negotiators obtained test ban treaty exemption for peaceful nuclear excavation in smaller countries .
 “The political opposition may well push for the site surveys themselves. Otherwise, if further delays ensued, “the political opposition will push for a site survey themselves.” The site surveys are due to take place in 2015 .
 The Flag Riots stimulated bipartisan congressional support for nuclear canal excavation . The AEC pressed the White House for permission to resume relevant work at the Nevada Test Site .
 It had been nineteen months since the first and last excavation experiment, Project Sedan . Other Plowshare detonations oriented toward device development had taken place in the meantime .
 Project Sulky involved a blast of only ninety-two tons . In contrast to the hundred-kiloton Sedan device that left an enormous crater on the desert floor, the next proposed excavation test would involve only a small blast . The project Sulky would be the first of its kind
 The explosion could still vent enough radionuclides to be detected in Canada or Mexico . The explosion sparked internal debate about the risks of violating the test ban treaty . But concerns raised that the explosion might still vent radionucleides .
 The administration decided in February 1964 to postpone the project until the following winter .
 The intervening months would provide more time to continue developing less-contaminating explosives and thereby improve the prospects of nondetection, the authors say .
 By then, the grazing season and the presidential election would have also passed, thereby reducing the test’s literal and figurative fallout .
 The long-delayed congressional bills for sea-level canal feasibility studies got a new round of hearings in March 1964 . The bill was passed by Congress in April 1964 .
 Cabinet officials framed the nuclear seaway as the solution to long-standing problems encompassing the technological, economic, and political realms . The seaway would be the solution for long-term problems .
 Vance reiterated the postwar history of calls for canal modernization . He explained ‘the current difficulties” between the two nations as a function of the lock waterway’s complexity and concomitant need of a large U.S. labor force . Vance: "The current difficulties
 Anderson attributed his acceptability to the goodwill he had established among Panama’s ruling elite . Anderson led the 1959 effort to organize the Inter-American Development Bank . The Panamanian officials with whom Johnson administration officials had conferred did not want a career diplomat .
 Johnson's unrealistic assumption that treaty negotiations could be completed within two to three months, Anderson says . The treaty negotiations stretched over two-and-a-half years over which they stretched .
 Johnson expressed concern about how the Panama Canal related to one of his signature initiatives, the space program . Some of the enormous rocket parts had to be transported via barge from California to launch site .
 Anderson agreed to serve as the special representative for U.S.-Panama relations in exchange for access to the president and permission to remain based in Manhattan . Johnson established two new entities to formulate and execute United States policy in Panama .
 Canal Zone police and U.S. Army personnel used disturbingly excessive force at some points, but that use of force per se was justified to quell riots . The jurists concluded that Canal Zone Police and United States Army personnel .
 The 25 percent tropical hardship differential paid to U.S. citizen employees in the Canal Zone . The perk was a perk that attracted attention in the 1970s .
 The salary boost had been deemed necessary to attract northern whites in the early 1900s . Malaria and yellow fever posed dangerous threats to foreigners lacking immunity . It was deemed necessary in the 1930s to attract northerners .
 Sanitary engineering, chemical pesticides, air conditioning, and other technological advances had long since reduced the hazards of tropical living . But sanitary engineering and chemical pesticides have since reduced tropical living in tropical areas .
 The fiftieth anniversary of the opening of the waterway transpired with “quiet and restrained ceremonies which were not offensive to Panama,” as the secretary of defense assured the president .
 The Zone leadership overlooked other requested changes, such as having ships transiting the canal fly the Panamanian flag . Other requested changes include making Spanish an official language, and using the host country’s postage stamps .
 An agreement for a new seaway in Panama “would put to rest many of the emotional issues which now plague our relations.’s relations, he said .
 A new treaty for a simplified waterway requiring fewer U.S. employees would be required to leave by a fixed date, even if it were far in the future . The treaty is key for improving relations with Panama over the short and long terms .
 A new feasibility study authorization bill that had emerged from March hearings had passed the Senate . The bill is scheduled for an upcoming House vote .
 A new technical assessment of the nuclear-excavated canal is the first since i960 . It's the first to be conducted by the U.S. government since the i960 era .
 Cutting through the i,ioo-foot-high Continental Divide would require an explosion of some 35 megatons . While the average yield per detonation would be approximately 10 megatonons, cutting through the Divide would be 35 megatonon-wide .
 By comparison, the most powerful nuclear device ever tested by the U.S. was the 1954 Castle Bravo blast that released radioactive fallout over a hundred-mile swath of the Pacific Ocean . Castle Bravo exploded 15 megatons in 1954 .
 The other proposed nuclear path between the seas crossed Colombia’s portion of the Darien isthmus via the Atrato and Truando Rivers . The proposed path would cross Colombia's portion of Darien .
 Humboldt was fascinated by the route that had intrigued him in the 1850s . Designated Route 25, it closely paralleled the route . Route 25 was named Route 25 .
 The Panama route would require approximately $307 million for the Panama route and $315 million for Colombia one . The Colombia route would need approximately $315million for the Colombia route .
 The army engineers and Plowshare scientists called for the accumulation and analysis of much more data pertaining to the topography, geology, meteorology, and hydrology, coastal hydrography, seismology, ecology, demography, and economic resources of the two regions .
 The Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission was authorized by Congress in September 1964 . The commission is responsible for overseeing the research program .
 Flag Riots had expedited long-standing calls for action regarding the obsolescing canal . Rather, they had been called to address the issue of obsolesced canal .
 His home state of Washington was the site of the Hanford facility that produced the plutonium for the nation’s nuclear weapons . Hanford is the site where the plutonium was used to make the weapons .
 They have been talking about this for a long time, hoping that new nuclear technology can be put to some good uses . They hope it can be used in the future of the nuclear industry .
 Representative Flood ensured that neither cabinet members nor civil servants would oversee the feasibility studies . Flood did succeed in ensuring that no cabinet members or civil servants were involved in the study .
 The final bill authorized the president to appoint five private citizens without congressional consent . However, the final bill authorizes the appointment of private citizens to the president without congressional approval .
 Wilson Jr. Wilson Jr., Lieutenant Colonel Robert W McBride, and Senator Warren G Magnuson discussing the use of nuclear charges to excavate a second Central American canal, March iz, 1964 . Wilson, Lieutenant Colonel McBride and Senator. Warren G. Magnuson .
 Johnson’s Panama-based policy review committee met days later to develop guidelines for the treaty renegotiations . The committee met in Panama to develop the guidelines .
 Mann worked with State and Defense Department personnel to develop framework for three new treaties . Mann: "By December 1, Mann had developed framework for 3 new treaties"
 Sea-level canal accord would give the U.S. the right to conduct the needed surveys and to construct the new waterway, but not to operate and maintain it . That would be the job of an international commission, and sovereignty over the seaway would be held by the country
 Bundy: Abrogating the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty would secure U.S. canal rights for the time being . Bundy: Undercutting antiAmericanism on the isthmus would be undercutting anti-Americanism .
 Bundy urged the president to make a strong statement later in December regarding the sea-level canal treaty negotiations . Bundy: President Obama should make strong statement in December on the treaty . Bundy urges Obama to take action on the issue of the treaty treaty .
 To hammer out the language, the cabinet would meet the next day at the White House .
 Former presidents Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower were among VIPs whose approval Johnson had secured in advance .
 Johnson outlined the technological, economic, military, and political reasons for changing course . “Such a canal will be more modern, more economical, and will be far easier to defend,” he said .
 Congress had authorized to study four possible routes in Panama, Colombia, and Nicaragua . The U.S. would be well-equipped to modernize maritime transportation . The $17 million project would be funded by Congress .
 It is an age of friendly partnership among the nations concerned with the traffic between the oceans . It is a friendly partnership .
 The Flag Riots helped transform the nuclear seaway idea from a United States presidential delaying tactic into a serious diplomatic instrument for resolving tensions caused by the 1903 treaty between the United States and Panama . Mobilizing for Panama Canal II 63 Conclusion: Panama canal II 63. 63 Conclusion .
 The sea-level canal’s economic, defense, and political rationales each proved insufficient to justify the project . The project was built in the 1960s and 1970s . The canal was the first to be built under water rights in the world .
 The unprecedented scale of anti-U.S. violence in January 1964 accentuated the value of merging the three factors . The U.N. decision makers of the 1964 decision made a decision to merge the three elements .
 Technical advances in PNEs further strengthened the case for committing significant scientific and diplomatic attention to the possible routes the megaproject might take .
 An immense amount of scientific, engineering, and diplomatic groundwork remained before the problems produced by the 1903 treaty could ever go away . The treaty was signed in 1903, but the treaty was never ratified .
 President Johnson used the sealevel canal idea to his advantage, like his predecessors . It is true that, like others, he used the idea to use it to advantage .
 Framing the proposal as a cynical ploy or high-modernist boondoggle limits our understanding of how it functioned as a complex, qualified instrument of technological anti-imperialism . Framing it as cynical ploy is not a good idea, but a good example of anti-
 While it did serve to buy time and distract angry stakeholders, that does not mean the proposal was fictitious . The proposal was not fictitious, but it was meant to be a distraction .
 Johnson’s advocacy of the nuclear canal set in motion a process that would have important, unpredictable side effects pertaining to politics, science, technology, and the environment . Whether or not he believed it would ever come to fruition, Johnson's advocacy for the canal set the motion in motion
 In fact, the nuclear seaway resembled other Johnson administration initiatives to mobilize science and technology for diplomatic ends in the so-called Third World, from weather modification in India and Pakistan .
 The Panatomic Canal embodied the broader Cold War ethos of faith in science and technology that “encouraged bold environmental interventions” to reshape and optimize the landscape for human use, the author says .
 Commission has been criticized for wasting millions of dollars, minimizing ecological risks, and rubberstamping a foregone conclusion . Commission's final report in 1970 recommended conventional rather than nuclear construction .
 In the capitalist West, democratic institutions vitiated the ability of planners to impose their absolute visions of order upon the land and people . In the West, planners can impose an absolute vision of order on the land, people .
 North American megaprojects such as hydroelectric dams and urban renewal did feature top-down planning and other high-modernist hallmarks . Hydroelectric dams, urban renewal projects were among the most complex projects in North America .
 The CSC operated in the context of a presidential administration that privileged technological solutions to political problems and disdained criticism thereof, as exemplified by the near-simultaneous escalation of chemical herbicidal warfare in Vietnam .
 Major architects of the war in Vietnam were the greatest proponents of the nuclear sea-level canal, or at least of renegotiating relations with Panama in relation to it .
 After the Flag Riots, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy promoted the historic foreign policy change regarding the U.S.-Panama treaty .
 The sea-level canal held the key to modernizing the technological and political Panama Canal complex . Panama Canal is the world's largest and largest canal system .
 Under such circumstances, it was not at all inevitable that the commission would advise against nuclear construction of a new canal . The commission will advise against the construction of the canal .
 Congress passed NEPA in December 1969, after several high-profile cases of pollution focused public attention on the negative environmental consequences of modern industrial society . NEPA was passed by Congress in 1969 .
 NEPA sought to instill environmental values into federal megaproject decision-making . NEPA required agencies to conduct preliminary environmental impact studies .
 The law provided opportunities for public input and empowered citizens to challenge technocratic projects via the courts . The law also provided opportunities to public input, according to the law .
 Rachel Carson’s best-selling 1962 book Silent Spring argued that “the authoritarian temporarily entrusted with power” had no right to make unilateral decisions regarding the use of technologies affecting society . Such developments traced in part to the revolutionary argument of Silent Spring, Rachel Carson .
 The commissioners and their executive director showed no awareness of Carson’s book . They derided environmentalism as a passing fad, and derided it as a fad .
 Pressure from marine scientists forced them to consider how broadly they should define the scope of the environmental data needed to determine the sea-level canal’s engineering feasibility .
 The commission was formed in 1968 to December 1970 . It was the second half of its tenure, from early 1968 to early 1970 .
 This chapter examines how the CSC and its consultants engaged in multiple sets of negotiations in the service of the nuclear sea-level canal endeavor during its first two-and-a-half years, from the spring of 1965 to late 1967 .
 The commission's scrapbooks and declassified meeting transcripts shine light on an evolving approach to environmental impact assessment in the pre-NEPA era . By divulging the twists and turns of their deliberations, the commission’s scrapbooks reveal an evolution of the approach .
 The concept of “negotiated high modernism” refers to consultations and compromises that democratic governments must engage in to bring unpopular megaprojects to fruition . The CSC coped with the challenges of rendering a responsible decision .
 The commission navigated those rough waters with a degree of flexibility that was remarkable for large-scale technocratic planners of the era . It navigated the rough waters of the 1990s with a level of flexibility .
 Architects and implementers of the Aswan Dam, midcentury Manhattan, and the chemical war in Vietnam demonstrated little if any consideration of the ecological and social toll . To take but three contemporary examples, the architects and implementors of the . Aswan . Dam, . midcentury . Manhattan
 President Johnson’s canal study group deserve more attention for how they reconciled their faith in the promise of nuclear excavation with external demands to address its nonfinancial costs .
 Congress established the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission near the end of the 1964 session . Eight months later, the Flag Riots exposed the political unsustainability of the U.S.-run Panama Canal Zone .
 The law authorized the commander-inchief to appoint “five men from private life” to conduct an investigation of enormous scope to determine where and how to build an isthmian sea-level canal .
 The Democratic Pennsylvania congressman had been defending the sovereignty of the United States over the Canal Zone since the 1958 riots . He had worked to ensure that the CSC members would not be the government officials desired by Johnson .
 Flood alleges a cover-up by President Nixon for the delay in appointing officials . Flood also alleges that the president had visited Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Colombia and Panama in January 1965 to discuss canal options .
 Flood reminded his colleagues of why Theodore Roosevelt had rejected the sea-level arguments back in 1906 . Flood was convinced the Panama Canal Company’s 1947 recommendation to convert the present waterway to sea level, and that nuclear routes were propagandistic distractions .
 Representative Leonor Sullivan confided that she would not be able to slip a requested change through by simply listing it on the committee calendar . Sullivan: At one pivotal point, Representative Sullivan told her that she couldn't slip a request through .
 Johnson selected Robert B Anderson, the special representative for U.S.-Panama relations, as CSC chair . To keep treaty negotiations and seaway feasibility studies interlinked, Johnson selected Anderson as chair .
 Raymond A Hill was a renowned water resources expert and lead author of a 1938 compact that addressed long-standing water rights disputes over the Rio Grande . Hill was the author of the 1938 compact .
 Worked in Panama since 1961 as military assistant for canal affairs to the secretary of the army .
 Earlier in his career, he also completed a three-year program in nuclear energy and weapons .
 Sheffey, then in his midforties, retired from the military to take on what he considered a prestigious assignment as the study commission’s executive director . The study commission's executive director is now retired .
 The Army Corps of Engineers had strong links to the atomic energy establishment . Its postwar mandate emphasized flood control, navigation works, and other aspects of water resources development .
 The corps had played a key role in organizing the Manhattan Project, and in 1962 established the Nuclear Cratering Group at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory .
 Like the Livermore Plowshare physicists, engineers sought to reshape the landscape for utilitarian purposes . Like the engineers, they reshaped the landscape in a bid to make it more utilitarian .
 Plowshare-Corps partnership was mutually beneficial . The corps’s influence in Congress is a function of its pork barrel water projects .
 The CSC designated an Army Corps officer as its official engineering agent . The Army Corps was designated as the CSC's engineer agent .
 Livermore physicists and Nuclear Cratering Group engineers had been working on the sea-level canal project for years . The canal study commissioners had much of their work cut out .
 Good maps, let alone subsurface geophysical data, remained elusive . Yet good maps and subsurge data remain elusive .
 To do it in less than a minute with a single explosion staggers the imagination. To do this in under a minute, it's a miracle, it can be done in under 30 seconds .
 The atomic seaway would take ten to thirteen years to complete, Seaborg, Johnson, and Kelly testified before Congress in January 1965 . Field surveys and nuclear cratering tests should start as soon as possible, they testified .
 Anderson Commission did not begin meeting until the late spring, by which time it was already behind schedule . Yet the Anderson Commission began meeting in late spring . Anderson Commission was already meeting behind schedule when it began .
 Due to the original three-year congressional limit and the short tropical dry season, Corps of Engineers representatives had outlined an ambitious schedule of data collection and site surveys . The original congressional limit was three years .
 The final year of 1967-68 would be reserved for evaluating all the data to determine the most feasible, cost-effective channel designs, as well as the projected schedule of nuclear detonations and area evacuations .
 Plowshare scientists and technicians would be conducting six experiments at the Nevada Test Site to see how various configurations of PNEs operated in nature rather than in theory . If all went according to plan, six experiments would be conducted at the site .
 Commission members harbored deep concerns about the costs posed by the field studies . Not only was time not on their side but also, from the start, they had deep concerns over the costs of the studies . Commission members were concerned about the cost of field studies.
 The $17. million cost of the project would be $2 million . Infrastructural costs alone would be the largest in the world .
 Congress resisted releasing funds before the survey agreements with Panama and Colombia had been inked, making for yet more delays and logistical headaches . Ideally, the equipment would be set up prior to the dry season of January 1, 1966 .
 Commission has no control over radioactive debris depositing radioactive debris in adjacent nations . The test ban treaty restriction against depositing nuclear material in adjacent countries is also a problem .
 Despite the commissioners’ enthusiasm for PNEs, they knew there would be no point in conducting any sea-level canal studies . The administration had no intention of spending political capital to amend the protocol to allow peaceful nuclear experiments .
 Kelly maintained that the Russian language text of the treaty provided for a more liberal interpretation of the ban on radiation outside national borders . Kelly said every test shot would release some radiation, which would not pose a serious health risk anyway .
 Plowshare was viewed as a threat to nuclear weapons nonproliferation initiatives . State Department, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency viewed Plowsharing as a nonpro-nuclear weapons non-pro-nuke initiative .
 The third CSC meeting, in July 1965, featured a heated discussion among representatives of the AEC and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
 From the start, the CSC and its AEC partners recognized the importance of researching isthmian food chains and ecosystems to determine how their human users would be affected by the radiation released by PNEs . The CSC said it was important to research the impact of PNE
 The AEC provided a major source of support for ecosystem ecologists during the Cold War . Even as the AEC assured the public that radioactive fallout carried minimal health risks, the agency provided major support for ecology .
 Chairman Anderson’s deputy treaty negotiator is chairman of the board of directors . Chairman Anderson's deputy negotiator is the chairman's deputy treaty negotiators .
 John N Irwin II, a fellow Republican and Manhattan-based lawyer, attended the CSC meetings when his boss’s busy schedule kept him away . Irwin II attended the meetings with his boss .
 Irwin’s job was to brief the commission on the latest developments in the U.S.-Panama treaty talks . He also bugged them about an interest that occupied his leisure time . Irwin's job: Briefing the commission about the treaty talks was to inform them of the
 The essay addressed the “interesting biological problems” regarding the marine consequences of building a sea-level canal . The essay addresses the ‘interesting biological . problems’
 A sea-level channel would join the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for the first time since the rise of the isthmian land bridge during the late Pliocene . Unlike the existing lock canal, which contained a large freshwater reservoir that prevented most marine species from transiting .
 The Battelle Memorial Institute planned to collect terrestrial baseline data as well as oceanographic currents, temperature gradients, and marine life on either side of the isthmus . The private research organization won the AEC’s bioenvironmental contract .
 When the Chariot project began, an agreement between the State Department and AEC had precluded the latter from taking a proactive stance . “We got into trouble because that is all we could do, answer questions,” he said .
 Other members of the atomic energy establishment echoed Kelly’s attitude about the proper way to mold public opinion . Kelly: "I don’t want to mold my public opinion. I’m not going to do that."
 Both of Alaska’s senators had supported Project Chariot and thus the plan should have proceeded . As the former AEC commissioner and Nobel prizewinning physical chemist Willard Libby told a journalist in 1966, .
 "Our cautiousness gave the lie to our reassurances about fallout, and ruined the project," says the author . "We were very cautious, but our cautiousness was wrong," she says .
 Despite Flood’s allegation that the commission would recommend converting the existing canal to sea level, the CSC invested little in that option . The Panama Canal Company had advised in 1947 that the canal should be built on sea level .
 At their seventh meeting, in November 1965, they grilled National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy about the administration’s commitment to the atomic seaway . Bundy was the president's national security adviser .
 Commissioner Hill pressed Bundy about whether the sea-level canal decision would ultimately come down to economics or politics . Commissioner Hill said the decision will ultimately be made on whether to build the canal . Bundy said it would be a matter of politics or economics .
 Bundy hedged that a new waterway appeared to be on the horizon due to its technological and diplomatic superiority over the outdated existing channel . Bundy said it was by no means a fait accompli. Bundy said a new channel would be a "faire accompli"
 The chair ordered the ensuing discussion off the record, a sign of the topic’s immense sensitivity . The chair of the committee ordered the discussion to be kept off-the-record .
 Bundy addressed one last question on the record, about how the commission should interpret the word feasibility as used in the authorizing legislation . Bundy: "The word feasibility" in the legislation is considered feasibility . Bundy also addressed a question about the language feasibility in the bill .
 Seaborg insisted at a 1966 CSC meeting that by consolidating the remaining nuclear excavation experiments, Plowshare personnel could answer the feasibility question by the June 30, 1968 deadline .
 Navigating High Modernism 79: Budget cuts, political and meteorological impediments loomed large . Navigating high modernism with budgets being cut left and right .
 AEC had planned to conduct six shots starting with the Cabriolet experiment at the Nevada Test Site that spring . The AEC planned to carry out six shots of the vehicle .
 The timing of each test was essential to avoid potential releases of radioactive fallout during the grazing season . The timing was essential, as was to avoid release of radioactive material during grazing season.
 Johnson postponed the Cabriolet shot during the critical 1966 window for fear of violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and disrupting the current Soviet nonproliferation discussions .
 The Darien fieldwork also failed to start as planned . Thousands of miles south of the Nevada desert, the Darien project also fails to start .
 Gaining permission from the governments of Panama and Colombia proved more difficult than expected . Legislators in both nations perceived the field studies as diversionary tactics .
 The late start cost a great deal of time and money, as did the unexpected allocation to Southeast Asia of military helicopters and other equipment needed by the Darien surveyors . Surveyors say the late start of the project has cost a lot of money and time .
 Johnson had little to celebrate, as the treaty negotiations dragged on . The treaty negotiations were still to be concluded .
 Geopolitical, economic, and meteorological constraints were converging so as as to subvert the technocratic ‘air of inevitability” and the assumption underlying the AtlanticPacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission . An engineering solution to the multifaceted problems posed by the
 Commissioners found themselves having to adapt to obstacles that decelerated the institutional momentum underlying Plowshare . By the time the engineering feasibility field studies finally took place from 1966 through 1969, commissioners found themselves .
 Eastern Panama's population consisted of Indigenous tribes, African descendants, and mestizo settlers . Eastern Panama’s population of approximately fifty thousand consisted of about fifty thousand people . The population of Eastern Panama is estimated to be about 50,000 .
 The Kuna, or Guna, are famed for their independence and mola artwork . They practiced subsistence fishing and slash-and-burn farming in the upper Chucunaque River valley and on the San Bias coast .
 Indigenous Choco occupied villages along rivers draining into the Gulf of Miguel, the Pacific terminus of Route 17 . Route 17 is the Pacific Ocean's Pacific route .
 Colonel Alexander G Sutton Jr. had taken charge of the office the previous summer . Sutton had previously directed the corps’s Waterways Experiment Station in Vicksburg, Mississippi .
 The facility’s large-scale models of the Mississippi and other rivers helped engineers predict the effects of flood-control structures and other structures . The facility's models helped engineers . Engineers say they bridge the realms of hydraulic science and engineering .
 Taking the measure of the formidable Darien would entail different kinds of considerations and actions than operating a control panel of knobs and switches .
 The Johnson administration’s month-long delay in announcing the site survey agreement led to misunderstandings, as did a lack of transparency on the ground . Johnson administration's delay in announcement led to misunderstandingings, the Johnson administration said .
 Eyewitnesses saw a few dozen men setting up tidal and weather stations across Darien . Coast-to-coast surveying track was set up across eastern Darien, Panama .
 The U.S. Embassy and other offices denied that the Route 17 work had begun . Yet when reached for comment, the United States embassy and others denied it .
 The author considered such secrecy pointless, given that land was not covered in high-tech technology . Navigating High Modernism is a challenge for the author to overcome .
 Equipment delivered via U.S. Navy tank landing ship to construct meteorological station on Soskatupu Island near the Atlantic terminus of the proposed Panamanian nuclear route . The station was located on the island of Soskupu island .
 Eleta had provoked anger among his fellow citizens by not submitting the site survey agreement for advance approval to the National Assembly . He had waited until April to confirm that field studies had actually begun .
 Eleta supported Route 17 proposal to stimulate development of area where he owned property . He might have been concealing a conflict of interest, according to a confidential document .
 The business leader held an undergraduate degree in structural engineering from MIT . He also asked that an upcoming exhibition scheduled for Panama focus more on the promise of nuclear excavation .
 The article’s flattering approach made it more of a press release than a journalistic expose . As the Office of Interoceanic Canal Studies liaison officer boasted to the commissioners back in Washington .
 The corps sent extra copies as a morale-building effort to the three dozen men in the field . They were experiencing grueling heat and the predations of biting mosquitoes and vampire bats .
 The upbeat news story got picked up by international media, which facilitated the commission’s task of controlling the narrative that the field studies were at last underway and under control . The international media got the attention of the story .
 A hard lesson entailed paying more respect to residents of the survey areas, especially the semiautonomous Guna . Guna is a people with a long history of resisting Spanish, Panamanian, and United States domination .
 Torres helped broker an agreement by which the U.S. would provide medical assistance and compensation for damaged Guna trees and gardens . Torres helped to broker the agreement .
 Guna negotiated reimbursements of $2 to $5 for palms and $7 for avocado trees cleared . Navigating High Modernism 83: Navigating Modernism .
 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers colonel Alexander Sutton paid a stack of United States bills to Guna chief Yabiliquina to compensate for trees and vegetation removed during the construction of a weather-recording station .
 Her results informed the U.S. Department of Transportation environmental impact statement requirements for the proposed completion of the Pan-American Highway through the Darien Gap . Her results later informed the United States .
 Along Route 17, all sixteen hydrology stations, including tidal gauge, rain gauge, and river gauge stations, were up and running . All sixteen hydrological stations were up running .
 Coverage by local journalists emphasized the benefits to Panama, which included jobs and valuable data about potential mineral, hydroelectric, agricultural, and fishery resources .
 Field studies to the southeast in the Atrato River valley of Colombia had also at long last begun . The field studies had also begun .
 Reina Torres de Arauz with Guna, Panamanian, and United States representatives preparing to meet to execute payment for trees removed during the construction of a weather-recording station in conjunction with the canal studies .
 Despite carefully staged ceremonies, protests against both Yankee imperialism and the oligarchic Robles government erupted on the third anniversary of the Flag Riots, January 9,1967 .
 At a congressional hearing, a corps representative testified that “agitators” were sowing discontent among Indigenous people working for the Route 17 survey . The corps representative said they were not being paid enough for the survey .
 More canal study calamities were unfolding stateside . More canal studies were unfolding Stateside .
 President Johnson acceded to pressure from the State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to call off the Cabriolet test . For the second year in a row, the president called off the test .
 Johnson agreed to another delay in February 1967 to avoid disrupting negotiations in Mexico City among twenty-one countries to outlaw nuclear weapons in Latin America via the Treaty of Tlatelolco .
 Underground explosions at the Nevada Test Site from 1963 to 1966 had emitted fallout eight times . Underground explosions from 1963-1966 had emitted eight times of fallout .
 The State Department had just sent a representative to the Tlatelolco treaty conference to protest a provision that allowed participating nations to use nuclear devices for peaceful purposes . Even though none of the incidents involved cross-border releases, the State Department protested .
 Johnson asked Congress to increase Plowshare appropriation from $15. million to $19. million for the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1967 . To placate his pro-PNE critics, Johnson wanted Congress to raise the amount .
 In 1967, Presidents Johnson and Robles agreed to replace the HayBunau-Varilla pact with three new treaties governing the existing canal, the Zone defense bases, and the proposed sea-level canal .
 Chicago Tribune published unofficial texts before accords could be signed . Chicago Tribune publishes unofficial texts of the texts .
 Anderson and others held out hope that the diplomatic process could continue . Anderson and other administration members held out . Anderson: "We are going to have a very difficult time"
 After World War I, most of the world’s nations outlawed them via the Geneva Protocol of 1925 . The Geneva Protocol was the result of a chemical weapons ban in 1925 .
 In all these cases, governmental decision makers played powerful roles in determining which new technologies and associated infrastructructures gained dominance .
 PNEs were used for harbor and canal construction in the late 1960s . Support came from an unexpected source in the early 1960s, when the first PNE was built .
 Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists published a special report in its December 1967 issue . Bulletin had featured the famous Doomsday Clock since 1947 to represent the changing threat to humanity by nuclear technology .
 Navigating High Modernism 87 excavation with unexpected diplomatic and economic issues, required much more than the three years originally allocated by Congress . Managing public relations and governmental expectations, and reconciling their faith in the potential of nuclear .
 Key allies enabled the commission to gain one last extension, until December 1,1970 . Key allies provided the commission an extension, which was extended until December 31,1970. Key allies were able to keep the extension .
 Even some of the stalwart congressional defenders of the canal status quo worked to ensure the completion of the sea-level studies .
 Anderson Commission has ruled out PNEs . Anderson Commission members are plotting out their final two years in the process of planning their next two .
 The U.S. nuclear program has been a thorny thorny problem for some of the world's leaders . It's not the first time they have considered a nuclear solution to the nuclear crisis .
 The geological and marine biological dimensions of the sea-level canal endeavor prompted significant epistemological and diplomatic challenges and opportunities . The isthmian environment itself—both the land and surrounding seas—helped shape political perceptions of the new waterway’s feasibility .
 Commission sponsored data-collecting expeditions along the two proposed nuclear routes . Commission sponsored several data-collection expeditions on the proposed routes .
 Scientists knew so little about the Darien rainforests and marshlands, much of the work entailed basic environmental research . Humboldt would have approved such research .
 Corps of Engineers personnel also conducted experiments pertaining to ground and air blast activity . Corps of Engineer personnel conducted experiments .
 Subcontracted studies generated numerous peer-reviewed journal articles and volumes of gray literature . The subcontracted work generated hundreds of studies .
 The saturated clay shale soils along a twenty-mile stretch of the otherwise-ideal Route 17 would not hold up to underground thermonuclear blasts, workers say . Workers confirmed that the saturated clay . shale soil would not be able to withstand underground blasts .
 The finding had revolutionary implications both for the proponents of nuclear construction and for the U.S. treaty negotiators . While not wholly unexpected, the finding had implications for nuclear construction .
 The clay shales “bad actor” sheds light on the secretive, technocratic aspects of their approach to environmental impact assessment . How the commissioners dealt with the clay shale "bad actor"
 The CSC had always accepted the need for biological data to predict the effects of nuclear excavation on the human societies of the isthmus .
 The canal treaty negotiator suggested looking into the broader effects of a sea-level waterway on oceanic organisms . But they drew a sharp line between essential and desirable bioenvironmental information .
 Sea-level canal has emerged as an international forum for debating the effects of maritime transportation on marine biological diversity . How they handled the pressure highlights one of the most intriguing side effects of the story .
 President Johnson permitted the 2.3-kiloton Cabriolet shot to proceed at the Nevada Test Site in 1968 . After two years of waiting for the experimental program to begin, the Anderson Commission received the news in January 1968 .
 The timing had to be precise before the State of the Union address, but before the Nevada grazing season . Because radioactive fallout might escape into the atmosphere and contaminate the local milk supply or cross the border to cause an international incident, the timing was precise .
 An unnamed AEC source attributed the smaller amount of radiation to the ‘really tiny fission device” used to trigger the thermonuclear explosive . The AEC said the smaller radiation was caused by a “really tiny” device .
 Latin Americans have long opposed the use of nuclear explosives on their lands . Such rhetoric discounted the continuing opposition by Latin Americans to nuclear weapons . The U.S. government has said it will not use nuclear weapons in the region .
 The U.S. Navy’s largest ships needed to be able to cross the isthmus as quickly as possible . But that was not the case for an emerging class of commercial vessels .
 In 1966, massive new tankers began bypassing the Suez Canal to save on tolls . Voyaging around the Cape of Good Hope took longer, but the size of their cargoes made up for the loss of time .
 Route 17 geological consultants delivered unwelcome news to the Anderson Commission . Route 17 consultants were part of the Route 17 Commission's economic advisors .
 Nuclear explosives would likely not form stable slopes in such an unstable medium . It would require conventional excavation techniques to avoid collapse .
 Clay shale happened to be the same type of sedimentary rock that had caused destructive landslides during the construction of the original Panama Canal . The problem was not a surprise to engineers familiar with the physics of the isthmus .
 Livermore physicists conducted chemical explosive experiments to try to model the effects of burying thermonuclear devices in wet clay shale . Engineers consulted with leading soil mechanics specialists to determine whether the geological discovery really did rule out PNEs .
 If nuclear excavation of Route 17 was no longer possible, then that had major implications for future U.S.-Panama treaty negotiations . The U.N. and Panama have been involved in nuclear negotiations .
 The 1967 draft treaties had established the U.S. commitment to building the sea-level canal in Panama . The treaties had granted Panama the right to veto nuclear methods . Panama had also been granted a veto over the use of nuclear weapons .
 The deadline for the fourth annual report, covering the period from July 1, 1967 to June 30, 1968, was approaching . It would be the last one prepared for President Johnson, who had decided not to run for reelection .
 President Johnson omitted the clay shales matter from his public statement, and sent mixed messages by emphasizing both the benefits of the conventional Route 10 and the favorable results of the two Nevada Test Site shots .
 The Smithsonian Institution secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Leonard Carmichael, had posed a version of this question to AEC director Glenn Seaborg back in the spring of 1963 . U.S.-Panama tensions, the resumption of nuclear testing, and the negotiations over the test ban
 Carmichael was prompted by an employee of the Museum of Natural History . Oceanographer I Eugene Wallen had spent years studying faunal effects of nuclear testing in the South Pacific . Carmichael had been prompted by Wallen's work .
 Lyndon B Johnson presented a plaque to Smithsonian Institution secretary S Dillon Ripley, June 13,1967 .
 Smithsonian officials tried but failed to secure federal funds from Johnson’s canal study commission for a ten-year baseline inventory of marine life on either side of the proposed seaway .
 The AEC chose the Battelle Memorial Institute, a private organization that subcontracted with university-based teams . However, the AEC did not contract with university teams .
 Wallen and Ripley regrouped to consider their options . Ripley and Wallen were disappointed with the decision .
 In 1937, he visited Barro Colorado Island in Panama’s Canal Zone while voyaging from Philadelphia to New Guinea for a zoological expedition . Decades earlier, in 1937, in Panama's Canal Zone, he had visited the island while on an expedition .
 BCI was an artifact of the construction of the canal, as the reservoir created by Gatun Dam left only the highest hilltops of the Chagres River valley unsubmerged . BCI is an artifact .
 The island was also a testament to the Smithsonian’s embrace of the isthmus as a model study site, beginning with 1910-12 biological survey of the Panama Canal Zone .
 The governor of the Canal Zone designated BCI a reserve in 1923 . Over the next two decades, the research station drew more scientific visitors than any other tropical research facility .
 BCI and the associated Canal Zone Biological Area became a Smithsonian bureau after the war . BCI provided the setting for hundreds of articles on tropical forest biota and dynamics .
 CZBA lacked facilities for long-term terrestrial and marine research . However, the CZba lacked facilities to conduct long term research .
 Expanding the institutional base of tropical biology gained urgency as nations decolonized and sought to accelerate deforestation for development .
 Ernst Mayr, an old friend of Ripley and fellow ornithologist, was the head of Harvard’s Museum of Comparative Zoology, and the mentor of BCI director Martin Moynihan . Mayr was also the mentor to BCI Director Martin Moynian
 Mayr gained fame in the 1940s as a proponent of the Modern Synthesis of evolutionary biology and the concept of allopatric speciation . The Panamanian isthmus provided an ideal setting for Mayr to discuss the concept .
 Knowing the approximate period of the geological emergence of the land bridge made it possible to date the origin of evolutionary differences between marine species on either side of the isthmus .
 The 1910-12 Smithsonian survey had built upon a few pioneering studies to expand knowledge of the marine fishes of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and associated evolutionary effects .
 Mayr substantiated for shallow-water sea urchins in a foundational paper that called for more research on modes of speciation in marine organisms . Naturalists subsequently documented some other taxonomic groups west and east of the isthmus that appeared similar but not identical .
 Mayr’s recognition of the evolutionary importance of the Central American isthmus shaped his reaction to the 1964 announcement . President Johnson announced the decision in December 1964 .
 I have been worrying for some time about the contemplated sea-level canal across the Isthmus of Panama . I have also been worrying about the proposed sea level canal across Panama . The canal would be built on the Istmus .
 There is little doubt that such a salt water connection between the two great oceans will have many and drastic effects on the marine faunas and floras .
 There are closely related species living on either side of the Isthmus . No one can predict with certainty what will happen if such species come in contact with each other .
 In this regard, organismic biology is, on the whole, poorly represented on high level boards in Washington, he said .
 Mayr had an important informant who helped shape his thoughts about the sea-level canal . Ira Rubinoff, a recent graduate student, helped shape Mayr's thinking about the canal .
 Conducting such research in the Canal Zone entailed unusual occupational hazards, from having to pass checkpoints manned by surly sentries to missing optimal tides due to lack of gas stations .
 Ripley announced the name change to Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute the following year . Ripley's name was changed from Ripley to Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute the next year .
 Rubinoff provided an energetic on-the-ground complement to the D.C. campaign of Ripley, Wallen, and Wallen . Rubinoff is STRI’s marine director, a former Office of Naval Research biologist .
 Rubinoff published the first article on the sea-level canal’s potential nonradiological effects in July 1965 . Irwin wrote the Natural History essay that likely caught Irwin's attention .
 Several outcomes seemed possible, including large-scale extinctions, as suggested by principles of ecology and genetics, and morphological comparisons of Caribbean and Pacific shore fishes .
 Dutch elm disease and the Australian rabbit invasion were infamous in the annals of pest outbreaks . Other cases like the canal-facilitated migration of voracious Atlantic sea lampreys into the United States Great Lakes were less well known but equally devastating .
 At the 1965 International Conference on Tropical Oceanography in Miami, Rubinoff and oceanographers from other distinguished institutions discussed the importance of expanding the preproject studies beyond radioactivity in the food chain . They marveled at Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment 97 what they considered
 Battelle Memorial Institute officials discuss the limitations they faced in fulfilling their AEC obligations . However, in the spring of 1966, they realized the limitations of the AEC's obligations .
 Galler convinced the Battelle managers to invite the Smithsonian to cosponsor an international symposium aimed at developing a long-term ecological survey for the Canal Study Commission . Galler: The Smithsonian will participate in the symposium to develop an ecological survey .
 Sharp differences emerged regarding questions of framing and language . However, sharp differences emerged over questions of language and framing .
 Some transisthmian species liable to go extinct might be “those we would want to exterminate” attention should also be devoted to the beneficial environmental changes that the canal might effect, he says .
 Smithsonian employee said using words like “catastrophe” and “profound disturbance” would upset his bosses, who had been tasked with determining where to build the sea-level canal . When a Smithsonian employee explained that only by accentuating the negative would Congress respond with
 The Smithsonian team also recognized the importance of “not antagonizing the Panamanians,” and thus invited both U.S. and Panamanian representatives to the symposium slated for November 1966 .
 Allocating internal resources to stage the Panama conference and relevant pilot projects at STRI became an important part of the Ripley team’s evolving strategy to create, in the words of Galler, “a receptive constituency” among the scientific and governmental communities to fund the Smithsonian
 Smithsonian research awards enabled the husband-and-wife team of Ira and Roberta Rubinoff to focus on interoceanic colonization and isolating mechanisms in fish populations .
 Grants also made it possible for visiting marine biologists to conduct research at STRI’s new facilities on the Caribbean and Panama Bay coasts, resulting in publications that would drive much of the sea-level canal debate .
 The Smithsonian’s self-funded canal studies also benefited marine scientists on the other side of the globe . The Smithsonian's self funded canal studies helped scientists in the U.S.
 The hundred-mile-long Suez Canal, completed in 1869, had a high-salinity interior that blocked most, but not all, species’ migration between the Red Sea and Mediterranean waters .
 Israeli marine biologists made major contributions in the study of Red-Med species exchange . They cleverly dubbed “Lessepsian migration’ after Ferdinand de Lesseps, the architect of Suez and Panama Canal .
 The Smithsonian’s target constituency for canal ecology fundraising did not include the public . Mainstream attention to the nonnuclear dimensions of the sea-level canal was increasing at the time Galler made his prediction .
 The Pacific Ocean stood higher than the Atlantic by an average of six feet . Scientists say the Pacific Ocean is higher than any other ocean .
 To test the possible consequences of interbreeding between formerly isolated populations, Rubinoff and his collaborators conducted mating experiments between Atlantic and Pacific marine gobies .
 The range of results regarding the viability of the offspring, and the broader question of which species might dominate, hybridize, or go extinct, demonstrated the need for extensive knowledge of morphological and behavioral characteristics of the organisms in question .
 Kennedy announced his intention to minimize government secrecy and foster greater discussion by the international scientific community about proposed large-scale development projects . Kennedy signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty two weeks after signing the treaty .
 In important ways, he echoed the drafters of what would become the United States National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 . The groundbreaking law required preliminary environmental impact assessments of federally funded projects .
 Naturalist-based disciplines such as taxonomy, biogeography and evolutionary and ecological science lagged further and further behind the more reductionist, experimental life sciences, as epitomized by molecular biology .
 Not until the 1990s and early 2000s did funding agencies begin devoting serious attention to ocean . Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment: Assessing the ocean . IOI conservation science .
 A terrestrial bias also permeated the agenda of the emerging environmentalist movement . The movement was formed in the 1970s .
 Fears of marine species migration and mixing did not fit the agenda of potential allies who focused on terrestrial threats posed by synthetic chemicals and rapid population growth .
 Oil spills and overhunting present obvious dangers to fish and marine mammals . Competition from nonnative introduced species is much harder to comprehend, for scientists and environmental advocates .
 The late 1960s was still an era of intentional aquatic species introductions . It was still a time when the species were introduced .
 For over a century, governments and acclimatization societies in search of cheap protein or recreational opportunities had shipped live fish and shellfish for transplanting in rivers and bays .
 Elton described oysters as the “sessile sheep” of the sea . Pests often moved with the desired species, resulting in occasional warnings .
 Government officials stocked Lake Michigan with Pacific salmon in 1966 and replaced France’s adopted oyster, the Portuguese Crassostrea angulata, with the Japanese C gigas from 1971 to 1975 .
 The Panama Canal’s failure to facilitate disruptive marine species exchange is difficult to explain . Another difficult thing to explain pertained to the existing Panama Canal's failure to .
 Of course, identifying invasive species required consistent monitoring as well as thorough knowledge of the native organisms of each coast . Identifying invasive species requires consistent monitoring and thorough knowledge .
 Biotic exchange must already be occurring on a large scale, without any ill effects . Biotic exchanges must already already be taking place without ill effects, scientists say .
 The concept of “a risky mix” applied not only to the environmental threats of intermixing the fauna and planktonic flora of two oceans, but also to the threat posed by the intermix of fauna of two .
 It also involved the professional hazards facing scientists who stepped too far outside of their idealized realm of social isolation .
 Rubinoff's 1968 article opened the floodgates of critique from fellow biologists . Rubinoff’s 1968 article was published in the New York Review of Science .
 The major intellectual disputes encompassed conflicting interpretations of the limited empirical research on transisthmian evolution, biological diversity, and biotic mixing . The Suez and Panama Canals were models for predicting how the sea-level waterway might affect ecological and evolutionary processes .
 Some participants questioned Rubinoff’s more explicitly political assumptions and framing choices . Rubinoff: ‘I’m not a political person. I’ve got a lot of questions about my political views.’
 Biologists struggled to communicate the political relevance and fund-worthiness of a topic for which they lacked a common vocabulary and conceptual understanding . Biologists of different disciplinary backgrounds and levels of conservationist concern struggled .
 Briggs took issue with RubinofFs sense of opportunism and inevitability . While appreciating the redirection of scientific attention away from radiation damage, Briggs said he didn't want to focus on radiation damage .
 The Suez offers disturbing empirical evidence of how organisms from a richer marine ecosystem might outcompete the natives of a less stable one . Red Sea fishes, crustaceans, mollusks, and tunicates have migrated into the nutrient-poor eastern Mediterranean .
 Briggs calculated that 6,710 Caribbean species would migrate westward through a Central America sea-level canal . 4,480 less robust Pacific species would move eastward, resulting in massive extinctions among the latter, he said . Briggs: "It would be a disaster"
 Briggs deemed such methods “risky and distasteful” and instead called for improving the existing canal to meet the needs of world shipping . Briggs suggested that a sea-level waterway could kill migrating animals with chemicals or hot water .
 Briggs's analysis provoked strong reactions from fellow members of the scientific community . Briggs’s analysis has provoked strong reaction from fellow scientists .
 Rubinoff and other scientists questioned his statistical methods and assumptions . Rubinoff's statistical methods were questioned by scientists .
 The two isthmuses differed in terms of not only salinity levels but also geological histories . The isthmususes are located in the same area as the Great Barrier Barrier Barrier .
 The more recently separated coastal Caribbean and Pacific biotas contained many closely related pairs of species . Mediterranean and Red Sea Biotas contain almost no such sister species . Differences presented “extremely urgent, and at the same time very promising, opportunities for systematic, ecological, and evolutionary studies
 It was no surprise, he argued, that Red Sea ichthyofauna had occupied the vacant niches of the impoverished Mediterranean . The Red Sea is the only natural habitat in the Mediterranean .
 Most of the ecological niches on either side of the Central American isthmus were already filled . Most species introgression through a sea-level canal would likely not cause widespread extinction . By contrast, most of the niches in the area are already filled by the canal .
 Robert Menzies concluded genetic exchange was probably already occurring on a large scale due to the ability of fouling organisms attached to the bottoms of ships to survive the full fifty-mile transit .
 A visiting biologist studying marine plankton transport, Richard Chesher, confirmed via interviews with Panama Canal Company officials that tankers and freighters had been required since 1956 to ballast down prior to the transit to ensure maneuverability .
 Chesher says Menzies used intertidal organisms preadapted to survival in fresh water . He also questioned the scanty empirical evidence for ballastmediated carriage . Chesher argues that Chesher overlooked the toxic anticorrosion coatings lining ballast tanks .
 He did concede that modern tankers with stainless steel tanks might enable plankton to survive passage from ocean to ocean .
 The commission scrounged up enough funds to elicit the National Academy of Sciences to lend its authority to the quest for external federal support of a comprehensive tropical marine biological inventory . The commission is seeking to raise funds for external support of an inventory of tropical marine wildlife .
 The CSC conveyed its fifth annual report to the new president, Richard M Nixon, in the summer of 1969 . The report was made to Richard Nixon, President Richard Nixon .
 The report acknowledged the Route 17 clay shale problem, as well as the expanded efforts to address marine biotic exchange . The report also acknowledged the expanded effort to address the problem of the clay shale .
 The fifth annual report glosses over Panama’s revolutionary events of October 1968 . The military coup staged by Omar Torrijos and other officers of the Guardia Nacional was staged .
 The international relations section of the CSC document praised the U.S., Panamanian, and Colombian officials whose cooperation made the field surveys possible .
 Biologists insist canal engineering feasibility studies address issues that had nothing to do with radioactivity . So did the insistence of biologists that the canal engineering . feasibility studies . address issues . that had not to do . do with . radioactivity, they say .
 It is clear that those demanding realistic, comprehensive assessments of the megaproject’s environmental effects were as forward-thinking as the other sea-level canal stakeholders . Today, fifty years on, it is clear, that .
 Plowshare physicists and allied engineers sought to advance the unproven field of nuclear excavation . United States officials aimed to update the isthmian transportation system and relations with Panama .
 The marine evolutionary and ichthyological scientists sought to revitalize relevant naturalist disciplines to analyze the enormous ecological changes a wide channel at the level of the seas would induce .
 The sea-level canal proposal served as a modernization strategy for a wide range of stakeholders . "It facilitated many kinds of work with far-reaching political and intellectual effects," she says .
 The collapse of the treaty reform process, the delayed nuclear test shots, Panamanian and Colombian opposition to the field surveys, the diversion of surveying equipment to Vietnam, and the discovery of unstable clay shales along the preferred nuclear route . The optimistic assumption of the 1964 enabling legislation,
 The commission convinced Congress to extend its deadline and funding for a nuclear seaway project . It's a sign of the seaway’s powerful allure as a technological solution, the commission says .
 The group’s leaders were by no means paragons of objectivity and transparency . They embarked on their mission with preconceived notions about the value of employing PNEs for canal construction, and sat on geological intelligence of significance to future treaty negotiators .
 The commission was much more flexible than other federal agencies with which it worked to demonstrate the feasibility of peaceful nuclear excavation, the Atomic Energy Commission said .
 The five commissioners and their executive director ultimately accepted that they could not overlook the technical nor public relations problems of peaceful nuclear excavation . Despite the enormous cost savings it appeared to offer, they said they couldn't overlook technical and public relations .
 The second matter, about the biological, nonhuman consequences of joining the oceans without a freshwater barrier, absorbed an increasing amount of their time during the second half of their tenure .
 The pressure the commissioners encountered from 1968 to 1970 to fund preliminary studies of nonradiological ecological effects happened to coincide with the rise of the modern environmental movement .
 Marine biologist Ira Rubinoff originally sought not necessarily to stop the project but to tap into the CSC’s pool of funds . Other members of the scientific community disagreed with Rubinoff .
 The CSC leadership conflated them with the students and activists in the news raising their voices against the environmental costs of modern society . The leadership conflated them with those raising environmental issues .
 Nineteen sixty-nine was a particularly important year for the rise of modern environmental advocacy . The year of the first World War II was the year of environmental activism .
 Onjanuary 28, an oil-drilling platform off the coast of Santa Barbara exploded, coating dozens of miles of the Southern California coastline with oil . The platform exploded on January 28, 2010 .
 Later that summer, hazardous waste in Ohio’s Cuyahoga River caught on fire . Hazardous waste caught fire in the river in Ohio .
 Grassroots groups built on the momentum of earlier citizen protests against radioactive fallout to call for stronger regulations against industrial pollution and rampant development .
 President Nixon approved the National Environmental Policy Act as his first official act of the decade of the seventies . Congress responded, as did President Nixon, and he approved the act .
 The leaders of the CSC cared little for environmental causes, but they recognized the public relations value of supporting them in at least limited ways . Like Nixon, they cared little about environmental causes but recognized the value of public relations .
 The CSC did expand the bioenvironmental studies to go beyond the public health effects of radiation in the isthmian environment . It commissioned the National Academy of Sciences to produce a comprehensive ecological research agenda to precede the seaway's construction .
 The commissioners’ final assessment regarding the risk of adverse ecological consequences—that it appeared acceptable—elicited intense criticism from scientists, environmentalists, and antienvironmentalists seeking to preserve the Canal Zone status quo .
 Commission members experienced a remarkable transformation on the topic of peaceful nuclear excavation . The commission was formed in the late 1960s to discuss the state of marine invasion ecology .
 Rumors circulated that the NAS might appoint an investigative committee circulated at oceanographic and zoological conferences following the publication of RubinofPs pivotal 1968 Science article .
 The academy was established in the 1860s to provide the government with expert advice . During its first century, the advice pertained mostly to the physical sciences .
 The academy faced pressure to admit more ecologists, especially in the wake of its advice reinforcing the status quo on chemical pesticides . The i96os-era environmental movement was led by environmental activists .
 LaMont Cole was the most outspoken about urging the organization to think ecologically . LaMont said the organization should be more environmentally friendly .
 The CSC lacked the time and funds for nonradiological research . It recommended that the Smithsonian develop and execute a coordinated program of ecological studies . Academy-designated experts advised the Smithsonian .
 Anderson: "We would be able to tell conservationists and other people who are concerned with this sort of thing what the probabilities were and whether there were steps such as fish nets that might or might not be employed" to prevent harmful biological effects .
 Commissioner Hill did not conceal his contempt for those asking about marine effects . Commissioner Hill was hard-nosed water resources expert .
 Hill conflated the scientific sea-level canal authors with political environmentalists, even though the scientists argued among themselves about whether the megaproject posed a threat to be opposed or a research opportunity to be seized . Hill conflated the scientific scientists with the political environmentalists .
 The commissioners also approved the $50,000 contract with the National Academy . Commissioners also approved a contract with National Academy with the academy . The commissioners approved the contract .
 The Battelle program is an action program for a product and an answer at the end of it . Sheffey: "To distinguish the two, the Battelle programs are action programs for product and the answer at end of them"
 Sheffey had started drafting the final feasibility report by emphasizing that much more research and development was needed to determine whether nuclear excavation could be used to dig a new canal .
 His “degree of negativism” appalled John Kelly and other AEC officials, John Kelly said . However, his “degrading” attitude was not enough, he said .
 Hill had recently visited Livermore to discuss the issue of the Route 17 clay shales with Plowshare scientists . Hill recently visited the area to discuss further research on the soil mechanics in question .
 Anderson met in his capacity as lead treaty negotiator with Panama’s dictator, General Omar Torrijos, in September 1969 . The negotiations had been suspended since the 1967 leak of draft treaties .
 Strong arguments existed for not risking a violation of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, especially after the 1968 Schooner debacle . As in the case of Cabriolet and the other canal-oriented Plowshare tests conducted at the Nevada Test Site .
 The U.S. is at stake in Panama with respect to its bargaining position with Panama . Now even more was at stake for the United States .
 Fields’s colleagues did not share his eagerness to pursue the Sturtevant test . Fields's colleagues didn't share his enthusiasm for the test .
 By the time the commission held its next meeting, on January 22, 1970, another portentous political event had occurred . The commission met again on January 23, 1970 .
 President Nixon signed the National Environmental Policy Act on the first day of the new decade . It requires federal agencies to consider environmental consequences and open up environmental project decision-making .
 Thompson referenced congressional hearings held by the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy in 1959 on the biological and environmental effects of nuclear war . Thompson referenced hearings held on the effects of war in 1959 and Project Chariot Alaskan ecological study .
 Thompson: Environmentalists’ rejection of American ideals of progress and technological change constituted a possibly greater danger than threats to the environment per se . Thompson: For Thompson, rejection of U.S. ideals and technological progress constituted a potentially greater danger .
 As would soon become evident, such attitudes echoed those of the CSC members . The CSC was in the midst of a crisis in the United States .
 Thompson concluded his speech by praising Plowshare’s potential “to improve the quality of our environment, enrich our understanding of the ecology and natural resources and enhance our efforts to achieve a productive harmony .”
 A Plowshare official, Livermore physicist Glenn Werth, made the closing remarks at the 1970 Las Vegas conference . The closing remarks reiterated the failure of the atomic bureaucracy to reckon with the values embodied by NEPA and the modern environmental movement .
 He proposes to use nuclear energy to clear smog, tap non-fossil fuel energy sources, and preserve scenic landscapes by storing wastes underground . He repeated arguments about the economic savings of nuclear canal construction .
 In 1971, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation used NEPA to contest the AEC’s process for licensing a new nuclear power plant in Calvert Cliffs, Maryland .
 The case produced a landmark decision that transformed the commercial nuclear industry . It warned all federal agencies to comply with the procedural requirements .
 The Calvert Cliffs verdict forced the AEC to suspend reactor construction for 17 months as it filed the appropriate impact statements . A legal scholar asked in late 1971 whether NEPA constituted an “environmentalist Magna Carta” or a “coup de grace”
 Route 17 s clay shale soils could be safely excavated with nuclear devices . Plowshare proponents continued to try to convince the canal study commissioners that Route 17 could be excavated .
 Kelly reported good news at the commission’s March 1970 meeting . Kelly had conferred with Soviet nuclear scientists during recent trips to Moscow and Vienna . Kelly said good news had been made by Soviet scientists .
 Hill delivered a stern rebuke to his fellow commissioners for having ‘played along with’t Kelly’s optimistic expectations about PNEs for far too long . Four months later, his patience fully eroded, Hill said .
 By the spring of 1970, the commission was fed up with the scientists seeking CSC funds to explicate the seaway’s potential consequences for marine life on either side of the isthmus .
 Hill mentioned an article he had read about activists in Death Valley, California, trying to stop a development project based on the discovery of pupfish . The pupfish conservation efforts were initiated decades earlier by ichthyologist Carl Hubbs, Hill said .
 Commission members agreed that the faunal-exchange problem should not be allowed to block a decision in favor of a sea-level canal . One month before the highly anticipated Earth Day teach-in events of April 1970, the commission members agreed to the final report should include a statement
 The National Academy study is a program of investigations that you should pursue in the years to come to answer all these questions . Added one of the engineering consultants, “The one thing you can do is get them off your back is going to come from the study,” he said
 Science expose that had portrayed Sheffey as antipathetic to ecological questions generated more press . In the meantime, the Science expose had been published by the BBC .
 Lederberg urged the CSC not to allow diplomatic, engineering, military, political, and political issues to bury the scientific ones . Lederberger urged not to let diplomatic and engineering issues to be buried in scientific issues .
 The National Academy established CERIC, the Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal . That was precisely the point of the contract with the National Academy establishing CERI .
 In the spring of 1969, Mayr, who had agreed to chair the committee, met with several advisors, including Wallen and Galler of the Smithsonian, John Wolfe of the AEC . The committee’s scope and membership were discussed by advisors .
 Researchers identified dozens of research questions pertaining to marine biota, the biology of species dispersal, and the physical parameters governing water movement through the canal as well .
 The ten members seem to have been chosen, primarily by organizational affiliation, by NAS executives, with input from Mayr . Mayr. The 10 members of the NAS board were chosen by the organization's executives .
 Mayr gained representation for two Caribbean university marine biology programs . He did not succeed in having Rubinoff appointed as the Smithsonian representative .
 The school employed Gilbert Voss, Frederick Bayer, and C Richard Robins . The team was subcontracted by Battelle, the private organization that won out over the Smithsonian in the 1965 competition for AEC funds .
 Mayr wanted an eminent ecologist to serve on the committee and convinced his younger colleague Edward O Wilson to do so . Mayr also convinced Edward Wilson to serve .
 The insect systematist aimed to revolutionize ecology by linking it with genetics and biogeography . He was codeveloper of the innovative theory of island biogeographical geography .
 Wilson had also participated in a foundational 1964 symposium at the Asilomar Conference Grounds in California on the genetics of colonizing species, presenting on the invasive— or as it was called, imported—South American fire ant . Wilson had participated in the first symposium in 1964 .
 Mayr explained the committee would proceed on the assumption that the sea-level canal would actually be built . At CERIC’s first workshop, held in August 1969 in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, Mayr said .
 Wilson’s presentation noted the repeated failure of intentional species introductions . The need for field and laboratory experiments to determine the qualities of successful colonizers, he says .
 To assess the current state of knowledge on selected Central American marine biota and how human effects might change them, Bakus contacted nearly two hundred specialists with exhaustive requests for information . Bakus: "I want to know what the future of the marine environment in Central America is."
 One informant complained he would need six months and “at least $10,000 plus perquisite” to do the job . One informant said he needed six months to complete the job and six months of training .
 John Briggs organized a symposium at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston . The symposium featured presentations by Sheffey, Voss, Topp, and other sea-level canal authors .
 Bakus concluded that many speakers overlooked evolutionary mechanisms of species dispersal . Bakus attributed some of the disagreements about the likely patterns of migration, colonization, and competition to diverse disciplinary outlooks .
 A A AS scientific speakers did acknowledge one specific danger, the crownof-thorns starfish . The crown of the crown of thorns star fish was also a danger to the species .
 Voss says a little-known eastern Pacific species, Acanthaster ellisi, appeared almost identical to A planci . A Central American sea-level canal might enable A ellisi to prey on Caribbean corals .
 Rubinoff shifted his attention from gobies to the physiology and ecology of Pelamisplaturus, a venomous organism that periodically appeared in large numbers along Panama’s Pacific shores .
 By offering the snake to potential Atlantic predators, Rubinoff and his collaborators sought to predict how fast it might colonize the Caribbean Sea and adjacent Atlantic Ocean . Rubinoff: "It's a good idea to think about how fast the snake could colonize"
 Atlantic predators were much more likely to attack the serpents and die than Pacific carnivores . Natural selection would favor predatory fishes disinclined to attack sea snakes, scientists say .
 Pelamis might not only invade the Caribbean and Atlantic but also ride the Gulf Stream all the way to the English Channel . Due to its ability to drift and feed at the surface, it might be able to drift to the surface of the Gulf .
 The preliminary research program would require at least ten years, an initial capital outlay of $4 million, and annual budgets of about $2 million, to be paid for by “a new system” of environmental cost accounting .
 Representative Dan Flood used Mayr’s words to denounce the wastefulness of the CSC and to reiterate his long-standing argument for expanding the existing canal . Representative Flood said Mayr's words were a waste of money .
 "Some Observations Prior to a Sea-Level Canal" grew out of a March 1970 conference organized by invertebrate zoology curator Meredith Jones of the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History .
 Such distinctions were lost on the CSC members and engineering consultants . The CSC is the largest body of its kind in the world .
 Meeting in July 1970, they scorned CERIC’s argument for a thermal species barrier, an expensive method of preventing species exchange via hot water . Meeting was in response to an argument for thermal species barriers, which they rejected .
 The commission did not appreciate CERIC’s insistence on making value judgments regarding the risks at hand .
 The academy group argued that the dangers of species exchange justified the installation of biotic barriers .
 Sheffey asked the commissioners for policy guidance, which revealed their inability to grasp the rising political influence of the modern environmental movement . To reconcile the two groups’ different views in the final report, sheffey said .
 Sheffey also asked for advice about whether to include ‘the ecology discussion’ in a separate chapter or as part of a longer chapter on technical and financial considerations .
 Eisenhower's recommendation that he need not worry about the shortness of the ecological chapter would soon come back to haunt the group . Eisenhower’s recommendation that . he needn’t worry about . the shorteness of the . ecological chapter . would soon be back in action .
 Commission members favorably interpreted the lack of data on the potential disastrous effects of seaway-induced biological invasions . But they did not do so for PNEs . The commission did not agree with the report .
 In fact, they spent one of their last meetings grappling with their own rapid evolution on the issue . They spent the last meeting grappling with the issue of immigration reform .
 Chairman Anderson: “This gets overlooked. This gets overlooked,” stated Chairman Anderson at the twenty-eighth meeting in July 1970 .
 Route 17 had appeared optimal to the Livermore physicists, the developers of the nuclear cratering technology . Route 17 appeared to be optimal for the engineers who developed the technology in the 1960s . The cratering technique was developed by Livermore scientists .
 Engineering studies exposed the clay shale permeating much of the preferred Panamanian route . The clay shale is permeating the preferred route .
 The commissioners rejected the idea of adding a third, wider lane of locks to the existing waterway . It would buy only twenty years before ships exceeded the new locks once again and would require pumping in massive quantities of seawater .
 Even if the original canal were operated free of tolls, economies of scale would likely lead the shipping industry to divert the bulk of traffic to much larger ships by the turn of the twenty-first century .
 Route 10 was the shortest of the five routes considered and the only Panamanian one that would not interfere with the existing canal . Route 10 location was considered disadvantageous due to the need to acquire new lands, commissioners considered the route disadvantageous .
 In accordance with NEPA, the appendices included brief environmental impact statements for the proposed routes .
 Commissioners made no mention of environmental issues in classified letter to president . Commissioners say they will send classified letter on Friday .
 U.S. control of a modernized isthmian canal system for several decades thereafter . The treaty talks were in the context of future treaty negotiations with Panama .
 The existing canal had contributed to U.S. national security . It enabled the United States to influence the economic development of several Latin American countries, the transportation costs of many United States exports and imports .
 Commissioners: Risk of financial loss would be offset by maintaining U.S. control of Panamanian transportation corridor . The astronomical costs of building a new sea-level waterway with conventional methods could not be recompensed quickly by tolls .
 Officials expressed concern about the additional lands that would have to be obtained, and the possibility of creating another artificial river with no bridges over it . The report's focus on the value of building the new waterway in Panama generated positive press .
 Representative Flood asserted that “there was never any doubt that when the commission finished that would be their conclusion” and that the group “wasted bags of money” surveying remote routes in eastern Panama and Colombia that it knew could not be used for the new canal .
 The CSC report’s skimpy analysis of environmental issues angered scientists . CERIC and Smithsonian scientists had lobbied for preliminary ecological research for so long .
 The CSC's privileging of the Battelle-Miami’s upbeat analysis, and featured an interview with Mayr that included the quote, “We said that great danger would result from building a sea-level canal, though we can’t prove it.�
 Boffey published an important book about the National Academy of Sciences that blew the whistle on the close ties among many of its expert panels and special interests .
 Erroneous interpretations of an earlier author eventually become myths, accepted without question and carried forward from generation to generation . Erroneously interpretations of earlier author become myths and carried through generations .
 Mayr the historian left the door open for deeper interpretations to emerge . Yet by preserving his private correspondence for future scholars, Mayr left a deeper interpretation .
 It is a great irony that the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission is now closely associated with the “environmental considerations” of the proposed sea-level canal, or rather the lack thereof . The study commission is now so closely associated .
 The commission’s work wound up highlighting the increasing importance of environmental criteria in public works planning . The commission's work was highlighted by the work of the commission .
 Opponents of renegotiating the U.S.-Panama treaty publicized the dangers posed by otherwise-obscure marine organisms . The treaty was signed in 1971 .
 The memo also asserted that defense and foreign policy goals no longer justified construction . Granted, the memo also said that defense or foreign policy reasons no longer justify construction .
 The biologists’ concerns did not shut the project down, but they did constitute another important rationale against it, especially in the context of a new era of statist environmental management . The project was not shut down .
 The Canal Study commissioners navigated a difficult course during their five years of their tenure . The canal study commissioners were commissioners for five years . The Canal study commissioners are now in charge of the canal .
 Scientific discussions of the environmental risks posed by the sea-level canal did influence federal officials and policy makers in unexpected ways . The CSC took a more nuanced approach to the question of environmental considerations than one of complete dismissal .
 Despite tensions and biases, its engineering agents and executive director worked for years with the Smithsonian and National Academy to increase congressional appropriation for marine ecological research .
 The CSC members failed to appreciate the problem of marine invasive species . They failed to differentiate between scientists seeking financial support to study the potential effects of a proposed megaproject .
 Commission's blind spots about marine bioinvasions should not diminish how its leaders overcame their own technocratic embrace of Project Plowshare . Nevertheless, the commission’s blind spots should be noted .
 The CSC wound up caught between two eras, the high-modernist period of extreme faith in science and technology, and the new environmentalist age of increasing public suspicion of large-scale technological solutions . CSC was caught between the two eras of high-tech and environmentalism .
 The United States National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 required federal decision makers to quantify the environmental costs of development . The act imposed an enormous cultural change on entrenched bureaucratic agencies that had hitherto ignored such costs .
 Unlike the Army Corps of Engineers and the Atomic Energy Commission, the CSC was an ad hoc organization with no public constituency . CSC's authority diminished after Johnson’s presidency .
 In 1970, President Richard Nixon's administration was criticized for being too cozy with the White House . The White House was in the throes of Watergate scandal in the 1970s .
 The U.S. Department of Energy refused to make a recommendation for nuclear excavation technology five years ago . The decision speaks to the rapid shift in values and expectations regarding environmental planning and policy-making, it says .
 Aims to determine feasibility of the sea-level canal provides a clearer view of the failure of an iconic high-modernist project to take root .
 Democratic president Jimmy Carter entered office on January 20,1977, determined to complete the efforts of his predecessors to develop a more equitable relationship with Panama . The 1976 Republican United States presidential primaries had reiterated the extreme unpopularity of relinquishing control of the waterway and zone .
 President Obama has set a six-month deadline for a resolution of the debt ceiling . He set a tight deadline of six months to reach a resolution .
 The debate over the 1977 Torrijos-Carter Treaties featured the issues of sovereignty, national security, and economics . Yet other concerns played subtle, intriguing roles over the course of the arduous negotiation .
 The pacts did come to fruition in the midst of the ‘environmental decade” and the energy crisis, and at the helm of a president with high standing among environmentalists, with a naval engineering background, and with a focus on reforming federal water project policy-making .
 Viewing the diplomatic and domestic watershed through an environmental lens reveals the rising yet uneven political influence of the environmentalist movement during the 1970s on megaproject infrastructural planning . Viewing this diplomatic and personal watershed through the environmental lens shows the rise of the eco-conscious
 Carter compelled negotiators to include an option for a future Panamanian sea-level canal . The move irritated many in both Panama and the United States . The treaty was signed in 1977 in Panama .
 The sea-level canal provision of the Panama Canal Treaty has been described as a mere distraction and ploy to win an Alaskan ratification vote or two .
 The seaway had become almost a nonissue for the i970S-era mediators . It is true that in contrast to the dominant role the idea played in the 1967 U.S.-Panama negotiations, the seaway has become almost nonissue .
 Last-minute revival deserves to be taken more seriously for several reasons, including its last-minute comeback .
 The postatomic rebirth of the sea-level waterway proposal challenges the idea that it died along with Project Plowshare in the early 1970s . The sea level waterway was proposed in the 1970s, but has since been revived .
 It helps elucidate changes in U.S. statist environmental management during the pivotal environmental decade . Moreover, it helps . elucidate . changes in . United States statist environmental . management .
 The proposed megaproject shines light on the new opportunities and constraints of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 . The proposal reflects changing attitudes about what constituted acceptable costs of implementing new forms of energy-security infrastructure following the 1973 oil shock .
 The i970S-era invocation of the interoceanic sea-level canal also provides a deeper look at Carter’s enigmatic environmental record . Carter's environmental record remains enigmatic .
 He faced the challenge of balancing environmental goals with efforts to end the oil crisis and stimulate the economy . He sought to make the federal system of water project policy-making less wasteful and destructive .
 Early in his term, Carter tried to cancel plans for nineteen large-scale dams and reclamation projects that had already been authorized . The endeavor alienated many members of Congress .
 The Panamanian sea-level canal has been revived in Panama . Environmentalists commended the water projects "hit list" But they detested the resurrection of the canal . The canal is still under construction .
 Several environmental groups mobilized against the proposal, rather than welcoming it as an alternative to new terrestrial pipelines . Building on the ecological and evolutionary insights of the marine biologists of the late 1960s, several prominent environmental organizations mobilized against it .
 The 1970s phase of the seaway proposal illuminates changing attitudes toward nonnative species, especially in terrestrial versus marine contexts . The plan also contradicts Carter’s own executive order recognizing the ecological risks of invasive species .
 President Carter’s advocacy of the nonnuclear sea-level canal speaks to the extraordinary challenges he faced as an environmentally oriented president steering the ship of state through the energy crisis .
 Carter’s insistence that the Panama Canal Treaty provides for the eventual construction of a sea-level waterway . At the same time, Carter's determination to overturn the 1903 treaty itself also supports his trusteeship model of leadership .
 Carter acted as a trustee of the public welfare by applying an engineering approach to solving certain problems as quickly and efficiently as possible, as in the cases of the canceled water projects and federal bureaucratic reorganization .
 In other instances, his antipolitical trusteeship style featured a strong sense of morality . In other times, he was criticized for his lack of transparency .
 The sea-level canal proposal, and the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty of which it was a part, exemplified Carter’s technocratic and moralistic impulses to do what he considered right for the country .
 Once Carter became aware of it, the sea-level canal option seemed to hold one of the keys to breaking down a few blocks in the wall of domestic resistance . Once . Carter becomes aware of the option, he said .
 Alaskan oil boosters, antipipeline environmental activists, and undecided senators seeking future cooperation with Panama on an exciting energy-security megaproject . Panama is the focus of the Panama Canal project .
 Newspaper editors do not often get the chance to use sixty-point font . The Ship of Joules uses sixty-points font .
 Atlantic Richfield and Humble Oil companies confirm they have discovered North America’s largest field of subaqueous oil in Prudhoe Bay on the North Slope . After years of exploratory drilling, and months of rumors, the companies confirmed they had discovered the field .
 A pipeline could be built through Canada to the northern tier of the midwestern U.S. It would require bilateral control and cooperation from Canada .
 A harbor could be excavated in Prudhoe Bay for East Coast-bound icebreaking supertankers to carve out the fabled Northwest Passage . More dauntingly, a harbor could also be dug for East-Coast-bound ships to make it easier for the passage .
 Manhattan from Chester, Pennsylvania, to Point Barrow and back during the summer and fall of 19 6 9. 9 .
 TAPS would preclude the need for international pipeline right-of-way agreements . It would offer a variety of transit options . TAPS is the first step in the process of developing a new pipeline system .
 Tankers could travel from Valdez to refineries of the continental West Coast or energy-starved Japan . Japan, which received more than 80 percent of its oil from the Middle East, receives 80 percent .
 Tankers could offload their hydrocarboniferous cargo at a proposed pipeline terminal in Central America for reshipping to Gulf Coast and Caribbean refineries . Or tankers could be offloaded their hydrocarifers at a pipeline terminal .
 Panama Canal could not accommodate ships larger than 65,000 deadweight tonnage . Supertankers of 70,000 to 189,000 dwt could convey North Slope oil eastward by traveling around Cape Horn .
 Oil companies began ordering pipe from Japanese steelmakers without the required federal permits . TAPS plan was a foregone conclusion .
 Environmental groups sued to halt construction, citing their authority to do so under the National Environmental Policy Act . They got a rude awakening when they sued to stop construction .
 Congress had passed the law in December 1969 . Many of its supporters probably deemed it a mere feel-good nod to the rising environment movement . The law was passed in 1969 .
 The Center for Law and Social Policy filed a lawsuit on behalf of three organizations to force the Interior Department to conduct a more detailed study of TAPS’s environmental repercussions . The Wilderness Society, Friends of the Earth, and the Environmental Defense Fund sued .
 The original TAPS report, issued on March 5, 1970, had sparked the litigation . It concluded, based on only eight pages of evidence, that the pipeline would have no major effects .
 In what became the first major NEPA-inspired lawsuit, TAPS opponents focused on the threats that the hot-oil pipeline posed to Native American land rights, permafrost, and caribou, as well as the danger of oil spills occurring along the sea route .
 EIS in January 1971 was criticized for failing to take the wide range of potential environmental consequences seriously . Many citizens outside of the scientific and academic communities denounced the EIS .
 Some environmentally inclined stakeholders invoked other possible unintended consequences . Some environmental groups invoked the possibility of unintended consequences.
 Minnesota’s Democratic senator Walter Mondale led the fight for a Trans-Canadian Pipeline on environmental and economic grounds . In particular, Minnesota's Democratic senator Mondale, who later became Carter's vice president, fought for the pipeline .
 Mondale predicted that if TAPS supporters prevailed, a large surplus of oil would flood the West Coast’s refineries . Mondale: If TAPS backers prevailed, the surplus would flood refineries in the region .
 Alaskan oil consortium sought to export up to a quarter of the precious resource to Japan, he said . He also alleged that the Alaskans sought to use the planned Valdez TAPS terminal to benefit U.S. consumers .
 Interior Department’s Final Environmental Impact Statement, released in March 1972, covered six volumes . The Interior Department released the statement in 1972, covering six volumes.
 The pipeline infrastructural system, including the haul road, oil field, and tanker ballast treatment facility, would have a variety of unavoidable effects during construction, operation, and maintenance .
 Congress initiated new hearings based on a court decision that the report did not meet the requirements of another relevant law, the Mineral Leasing Act . A court decision was overturned by a court ruling .
 Alaska Senator Mike Gravel introduced an amendment that exempted the project from further environmental review . Vice President Spiro Agnew broke a tie-breaking vote in July . Alaska Senator Gravel was the first senator to introduce an amendment to exempt the project .
 The path was cleared for the pipeline, and Congress had checked its own initiative to subject megaproject planning on federal lands to greater public oversight . Congress had set up a bill to allow greater oversight of the project .
 Some took solace in having forced designers to implement important changes, such as building parts of the forty-eight-inch-wide pipeline above tundra areas vulnerable to melting .
 Equipment sat exposed to the intense Arctic elements for three winters, and government officials received bad press . Equipment was left exposed to intense elements and exposed to harsh weather . The government was criticized for not doing enough to protect equipment .
 OPEC retaliated against the U.S. for supporting Israel during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War by cutting off the flow of oil . The 1973 war sparked a crippling recession in the United States .
 Environmentalist action turned to conservation and the development of renewable energy sources . More efficient cars and mass transit were also key to conservation .
 TAPS construction began with little attention paid to ensuring that the transportation network that would be needed to distribute North Slope petroleum would meet the same high environmental standards as the pipeline itself .
 Reduced United States consumption of fossil fuels following the embargo had its own unintended consequences . Reduced U.S. consumption of oil following embargo had many unintended consequences, including the loss of oil .
 The eight-hundred-mile pipeline was completed in 1977 . The first barrels started flowing in the summer of 1977 . Officials faced an embarrassing dilemma .
 The predicted West Coast glut had come to fruition, mainly because most of the area’s refineries could not handle the high-sulfur crude . Most of the region's refineries were unable to handle the North Slope's high sulfur crude .
 Following the Santa Barbara oil rig blowout of 1969, California and Washington had enacted stringent water and air pollution laws that stymied initiatives to build new transcontinental pipelines .
 Of the four oil infrastructure projects on the table in 1977, the most publicized environmental conflict involved the Standard Oil Company of Ohio . Standard Oil of Ohio of Ohio was controller of 50 percent of the North Slope reserves .
 Sohio proposed to build a new terminal at Long Beach, California, to access an existing natural gas pipeline to transport five hundred thousand barrels of crude oil per day to Midland, Texas . The western terminus of a crude pipeline network stretching to the Northeast .
 The terminal would increase air pollution in the smoggy Los Angeles basin . The California Air Resources Board and California Energy Commission objected to the terminal .
 For the first time since World War II, the number of ships transiting the Panama Canal fell from 15,500 to 13,500 in 1976 . The embargo had another shocking effect, the first since WWII, when ships transited the canal .
 The Anderson Commission surveyed the twenty major U.S. oil companies regarding the nuclear sea-level canal idea in 19 6 8 . Shippers of petroleum and petroleum products had been a major source of traffic and income for the canal .
 OPEC ban reduced the number of oil-carrying ships through Panama Canal . Suez Canal closure closed following the 1967 Six-Day War . OPEC ban also closed the Panama Canal after the Six-day War .
 The eight-year-long shutdown accelerated the trend toward larger tankers, which could compensate for the longer trips around the Cape of Good Hope by carrying heavier cargoes .
 These superships made it more economical to bypass the Panama Canal in favor of the lengthy South American Cape Horn route . Likewise, these superships also made it easier to bypass .
 Although such a trip took thirty-eight days, it was cheaper than sending a fully loaded 50,000-ton ship to the Far East via Panama .
 By 1976 over 1,300 of the world’s 21,500 merchant vessels were too wide for the Panama Canal's locks . Another 1,700 ships exceeded the draft limits when loaded to capacity . By 1976 1,400 ships were too big for the canal's locks, and
 Negotiators of the 1964-67 program to replace the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty had devoted one of the three draft treaties to a future sea-level canal . The Seaway’s Post-PNE Resurrection is now underway .
 By the time the two nations resumed serious talks in 1973-75, the futuristic waterway had been all but forgotten .
 The Anderson Commission’s 1970 recommendation against nuclear excavation, the 1971 U.S. National Security Council memo addressing the sea-level canal's ecological issues and lack of military and foreign policy benefits, had sapped United States enthusiasm for what had once appeared an ideal technopolitical solution
 A strong sense on both sides that any new canal—however unlikely—would have to be sited in Panama dissipated the U.S. leverage that had prevailed in previous treaty talks .
 Diplomats retain language allowing for eventual cooperation on a sea-level waterway . Even so, diplomats retain language that could allow cooperation .
 President Ford directed his negotiators to seek the longest possible period for a U.S. option to increase canal capacity . Subsequently, in 1975, the United States sought to expand canal capacity by adding a third lane of locks or building a sea-level canal .
 Ford wanted to prevent any other nation from building a new waterway . Technology and economic changes might eventually render such a project viable and useful for the U.S., he says .
 Democrat Jimmy Carter won the election, with strong support from environmentalists . Jimmy Carter was elected president of the United States in 1977 .
 He immediately made the Panama Canal Treaties a centerpiece of his foreign policy agenda . He retained Ford’s negotiator Ellsworth Bunker and appointed Linowitz as co-negotiator, for a six-month term .
 Treaty reform, Flood warned in a private letter, “could well be your ‘Bay of Pigs’ and prevent your renomination or re-election,” he said . President Kennedy failed to overthrow Fidel Castro’s government in Cuba in 1961 . Flood: Treaty
 During the 1976 campaign, Carter’s team had cultivated the environmental vote by hailing his record as governor of Georgia . Carter's team had been cultivating the vote by saying his record was environmental .
 Carter incurred the wrath of many Georgians by vetoing the project . After being persuaded by environmental groups to reverse his support for an imminent Army Corps of Engineers dam on the Flint River, Carter faced the ire of Georgians .
 President Obama sought to eliminate wasteful pork barrel water projects . The move combined his interests in environmental quality and fiscal conservatism . It raised his national profile .
 Flood, a conservative Democrat, had little interest in environmental issues . His passion project was preserving the Panama Canal Zone . Flood was a passionate advocate of preserving the Canal Zone.
 He and other opponents of treaty reform had been mobilizing ecological arguments against the sea-level canal proposal for years .
 The sea-level canal idea attracted renewed attention at congressional hearings on efforts of Flood, Thurmond, and others to allocate $850 million for a third lane of locks . Friends of the Earth played a prominent role, beginning in 1973 .
 FOE was founded in 1969 by the former executive director of the Sierra Club David Brower . FOE is a young organization, having been founded by Brower in 1969 . The organization was founded by former Sierra Club executive director Brower.
 The group's membership grew to twenty-seven thousand within four years . Taking strong stands against TAPS, chemical warfare in Vietnam, nuclear energy, and other technologies of the postwar era .
 George Alderson is the legislative director of the House Interior committee . Alderson has become such a congressional fixture that a member of the committee joked about calling him by his first name .
 Alderson had also helped organize the successful environmentalist coalition against the federal supersonic transport program . Alderson later authored a guide to citizen lobbying .
 During both the Ford and Carter administrations, Alderson endeavored to mobilize the insights of the i96os-era marine biologists . Alderson was a leading employee of FOE and then of the Wilderness Society .
 Alderson sought to elevate ecological matters to the level of economic ones . While shipping industry representatives objected that such a waterway would lead to increased tolls .
 In letters to the House Panama Canal subcommittee chairs, Alderson says expanding the original waterway would serve commercial maritime needs . No environmental impact statements for modernizing the Panama Canal had yet been filed, he says .
 Alderson wrote to the Domestic Policy Staff’s environmental expert, Katherine Fletcher . Alderson tried to get the White House attention .
 She had participated in Earth Day 1970 and worked in Washington lobbying for environmental legislation . She also worked in Colorado opposing oil-shale development .
 In March 1977, she was consumed with the congressional fallout of the water projects hit list, among other issues .
 Fletcher responded two weeks later, in April 1977, that she was forwarding his letter to CEQ and Office of Management and Budget and would like to learn more about this “very interesting situation,” but otherwise remained noncommittal . Fletcher responded to the letter with a noncomm
 The following month, Carter received a persuasive letter from a pro-sea-level canal senator, Mike Gravel . Gravel wrote a letter to Carter urging him to keep the canal in place . Carter received the letter from Gravel, a senator from South Carolina .
 He "picked up the cause, having become convinced that it offered the best solution to the problem of distributing Alaskan oil to the energy-hungry East and Gulf Coasts"
 The Army Corps of Engineers should update the Anderson Commission’s 1970 report . In particular, the report should be updated to update the report .
 Other recommended actions echoed those of previous administrations, such as transferring some lands and responsibilities for operating the canal to Panama .
 A civil liberties framework infused Gravel’s ensuing forty-six-page report to the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee . Gravel outlined the political and technological outmodedness of the existing waterway . The report was presented before a Senate committee .
 He focused on the need to rectify the historical injustice perpetuated by the U.S. against Panama . The Canal Zone was a “colonial-socialistic enclave” incommensurate with American values, he said .
 Gravel rejected the argument that Panamanian control would lead to the waterway’s ruin . Gravel: Panamanians control the Panama Canal .
 He also presented data he had commissioned demonstrating the canal’s diminishing value due to its inability to accommodate the new class of postPanamax supertankers .
 Gravel presented five reasons for developing a new interoceanic waterway at sea level . Any one of which in Gravel's view justified the project, any one in his view .
 First, the need to transport the oil and natural gas resources of his own state eastward would enhance the economic viability of a wide sea-level canal . The need for a canal would also help transport the natural gas and oil .
 Such a waterway, which he proposed to be fully owned by Panama, would resolve the 13-year-old stalemate in treaty negotiations . It would reduce U.S. dependence on foreign energy sources, preclude massive United States investments in new east-west oil pipeline systems .
 Gravel made no mention of furor over the biological questions raised by the i96os-era sea-level canal debate . Gravel addressed the report to the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works .
 President Obama's energy security and infrastructure needs are not linked to environmental concerns . He says he's concerned about energy security, infrastructure needs and energy security . He's also concerned about the economy and infrastructure .
 Gravel's lobbying paid off when he scored a twenty-minute meeting with the president in the Oval Office on July 13,1977 . Gravel’s lobbyist paid off .
 The new treaty would provide an option for the U.S. to build a sea-level canal . The document's background section included no information about the proposal’s checkered history . The final point reminded Carter .
 Carter brought up the sea-level canal idea in an unexpected venue . That seemed to be the end of it, but eight days later, on July 21, 1977, Carter brought it up .
 At a town hall in Yazoo City, Mississippi, a citizen implied that he opposed granting Panama control of the canal . The area would provide vital military assistance in the event of a third world war, the citizen implied .
 President Lyndon Johnson’s administration had studied the multibilliondollar project . The need to transport Alaskan oil and gas in huge tankers to the Gulf and East Coasts had since then intensified the need for a wider waterway .
 The $8 billion spent by private industry on TAPS, and the $11 billion projected for an Alaskan natural gas pipeline, had put the Anderson Commission’s estimate in perspective . The Anderson Commission estimates cost of the TAPS pipeline is about $10 billion .
 $2.88 billion cost of Route 10 seaway had seemed beyond the pale in 1970 . Even when adjusted for inflation at $5.29 billion, it seemed much less objectionable . Route 10 cost was much less .
 At a question and answer session with members of the press in New Orleans on July 22, Carter responded, “I told you at least as much as I know,” prompting laughter from the crowd .
 Press concluded with an offer to initiate an update by the National Academy of Sciences, which Carter approved . Carter approved the offer .
 During the late summer and fall of 1977, a multitude of agencies and organizations rushed to contribute to the revived discussion . The discussion was revived in the summer of 1977 .
 Article XII Carter’s sudden espousal of the sea-level canal annoyed the treaty negotiators, who considered it settled and subordinate to resolving differences over the United States military bases, canal annuities to Panama, and many other issues .
 This would have been wide enough for all our warships as well as the largest oil tankers, it has been claimed . This would've been a wide enough space for warships and large oil tanks .
 Despite his historical amnesia, Hollings exemplified the venerable view that complex political problems could be resolved via a technological approach . Hollings: Complex political problems can be resolved using a technology approach .
 The sea-level canal provision was shoehored into the almost-complete treaty . But shoehorning the sea level canal provision into the treaty was complicated . The treaty is almost complete, but it is expected to be signed in 2015 .
 Bunker and Linowitz tried to obtain a U.S. veto over canal construction by a third country in Panama . The treaty’s expiration on the last day of 1999 expired in 1999 . Bunker, Linowitz and Bunker tried to get a United States veto .
 President Torrijos and the presidents of Colombia, Venezuela, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Jamaica call for the United States to reciprocate by agreeing not to negotiate with other Central American nations to build a new interoceanic route during the life of the treaty .
 Latin American presidents appealed to Carter to accept the condition . Otherwise, Panama would walk away from the table . The Latin American president said the condition would be unacceptable .
 Panamanian negotiators later charged that U.S. insistence on right to exclude other nations from excavating a sea-level channel through Panama jeopardized the treaty talks . United States officials downplayed the allegation that United States had downplayed .
 Dozens of Latin American and U.S. dignitaries gathered in Washington, D.C. to celebrate the signing of the Torrijos-Carter Treaties .
 The day before the ceremony, on September 6, 1977, eleven organizations across the spectrum of environmentalist advocacy telegrammed the White House with an urgent plea to reject Article XII of the Panama Canal Treaty . The petition was sent by eleven organizations .
 Environmental Action Inc., the Environmental Policy Center, and FOE, which probably led the telegram effort . Environmental Action . Inc. and FOe. Inc. led the effort .
 It quoted from a 1970 report by the National Academy’s Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal . It reminded the president of the 1975 telegram opposing any treaty option involving a sea-level waterway . It also reminded him of the 1970s report by
 The coalition objected that the State Department had only released a draft EIS of the Panama Canal Treaty days earlier . The academy had not yet issued its updated report for the White House .
 General Omar Torrijos and U.S. president Jimmy Carter signed Panama Canal Treaties in Washington, D.C., September 7, 1977 . Panamanian general Torrijoos and United States president Carter signed the treaties .
 Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-DIG-ppmsca-09785. wide range of initiatives pertaining to pollution control, human health, energy, and population growth .
 On May 23, 1977, Carter issued an executive order to prohibit the establishment of exotic organisms on federal lands and waters . Carter also directed the secretaries of agriculture and the interior to develop legislation .
 Article XII seemed to contradict key environmental goals of the Carter administration . The environmentalists’ last-minute telegram did not stop the signing ceremony for the treaties .
 President Carter: "Any future sea-level canal will be built in Panama and with the cooperation of the United States" Carter: U.S. and Panama have agreed to build the canal in the spirit of reciprocity .
 Carter could not ignore the environmentalists’ antiseaway publicity indefinitely . But as the diplomatic process gave way to domestic politicking for the ratification of the accords, Carter couldn't ignore the environmentalists’ .
 Sen. Gravel's vision of the sea-level canal raised difficult questions about the relationship between oceanic health and maritime infrastructure . The proposal, as it had in the 1960s, raised questions .
 The Senate ratification campaign would soon force him to realize that federal officials could no longer dismiss such esoteric questions as easily as in the pre-NEPA years .
 The emergence of nuclear excavation technology had revived the dormant dream of an isthmian sea-level canal in the late 1950s . PNEs in the early 1970s did not lay it to rest .
 In fact, the seaway idea outlived by several years the postwar enthusiasm for using buried thermonuclear bombs to overcome the economic and technical burdens of monumental engineering projects . The seaway seaway concept was first proposed in the 1950s .
 Project Plowshare funding finally ended in 1977, seven years after the Anderson Commission concluded it could not recommend atomic ditch-digging .
 By the mid-1970s, the economic and political calculus had changed for peaceful nuclear explosives . By the 1970s, conventional construction did pose much higher costs than those originally calculated for nuclear weapons .
 The $8 billion Trans-Alaska Pipeline created a new benchmark for public and private stakeholders about what constituted reasonable expenditures for critical fossil fuel facilities and infrastructure . The Trans Alaska Pipeline is the largest fossil fuel pipeline in the world .
 The men appointed by President Johnson to investigate the seaway’s feasibility would have been amazed by the multivolume EIS issued by the Department of the Interior .
 Congress had demonstrated its authority to check the rapid rise of environmentalist influence on federal megaproject planning by exempting TAPS from further review in the summer of 1973 .
 President Carter spoke out in favor of a treaty clause regarding U.S.-Panamanian cooperation to develop a second canal at the level of the seas . Perhaps President Carter had this in mind, as well as the shockwaves caused by the subsequent OPEC embargo .
 The notorious water projects hit-list episode was but one case that confounded his environmentalist constituency . The water projects were one of the most controversial projects in the world .
 In August 1977, outraged congressmen from both parties presented Carter with an appropriations bill that restored support for all the water projects for the 1978 fiscal year . The bill was passed by both parties and passed by Congress .
 The president’s reluctant signing of the bill frustrated environmentalists . Later initiatives to address the energy crisis included one to fast-track synthetic fuel plants, refineries .
 Carter’s support for the sea-level canal should be seen within this context of supporting federal environmental regulations and projects, but not when they conflicted with his top priority of economic recovery . Carter: ‘I’m not going to support the sea level canal.’
 Carter had a keen appreciation of the potential threats posed by nonnative invasive species . Carter's executive order restricting the introduction of foreign plants and animals was revealed by his executive order .
 The executive order's framing with respect to the federal agencies overseeing agriculture and public lands, and his own farming background, suggests that Carter and his environmental lieutenants viewed nonnative species through a terrestrial rather than marine lens .
 i96os-era biologists' insights on species exchange influenced environmental groups opposing the sea-level canal in the mid-1970s . Yet the science of marine invasion biology and conservation biology remained underfunded and underdeveloped .
 Oceanography, fisheries science, and other marine disciplines still focused more on providing data to facilitate the development of ocean resources than on elucidating their biological diversity and vulnerability to human activities .
 Carter’s time in the navy during and after World War II may have shaped a view for him of the oceans as invulnerable to overexploitation . It is possible that Carter's time in and after WWII shaped his view of the ocean .
 Carter, others who sought to maximize the productivity of the seas, did not care for the life within . That is not to say that Carter, nor others . Carter, or others . did not . care for life within the seas .
 Carter’s national security worldview, engineering mindset and engineering mindset likely all played important roles in his advocacy of the sea-level canal . His need for canal treaty ratification votes from every possible source of support likely played important role in advocacy .
 Next on the agenda was another titanic challenge, securing Senate approval of the pacts before the 1978 midterm elections .
 High-level officials and surrogates met with hundreds of constituent groups and opinion makers, and cut deals with dozens of individual senators, to secure the sixty-seven senate votes needed for ratification .
 Carter and his team spent considerable political capital to reassure reluctant Americans that the accords did not constitute an abject surrender of U.S. prerogatives . Carter: The accords were not a surrender of United States prerogative .
 Environmental groups made it clear after Carter revived the sea-level canal proposal that their support could not be taken for granted .
 The Panama Canal Treaty entered into force on October 1, 1979, and terminated on December 31, 1999, with the transfer of full control of the waterway to Panama . The treaty contained two major environmental provisions .
 Article XII authorized the two nations to conduct a feasibility study for a sea-level waterway . It also prohibited Panama from building a new interoceanic canal and the U.S. from negotiating with other Central American countries to construct one .
 NEPA enabled citizens to take legal action against agencies that failed to take the EIS process seriously . NEPA had already transformed statist environmental management by enabling citizen action .
 Prior to 1977, only treaties to undergo impact assessments by U.S. agencies focused on environmental themes such as natural resource use, pollution control, and the endangered species trade .
 The State Department’s completion of an EIS for the Panama Canal Treaty thus marked a milestone in environmental diplomacy . The EIS is a milestone for environmental diplomacy, the State Department says . The State Dept. completed the EIS on Panama Canal treaty .
 The report was not a paragon of rigorous analysis, but it provided a new forum for addressing the ecological threats posed by the sea-level canal . It was not an analysis that was rigorous, but the report was a good start to the project .
 Ira Rubinoff and fellow biologists had tried to mobilize funds for taxonomic and evolutionary studies needed to predict the seaway’s effects on marine fauna . They participated once again in government initiatives to assess the megaproject, but now with the support of professional advocacy n
 Many members of Congress doubted the eventual need for a second canal . The continuing energy crisis made them more willing to hear out Senator Mike Gravel’s proposed remedy .
 The i970S-era phase of the sea-level canal story illustrated the expanding international scope of U.S. environmentalist advocacy . The project was the first phase of a U.N. effort to build a canal in the world .
 Some environmental arguments and rhetoric did not reflect the Panama Canal Treaty’s anti-imperialistic spirit . The treaty was signed in 1903 . The Panama Canal Canal Treaty was signed by the United States in 1904 .
 Conservative congressmen seeking to preserve U.S. sovereignty over Canal Zone had long used the sea-level channel’s potential ecological threats for own ends .
 Marine biologists continue to promulgate the relevance of struggling naturalist disciplines to megaproject planning . Marine biologists continued to promulgate the relevance .
 Environmental NGOs compelled the administration to pay closer attention to the environmental consequences of both the sea-level canal and of the transfer of the original waterway and Canal Zone to Panama .
 State Department issued statement designed to mollify NGOs that might oppose ratification . State Department responded to environmentalist pressure for a stronger EIS . Environmentalist pressure was prompted by the State Department .
 NEPA enabled environmental interest groups to exert significant influence in Washington . Only seven years after Lyndon Johnson’s canal study commissioners dismissed environmentalism as a passing fad, NEPA had enabled environmental groups to influence Washington .
 President Carter’s surprise announcement at the Yazoo City town hall on July 2.1,1977, about the value of keeping U.S. options open for a future Panamanian sea-level canal . The Panama Canal Treaty EIS was created by President Carter .
 Officials debated how to meet environmentalists’ demands for a full NEPA review . The ambassadors raced against their August 10 deadline to strengthen the sea-level canal clause .
 Marion Edey is one of the still-unconfirmed members of the Council on Environmental Quality . She wrote a long letter to Stuart Eizenstat, the president’s domestic affairs advisor, about the project .
 Edey co-founded the League of Conservation Voters in 1970 . Edey was a well-connected member of the D.C. environmental lobbying circuit .
 Press has asked the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a new assessment . Press immediately conveyed the request to academy president Handler .
 The academy agreed to sponsor a conference of experts in September and to prepare a report soon thereafter . It was a tall order—to assemble seven years’ worth of work within eight weeks .
 Press’s office apparently acted without having consulted the CEQ . Edey wrote him on August 23 to outline the many questions her office considered paramount for the academy study . Press's office has not responded to the request .
 Katherine Fletcher suggested that the CEQ and the Office of Science and Technology Policy work together on the seaway issue . George Alderson's request came in response to environmentalist's request .
 The failure of two White House agencies to communicate in a timelier manner revealed the disorganized executive-branch approach to the seaway proposal, as well as the mounting pressure by the Washington-based environmentalist community to subject the treaty to NEPA oversight .
 In the meantime, representatives of the CEQ and several of the concerned environmental groups met in Washington with the assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs, Patsy Mink .
 State Department officials admitted they had not yet started the assessment . State Department says it is still assessing the damage caused by the loss .
 The draft EIS announcement appeared in the Federal Register on August 29, inviting interested parties to submit comments within thirty days . But just a few weeks later, the EIS was announced .
 The National Academy’s new ad hoc group had not yet met, let alone issued its requested report to the president . The new group has yet to issue a report to President Barack Obama .
 Many of the eighteen federal agencies, nineteen private organizations, and seven individuals who responded to the Panama Canal Treaty draff EIS castigated the rushed job .
 The State Department violated the NEPA statute providing commentators forty-five days . Not only was the report short, but the State Department also violated the law .
 The agency did reinstate the full period of public comment (that is, until October 13, 1977), but did not hold public hearings . The agency re-opened the public comment period in 1977 .
 Biologists influenced by the earlier seaway debate had passed resolutions calling on the Panama Canal Company to protect the waterway’s freshwater barrier by not pumping in salt water .
 Scientists feared the proposal to augment the Gatun and Alajuela reservoirs with ocean water would gather momentum . After a record-setting drought in the winter of 1976-77 forced canal operators to restrict transits, however .
 Commentators call for the final EIS to provide detailed analyses about a variety of other issues . Commentators called for more detailed analyses of the EIS .
 A United States nongovernmental organization adopted an explicitly anti-imperialist approach to environmental management . A U.S. government organization, however, adopted an openly anti-Imperialist view .
 Wright expressed confidence in the Panamanians’ commitment to protecting the canal watershed from deforestation-induced erosion . Wright expressed his confidence in Panama’s commitment .
 Environmental quality committee excoriates draft EIS for not employing broad enough view of human ecology . Draft EIS was criticized by committee representing both entities for not using broad view of ecology .
 Senator James Allen of Alabama used the draft EIS to bolster his case against ratification . The treaty is the first to be ratified by the U.S. Congress .
 In a speech on September 28,1977, he urged his fellow senators to “listen carefully to the recommendations of environmental groups’s recommendations’ He raised the specter of Panamanian-caused deforestation in the Canal Zone .
 The draft EIS had also considered how Panamanian-imposed canal toll increases might affect environmental and economic well-being . Allen focused on the increased atmospheric pollution and higher consumer costs that would ensue if shippers of coal, petroleum, and other raw materials avoided the canal .
 The final version of the EIS came out late in December 1977 . It did not list any authors but identified William Mansfield III of the State Department’s Office of Environmental Affairs as the contact person .
 The report retained a heavy, though not exclusive, focus on how environmental changes under the treaty might impact the U.S. interests . The report was released in March .
 The loss of the Zone’s forests would also threaten wildlife, including ten mammals and five birds listed under the U.S. Endangered Species Act of 1973 . Ten mammals, five birds and five mammals are endangered under the 1973 Act .
 Final impact statement did not provide the in-depth historical evaluation of environmental management practices that several commentators sought . Otherwise, however, the final impact statement does not provide an evaluation of historical management practices .
 Ad hoc group chaired by Alfred Beeton of the Great Lakes and Marine Waters Centers formed . National Academy of Sciences was also hard at work after receiving presidential science advisor's request .
 The Beeton Committee held a conference of experts on September 1-2, solicited comments from almost two dozen more . The committee issued its eleven-page report on September 28 .
 Rubinoff, who became STRI’s director in 1973, had since come out against the seaway proposal . Rubinoff called for the construction of a third set of locks with saltwater pumps, tidal gates, and a “toxic barrier” to kill fouling
 Sylvia Earle, Joel Hedgpeth, Meredith Jones, John McCosker, William Newman, C Richard Robins, Richard Rosenblatt, Howard Sanders and Howard Sanders, Geerat Vermeij, and Gilbert Voss .
 Even John Sheffey participated, presenting on physical barriers to faunal mixing .
 The Beeton Committee report packed a lot of information into eleven pages . It provided the sea-level canal authors a fresh forum to explain why marine ecology mattered for development .
 The 1977 academy authors criticized the Anderson Commission for its notorious conclusion about the acceptable risks of adverse ecological consequences . They called for a barrier system to prevent migration and colonization that would follow the opening of a sea-level canal .
 Despite the passage of seven years, isthmian marine ecology had barely advanced . But despite the passage, marine ecology has barely advanced, scientists say .
 Few surveys had been conducted to identify the species capable of migrating, especially not in the deeper areas requiring special equipment and research vessels . Few surveys have been conducted .
 Basic knowledge of marine parasites and disease organisms, even for commercially important organisms, remained sparse . Basic knowledge about marine parasites was sparse .
 The Beeton report also called for a more complex approach to predicting the seaway’s consequences for ocean life . The report was published by the Beeton Report on Monday .
 The earlier controversy’s focus on extinction events and charismatic species like the yellow-bellied sea snake and crown-of-thorns starfish emphasized the direct effects of seaway construction at the expense of indirect effects .
 A sea-level waterway would affect nutrient dynamics, food webs, and species abundance by altering oceanic currents and sediment flows . The original Panama Canal had destroyed local mangrove forests, sea grass beds, coral reefs when crews dumped masses of dredge spoil .
 State-of-the-art computer models, in concert with updated taxonomic information, offered promise for determining such localized effects . The study was published in the U.S. National Geographic Geographic Geographic Center on Monday .
 An updated assessment of the sea-level canal is now estimated at $6. billion . On the plus side, he considered $7 million “a relatively small price to pay” for an updated assessment .
 McIntyre emphasized the project’s questionable economic returns, even in the context of increasing energy-transportation problems . After implicitly referencing the Beeton report, McIntyre said the project would not be sustainable .
 At one of the first post-signing ceremony ratification campaign events held by the White House on September 15, 1977, environmental groups constituted six of the thirty-two civic organizations represented . The White House held the event at the end of September 15 .
 Gravel’s bill for a new sea-level canal study probably reflected a deeper appreciation of the proposal, as conveyed by the report . Carter's decision in early October not to authorize Gravel's bill reflected a deep appreciation of its controversial history, the report says .
 FOE President David Brower called the group’s interpretation of the seaway as “a sinister move on the part of the oil lobby,” the magazine quoted from a scathing editorial by President Brower .
 He excoriated Carter for promoting the project without having solicited CEQ’s recommendations or directing an EIS to be conducted before the treaty talks began .
 Brower: Alaskan senator tried to circumvent Congress, the CEQ, and the public by persuading Carter to have the sea-level canal written into the treaty . Brower says he believes the Alaskans wanted a new feasibility study on the canal .
 The country also faced massive changes due to a proposed highway through the Darien Gap and the newly completed Bayano Hydroelectric Complex . Thousands of Indigenous people in the eastern portion of Panama were displaced by the proposed highway .
 Three huge projects embodied the challenges of reconciling economic development with respect for human rights and environmental quality . The three huge projects embody the challenges to reconcile economic development .
 Smithsonian official Rubinoff and another Smithsonian official, Ross Simons, discuss Panama Canal Treaty . Rubinoff, Simons and Aragon were asked for their take on the environmental issues raised by the treaty .
 Rubinoff and Simons advised Carter’s team to assure them that no decision would be made in the absence of further scientific study . As for the seaway, “perhaps the most emotional issue to environmentalists,” they advised them to .
 Representatives of the most vocal environmental groups had also been calling for such assurance . They would likely have objected to being described as emotional .
 Such threats include larger oil spills by the massive tankers that would use a sea-level channel, the need to deepen U.S. ports to accommodate these vessels . The effects on the urban ports of Panama City and Colon of reducing traffic through the existing canal would also be significant .
 It had only begun expanding its international presence since 1970 . It had achieved great success using NEPA to challenge foreign megaprojects slated to be built with U.S. funds .
 The club and three other organizations sued the United States Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration in 1975 to demand a better EIS for the proposed Pan-American Highway through the Panama-Colombia border .
 The plaintiffs sought a greater focus on preventing the spread of hoof-and-mouth disease from South American livestock across what had long functioned as a biogeographical barrier . The dense rainforests of the Darien have long been an important barrier to livestock .
 The disease threatened to kill off a quarter of the North American cattle herd, a $10 billion loss . The disease gained a lot of traction because of its potential to kill a quarter .
 A U.S. district court agreed that both the draft and final impact statements failed to adequately address aftosa, as well as the cultural survival of the affected Guna and Choco tribes . A federal court agreed to the decision, saying the draft statements did not adequately address the issue
 Vance had a deep knowledge of U.S.-Panama affairs, having served as the Panama Canal’s sole shareholder (as secretary of the army) and the deputy secretary of defense during the 1964 Flag Riots . Vance also served as Lyndon Johnson's deputy secretary .
 The environmental community had to settle for a glorified cover letter by the second-ranking foreign affairs leader . Instead of a high-profile speech by the nation’s top foreign policy official, however, the environmental community was disappointed .
 Christopher issued the “Statement on the Panama Canal Treaties and Environmental Protection” on January 12, 1978 . The statement was issued in 1978 .
 Article XII provided only “for a study of the feasibility of such a canal without making a decision or commitment that a sea-level canal will be built,” the document declared . The document declared that Article XII . provided only . “For a study ... without making an
 Article VI “as an integral part of the Panama Canal Treaty,” a dubious claim given the pact’s overriding focus on the operation, defense, and transfer of the waterway and associated lands and property . He identified Article VI as an “integral part of
 The lawyer had a history of pressuring the State Department and other U.S. foreign affairs agencies to comply with NEPA . Congress intended the law to extend beyond the territorial boundaries of the United States .
 That was not to say that NEPA permitted interference in the internal affairs of other nations . NEPA did not say that interference in other nations' internal affairs .
 Environmental groups would have to ensure that the enabling legislation met the State Department’s ambitious objectives . As for the joint commission outlined by Article VI, environmental groups would need to ensure the legislation meets the objectives .
 Robert Byrd of West Virginia and Howard Baker of Tennessee expressed willingness to delete it in order to “pick up votes,” especially that of one senator, Robert Griffin of Michigan . Despite strong support among some of their colleagues for it, the leading protreaty senators expressed their willingness
 Christopher cautioned them against this maneuver on the grounds that the article was in the national interest, and that any deletions would put the treaty at risk of further revision . Christopher: Any deletions of the treaty would put it at risk for further revision.
 Baker agreed to shelve the plan for the time being . Griffin appeared to be turning against the treaties anyway, Baker said .
 By early February, sixty-two senators had committed to support the treaties, twenty-eight opposed them, and ten remained undecided . Twenty-eight senators opposed the treaties .
 To obtain the requisite sixty-seven votes, the administration made many last-minute concessions, including one that infuriated the Panamanians . Arizona senator Dennis DeConcini introduced a reservation allowing the U.S. to use military force in Panama to keep the canal open, if
 The Senate approved each of the pacts with one vote to spare . The Neutrality Treaty passed on March 16 and the Panama Canal Treaty on April 18 with identical roll calls . The Panama Canal treaty was passed on April 17 .
 Carter officials had to provide statements of reassurance not only to environmentalists fearing a future sea-level canal but also to reluctant treaty supporters fearing the loss of the treaty right to defend the waterway .
 The Trans-Alaska Pipeline was only transmitting a few hundred barrels per day . Energy analysts expected that number to skyrocket in the near future .
 On May 4, 1978, the Senate approved moving forward with Gravel’s bill to provide $8 million for a new commission to conduct a full NEPA review of the seaway project .
 The measure included a flora, fauna, and ecosystem inventory of the Panamanian isthmus and assessment of the ecological effects of marine species movement . Though he had previously ignored the risks of species exchange .
 The bill allocated three years for the commission to complete all its work, including the economic and technological feasibility studies . The bill was passed by the US House of Representatives on Wednesday .
 The House of Representatives held three days of hearings to consider Gravel’s plan in June 1978 . Gravel's plan was rejected by the House, where antitreaty sentiment remained strong .
 Gravel used data he had commissioned to argue that 98 percent of the world fleet could still go through the Panama Canal .
 Actual tonnage through the canal did meet earlier predictions due to increase in average vessel size . Despite the drop in the number of ships, he argued that actual tonnages did meet predictions .
 The canal could only be said to have accommodated 42 percent of the world shipping fleet in 1977 . However, that figure would likely drop to 7.64 percent by 2000 . The oil industry could no longer use the Panama route .
 Big Oil would not be the only beneficiary of a deep and wide new waterway . The U.S. construction, steelmaking, shipbuilding and shipbuilding industries would also profit . West Coast timber industries would benefit from the project .
 Gravel: “I would rather the Congress not fight about something that is obsolete,” Gravel implored his colleagues . Gravel says he wants Congress not to fight about an obsolete treaty .
 When grilled about the project’s environmental effects, Gravel revealed his terrestrial bias . Gravel said the project's environmental effects would be environmentally harmful .
 Building the requisite infrastructure across the part of the continent that was only 50 miles wide as opposed to where it was 1,500 miles wide offered the least damaging solution to conveying the vital cargo eastward . Building the necessary infrastructure across part of Africa was the least damage .
 His TAPS battle scars might have taught him a hard lesson about the persistence of environmentalist opposition, or he sincerely believed that investing in a sea-level canal made more sense than expanding the nation’s oil pipeline infrastructure .
 Many biologists are frustrated with the proposal reemerging with only token attention to baseline research . But one thing that had not changed was the frustration of many biologists .
 The $3 million needed for a decade-long investigation would be worth it if the sea-level canal were ruled out on economic and national security grounds, the researchers say . They affirmed so by focusing on the value of the isthmus for addressing one of biology’s most
 Analyzing how fish, urchins, and numerous other organisms had changed after being separated by the isthmian land bridge for three million years would provide new insights for evolutionary biology .
 Robins had contributed to the infamous Battelle report that downplayed the threat of faunal mixing . Robins still seemed to harbor resentment against the biologists who had dismissed his team’s labors .
 Under Rubinoff’s leadership, STRI increasingly expanded its Panamanian employment, training, and education programs . STRI negotiated additional agreements with the government of Panama in 1985, 1997, and 2000 to continue operating in the former Canal Zone .
 Ortman of FOE delivered a sharp denunciation of the sea-level canal on several fronts . Ortman's Not Man Apart article was entered into the record along with the telegram delivered to the White House on the eve of the Torrijos-Carter signing ceremony .
 A representative of the Izaak Walton League of America, a venerable organization of about fifty thousand anglers, also spoke . FOE is almost twice as many anglers as FOE, and FOE has more than fifty thousand members .
 Both argued that Gravel’s bill did not afford adequate attention to ecological research due to its three-year timeframe, far less than biologists had requested .
 John Sheffey, the former executive director of the Anderson Commission, testified at the hearing . The Anderson Commission was the subject of a series of hearings in Washington, DC .
 He remained convinced that a sea-level canal would be a better investment than the third-locks expansion project, which would be rendered obsolete as ship sizes once again increased .
 He did not think it necessary to spend $8 million for a comprehensive new study . Yet he did not want to spend that much .
 Rubinoffs and others had conducted breeding experiments in tanks and had towed species through the canal to start to provide a quantitative basis for predicting the effects of marine species mixing .
 Scientists would have plenty of time to conduct baseline ecological studies during the fifteen-year process of negotiating, planning, and building it . As he saw it, once the president had decided for economic, military, and political reasons to build a sea-level canal .
 Even geophysical studies, including in-depth analyses of subsurface geology, slope stability, and hydrodynamics of ships moving through confined waters in variable currents, could await executive consent .
 Sheffey said he would support a decision to build a seaway without having completed a geophysical analysis . The seaway would be the first to build without an analysis of geophysical data .
 At the hearing, Sheffey also provided deeper insight into President Johnson’s reasons for supporting the sea-level canal .
 Once built, its relative invulnerability to sabotage would preclude on-site U.S. defense forces . Its relative ease of operation and maintenance would enable the host country to quickly assume day-to-day operations .
 Sheffey told a Wall Street Journal reporter that a major purpose of the sea-level canal was to achieve “excellent treaty relationships” between the two countries .
 Sheffey still smarted from having believed the hype about PNEs . Fifteen years after the Flag Riots of 1964, sheffey was still smarting from the hype .
 Edward Teller and Gerald Johnson had oversold the nuclear canal to Johnson’s administration and many members of Congress, persuading Sheffey to change his life and career so as not to miss out on such an exhilarating endeavor . As he confided to Jorden, the
 Sheffey emphasized the long history of commissions that had investigated the canal question . As for his argument for authorizing only a limited new study of the sea-level canal’s feasibility, he said .
 The economic and political circumstances of the 1970s differed significantly from those of the earlier periods during which powerful stakeholders had invoked the sea-level canal as an ideal solution to the problems of isthmian transportation, and United States control thereof .
 Each phase of the controversial proposal generated novel understandings of nature and of how to engineer nature for diverse human goals . Each phase generated novel understanding of nature .
 Rubinoff spoke out against the project in an article that appeared in a 1975 volume associated with the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea . The nine-year-long forum led to an international agreement governing multiple aspects of marine resource use . Rubinoff's article was published in a
 Rubinoff was director of STRI from 1973 to 2008 . Rubinoff championed many initiatives to elucidate and protect Panama’s marine and terrestrial biodiversity . More broadly, as STRI’�s director, Rubinoff promoted many initiatives .
 Edward O Wilson, who served on the National Academy’s first canal committee, also inched toward advocacy in the succeeding years .
 He also called it his first explicit application of island biogeographical insights to conservation planning . He said it was his first explicitly application of the island's biogeographic insights .
 The renowned evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr, who worked with Rubinoff and Wilson at Harvard, did not participate in the controversy . He did not address it in his later books .
 When Mayr died in 2005 at the age of one hundred, Rubinoff paid homage to his forgotten leadership of the National Academy committee . Rubinoff: Mayr was the forgotten leader of the committee .
 Many stakeholders worked to ensure the government paid as much attention to the megaproject’s ecological effects as to its economic, military, and geopolitical ones . Many other stakeholders during the decade after Mayr stepped away from the debate worked to .
 The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 enabled citizen environmentalists to mobilize the insights of biologists in powerful, unexpected ways . The bill was passed by Congress in 1969 .
 The NEPA requirements entailed a steep learning curve for the State Department and White House . Adapting to the requirements has been a difficult task for the White House and State Department .
 Carter administration spent a mountain of political capital to actualize the Panama Canal Treaties for both idealistic and pragmatic reasons . President Carter spent political capital in the effort to realize the canal .
 Transferring ownership of the canal and buffer zone righted the wrongs inscribed in the unjust 1903 treaty . The treaty recognizes Panama’s sovereignty over all its lands and resources . It also eradicated an offensive relic of colonialism by recognizing Panama's sovereignty .
 The treaties ensured continued access to the interoceanic waterway and the right to send in troops to defend it if threatened . At the same time, the treaties also gave the U.S. access to it and the ability to send troops in if threatened.
 Despite all the blowback, the United States retained a significant stake in its long-term investment, the U.S. retained significant interest in the project .
 Panama Canal Treaty committed the United States and Panama to study and negotiate a sea-level waterway . Lesser known provisions of the treaty committed the U.S. and Panama .
 Carter and his diplomatic team sought to promote a more equitable relationship between the superpower and the small yet strategic nation . They stopped short of immediately transferring all United States rights over the canal to the Panamanian government .
 Treaty EIS precluded Panama from negotiating with other wealthy nations to build a better seaway during the treaty’s twenty-two-year life span . The treaty EIS did not ensure that the treaty analyzed Panama's options for managing the canal watershed . Panama's canal watershed is
 The isthmian sea-level canal idea remained viable after both the demise of PNEs and the ratification of the new agreement with Panama .
 The seaway proposal survived because it performed important kinds of work for many different stakeholders in the context of the mid-to-late 1970s U.S. energy crisis .
 It provided an option for modernizing maritime transportation, for incorporating environmental values into public works planning, for prioritizing neglected forms of biological research, and for considering the proper scope of extraterritorial environmental protection .
 Far from being a mere gimmick, the sea-level canal proposal provided powerful visions of alternative futures for those who skillfully deployed it . Far not being a gimmick, it provided visions of alternatives for those using it .
 E nvironmentalists did not kill the sea-level canal, neither in 1970 nor in 1978 . Remembering the Unbuilt Canal is important for the future .
 The U.S. government put the brakes on the megaprojects because the fiscal, national security, foreign affairs, and domestic benefits did not converge at the right political moment to justify further investments of capital and energy .
 Chairman Robert Anderson of the Canal Study Commission had outlined the stakes back in March 1966 . Chairman of the canal study Commission had said the stakes were high .
 An eventual streamlined seaway held the promise of satisfying Panamanian aspirations for full sovereignty while maintaining U.S. access to the Zone’s strategic locale and assets .
 By the time the Anderson Commission submitted its final report in 1970, concerns about violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty had prevented Plowshare physicists from conducting all the needed PNE experiments .
 A large portion of the preferred route would not hold up to nuclear dynamite anyway, according to the geological surveys . The geological surveys say it would not be possible to use a nuclear bomb on the route .
 The demise of cheap nuclear construction methods, combined with the loss of momentum for U.S.-Panama treaty reform and the nation’s huge budget deficits caused by the Vietnam War, played the major role in undermining support for the 1960s iteration of the sea-level canal .
 President Carter perceived that the sea-level canal’s moment might have come in the 1970s . President Carter saw it as a potential opportunity to build the canal in Panama .
 He secured a treaty option for the two nations to commit to a new study of a future seaway meant to transport Alaskan oil eastward . The seaway is meant to be a seaway for the future transport of oil from Alaska .
 Environmentalist groups now have the ability to challenge public works planning via the National Environmental Policy Act . But he did not anticipate the intensity of opposition by environmentalist groups .
 Carter’s team scrambled to show respect for his environmentalist constituency by ensuring that the State Department complete an environmental impact statement for the Panama Canal Treaty . The State Department completed the statement in response to a request from Carter .
 Activist groups criticized the final EIS as insufficient . The administration tried to conciliate them by issuing a statement of reassurance .
 It worked, thereby avoiding an embarrassing NEPA challenge to the treaty during the grueling ratification campaign of 1977-78 . It worked .
 Following ratification events, the seaway proposal simmered on the back burner of U.S. economic and national security policy-making . Japan sought to assert their rising influence in the Western Hemisphere .
 President Carter remained intrigued by the promise of a seaway for conveying Alaskan oil to the energy-starved East Coast . The seaway was proposed by Senator Gravel and Representative Murphy to conduct feasibility studies .
 Environmental groups renewed efforts to convince Carter to change course . The hearings to enact enabling legislation for the Panama Canal Treaties heated up after the 1978 midterms .
 The Office of Technology Assessment consulted with four of the biologists who had contributed to the 1960s debate . They noted their concerns about the EIS's lack of attention to the consequences of pumping seawater into the existing canal during droughts .
 The Panama Canal Act of 1979 did not authorize funds for new seaway feasibility studies . Article XII of Article XII committing the two nations to study the issue .
 Congress debates over implementing the treaties focused on military and economic issues . Otherwise, the congressional debates would be focused on the military, economic and military .
 The enabling laws took effect just three days before the treaties entered into force on October 1, 1979 . The first day the Panamanian flag flew alone over the former lands of the Canal Zone was the first day Panama flew alone .
 The possibility of cutting a new canal west of the Zone has been revived yet again in the new decade . The new canal will be the first of its kind in the area to be cut west of London .
 Report of Anderson Commission had generated revilement in the U.S. but the Japanese read it eagerly . Anderson Commission report was published in 1970 . Report was published by the Anderson Commission in Japan .
 By 1980, Japan’s postwar economic transformation was nearly complete . It had embarked on a series of overseas development projects to secure strategic resources and its status as a global economic behemoth .
 Panama had a great interest in not allowing the canal to become obsolete once it acquired full control in 1000 years . Panama also had an interest in preventing the canal from becoming obsolete . The canal was the first to be controlled by Panama in 1000 .
 Carter’s lieutenants sought to manage the situation by “giving him a little bit more information” about the plan to inform the Panamanians and Japanese of the president's interest in the study .
 Gravel shared his thoughts in a 1979 interview with William Jorden, who as ambassador to Panama had played a major role in brokering the canal treaties . Gravel: "The canal treaties were the result of a treaty between Panama and the United States .
 The deliberations did not begin, however, until Ronald Reagan's administration in 1980 . The deliberations began in the 1980s, when Carter was defeated by Reagan .
 The eighty-one-mile-long Trans-Panama Pipeline proceeded without any state-mandated environmental review . Completed in 1981 with private financing, the pipeline was completed in 1981 . The pipeline is one of the largest in the country's largest oil fields .
 Like the Anderson Commission of 1965, it had an ambitious five-year agenda to analyze the impacts of a sea-level canal, modifications to the present one, and overland options such as pipelines or container rail transit .
 A new commission was tasked with determining the environmental and social, as well as the economic and political, impacts of such alternatives . Unlike the previous group, the new commission is explicitly tasked with assessing the environmental, social and economic impacts of those alternatives .
 The questions raised in the 1960s about nonnative marine species exchange remained inchoate, underfunded, and unfamiliar, even to its Japanese boosters . Yet, the questions raised about the exchange remained unanswered .
 Ecological sensitivity was also in short supply at a 1986 international gathering in Anchorage, Alaska, devoted to megaproject planning . Nagano was dumbfounded, a sign that the scientific and environmentalist communities still had much work to do in Japan . i8o CONCLUSION:
 The International Federation of Institutes for Advanced Study conference featured presentations on projects such as a moon city, a dam across the Bering Strait, an Alaska-Norway ice highway and a river diversion network .
 Political obstacles now pose ‘insurmountable problems’ to nuclear geoengineering, scientists say . Regardless, political obstacles now posed ‘in insurmountable’ problems, they say .
 Smithsonian Institution steps in to draft terms of reference for tripartite seaway study commission . State Department asked Smithsonian Institution to step in . Council on Environmental Quality and Environmental Protection Agency declined to help draft terms .
 The Japanese stock market crash of 1989 led to a ‘lost decade’ of growth and the end of its ambitions . Lessepsian ambitions for a second Panama Canal ended in 1989 .
 The U.S. invasion of Panama in 1989 to remove the dictator Manuel Noriega refocused attention on whether the nation could manage the original waterway within a decade, let alone build a new one . The Panama Canal’s neutrality was questioned by the United States .
 After 1979 transfer of the Zone lands to Panama, many of the embittered Zonians blasted the Panamanian government for not cutting the grass properly . The Panama Canal Company’s well-funded mosquito-control practices and large groundskeeper force are a function of the Panama
 Panama had to deal with the problem of cleaning up unexploded ordnance left behind by the U.S. military . New forms of canal watershed management have been implemented .
 Panamanian government praised for doing a far more effective job of operating canal than the United States . Despite the challenges of the twenty-two-year-long transition, the 1999 transfer of the canal proceeded smoothly .
 Autoridad del Canal de Panama criticized for replicating undemocratic, heavy-handed decision-making processes . Environmentalists criticize the new agency for modernizing the Panama Canal .
 The decision grew out of several 19 9-Os-era meetings that deemed a sea-level canal too expensive . The decision was made in response to concerns about the cost of the canal .
 The “Si” measure to expand the existing channel passed by an overwhelming 80 percent . Only 40 percent of eligible voters participated . Opponents expressed concern that corruption and costs would spiral out of control .
 The ACP did not complete the required EIS until nine months after the referendum . Allegations that officials manipulated the voting process to ensure a favorable outcome led to criticism .
 Panama had sought for decades to escape the oversight of the U.S. The colonial construct created by the canal remained palpable . The canal was built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 As Gonzalez argued in a 2008 assessment, the ACP promoted a technocratic rather than democratic model of environmental impact assessment . The process privileged compliance with preestablished regulatory standards rather than public involvement .
 The ACP completed the massive project over budget and two years behind schedule, in 2016 . The project was completed over budget, two years ahead of schedule .
 Engineers devised an innovative system of water-exchanging basins that enables the locks to reuse up to 60 percent of the water, rather than washing it all into the sea . The canal’s dwindling water supply has led to a water shortage .
 Pressure on Gatun and Alajuela Lake water storage system remains high, especially in drought years . Water storage system is under strain, especially during drought years, officials say . The Gatun Lake is the largest reservoir in the country .
 Environmentalist concern and scientific interest in Panama Canal as a model system for testing predictions about tropical marine invasions revived during and following the third-locks expansion of 2007-16 .
 The tropics appear to have greater ecological resistance to marine invasive species than temperate zones . Scientists have found that the tropics have a greater resistance to invasive species .
 With the Panama Canal’s doubled capacity for shipping traffic, marine species introductions will likely increase worldwide, especially in receiving ports of the U.S. Gulf and East Coasts .
 Atlantic and Pacific marine biotic mixing has also begun to escalate via the Bering Strait as the Arctic sea ice melts . Atlantic, Pacific and Pacific biotic mixes are also beginning to escalate .
 Russian and other stakeholders began investing billions of dollars to develop a “Suez of the north’s north,” but little if anything for environmental impact assessment . Russian, other stakeholders are investing billions in developing a ‘Suez .
 The first official vessel to transit the new locks, an enormous Chinese vessel packed with almost 9,500 containers en route to the Pacific, heralded a new geopolitical era .
 First U.S. liquefied natural gas shipment to China in August 2016 . First instance of three LNG tankers transiting the same day on same day in April 2018 . First time three tankers have transited the canal together in the past year .
 U.S. LNG had not been profitable in Asia prior to 2016 . Transported in NeoPanamax vessels, United States LNG was not profitable in 2016 .
 Since the canal expansion, the industry has expanded rapidly, developing new facilities and terminals to facilitate the booming commodity, a result of the hydraulic fracturing shale gas revolution in the United States .
 The LNG gas boom played out against the backdrop of plans to build the largest canal in history, a new Atlantic-Pacific link spanning Nicaragua . Remembering the Unbuilt Canal .83 .
 President Daniel Ortega claimed in December 2014 that construction had already begun . The international scientific community mobilized against the megaproject .
 Environmentalists and biologists raised grave concerns about the project’s effects on water resources and biodiversity . They urged the government to consider the environmental guidelines and human rights laws that now govern infrastructure decision-making .
 The protests led the Nicaraguan leadership to authorize an environmental and social impact assessment . Critics deemed the assessment superficial, though critics deemed it superficial .
 The country’s highest court paved the way for the work to resume by dismissing the last environmentalist challenges in 2017 . The work will resume in 2018 .
 By then, however, the Chinese concessionaire had lost most of his telecom fortune . Panama had reestablished diplomatic and economic relations with China .
 Since Nicaragua announced its plans for the Grand Canal, other nations have upped the ante by proposing even larger maritime highways . Other nations have also announced plans to build a larger maritime highway .
 The Panama Canal’s operators did begin building a third lane of locks in 1939, but after World War II scuttled the project . U.S. officials spent the rest of the century debating whether it made more economic, military, and political sense to engineer a new channel
 The waterway’s overall revenues now exceed $2 billion per year . The investment appears more than worthwhile .
 Panamanian officials must now contend with problems inconceivable to Roosevelt and his successors . Yet Panamanians must contend with new challenges . Roosevelt and successors faced similar problems .
 Global climate change is rendering it much more difficult to manage infrastructural systems built during periods of relative climatic stability . Infrastructure systems built in periods of stability are affected by climate change, experts say . Climate change is making it more difficult for infrastructure systems to manage .
 Recent severe drought events have lowered Gatun and Alajuela Lakes, which supply fresh water for the canal and for Panama’s growing population . Drought events force limits on cargo ships and thereby forfeit millions of dollars of tolls .
 For the canal to remain viable, officials must now consider building expensive, disruptive new networks of reservoirs, dams, and tunnels for storing and transporting fresh water . Officials must also consider building costly new reservoirs and dams .
 The assumption that technocrats can easily manage unintended ecological consequences is no longer tenable . As anthropogenic carbon emissions alter climate patterns, the assumption is not tenable, as is the assumption .
 Knowledge about likely bioenvironmental effects is now essential, not merely desirable, for making sound infrastructural investments . Large-scale projects require the convergence of many forces, including political, economic, technological, scientific, and environmental .
 It is also the case that grand infrastructural visions of the future sometimes fail to crystallize despite powerful coalitions in favor of them . It's also a case that it's also possible that the future of infrastructure will not crystallize in the future .
 Checking the technocratic impulse to solve complex problems with environmentally disruptive technological solutions requires political will, analytical rigor, and awareness of the options foreclosed by high-modernist plans for accelerating modernity . Checking out the impulse for technological solutions to complex problems requires political .
 Throughout its many phases, the Central American sea-level canal inspired visions of development that held both liberating and constricting implications for the anticipated host countries . The canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s, and is expected to be completed in 20 years .
 The seaway proposals of the 1960s and 1970s served different U.S. presidential goals for improving relations with Panama . The original waterway and the Canal Zone slid into technopolitical obsolescence .
 The proposals also had important, unexpected repercussions for environmental management and associated concepts of progress . The proposals were also important to environmental management .
 Environmental scientists and activists did not cause the cancellation of the seaway in any of its iterations . Environmentalists and activists were not responsible for cancellation .
 The proposal opens up new discussions about the harmful consequences of maritime-induced bioinvasions . They did, however, use the proposal to open up new discussion about the negative effects of marine invasive species .
 The resurgence of the sea-level canal proposal at strategic points in the intertwined history of the U.S. and Panama provides windows into moments of diplomatic, technological, scientific, and environmentalist transformation . The proposal is one of the key moments in the history of Panama and the United States
 Such historical moments in turn remind us of the value of envisioning alternative futures, and of questioning technocratic prescriptions that promise to modernize landscapes and societies without ensuring environmental quality .
 The Central American Sea-Level Canal and the Environmental History of Unbuilt Megaprojects 1.0.0 . 1.5 million people live in the United States .
 David Kirsch: "Project Plowshare" and "A Hot Idea" Kaufman: "Hot Idea" is the name of the project . Kaufman: A Hot Idea is the first time the project has been featured in the documentary .
 Heffernan, “Bringing the Desert to Bloom” and “Shifting Sands,” 618. The author also wrote about the desert in his book, "Bringing The Desert"
 The Insane 1950s plan to use H-Bombs to make roads and redirect rivers was mocked by the U.S. government .
 On the political role of scientific expertise, see Bocking, Ecologists and Environmental Politics . i. ii. i. Bocking: The role of the role of political expertise in environmental politics is to be seen as a matter of concern for the environment .
 David Kirsch, “Project Plowshare,” 216; O’Neill, Firecracker Boys, 83; Scott Kirschs, Proving Grounds, 77 . David, ‘Plowshare’s’, 216; ‘Project Pl
 Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, 76, and Mitchell, “Earth-Moving as the ‘Measure ofMan,’ ” 129. Scott .
 Heffernan, “Bringing the Desert to Bloom,” 108; Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, 8.9. The Desert is full of desert memories .
 See,g., Taylor , Caldwell, Caldwell and Caldwell, Clark and Canter, Environmental Policy and NEPA . Andrews, Andrews, Managing the Environment, Managing Ourselves.
 Rankin, Rowe, Rowe and d’Avignon are among those behind the scenes in the documentary .
 On the blurring of boundaries between technology and nature, see,g., White, Organic Machine-, Stine and Tarr, “At the Intersection of Histories”; Reuss and Cutcliffe, Illusory Boundary .
 English language monographs include Helferich, Humboldt’s Cosmos-, Sachs, Humoldt Current-, Walls, Walls, Passage to Cosmos-. Echenberg, Echechenberg and Wulf .
 Humboldt, Political Essay, Personal Narrative, 6;z4z-43. Bonpland and BonPland, Personal . Narrative. Humbt, political Essay . Humbllt and Bonland, Political . Essay. H
 On the Raspadura Canal see Humboldt, Personal Narrative, 6:z6o . Frederick Collins, “The Isthmus of Darien,” 149.
 Lloyd, “Account of Levellings Carried across the Isthmus of Panama”; Humboldt, Views of Nature, 191. Lloyd, "Account of . Levellers Carried . across the . Ist . of Panama"
 Murchison, Bidwell and Bidwell, Isthmus of Panama, 99; Balf, Darkest Jungle, 59 . Balf was a member of the Royal Geographical Society of London. Bidwell was a British explorer of Panama .
 Frederick Collins, “The Isthmus of Darien and the Valley of the Atrato,” 148, i6i-6z. Frederick Collins . Collins .
 For English language scholarly studies, see,g.,Ealy, Yanqui Politics and the Isthmian Canal-, McCullough, Hogan, Panama Canal in American Politics- Parker, Parker, Maurer and Yu, Big Ditch, for English language .
 Report of the Board of Consulting Engineers for the Panama Canal, 35, 61. Report: The Panama Canal was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 For more detail on the mechanics of the isthmian sea-level canal's requisite tidal lock, see Mehaffey, Isthmian Canal Studies — 1947, 66, 73, 75, 96 .
 Report of the Board of Consulting Engineersfor the Panama Canal, 8z, 85, 91, 91. Report ofthe Board of Consultants Engineers for Panama Canal was published in 1988 . Report: The Panama Canal is the world's largest canal system .
 Michael Donoghue, “The Panama Canal and the United States”; Missal, Seaway to the Future, is a guide to the future of the canal .
 Missal, Henderson, “The Face of Empire”; Strong, ‘Jimmy Carter and the Panama Canal Treaties,” Z71 . Strong: “Jimmy Carter’s Panama Canal Treaty Treaties” Missal: ‘The Seaway to
 English language analyses of Humboldt’s imperialist legacy include Pratt, Sachs, Sachs and Rupke . English language analysis includes Pratt, Imperial Eyes-, Sachs, “The Ultimate ‘Other’ ”
 Alexander von Humboldt’s visit to Washington was one of the most famous visits to the U.S. to Washington .
 Frenkel, “Geography, Empire and Environmental Determinism”; Carse, Beyond the BigDitch, 7Z-73. Carse. Frenkel . Carse: “Beyond the Big Ditch’s” is an example of a
 Conniff, Black Labor on a White Canal-, Newton, Newton, Silver Men, Julie Greene and Julie Greene, Canal Builders. Conniff . Greene: "Black Labor on the White Canal-Newton, Newton" Conniff: "Canal Builders"
 Knapp, Red, White, and Blue Paradise-, Missal, Seaway to the Future-, Moore, Moore, Empire on Display, Michael Donoghue, Borderland on the Isthmus . Knapp: "Red, White and Blue" is Knapp's Red,
 Report of the Board of Consulting Engineers for the Panama Canal, 10, 10; APICSC, Interoceanic Canal Studies 1970, V-23. Report of Panama Canal studies 1970, 10 .
 Reines, “The Peaceful Nuclear Explosion”; Vortman, ‘Excavation of a Sea-Level Ship Canal’s Canal,” 88. Reines . Reines: “Peaceful nuclear explosion” is the result of a
 Wolfe, Golley, and Golley: Project Chariot are examples of ecosystems in ecology . Wolfe: "The Ecological Aspects of the Ecosystem Concept in Ecology,” Golley .
 Isthmian Canal Studies Board of Consultants, Report to the Committee on Merchant Atarine and Fisheries, 7.7.05 . Report: Report to be made public on July 7, 2009 .
 Chiari to Kennedy, Sept. 1961, repr. in Star & Herald , Nov.,1961, in ICPQ, i6z. Chiari: "I love you, I love you. You love you" Chiari .
 Ball helped President Carter rally senatorial support for the ratification of the 1977 Panama Canal Treaties . Ball also urged Kennedy to avoid U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 A-Blasts May Do the Job,” U.S. News & World Report, 1963, .
 Eisenhower's nuclear test ban on nuclear weapons is a key part of the nuclear policy . Eisenhower's decision to test nuclear weapons has been debated for decades .
 See,g., Doel and Harper, “Prometheus Unleashed”; Doel, ‘Scientists as Policymakers’; Dorsey, ’Dealing with the Dinosaur’. See, g.g. Hamblin, Oceanographers and the Cold
 Belinfante, Petren, and Vakil, Report ora the Events in Panama, January 9-12, 1964 .
 The U.S. government owned the Panama Canal Company . The secretary of the army was the stockholder and personal representative of the president .
 Belinfante, Petren, and Vakil, Report on the Events in Panama, January 9-12,1964. 1964 .
 U.S. Congress authorized the President to Appoint a Commission, 1.1.2.3.5. The Commission was created by Congress in 1903 .
 Lyndon B Johnson, “Message to the Congress Transmitting First Annual Report of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission,” August 3, 1965, in PPPUS, 1965 .
 Jorden, Panama Odyssey, 107; Phillips, Hall, and Black, Reining in the Rio Grande, chap. 107 . Jorden: "Reining in Rio Grande" is the work of Hall, Hall and Black .
 Sheffey did not assume the official title of executive director until mid-1967 . Prior ZOO Notes to Chapter Four to then, he was called the acting executive director or executive secretary .
 John Sheffey, 70, Dies; Expert on the Panama Canal,” Washington Post, Nov. 30 .
 Noble replaced Woodbury in June 1967, and Groves replaced Noble in June 1969 . Groves was replaced by Woodbury after Woodbury replaced him in June 1968 .
 U.S. Congress, Peaceful Applications of Nuclear Explosives, z-53. United States Congress passed the bill in 1953 .
 UPI, “Johnson Urges Speed Up of $$ for Canal Survey,” El Panama America, Aug., 1965; “Funds for Canal Surveys,’ Philadelphia Inquirer, Aug. 1965; .
 Robertson, Robertson, Malthusian Moment-, Flippen, Conservative Conservationist. See,g. Robertson, . Robertson, for example, in his book, “Malthusians’s”
 Willard Libby quoted in “Plowshare Future Tied to Soviets,” Christian Science Monitor, Apr.,1966. Willard . Libby quotes from Willard. Libby .
 U.S. Canal Study Commission Inspecting Routes in Panama inspects routes in Panama . Canal study commission: "Canal Study Commission inspects Routes"
 Lyndon B. Johnson, “Annual Budget Message to the Congress, Fiscal Year 1967,” Jan. 1967 . Lyndon B Johnson: "Annual budget Message to Congress, fiscal Year 1967"
 LBJ Told Poverty Dented, But Canal Plans Slowed,” Tulsa Daily World, Aug 16, 1966. See also “LBJ Tolds Poverty Dent, But canal plans Slowed.”
 Richard E Bevir, “We Built Our Own Road through the Darien Gap,” Popular Mechanics, Aug.61, zo6.61 . Bevir: We built our own road through the gap .
 These figures came from the i960 census, as reported in Torres de Arauz, Demographic Characteristics of Human Groups .
 Reeve Waring, “Darien Sea-Level Canal Survey Starts,” Sunday American (Panama), Mar. zo, 1966 . ‘Darien Indians Protest United States ‘Invasion,’ ” Panama American, Mar. zz, 1966.
 See also “The Panama Canal Study Hurting for Time, Money,” Oakland Times, May z6,1966 .
 Minister Confirms Atomic Canal Study,” Sunday American , Apr., 1966; ‘Bar Flays EletaAdair Notes on Sea-Level Canal Studies,’ Panama American, Jan., 1967. ‘Eleta adair’s notes on sea-
 Christobal Sarmiento, “What’s Happening in Darien Survey?” Panama American, May Z9,1966. Christobal .
 Bulldozers began work on canal site in 1966 . The site was the site of a new canal in New York City .
 Bevir: “We Built Our Own Road through the Darien Gap,” Popular Mechanics, Aug.61; Howe, Chiefs, Scribes, and Ethnographers, 194. Bevir, “Birds versus Buzz Saws in Jungle Joust” Scott
 See also “Jungle Quest for Answers to Future Canal Near End,” Star & Herald , Feb. 1968 .
 Battelle Memorial Institute, Environmental Impact Assessment for Darien Gap Highway, was released in March . The highway is expected to be completed by 2015 . Battelle Institute is responsible for the highway's environmental impact assessment .
 See also Judy Burton, “Storey Inspects Proposed Sites for New Canal,” Dallas Morning News, Apr.,1967 .
 Arlen J Large, “Blocked Canal,” Wall Street Journal, Sept. 1967; “US SeaLevel Canal Studies Going Smoothly, OICS Says,’ Panama American, Sept., 1967 . “OICS Phasing Out Studies of RP Sea-
 Victor K McElheny, “ United States Peaceful A-Use Program Opposed,” Washington Post, Mar.,1967. Victor K Elheny,  “ U.S. PeacefulA-Use program Opposed”
 David Kirsch: Electric Car and the Burden of History, Laird, Solar Energy, Technology Policy, and Institutional Values . Laird: Electric car and the burden of history is the result of the history of the electric car .
 I Bowler, Earth Encompassed, 108. Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment . Assessing the Most Giant Biological Experiment. Assess Mankind's Most Glamorous Biological Experiment, Bowler . Bowler: "I Bowler"
 Thomas O’Toole, “Super-Clean Nuclear Explosive Now Appears within United States Grasp,” Washington Post, May 11, 1968. Thomas O'Toole .
 See,g., Tate and Allen, “The Proposed New Treaties for the Panama Canal,” Z76. zo. See, g.g. The canal would have been built in the 1920s .
 Lyndon B Johnson, “Message to the Congress Transmitting the Fourth Annual Report of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission,” Sept. 1968, in PPPUS, 1968-1969, z:466. zz .
 Henson, “Baseline Environmental Survey.” zo 6 Notes to Chapter Five 36. 36. Henson . Henson: ‘Basinal Environmental Survey’
 These authors included Chesher, Topp, Menzies, Glynn, Dunson, Newman, Newman and Jones .
 Dreyfus and Ingram, “National Environmental Policy Act”; Taylor, Making Bureaucracies Think-, Caldwell, Caldwell, Andrews, Managing the Environment, Managing Ourselves-, Lindstrom, Lindstrom and Smith, National Environmental Policy .
 See especially Norse and Crowder, Marine Conservation Biology, xviii; Kroll, America’s Ocean Wilderness-, Oreskes, “Scaling Up Our Vision”; Rozwadowski, Vast Expanses. See especially Thor Thor Thor: Thor
 Szylvian, “Transforming Lake Michigan”; Mann, Exotic Species in Mariculture. zo8 Notes to Chapter Five 79.8 . Mann, ‘Transforming lake Michigan’; ‘transforming lake'
 Elton Hildebrand: Panama Canal as a Passageway for Fishes . Elton Elton: Ecology of Invasions, 94; Hildebr: Panama canal as a passageway to fish . The Panama Canal was a major source of food for many of the world
 Rubinoffoff and RubinofF, “Interoceanic Colonization of a Marine Goby,” 477. Rubinoff, F.F. “I’m not sure what’s going to happen,’ says Rubinoff .
 Carlton, “Transoceanic and Interoceansic Dispersal of Coastal Marine Organisms,” 319. See also Carlton’s book, ‘The Sea of the Sea’, 319.2, .
 William H Gorishek, “Dream of Nuclear Canal Turns into Pick and Shovel Nightmare,” Panama American, Apr. zz, 1969. William H. Goris he wrote, "Dream of nuclear canal turns into Pick & Shovel nightmare"
 Avoiding an Elastic Collision with Knowledge I See, Gottlieb, Forcing the Spring, Egan, Barry Commoner and the Science of Survival , Rubinson, Rubinson and Spears .
 Richard Nixon, “Statement about the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969,” Jan.,1970, in PPPUS, 1970 . Richard Nixon: “I am proud of my achievements in environmental policy .” Richard Nixon.
 Boffey, “Sea-Level Canal”; Newman, ‘National Academy of Science Committee,” Z56 . Sapp, What Is Natural-, Sapp, Coexistence; Sapp, "Coexistence"
 Luther Carter, “National Academy of Sciences”; Boffey, Brain Bank of America. Luther Carter . Luther Carter: “N.A. Scientist Luther Carter’s ‘Academics’, ‘N.Boffey’:
 Cole’s statement is poignant given that three years later the governing council apparently cut him from a list of nominees due to his environmental activism . Cole said he was cut from the Academy of Natural Sciences nominees list because of his activism .
 CERIC: General, 1968, NAS; Seitz to Mayr, May zz, 1968 ; Mayr to Frederick Seitz, Apr.,1968, Folder BIOLOGY & Agriculture .
 Colombia proposed new canal to cross border of Panama, Panama American, Sept. 9, 1969; “RP, Colombia Propose New Canal to Cross Border of z Countries,” Panama American. Z9,1969; . “New Canal to cross the border of z countries
 For the 1959 hearings see United States Congress, Biological and Environmental Effects of Nuclear War . Thompson, “Improving the Quality of Life,” For more information, see U.S. Congress,  Congress,  and  hearings .
 Murphy, “National Environmental Policy Act and the Licensing Process,” 963. Murphy . Murphy: “N.E.C.T.A. C. Murphy’s Act and Licensing process, 963, is a result of the National Environmental
 Joshua Lederberg, “Sea-Level Canal Points up Need for Environmental Data,” Washington Post, Feb. 1969.
 Baker and Stebbins, Genetics of Colonizing Species- Blu Buhs, Fire Ant Wars. Baker and . Stebins, Stebbinins, Baker and. Stebinins, . Baker and Buhins . Buhin: Fire Ants are
 Com. Interoceanic Canal, Com. on Ecological Res. for: Corres. re submission of Rept. for . Corres . re submission was submitted to the Ecological. Res. of the Reptile .
 Bayer, Voss, and Robins, . Robins . The Bioenvironmental and Radiological Safety . Safety Feasibility Studies .
 Entry Ai 36040-C, Container 5, container 5, RG zzo, NARA; CERIC, Marine Ecological Research, 155.5, is a marine ecologist . Marine ecologists have been working on the project for more than a decade .
 APICSC, Interoceanic Canal Studies 1970-70, U.S. Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 30Z-Z0.0.
 Robert M Sayre interviewed by Thomas J Dunnigan, Oct. 1995 . See also Sayre, Interview ivith Robert M. Sayre .
 Newman, Dunson, Rubinoff, Beeton, Sapp and Beeton . Sapp, Coexistence, 103. ioz.
 Flood, “1971 Statement before the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs,” 71; Francis B Kent, ‘The Biological Unknowns of a New Panama Canal,’ Washington Post, Jan. 1971 . Flood,  Kent, and others, wrote about the canal in
 The two pacts are officially titled “The Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal,” which grants the United States permanent rights to defend the canal . The two accords are commonly called the Panama canal Treaties .
 Major studies of the negotiations and ratification process include LaFeber, Jorden and Moffett .
 On the long-term domestic political and economic effects of the treaties, see Moffett, Limits of Victory, chap. chap. Moffett. See Moffett for more details of the treaty's effects .
 Stine, “Environmental Policy during the Carter Presidency”; Reisner, Cadillac Desert, chap. chap. Stine . Reisner: “Cadillac Desert’s Cadillac Desert is the best place to live in .
 Kaufman and Kaufman, Presidency of James Earl Carter, 3Z; GodboId, //»y»jy and Rosalynnn Carter, 176; Kaufman , Plans Unraveled, 16. Kaufman and . Kaufman and. Kaufman, the Presidency of . James Earl .
 Scott Kirsch and Mitchell, “Earth-Moving as the ‘Measure of Man’ ” iz8.9.9: ‘Earth-moving as the measure of man,’ iz .
 Teller: Harbor on North Slope Dug by Nuclear Blast is Mulled, Teller says . See also Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, zoz .
 “Senate Rejected Mondale’s ’73 Prediction of Disaster,” Boston Globe, Mar. 1973, Boston Globe . “Alaskan Oil to Begin Flowing Today; Pipeline Oil to Create Glut on West Coast,’ Washington Eto,
 Final Environmental Impact Statement, 1:1.1. zz. U.S. Department of the Interior, Final Environmental Impression Statement, is published by the Interior Department .
 Smith, “Alaskan Oil to Begin Flowing Today,” Washington Postfxme zo, 1977 . Smith: Alaskan oil to begin flowing today. Smith: "Alaskans Oil to begin flowing today.
 See also Associated Press, “Panama Canal Has Lost Strategic Value,” News & Sun-Sentinel , Mar., 1988 .
 Alderson: "American Environmental Movement’s Lost Victory” Alderson was an environmental leader in the 1960s and '90s . Alderson is credited with leading environmental leaders in the United States .
 Ortman testified before Congress on the Sea-Level Canal Studies . Ortman's testimony is part of a report by the U.S. House of Representatives on the project .
 Walter Pincus, “When a Campaign Vow Crashes into a Pork Barrel,” Washington Post, Apr., 1977. Walter Pinchus,  ‘When a campaign promise Crashes . into a pork barrel,’ he wrote .
 Alderson later transmitted his files to his FOE successor David Ortman . Ortman shared the letter with Congress during the 1978 hearings addressed in chapter 8 .
 See also “Enemies of the Sea-Level Canal,” New Scientist, Nov., 1977, Z71 .
 Jimmy Carter, “Remarks on a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Meeting at a public meeting,” July zi, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977 . Jimmy Carter: ‘Remarks are on a question and answer session .
 Jimmy Carter visited a floating oil rig, Muses on a Sea-Level Canal, in July 1977 . The trip was part of a tour of Panama .
 The $5.29 billion figure is from Gravel’s Panama Canal, which identified the source as a May 5, 1977, letter by Army Corps of Engineers general Ernest Graves .
 The Panama Canal Company also used the figure in testimony before the Committee on Environment and Public Works on July 22,1977 .
 Quoted in Eleanor Randolph, “Talk of Another Canal,” Chicago Tribune, Aug. 1977 .
 Ernest F Hollings, “The Panama Canal’s Panama Canal,” The Fritz Hollings Report (Sept. 30)
 Jimmy Carter, “The Environment Message to the Congress,” May Z3, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977 . Carter: "The environment message to Congress" was published in 1977 .
 Carter, “The Environment Message to the Congress,” May Z3, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977 . Carter: "The environment message to Congress" Carter: ‘The environment is an important part of our society’
 Stine, “Environmental Policy during the Carter Presidency,” 187,191,195. Stine . Stine: “The Carter Administration’s environmental policy was a model of American history .
 See,g., Doel, “Constituting the Postwar Earth Sciences”; . Kroll, America’s Ocean Wilderness-, Hamblin , Poison in the Well-, Finley, All the Fish in the Sea-, Dorsey, Whales and Nations
 Several of the implementation agreements for specific treaty articles pertained to environmental issues . In addition, several of the agreement agreements related to the environment . The treaty was signed in 1991 .
 These included the continuation of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, United States Army Tropic Test Center and Gorgas Memorial Institute of Tropical and Preventive Medicine .
 Robinson, “Environmentalist Looks at the Panama Canal Treaties”; Robinson: “Introduction.” no Notes to Chapter Eight . Robinson: "Environmentalist looks at Panama canal Treaties" and “Introductions to Chapter 8” .
 See also Lewis H Diuguid, “United States Study of Canal Pacts Cites Peril to Watershed,” Washington Post, Oct. 1977 .
 William Mansfield III, Sept. 1977, 5, in Department of State, Final EIS, P-41. Harold B Green Jr., Patricia T Fulton, Charlotte Kennedy, Jeri Steele, Jera Steele, and Melvin Borenam to William Mansfields III .
 President Carter nominated her as one of the three members of CEQon May 16, 1977 . She withdrew her name in January 1978 after senators delayed action on her confirmation due to her lobbying activities .
 Ortman testimony in U.S. Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 369; Beeton , Report of the Committee on Ecological Effects. Ortman . Ortman testified in United States Congress, . Sea-level Canal Studies .
 U.S. Study of Canal Pacts Cites Peril to Watershed,” Washington Post, Oct. 1977, A30; Department of State, Final EIS, Q-4 .
 The historic water shortage also provided an opportunity for foresters to emphasize links between rural land use, deforestation, and the canal system . Foresters also emphasized links between deforestation, deforestation and canal use . The water shortage was also highlighted by foresters' efforts to highlight links between land use and
 R Michael Wright to William Mansfield III, Sept. 1977, in Department of State, Final EIS, P-37 .
 Brower quoted in “Enemies of the Sea-Level Canal,” New Scientist, Nov., 1977,271. Brower quotes in ‘Enemies’ of the sea-level canal,’ New Scientist .
 Robert Goodland, “Triple Threat to Panama’s Ecology,” Washington Post, Dec. 31 . Goodland: Panama is facing a triple threat to its ecology .
 Ortman, “Mingling the Two Oceans,” in U.S. Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 364. Ortman . Ortman: The two oceans should not be separated .
 Robinson, “Extraterritorial Environmental Protection Obligations,” 170. Robinson . Robinson: The EPA has a “responsibility to protect the environment’s environment” Robinson says .
 Robinson, “Environmentalist Looks at the Panama Canal Treaties,” Z5-Z6. Robinson: ‘Environmentalist looks at Panama Canal .’ Robinson, an environmentalist, says Panama Canal should have been a priority .
 Stephen Haycox quoted in David Westphal, “Gravel was a Maverick in the ’70s, and His Politickin’ Hasn’t Changed,” Macon Telegraph, Jan. 8.8.
 Wilson Still Thrives on Being a Scientific Provocateur,” Quanta Magazine, May 15, Z019 . Wilson still thrives on being a scientific provocateur .
 Shigeo Nagano Says He Can Do It,” Christian Science Monitor, 1980.9,1980 .
 Idea for a Sea-Level Canal Revived in 1980s . Idea for the Panama Canal was revived in 1980 .
 Until its closure in 1996, the TPP carried 7.7 billion barrels of Alaska North Slope crude . The pipeline was reopened in Z003 to transport Ecuadorian oil, and its flow direction reversed .
 Sohio Dropped Pactex Pipeline for Profit Gains, Experts Say .
 A similar i98os-era initiative to revive the project was also unsuccessful . A similar initiative was unsuccessful in the past .
 Ken Wells, “Think Tank Thinks Gigantic Thoughts, and Expensive Ones,” Wall Street Journal, Aug. 8,1986; “Col. Ken Wells’s Think Tank Think Thinks . Gigantic thoughts, and expensive ones, come from the
 See also Edward Flattau, “Ecological Dangers of a Sea-Level Canal,” Chicago Tribune, Feb. zo, 1990, .
 Panama Canal Treaty Symbolizes a Paradise Lost, says Darryl Fears . See also, Niko Price, Lindsay-Poland, Emperors in the Jungle, 174.5 .
 Gonzalez, “Environmental Impact Assessment in Post-Colonial Societies,” 343. Gonzalez. Gonzalez . Gonzalez: ‘Environmental impact assessment in post-colonial societies,’ 343.
 Steven Mufson, “An Expanded Panama Canal Opens for Ships,” Chicago Tribune, June z, zoi6.
 Marco Evers, “Russia Moves to Boost Arctic Shipping,” Spiegel Online, Aug. 31 . Evers: Russia is moving to boost Arctic shipping .
 Neighboring Seas are Flowing into a Warming Arctic Ocean, Yale Environment 360, published May 10,1018 .
 Fred Pearce, “Mega-Canals Could Slice through Continents for Giant Ships,” New Scientist, Apr.1017.
 William Laurance, “Is the Global Era of Massive Infrastructure Projects coming Notes to Conclusion ZZ7 to an End?” Yale Environment 360, July 10, zoi8; McCall and Taylor, "Nicaragua’s ‘Grand Canal’ �
 Dwight D Eisenhower Presidential Library is located in Abilene, Kans. Eisenhower Library . Eisenhower Library is home to the Eisenhower Library's Manuscript Collections .
 The Foreign Affairs Oral History Collection is part of the Association for Diplomatic Studies and Training . The collection includes interviews with diplomats and students .
 Report of the Committee on Ecological Effects of a Sea Level Canal, Environmental Studies Board to the Honorable Frank Press. Beeton . Beeton, Alfred M Report of a Committee on . Ecological . Effects of the Sea Level . Canal, . Environmental Studies . Board to Frank Press
 A Report to the Committee on Environment and Public Works, United States Senate, is published by the U.S. Senate . It was submitted to the Senate Committee on the Committee of Environment and . Public Works .
 Engineering with Nuclear Explosives (April 21, 22, 23, 1964), 3ZI-34; repr. in U.S. Congress . Engineering with nuclear Explosives with nuclear explosions (April 20, 21, 23) 1964).
 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Contract LLNLCONF-464374, zoio. Zoio.com: "Zoio" is an acronym for the lab's research at the lab .
 Report to the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, U.S. Congress, on a Long-Range Programfor the Panama Canal June 1, i960. i960 . Report on a long-range program for Panama Canal .
 General Report on the Economics of the Peaceful Uses of Underground Nuclear Explosions. General Report . General Report of the Economics . of the . Peaceful uses of Underground nuclear Explosions .
 Phenomenology of Underground Nuclear Explosions, edited by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory-Livermore and AEC-San Francisco Operations Office, 8-13. Phenomenal of Underground nuclear Explosions .
 Hearings before the Subcommittee on National Parks and Recreation of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, House of Representatives March 13, is, 16, 22, and 23, 1973 . Hearings are held in the National Park and Recreation Subcommittee .
 Hearings before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, Eighty-Sixth Congress June 22, 23, 2, 2s, 2S, and 26, 1939 . Hearings were held before the Special Subcommittee on Radiation .
 Hearing before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, Eighty-Ninth Congress January s, 1963 . Hearings were held in 1963 .
 Hearings before the Committee on Commerce, United States Senate, Eighty-Eighth Congress, Second Session, on S 2428, a Bill to Authorize a Study of Means of Increasing Capacity and Security of the Panama Canal, andfor Other Purposes . S 2497, a
 A Digest of Information; Prepared for the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, by Its Subcommittee on Separation of Powers .
 United States Department of the Interior and United States Federal Task Force on Alaskan Oil Development . The task force is working with the U.S. government to develop an oil project in Alaska .
 Final Environmental Impact Statement for the New Panama Canal Treaties . Final environmental impact statement for the new Panama Canal projects . Panama Canal Canal is one of the world's largest canals .
 CNN.com will feature a new series of exclusive interviews with CNN iReporters . Please submit your best photos of the day's featured work for CNN iReport.com with us on Monday .
 Edith James, N Stephen Kane, Robert McMahon, and Delia Pitts, write-in .
 This week marks the 50th anniversary of the U.S. House of Representatives to meet President Obama in New York City .
 Panama Canal; Establishment of Commission to Study Sea-Level Canal and Alternatives . Panama Canal is the world's largest canal system . Canal was built in 1920s .
 In Proceedings of the United States Strategy Conference on Tropical Deforestation . The United States strategy conference on tropical deforestation .
 United States Department of State and United States Agency for International Development, 1978 . The U.S. State Department for State and the U.A. for State for Development and International Development .
 Selected Periodicals Atlantic Monthly Chicago Tribune Chicago Tribune Christian Science Monitor Los Angeles Times Neiv Scientist Neiv York Times Panama American Popular Mechanics The Scientist Bibliography 13 6 .
 In Vol. of The Writings of William Paterson, Founder of the Bank ofEngland; with Biographical Notices of the Author, His Contemporaries, and His Race .
 Darien Gap Highway fi-om Tocumen, Panama, to Rio Leon, Colombia, was part of the highway's Environmental Impact Assessment . The highway is located in Panama, Panama and Colombia .
 Marine Ecological Research for the Central American Interoceanic Canal . Marine ecological research for the Panama Canal . The Canal is located in Panama City .
 A Multidisciplinary Perspective of a Tropical River Basin, edited by Russell S Harmon, Z8-44. A Multiscultural Perspective of the Tropical River basin .
 Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, During the Years 17(1(1)(1-1804) .
 The Union of the Oceans by Ship-Canal without Locks, via the Atrato Valley, is the result of a ship canal without locks .
 Case Histories of the Japanese Oyster, Crassostreagigas , with Implications for Other Fisheries . Case Historians of the . Oyster . Crassstreagagas . The Oyster is a species of species found in Japan .
 William E. Martin, William E., United States Atomic Energy Commission, and Battelle Memorial Institute . Martin was the U.S. Atomic Energy . Commission was founded in 1945 .
 Moon, Katie, Vanessa M Adams, Stephanie R Januchowski-Hartley, Maksym Polyakov, Morena Mills, Duan Biggs, Andrew T Knight, Edward T Game, and Christopher M Raymond .
 Ros, Macarena, Gail V Ashton, Mariana B Lacerda, James T Carlton, Maite Vazquez-Luis, Jose M Guerra-Garcia, and Gregory M Ruiz. Ros .
 Kristin Saltonstall, Ellen E Strong, Gregory Ruiz, Gregory M Ruiz and Mark E Torchin are among those behind the scenes at the event .
 Demographic Characteristics of Human Groups inhabiting the Eastern Region of the Republic of Panama . Demographics of human groups in the Eastern region .
 The True Story of the Darien Expedition and America’s Ill-Fated Race to Connect the Seas is published by the Smithsonian Institution . The Darien expedition was the first attempt to connect the seas .
 Environmental Knowledge in the North American Arctic during the Cold War . Environmental knowledge in the Arctic during Cold War.
 Z46 Bibliography -, Christine Keiner, Pamela M Henson, Marixa Lasso, Paul Sutter, Megan Raby, and Blake Scott .
 Forgotten Architecture in the U.S. from Thomas Jefferson to the Space Age is edited by Alison Sky and Michelle Stone .
 James P. Delgado, James P., Tomas Mendizabal, Frederick H Hanselmann, and Dominique Rissolo. The authors of the book are published in New York, New York and London .
 Jimmy Carter, America’s “Malaise,”and the Speech That Should Have Changed the Country. Jimmy Carter's speech should have changed the country, he says . Jimmy Carter: America's “malaise” and the speech that should have Changed
 Eisenhower was president of the United States in 1945 . Eisenhower's decision to test nuclear weapons led to a nuclear test ban in 1963 .
 Alexander von Humboldt and the Latin American Journey That Changed the Way We See the World . Alexander von von Humbumbt's journey to Latin America changed the way we see the world .
 Editorial Universitaria, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 1981, published by Smithsonian Tropical Researcher, 1981 .
 Burton I. Kaufman, Burton I., and Scott Kaufman, The Presidency of James Earl Carter . Kaufman: The President of the United States was assassinated in 1968 .
 Laird, Frank N. Laird: Solar Energy, Technology Policy, and Institutional Values . Laird was a member of the U.S. Institute of Energy and Policy .
 White House Politics in a New Light, edited by Mitchell Lerner, zo-47 .
 Storm King Mountain and the Emergence of Modern American Environmentalism . The mountain was the inspiration for modern American environmentalism .
 Judicial Misconstruction, Legislative Indifference, and Executive Neglect, are examples of judicial misconstruction .
 Science and Technology in Canadian History in Canada History, edited by Edward Jones-Imhotep and Tina Adcock, 3Z6-47. Science & Technology in Canada .
 How America Took, Built, Ran, and Ultimately Gave Away the Panama Canal . Panama Canal was built by the U.S. in 1903 and opened in 1903 .
 History of South America and Mexico . Comprising their Discovery, Geography, Politics, Commerce and Revolutions . Niles, John M.
 Environmental History with Science and Technology Studies, edited by Dolly j0rgensen, Finn Arne Jorgensen, and Sara B Pritchard, 1-17. Joining Environmental History .
 Communities, the Environment, and Public Policy, is published by Laurel Sefton MacDowell, izi-49 .
 Rycroft, Robert W. Rycroft and Joseph S Szyliowicz. Hoover Institution Press, 1977. zs6 Bibliography .
 Nineteenth-Century Exploration and the Roots of American Environmentalism . Environmentalism. The Roots of Environmentalism in America. The roots of American environmentalism .
 Water, Science, and the Rise of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . The Corps is the largest engineering agency in the world .
 The United States Navy, the Marine Environment, and the Cartography of Empire. The U.S. Navy is the largest military force in the world . The Navy has been involved in the warship industry for decades .
 A Biography; The Congressional Career of an Economic Savior and Cold War Nationalist. A biography . The Congressional career of an economic savior. A biography . The career of a Cold War . Nationalist and an economic . savior .
 Environment, Politics, and the Building of the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway . The Tennessee Tombigbee River is one of the world's largest rivers .
 Agent Orange, Vietnam, and the scientists who changed the way we think about the environment, are at center of the story .
 Histor IM0E1970 es of Contemporary America Jimmy Carter, the Politics of Family, and the Rise of the Religious Right, byj. Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter was President of the United States in the 1970s .