 Took advantage of the situation in Cuba to gain a foothold in an area that was crucial to America’s security . The U.S. has been involved in the Cuban situation for decades .
 A threat to one's national security can lead to a country taking extreme measures . Safeguarding one’s national security is a key part of national security . A country can take extreme measures to protect its own security .
 USA over-reacted to situation and led to escalation of conflict . -E.g. USA . Over-reacting to situation led to escalating of conflict.
 CIA under President Eisenhower had sought to help the anti-Castro rebels to overthrow the regime . -E.g. The CIA helped the rebels overthrow the government of Cuba .
 America was trying to topple Castro through isolating Cuba, and in doing so, increased the hostility of the Castro regime against the USA and accentuated the fear of invasion, thereby prompting Castro to turn to Moscow for help to defend Cuba from America .
 USSR deployed regiments and weapons to Cuba, including nuclear cruise missiles and mid-range ballistic missiles that could strike targets in USA’s interior . USSR deployed units, weapons and regiments to Cuba including nuclear missiles .
 This was an indication of economic expansion into an area that ranked high on America’s defence priority. This was a sign of expansion into the area of the US defence priority .
 Sponsorship of Castro’s regime and subsequent creation of a de-facto military base in Cuba appeared to be a deliberate affront to America's national security . The U.S. government has been involved in the Cuban regime for decades . The Cuban regime has been accused of
 Transporting of military aid to Cuba escalated a crisis between 2 neighbouring countries into a Cold War issue that threatened World peace . Transporting military aid into Cuba thus escalated the crisis between two neighbouring countries .
 Cuba manipulated super-power politics to guarantee security of borders and to legitimise the new Castro regime . Cuba used super-powers to guarantee the new regime's legitimacy .
 Turned to USSR for economic and military help, so that it would not have to play the role of a submissive little brother to America . U.S. turned to Soviet Union for economic, military help in order to survive .
 By using USSR as a counter-weight to USA, Cuba was shrewdly manipulating super-power politics for its own advantage . Cuba used USSR as counter-weights to USA and used it to counter-balance the US .
 Castro was aware that Cuba’s distance from Moscow meant that it would be given a large measure of independence from Moscow, as opposed to the tight leash that would be kept on if they decided to concede to American superiority . Castro knew that Cuba's distance from Russia meant that Cuba would
 USSR - USSR -Other factors: USA and Cuba - USA - Other factors: USSR - USA .
 Defence lawyer: USSR not to blame, USA/Cuba more to blame . Yes, USSR to blame. No, USSR not the blame . No, Cuba/USA to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Have to come up with a balanced assessment, but also to apportion blame, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Have to be balanced assessment of the situation .
 Plans to assassinate Castro remained in place . Acts of economic sabotage organised by CIA . -Plans to assassinate Fidel Castro remained a place .