 President Bush sought to build a stable, lawful peace on the foundation of military victory . Like PresidentsWilson and Truman before him, PresidentBush sought a stable peace .
 Many doubt whether the goal is attainable, and suspect that a more reasonable hope is the chance of a less chronic disorder in the Middle East and elsewhere .
 Even if far short of a new world order, any new orderliness would be salutary in the chaotic, unipolar confusion of our immediate post-cold war era . Any orderliness in the chaos of the post-Cold war era would be a boon .
 World of shaky regimes, contested borders, ethnic upheavals and religious revivals, says George W. Bush .
 Iraq's "aggression of this nature" is nearly impossible to anticipate, author says . "Deterringdisorderlyconduct of the sortexhibitedby Iraqin August 1990 will not be easy," he says .
 Washington failed to realise until the last minute the importance of sending signals that could have had a deterrent effect on Saddam Hussein . Washington did not realise until last minute that the signals could have been a deterrent to Saddam Hussein.
 Iraqi decision making in the face of failed allied designs to deter them . They were expostulationsof perplexity, even disbelief, not explanationsof Iraqi decision .
 The USA and its allies were unable to predict the onset or nature of the crisis, nor the war that would be required to resolve it . It bodes ill for future attempts at avoiding new world disorder, writes David Cameron .
 First, despite the undoubted noveltyty of post-coldwar international relations, history provides insights . Historyprovidesrelevant insights .
 There are stiking reverberations between the Cubanmissile crisis and the first post-cold war crisis .
 Leadership evolution of leaders from anxiety to desperation, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Deterrenceno longer has its intended effect because disasterappearsto be inevitable"
 Third, we look broadlyat thepresent, looking for a class of states that would seem to be most at risk for creating the kind of disorder identified by Hoffmann .
 The end of the cold war is the source of much that is new and perplexing, but rather the consequences of the Soviet collapse for Moscow's former clients and other potential pariahs .
 Fourth, and finally, we addresststhefuture,andenvisionways in which today'stroublesomecountriescould become tomorrow's desperate despots . We add that we add that today's troubles could be tomorrow's dictatorships .
 Fidel Castro released correspondence betweenhimself and Soviet GeneralSecretaryNikita Khruschev in 1990 . Fidel Castro's correspondence was released on 23 November 1990 .
 Castro's gesture was prompted by a request from U.S. participants in the 1962 missile crisis . This gesture was Castro's contribution to ongoing discussions between American, Soviet, and Cuban scholars .
 Castro took the extraordinary step of calling for an all-out nuclear strike against the USA if, as seemed increasingly likely to Castro, the USA invaded Cuba . The letters were exchanged at the height of the missile crisis .
 There are many Cubans who are at this moment experiencing unspeakablebitterness and sadness . Cubans are experiencing "unspeakable bitterness and sadness," says President Obama .
 It is well to remember that these desperatewords were actually communicated from one leaderto anotherin the missile crisis .
 At that moment, for Fidel Castro, the cold war was suspended: The Soviets had capitulatedand in the process they had sold Cuba down the river . The USA was poised to destroy his regime; and there was absolutely nothing he could do to prevent the attack .
 In refusing Castro's request outright, Khrushchev condemned U.S. liquidation of the Cuban Revolution to meaninglessness . His choice, as he saw it, was between the total destructionof his country and martyrdomfor world socialism,and martyrdom .
 Butch and The Kid decide that death with honour is preferable to death withouthouthonour .
 They come out of the hut shooting, trying to take at least a few of the lawmen down with them . The lawmen are trying to kill at least one of them with them, says the soldier .
 As they emerge from their hut, smiling, guns blazing, they emerge smiling . The hills come alive with thunderous gunfire .
 The viewer is filled not with incredulity at this obviously desperate and suicidal act, but with admiration for its heroism in the face of unbeatable odds .
 This is because by this point in the film, we are 'inside' the protagonists, we can now more easily get 'inside Castro'smind' Then and now, due to the publication of his letters to Khrushchev, we're able to more easily understand Castro's mind .
 Those who are desperate are telling themselves they are not, or at least they appear to be . They are not . Or at least we know something about the stories those desperateare telling themselves . We need to find out who is desperate and why .
 If they truly believe that their choices have been reducedto deathwith honouror deathwith humiliation, then the first option becomes the rational choice . The first option is the death .
 Such "reckless" leaders are likely to lead to actions which appear, to outsiders, to be suicidal at worst, reckless at best . Such desperatestates of mindin leaders, while rationalfrom their point of view, may lead to irrational behavior .
 We should note carefully what we actually mean when we characteriseactions as suicidal or reckless . We meanthe actioncannotbe deterred. We meant he actioncould not be deterred, we meant it was suicidal .
 The situation has been defined as yielding only an absolutely perverse pair of options, both of which lead to death and destruction . It is too late, precisely because the situation is defined as yielding only perverse options, writes David Frum .
 Hoffmann: We must pay closer attention to an entireprocess. That is why preventingnew world disorderrequiredby Hoffmanncannotbegin at the momentof desperation .
 Castro believed he had no control over events, and no effective options, in 1962 . Castro believed the Soviet Union had abandoned him and his revolution .
 Inveteratedomestic instability led to Saddam Hussein's insecurity, writes Simon Tisdall . His anxiety was heightened by what he took to be the implication of Soviet capitulation, he says .
 Some observers attribute the invasion of Kuwait to greed, but we argue that the invasion resulted from a combination of opportunity and insecurity . The invasion, as well as the invasion, could only be the destruction of Iraq .
 The way to minimise new world disorder, given these examples, is to prevent anxiety of potentially troubled countries from evolving into desperation, as it did in the 1962 missile crisis .
 Moscow's former clients are entering a period of uncertainty . They fear regimethreateningcrises and face the prospect of dire emergency on their immediate horizons .
 North Korea and Cuba, especially, are on the leading edge of a multidimensional process of deterioration . The ingredients of the deterioration are unrelenting anti-American rhetoric and aging charismatic leaders .
 Former Soviet clients cannot avoid anxiety about Moscow's demise at a time of increased regional instability . Former Soviet clientele are anxious about the country's demise as a result of instability .
 Some find themselves ideologically on the losing side of history, facing potentiallyominousidentityrises as well as hard choices between political and economic liberalisation .
 The onset of a crisis could contribute to the evolution of situations so perverse as to seem to appear to their leaders to warrant steps . At the same time, all seem vulnerable to new forms of instability .
 The trick, to reiterate, is to prevent manageable, deterrable anxiety from evolving into desperation and dangerous, 'suicidal behaviour'
 Moscow's collapse has ushered in the end of soft currency bartering and cheap energy, and broughtbackbacksin aid . Moscow has been hit hard by the collapse of the Russian economy .
 The economic hardship is also being felt by its old adversaries in Eastern Europe . U.S. withdrawal from the Soviet Union is bringing economic hardship to the region .
 Moscow's former clients can no longer count on easy access to military hardware or superpower protection . A secondset of problems concernsmilitarytransfers andthe protectionfromexternal threats .
 Long before the August 1991 coup, former Soviet clients began to suspectthatthe rug could be pulled out of under them .
 Former Soviet clients now have nowhere to turn to preserve their security . Handouts have been curtailed across the board and their patron has collapsed .
 Former Soviet clients are no longer able to preserve a niche for themselves by playing the superpowers off against one another . Condominium Condominiums were built in the Soviet Union .
 Cambodia is being forced to share power with opposition factions including the hated Khmer Rouge . The Sandinistas were grateful that Washingtoncut aid to the Contras, but ultimately cost them control of Nicaragua .
 Multilateralconflict resolution may be designed to address regional instability . But by excluding the felt needs of certain regimes from the collaborativebenefits of the post-cold war order, some regimes may inadvertently be forced to comply with externallyimposed regional security arrangements .
 Unconfirmed reports claim 50,000 troops were needed to muzzle violent, popular resistance to the UN coalition . Dozens may have been killed in Syria .
 Attempt to bring North Korea in from the cold war also illustrathes the type of constraints faced by those who advocate integration .
 The United States can more easily choose to abandonthem now that containmentof Soviet expansion is no longer the monolithic goal of American foreign policy . Israel, Pakistan, South Korea, Taiwan, and others know that the U.S. can choose to abandon them now .
 Israeli restraintduring the Gulf War illustrates how the country'srelationship with Washington, the leadership'sability to suppress retaliatory instincts, helped the regime preserve national security .
 Had SaddamHussein possessed nuclearweapons, however, or used chemicalweapons, Israelmay have become sufficiently desperate to attack Iraq pre-emptively, or in retaliation .
 Some may provoke war in an attempt to divert attention from domestic instability or to promote loyalty to the regime . Moscow's former clients have greaterincentives for opportunism, but are more vulnerable to neighbours' opportunism .
 Cold war's end has 'unlocked' the USA, and former Soviet clients are concerned about enforcing the rules and regulations of a US-proclaimednew world order . First, the end of the Cold War has unlocked the USA .
 Russia seems to be freeing itself from its military obligations in Europe . The U.S. may now roam unchecked by Russia, it seems .
 President Bush said that the U.S. military will never again fight with its handstied behindits back . Many in the Third World perceive this statement as a euphemism for the USA's delight .
 Since there is no one to resist U.S. aggression, there are fewer reasons than formerly to limit the use of force and threats to use force . The argument is that since there are now fewer reasons to limit use of military force, there is fewer reasons for restraint .
 Many observers say Panamawas the middle step in a process that began in 1983 with the invasion of Grenada .
 Desert Storm consigned the lessons of the Vietnam war to oblivion . Desert Storm is regarded as a meaningful third step in the U.S. military .
 Recently declassified Castro-Khrushchev letters suggest ABC weapons may be used during post-cold war regional crises . Second, the recently declassified letters suggest that ABC weapons could be used in post-war crises .
 Scholars argue that deterrence in the ThirdWorld may be robust . Presentauthors fear this may not be the case .
 The stability of superpower deterrence reduced the likelihood of cataclysmic war for seceral decades . But the US-Soviet experience may be a poor guide for predicting the stability of ThirdWorld deterrence .
 Saddam Hussain refrained from attacking coalition forces with his chemical arsenal . It seems clear in retrospect that he calculated that Iraq would survive the war .
 Fidel Castro concluded in October 1962 that Cuba was about to be completely destroyed, leading to his contingent request for a nuclear first-strike . Fidel Castro, on the other hand, concluded that Cuba would be destroyed . The Cuban leader asked for a first strike in 1962 .
 The steadfastay of desperateThirdWorld regimes may contribute to crises and spirals of escalation in which neighbours come to fear that one or more opponents is about to use ABC weapons against them first .
 It is not only true that unconventionalweapons may be used in post-coldwar crises, it is also true . Importantly,therefore, therefore, it . is that unconventional weapons may . be used .
 Althoughestimatesvary, 11 Third World countries are thoughtto deploy mediumor long-range missiles . Several others deploy short-rangesystems .
 Cruise missile technology soon will become available to many ThirdWorld countries . Cruise missile tech soon will be available to the world's most populous countries .
 Experts say end of cold war has greatly reduced threats to U.S. from Third World . Cold war experts say threat posed by Third World has been reduced .
 John Chipman concludes that violence in the ThirdWorld fails to pass the 'so what' test . They predict that future violence will stay contained and limited to specific regions .
 Neither the coup itself nor Doe's personaldemise has impliedanything, one way or the other, for U.S. security interests .
 Advocates of 'so-what' view can retain it only by ignoring the psychology of desperation and its consequences . Such behaviour, even in the absence of ABC weapons, may matter a great deal to Washington because of its interest in pursuing multinational cooperation .
 A desperate leadercould drag the USA into an unintendedwar by attacking nations the USA values . Israel, South Korea, and Taiwan come immediately to mind . A desperate leader could ignite cross-regional conflict by using mediumor long-range missiles to attack regions .
 A partial example of this phenomenonoccurred when Iraqimissile attacksagainst Tel Aviv and Haifa incited Palestinianguerillas .
 The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 embodies the centralfeatures of the new world situation . To the USA, it representssthe moment the cold war was suspended, the lost opportunity to construct a 'new world order'
 Cuban Cuban missile crisis represents abyss of desperation . Crisis occurs when threat from one regional power is coupled with capitulation of an importantally .
 Second, the anxiety currently felt in the capitalsof much of the Third World is real and, from their perspective, realistic . Third World's anxiety is real, and it's not just a matter of concern, the author says .
 The anxiety in these states must be accepted as a fact and dealt with constructively, before anxiety turns to desperation, leading to new world disorder and danger .
 Usually, this is an anti-explanation, revealing a lack of understanding . The better we understand the local rationales, the more clearly we will see where leaders are, on the road from merely anxious to truly desperate .
 If any lesson has been learned from the last two administrations'coddling of Saddam Hussein, it seems clear that while addressing the sources of anxiety (such as economic distress, domestic instability, and regional tension) it is important to maintain a simultaneous deterrent posture .
 The USA has nothing important to lose, for it has already won the cold war . The U.S. has nothing to lose in the Cold War, but has already already won it .
 The U.S. should open diplomatic relations with Vietnam, Cuba and North Korea, writes CNN.com's John Avlon.com/Heroes .
 Recognition should take priority, now at the end of the cold war, over other policy objectives . Recognition of pariahs unlikely to moderatetheirbehaviour if excluded by a system that denies their legal right to exist .
 Cease economic and trade embargoeswhere possible, and encouragepariahsto join the world economic community . Cease diplomatic and economic and political embargues against the West .
 Explore incentives for future arms control efforts and information exchanges, should regional countries become secure enough to pursue such options .
 The evolution of the U.S. -Soviet verification regime took decades . Be patient, realising that the evolution took decades. Be patient .
 The importanceof reinforcing non-proliferationregimes already in place is underscored by the possibility that isolated leaders may use their nuclear weapons . The importance of reinforcing the non-Proliferation regime underscores the possibility of using nuclear weapons in the future .
 Even though these systems may be necessary during crises, they can be used offensively, provoking greater desperation . The systems should not be deployed during peacetime, and should be used only in emergencies .
 In addition, stop violating multilateralarms sales limitations that were established after the Gulf War . Stop violating international arms sales limitations established after Gulf War.
 We now know from new data on the missile crisis that it is perfectly possible for a leaderto decidecontingently to choose all-outnuclearwar. We now .
 Theoristsof nuclear deterrence have for many years discussed the differences between rational and irrational behaviour . Theorists have also discussed the different types of behaviour .
 Few have been able to articulate the circumstances in which a sane individual could come to see nuclear war as a viable option . Yet few have ever come to articulate how sane individuals could consider nuclear weapons .
 Fidel Castrodid did not control nuclear missiles in 1962 . Now, however, we know that it has happened. And we are lucky .
 We also know from the Gulf War, the first post-cold war event of major significance, that it is possible for a leader in this new world order to act repeatedly in ways that lead to certain destructionand chaos .
 This being the case, it may be wiser to forget trying to forge a new world order . Instead, focus on avoiding related,but idiosyncratic, new world desperationand disorder .
 Fred Barnes, 'Brave new gimmick', The New Republic, 25 February 1991, p 15. Fred Barnes . Barnes' gimmick was the first of its kind .
 Tyler, ' United States pursuesdiplomaticsolutionin PersianGulf crisis; warnsIraq', WashingtonPost, 25 July 1990, p A17. Tyler . Tyler, "United States pursuediplomaticolution in Persian Gulf crisis", WashingtonPost .
 Jerry W Sanders, 'Retreat from world order', WorldPolicy Journal, 8, Spring 1991 . Also Jerry W. Sanders, "Retreats from World Order", WorldPolicy . Journal, published in Spring 1991, .
 Scuds were launched in 1944-45; Iran-Iraq war. 80-88; Afghan government use of Scuds against resistance forces, 1989-90; Egyptianand Syrian launch of Scud against Israeli military facilities during 1973 war . Libyanattack on Americanfacility at Lampedusa
 Praeger, p 39; Desjardins, 'Ballisticmissile proliferation', CanadianInstitutefor InternationalPeace and Security, September 1990, p 2 . Praeger: 'Ballisticsmissile proliferate' Desjardsardins: "Ballistic Missile