 Simon & Schuster is releasing a new book this fall . The book is available on Amazon and other major retailers .
 Since memory is fallible and inevitably selective, I have tried whenever possible to check my recollections against the available records and to supplement them with contemporary sources . I've tried to check whenever possible .
 Some of these sources --memos, correspondence, public papers -- are self-evident, they say . Some of those sources are, of course, self-inflicted wounds .
 Throughout my public career I have had the habit of making extensive handwritten notes about my ideas, conversations, activities, and speeches . I have always been careful to keep detailed notes of my ideas and conversations .
 These notes, most of them made on yellow legal pads, total more than 20,000 pages . These notes are from my outlines for the debates in the 1946 campaign to the outlines of my resignation speech in 1974 .
 They range from offhand observations to extremely detailed passages of dialogue . The book is published in New York, New York and Washington .
 I cannot remember why I started or why I stopped making them, and they cover such a wide variety of subjects and personalities . There does not seem to have been any single purpose behind them .
 These diaries, which were dictated on Edison Voicewriter platters, were transcribed in 1961 when I wrote Six Crises . I did not use them directly in that book and they are quoted here for the first time .
 By historical necessity some of the events in the pre-presidential years that were treated in Szx Crises are also dealt with in this book . The book also deals with pre-Presidential years .
 The reader will find that while the facts concerning the events have not changed, the passage of time has enabled me to analyze them with greater perspective . The new context has made it necessary for me to treat them in a substantially different and more condensed manner .
 During the presidency, from November 1971 until April 1973 and again, from June and July 1974, I kept an almost daily dictated diary . I kept a diary from November 1970 to April 1973, and from June 1974 to June 1974 .
 With the exception of a few that were subpoenaed by the Watergate Special Prosecutor, none of these diary cassettes were transcribed until the summer of 1976 in San Clemente . The diary was transcribed by the Special Prosecutor .
 No word has been changed without adding brackets to indicate the change . While I have excerpted some of the passages from them that appear in this book, no word has changed .
 These dictated diaries do not have the orderliness of a written diary . Often I would dictate on a subject one day and then expand on the same subject a day or two later .
 I have combined entries that deal with the same subjects but were dictated on different days . Because of this, some of these entries have been combined into one .
 Diary entries dealing with Watergate, however, are always from the same dictating session on the same day . Diary entries dealt with Watergate are always in the same session .
 For Watergate period I have used some of the tape transcripts that are already public or that were used by the Special Prosecutor in different investigations and trials . For the Watergate period, I have . used some . of the . tape transcripts already . already public .
 Watergate break-in occurred in the early hours of Watergate . President Richard Nixon asked Mrs. Nixon to explain what he knew and what he did in the crucial period .
 Haldeman, John Ehrlichman, Charles Colson, Charles H. Colson for the month after my return to Washington following the break-in, June 20—July 20, 1972 .
 I asked her to do the same for my conversations with Haldeman in May 1973, when we were discussing what we remembered of the events of June 23, 1972 . I authorized the meeting in which the CIA was asked to limit the FBI’s investigation of Watergate .
 I believe that they have enabled me to give the most complete account of those days that has ever been given. Even so, I think that they've enabled me . Even though I'm not sure if I'm going to give them a complete account, I'm sure I'll give it
 In this book I recount many conversations, some of them as direct quotes . Some of the conversations are based on direct quotes from people who spoke to me .
 Those dealing with Watergate are largely based on the language recorded on the White House tapes . The tapes were recorded by President Nixon's White House staff members .
 There are also extensive memoranda of conversations —“memcons”—covering most talks with foreign leaders .
 Conversations in which I did not take part are obviously dependent upon reports from the participants or on secondary sources . Conversations with I-Report: The author of this article are based on a series of interviews with CNN iReporters .
 In a few cases, I have had to depend solely upon my memory of a conversation in re-creating it, but I have tried to limit this to exchanges in which the vividness of the words lodged them unforgetably in my mind .
 This book could not have been written or published without the help of dozens of people, and I am deeply grateful to all of them . This book is a collection of works by people around the world .
 The wonderful volunteer women who work every day taking care of the mail that comes into La Casa Pacifica spent many hours on the laborious but important proofreading of three drafts of the manuscript .
 Cathy Price, Marnie Pavlick, Nora Kelly, Cindy Serrano-Mesa, and Meredith Johnson worked late hours and many weekends to type the manuscript and then proof galleys against original documents .
 Judy Johnson helped with a variety of typing and research tasks . Meredith Khachigian helped to proof the manuscript against the originals of my diary . Judy Johnson also helped with typing and researching tasks .
 When all the papers of my administration were impounded, Howard W Smith, a private citizen, kindly sent us his complete set of the daily press office news releases and special briefing transcripts .
 Copy editors perform an enormous and vital task in a work of this size . Copy editors do the most important job of editing a book of a book .
 I want to thank David C Frost and Nancy Brooks of Grosset & Dunlap for their patience, diligence, and professional expertise .
 Jack Brennan, Bernard Shir-Cliff, Larry Gadd, Diana Price and Diana Price were among those who assisted in various tasks . Others who assisted were Jack Brennan .
 The index was compiled by Robert Daugherty, and the photographs were assembled with the help of Ann Grier .
 I am grateful to the dozens of former staff members and friends who took part in the events chronicled in this book . I am also grateful to those who gave hours of time to me and my staff as we worked to reconstruct those events .
 General Brent Scowcroft concentrated on the sections dealing with international affairs and foreign policy . Ray Price gave editorial assistance and advice, particularly on the domestic policy sections of the presidency . Herb Stein, who provided editorial assistance on the section dealing with the economy .
 Rose Mary Woods was able to spend several months in San Clemente sharing her memories of the twenty-three years during which she served as my personal secretary . Woods says she applied painstaking attention to detail in reading and checking the manuscript .
 Loie Gaunt, who first joined my staff when I was in the Senate, has served tirelessly as a limitless source of information and help throughout the past three years . Gaunt is a longtime aide to Sen. Mitch McConnell .
 Three people who have worked with me on this project from the beginning. Finally, there are the three people who've worked with him from the start .
 Ken Khachigian and Diane Sawyer pull together much of the source material for this week's episode .
 CNN.com's John Sutter thanks to Frank Gannon, his chief editorial assistant who organized the research and directed the project .
 RN La Casa Pacifica was born in a house my father built . Born in 1913-46 in a home built by his father .
 My birth on the night of January 9, 1913, coincided with a record-breaking cold snap in our town of Yorba Linda, California . My birth coincided with the cold snap, and I was born in 1913 .
 In the spring the air was heavy with the rich scent of orange blossoms . The air was also heavy with an orange blossom scent .
 "Sometimes at night I was awakened by the whistle of a train, and then I dreamed of the faroff places I wanted to visit someday," she says .
 My brothers and I played railroad games, taking the parts of engineers and conductors . "I was a train engineer and conductor. I was a conductor and engineer," he says. "I'm not a train conductor," he adds .
 Everett Barnum, the Santa Fe Railroad engineer who lived in our town, lived in Santa Fe, Texas . He says he remembers the thrill of talking to him about the railroad engineer .
 All through grade school, my ambition was to become a railroad engineer . I wanted to be an engineer, but my ambition is to be a train engineer, he says .
 I was three years old, and my mother was driving us in a horse-drawn buggy, holding my baby brother Don on her lap while a neighbor girl held me . I was driving in the buggy with my brother, Don, and a neighbor neighbor .
 The horse turned the corner leading to our house at high speed, and I tumbled onto the ground . "The horse turned to turn around the corner," she says .
 I must have been in shock, but I managed to get up and run after the buggy while my mother tried to make the horse stop . My mother was trying to get the horse to stop, but he managed to run after it .
 The only aftereffect of this accident was that years later, when the vogue of parting hair on the left side came along, I still had to comb mine straight back to hide a scar caused by the fall .
 Thanks to a vegetable garden and some of our own fruit trees, we had plenty to eat despite our low income . We had plenty of food despite living on a low income.
 "We also had a cow that provided milk from which my mother made our butter and cheese," she says . Her mother also had milk from that cow from which she made her butter .
 My mother had already taught me to read at home, and this head start enabled me to skip the second grade . My mother also had a head start to reading at home .
 After homework and chores, I often sat by the fireplace or at the kitchen table immersed in a book or magazine . After homework, I would often sit in the fireplace and read a book, magazine .
 We took the Los Angeles Times, the Saturday Evening Post, and the Ladies’ Home Journal . We also took a look at the Ladies' Home Journal and the Saturday Night's Magazine .
 Aunt Olive, my mother’s youngest sister, and her husband, Oscar Marshburn, lived in nearby Whittier and subscribed to the National Geographic . Aunt Olive was my mother's youngest sister .
 In 1922, my father sold our house and lemon grove in Yorba Linda, California, and we moved to Whittier, California . In 1922 he sold his home and lemongrove, and his lemon tree, in Whittler .
 He did roustabout work in the oil fields, but although it paid well, this physical labor offered no challenge to the man of ambition, intelligence, and lively imagination . He did work for the company, but it was not a challenge .
 Early on, my father could see that even though there were still very few automobiles and only one paved road in the area, the horseless carriage was an idea whose time was about to come . The carriage was the idea of the carriage carriage .
 He borrowed $5,000 to buy some land on the main road connecting the growing towns of Whittier and La Habra . The land will be used to build roads connecting the two growing towns .
 He cleared the lot, put in a tank and a pump, and opened the first service station in the eight-mile stretch between the two towns .
 The enterprise was an almost instant success, and he soon opened a general store and market . The business was almost an instant success .
 She insisted that it was at its best only when she beat fresh outdoor air into the batter before putting it in the oven .
 I remember her standing outside the kitchen door in the chilly predawn air, beating the batter with a big wooden spoon . She was standing outside in the early hours of the morning . She beat the batter out of the kitchen with a wooden spoon, she says .
 The grocery business expanded rapidly, and had it not been for the illnesses that struck our family, we would have been modestly well off by the standards of those times . The illnesses struck their family, and they were able to expand their business .
 Nixon Market was a “mom and pop’s operation; the whole family worked in the store . The Nixon Market is a ‘mom-and-pop’ operation . It was a family-run operation .
 In addition to waiting on the customers and keeping the accounts, inventory had to be taken, orders placed, and shelves kept stocked .
 The store had to be cleaned and swept each night and sprayed for flies each day . The store was also sprayed with flies every day and had to clean and sweep each night .
 Each morning I got up at four in order to be at the Seventh Street market in Los Angeles by five o'clock. Each morning, I would get there at 4 a.m.
 I chose the best fruits and vegetables, bargained with the farmers and wholesalers for a good price . Then drove back to East Whittier to wash, sort, and arrange the produce in the store and be off to school by eight .
 It was not an easy life, but it was a good one, centered around a loving family and a small, tight-knit, Quaker community . "It was not easy life," she says of her Quaker life .
 California in the 1920s seemed to be a place and time of almost unlimited opportunity . For those who were willing to work hard, California seemed to offer almost unlimited opportunities . The state of California was known as the Golden State .
 The principle that opposites attract aptly describes my father and my mother . The principle of opposites attracting aptly describes his father and his mother .
 They were devoted to one another, and no sacrifice was too great for them to make for their children . "They were completely devoted to each other," she said .
 Two more temperamentally different people could hardly be imagined . But they are not the same temperamentally .
 My father, Francis Anthony Nixon, was known throughout his life as Frank . Nixon's father, Frank, was born in 1945 and died in 1973 .
 His mother died of tuberculosis when he was eight, and her long illness left the family almost penniless . His mother left him with nothing to spare, and he was left with nothing .
 After her death the family moved to a small barren plot of land in eastern Ohio . My father had to walk several miles each day to the nearest school to get to school .
 A newcomer, small in stature and dressed in ragged clothes, he was taunted by his schoolmates . He was small, small, and dressed raggedly, taunting by schoolmates at school .
 He responded with a quick tongue and a ready pair of fists, and he soon became known as a natural fighter . He responded to his critics with a tongue and fists .
 The family fortunes did not improve, and after he had finished the sixth grade he quit school and went to work . After finishing sixth grade, the family fortunes didn't improve .
 Over the next few years he held many jobs, acquiring new skills with each one . Over the years, he learned new skills from each job . He spent most of the time in a career as a result of his success .
 He drove an ox team hauling logs to a sawmill, worked as a carpenter, managed a potato farm, sheared sheep in Colorado, and installed early hand-crank telephones . He also installed early telephones, managed potato farms, managed sheep, and sheared
 The insides of the early trolleys were heated by pot-bellied stoves, but the vestibules where the motormen stood were open . The inside of the trolley were heated using pot-busting stoves .
 Complaints to the company went unheeded, so he organized a protest by the motormen and conductors . Complaints were ignored by the company .
 They managed to get a bill passed in the state legislature requiring that the vestibules be enclosed and heated .
 He decided to move to Southern California, where at least frostbite would not be a problem . The battle had left him frustrated and discouraged .
 In 1907 he got a job as a motorman on the Pacific Electric streetcar line that ran between Los Angeles and Whittier . In 1907, he was working as a driver on the line that runs from Los Angeles to Los Angeles .
 In 1908 he met Hannah Milhous at a Valentine’s Day party . Despite reservations of her family because she had not finished college, they were married four months later .
 He had tempestuous arguments with my brothers Harold and Don, and their shouting could be heard all through the neighborhood . Their shouting was heard in the neighborhood, Harold said . He said, "I'm not sure what happened to him, but I'm sure he had a lot of
 'I tried to follow my mother’s example of not crossing him when he was in a bad mood. He was a strict and stern disciplinarian, and I tried not to cross him,' she said .
 Perhaps my own aversion to personal confrontations dates back to these early recollections . Perhaps I'm not afraid to confront myself, but I'm afraid to do so now .
 He often argued vehemently on almost any subject with the customers he waited on in the store . The store owner argued vehemently with almost any of his customers .
 His outbursts were not personal; they were just his way of putting life into a discussion . He said: "He was not personal, he was just putting life in a discussion. He was not going to be angry, but he was trying to make a point."
 It was a standing family joke that my mother or one of us boys would rush to wait on some of the more sensitive customers before he could get to them . Unfortunately some of our customers did not appreciate this, and it was a family joke .
 Whatever talent I have as a debater must have been acquired from my father, from his love of argument and disputation, he says . Whatever talent he has as a debate must be acquired from his father, he said .
 When I was on the debating team in college, he would often drive me to the debates and sit in the back of the room listening intently . He often drove me to debates and sat in the way of the debates, he said .
 He opposed vested interests and political machines that exercised so much control over American life at the beginning of the century . He opposed the vested interests .
 He chose to be supplied by the less well known Richfield Oil Company when he opened his service station in Whittier .
 As the Nixon Market grew, he became a vociferous opponent of chain stores . He became a vocal opponent of chains .
 He feared that through their volume buying they would crush the independent operator and the family grocery store . He said he feared that by the way of volume buying, the company would crush independent operators .
 In those days before television and when radio was still in its infancy, conversation within the family and among friends was a major source of recreation .
 Lively discussions of political issues were always a feature of our family gatherings . Lively political discussions were always an important part of the family gatherings. The family is proud of their political heritage .
 In 1924, he became disenchanted with the stand-pat Republicanism of Harding and Coolidge . In 1924 he became disillusioned with the Republicanism .
 A populist strain entered his thinking, and that year he deserted his party to vote for the great Wisconsin Progressive Senator Robert “Fighting Bob” La Follette .
 Townsend Plan proposed paying $200 a month to everyone over sixty who would spend the money and agree to retire . Townsend Plan was too liberal even for the New Deal . Townsend was an ardent supporter of Townsend Plan .
 He supported Hoover in 1932 because Hoover was a “dry,” and FDR a ‘wet” on prohibition . Hoover and FDR were both ‘dry’ on prohibition, but FDR was “wet on prohibition’s prohibition .
 The dignity of labor was the keystone of my father’s philosophy of life, he says . "The dignity of work was the heart of his life," he adds .
 During the Great Depression, my brother Harold had tuberculosis . My father refused to let him go to the county tuberculosis hospital, one of the best in the country, on the ground that going there would be charity .
 My father’s temper may have been exacerbated by a partial deafness that became almost total as he grew older . My father's temper may be exacerbated by his deafness, he says .
 There were times I suspected him of provoking a commotion just so he could turn off his hearing aid and watch the drama unfold before him like a silent movie .
 But it is the love beneath his brusque and bristling exterior that I remember best . 'It is a love beneath the bristles of his bristled exterior that he remembers best'
 We had to rush from the hotel to the theatre, and on the way he discovered that he had left his hearing aid in his room . On the way, he found it in his hotel room he'd left it .
 He was determined that he would not spoil our evening, and I remember how intently he followed the play . He laughed and applauded with the rest of the audience so that we would think he was having a good time, even though he could not hear a single word or a single note
 My father’s interest in politics made him the most enthusiastic follower of my career from its beginnings . My father was an avid supporter of me and my career, he said .
 He read them cover to cover —something that no congressman or senator I knew ever took the time to do . He read the books and took them out of his home in New York .
 "Everyone who ever knew my mother was impressed with what a remarkable woman she was," says her mother-in-law . "She was an incredible woman," she says of her mother .
 She was born March 7, 1885, in southern Indiana into an Irish Quaker family of nine children . She was the first woman to be buried in her native Indiana .
 When she was twelve, her father decided to move to a new Quaker settlement in California . She was moved to a Quaker community in California when she was 12 .
 After graduating from Whittier Academy, my mother went on to Whittiers College. After graduating, she went to the college where she graduated from high school to college .
 She loved history and literature, and she majored in languages, concentrating in Latin, Greek, and German .
 When she met and married my father, she had completed her second year of college . She had completed a second of college when she married her father .
 Harold, born in 1909; Richard, born 1913; Francis Donald, born 1914; Arthur, born 1918; and Arthur, . born in 1918; . Edward, was born in 1930 .
 My mother was always concerned and active in community affairs, but her most striking quality was a deep sense of privacy . Her most striking feature of her life was her privacy, her daughter says .
 She radiated warmth and love for her family, indeed, for all people, but was intensely private in her feelings and emotions . Although she radiated warm and love, she was private in many of her emotions .
 We never had a meal without saying grace, but except for special occasions when each of us boys would recite a verse from the Bible, these prayers were always silent .
 St. Matthew told his mother that praying should be done behind closed doors . She went into a closet to say her prayers before going to bed at night .
 This was her quiet Quaker way of saying, “I will be praying for you”— and it meant infinitely more to me because of its understatement . This was the quiet Quakers way of expressing their love for each other .
 Many people who knew my mother in Whittier referred to her, even during her lifetime, as a Quaker saint . Many people in her family called her "Quaker saint" Even during her life, she was referred to as Quaker Saint .
 Saints, I feel, have a special pipeline to God which provides them a fortitude not given ordinary mortals . Saints have a unique connection to God, which they must have to be strong enough to withstand .
 The quality that made my mother so special, and that made people want to be close to her, was that she never wore her religion on her sleeve . Although the inner serenity religion gave her shone through, she did not wear her religious beliefs on her sleeves .
 As a child I spent hours sitting at the piano in our living room picking out tunes . As a young boy, I would spend hours picking up tunes in my living room .
 Shortly after school, I started taking piano lessons from my Uncle Griffith Milhous. Shortly after I began school, he started taking lessons from him .
 My parents decided to give me a real test of my musical abilities . Probably because of Uncle Griffith’s urgings, my parents wanted to test their musical ability .
 My mother’s sister Jane had studied piano at the Metropolitan School of Music in Indianapolis and was an accomplished performer and teacher . My mother's sister Jane was a piano student and piano teacher .
 She lived with her own family in Lindsay, another Quaker enclave, in central California . She was a Quaker woman .
 It was decided that I should live with them for half a year and take lessons from her . It was then decided that she should take a half-year break from her to take lessons .
 The Beeson family went home after a family reunion at his grandmother’s house in December 1924 . He says he went home with Aunt Jane and Uncle Harold Beeson .
 For six months I took daily piano lessons from Aunt Jane and violin lessons from a teacher in Exeter . I walked a mile and a half each way each way to school with Alden and Sheldon .
 Even today, more than fifty years later, I still remember some of the music I learned back in Lindsay, Lindsay . "Even today,  I still . still . remember some . of the songs I learned from Lindsay. Even today."
 Playing piano is a way of expressing oneself that is perhaps even more fulfilling than writing or speaking . Playing the piano is an expression that can be even more satisfying than writing, he says .
 "I think that to create great music is one of the highest aspirations man can set for himself," says the singer . He says he wants to create "great music"
 Like any twelve-year-old I was happy to see them after what seemed like a very long time . Like any 12-year, I was . happy to . see them again, but it was a long time.
 As soon as he saw me alone, my youngest brother, Arthur, greeted me with a solemn kiss on the cheek . He greeted her alone, Arthur greeted her with a serious kiss . He said: 'As soon he saw her alone he greeted her as she saw him alone'
 I later learned that he had asked my mother if it would be proper for him to kiss me since I had been away . "He asked my mom if it was proper for me to kiss him," she said .
 Even at that early age, he had acquired our family’s reticence about open displays of affection . Even at the early age he had . acquired our . family's reticency about open shows of affection.
 Arthur complained of a headache a short time after we returned to Whittier, California . Arthur suffered from a headache .
 Arthur’s condition deteriorated quickly, and the doctor was unable to find the cause of his death . Arthur's condition deteriorated rapidly, and doctors were unable to identify the cause .
 After that most painful of tests had been taken, I remember my father coming downstairs . "I remember my dad coming downstairs. I remember him coming downstairs"
 Don and I were sent to stay with my Aunt Carrie Wildermuth in Fullerton, California . Arthur required constant care and attention, and Don was sent to live with his aunt .
 He had asked for one of his favorite dishes, tomato gravy on toast; we brought some up with us, and he enjoyed it . "I remember how much he enjoyed how much I enjoyed it," he said .
 The doctor said that it was tubercular encephalitis, but those words were too big, too cold, and too impersonal for us to grasp or understand . "Those words are too big and cold," the doctor said .
 My father had been keeping the service station open on Sundays to accommodate the increasing weekend traffic on Whittier Boulevard . Half believed Arthur's death represented some kind of divine displeasure, and he never again opened the station or the market on a Sunday .
 For weeks after Arthur’s funeral there was not a day that I did not think about him and cry . Arthur's funeral was one of the most memorable moments of my life, I said .
 For the first time, I had learned what death was like and what it meant. For first time I'd learned what it was like to be dead. For the rest of my life, I wanted to know more about death .
 As a freshman in college I wrote a short essay about Arthur for an English composition course . I wrote about Arthur as a young boy in college .
 The first two or three years of his brother’s life are rather indistinct in my memory for I was engrossed in the first years of my grammar school education . The first 2 or 3 years of the boy's life are . I'm not sure how much of his
 'There were certain things concerned with my little brother’s early development which did impress me. However, there was certain things concerning with his little brother's early development that did impress him,' he said .
 "I remember how his eyes changed from their original baby-blue to an almost black shade," his mother says . "How he learned to roll over, then to crawl, and finally to walk," she says .
 Although I do not remember many incidents connected with my brother’s early childhood, there were some which made a clear imprint on my mind . Although I don't remember many of the incidents, I do remember some of the most memorable ones .
 I remember how my mother had to work with him for hours to get him to do it, because he disliked walking with the little flower girl . I remember working with my mother for hours. She worked with him .
 "When he was about five years old, he showed the world that he was a man by getting some cigarettes out of our store and secretly smoking them back of the house," the author says .
 One of our gossipy neighbors happened to see him, and she promptly informed my mother . Unfortunately for him, the gossipy neighbor happened to be seeing him . She promptly informed her mother, who was in the family home .
 I shall never forget how he disliked wearing ‘sticky’ wool suits . He disliked wearing 'sticky' wool suits, he said .
 There is a growing tendency among college students to let their childhood beliefs be forgotten . There is also a tendency to let childhood beliefs forgotten .
 We find this true when we speak of the Divine Creator and his plans for us . Especially we find it true when speaking of the divine Creator's plans for our lives .
 I thought that I would also become that way, but I find that it is almost impossible for me to do so . I thought I would become that . I find it almost impossible to . do so, but it's almost impossible .
 He put his arms around her and said that he wanted to pray before he went to sleep . He then said he was going to pray to her before going to bed .
 There is a grave out now in the hills, but, like the picture, it contains only the bodily image of my brother . There is also a grave in the hillside, but the image of his brother is only of his .
 When I am tired and worried, I look up and see the picture of a little boy with sparkling eyes, and curly hair, I remember the childlike prayer . I pray that it may prove true for me as it did .
 My oldest brother Harold’s long bout with tuberculosis began several years before Arthur died, but it continued for more than ten years . Harold's illness began years before his brother Arthur's death . Arthur's brother Harold died from tuberculosis .
 "It was especially hard for us to accept because he had always had such a robust enjoyment of life," says his family .
 In high school he had a strippeddown Model T Ford that he raced with friends . He raced with his friends in high school .
 It was during Harold’s long illness that my mother showed the depth of her character and faith . My mother showed her strength during Harold's long illness, she said .
 In those days, TB was almost always incurable, and the long, losing fight left its tragic mark on our whole family . In the years of the past, the family was devastated by the loss of TB, which was incurable .
 First, Harold went to an expensive private sanatorium, and then he spent a few months in a cottage in the Antelope Valley in California . The area is drier than the Whittier area, which is considerably drier .
 Prescott, Arizona, is supposed to be excellent for tubercular cures because of its dry climate and high elevation . It was supposed to have been an excellent place to cure tubercular diseases .
 She cooked and cleaned, gave them bed baths and alcohol rubs, and did everything that a nurse does for a patient . She cooked, cleaned, cleaned and gave the children alcohol baths . She also gave her bed baths .
 In addition to the wrenching physical and emotional strain of nursing, the very fact of separation from the rest of us was very hard on my mother . The very fact that she was separated from her family was hard on her .
 My father regularly made the 14-hour drive to Prescott with Don and Don and me during Christmas and spring vacations, and we spent part of our summers there . Don's father often made the fourteen-hour journey to Prescott .
 During those two summers in Prescott, I worked at any odd job I could find, including odd jobs . During that time, I spent two summers working odd jobs at odd places .
 I was a janitor at a swimming pool, and once I helped pluck and dress frying chickens for a butcher shop . I've also been a Janitor at swimming pools, and I've been a butcher .
 I also worked as a carnival barker at the Frontier Days festival that is still celebrated in Prescott every July . The festival is still held in Prescott, Arizona .
 He was terribly unhappy and homesick in Prescott, so it was finally decided to let him come home . He was hoping that familiar surroundings would compensate for the damper climate .
 He had a desperate will to live and refused to comply with the doctor’s orders that he stay in bed . He had been told that he should not be allowed to go to bed .
 Harold was still so full of hope and had so much life in him, his family said . Harold's death was especially painful for us all because he was still full of life in life, they said .
 We kept hoping against hope that some mental lift might start him on the way back to physical recovery . We hope against hope he will be able to get back to full fitness .
 "When he said that he would like to go through the San Bernardino Mountains to see the desert, my father dropped everything to make plans for the trip," his son says .
 Harold spent hours with Harold planning their route and itinerary . He rented one of the first house trailers on the market . Harold rented a wooden structure built on a Reo truck chassis .
 "We saw them off one morning, expecting them to be gone for almost a month," says mother . "We were expecting them off for almost one month," she says .
 Harold had had another hemorrhage, and despite his insistence that they go on, my father knew that Harold would not be able to stand the rigors of living in the trailer . Harold had been suffering from a hemorrhage and had to be hospitalized .
 Harold told me that he was nevertheless glad they had taken even this short trip . Harold said he was still glad that they had gone on the trip, even though it was short .
 I can still remember his voice when he described the beauty of the wild flowers in the foothills and the striking sight of snow in the mountains . He said: "I can still . still remember him describing the . beauty of . the . foothills"
 He had seen an ad for a new kind of electric cake mixer he wanted to give our mother for her birthday the next day . He had been planning to give her a cake mixer for the day .
 We had them wrap the mixer as a birthday present, and we hid it at home at the top of a closet . We had the mixer wrapped up as a present for a friend .
 The next morning he said that we should postpone giving our presents to mother until that night because he did not feel well and wanted to rest . The next day he said he wanted to give presents to her because he felt ill .
 "I was studying in the college library when I received a message to come home. About three hours later I was studying," he says . "About three hours after I was ... there was no sign of him coming home."
 Harold's parents were crying uncontrollably as the undertaker carried out Harold’s body . My parents were cried uncontrollably, as they were carrying out Harold's body . Harold's funeral was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Harold asked his mother to put her arms around him and hold him very close, she says . Harold asked her to hold him close to her as she left for school . Harold's mother says Harold was very concerned about his health . Harold died at the age of 92 in August .
 Harold gave his mother a cake mixer and told her it was Harold’s gift to her . That night I got the cake mixer out and gave it to my mother . Harold's cake mixer was Harold's birthday gift to his mother .
 "I loved my parents equally but in very different ways, just as they were very different people," she said . "I was very proud of my parents. I loved them equally but they had very different lives," she added .
 My father was a scrappy, belligerent fighter with a quick, wide-ranging raw intellect . He was also a fighter and a fighter, and his father was the best of all .
 "He left me a respect for learning and hard work, and the will to keep fighting no matter what the odds. He left me with a respect," he said. "I will always remember him as a great fighter," he added .
 My mother loved me completely and selflessly, and her special legacy was a quiet, inner peace, and the determination never to despait . Her special legacy is a quiet inner peace and determination to never despait, she said .
 The Milhous family was one of the oldest in the town, and counting sisters and cousins and aunts, it included scores of people . The family is one of many of the town's oldest families .
 It was a matriarchy headed, first, by Elizabeth Price Milhous, her great-grandmother . It was also headed by her great grandmothers, who died in 2011 .
 Eliza Cope Birdwell was the model for Eliza Birdwell in Jessamyn West’s novel The Friendly Persuasion .
 She died in 1923 at the age of ninety-six, when I was only ten, but I can remember her well . She died at the time of her death in 1923, when she was just ten .
 At our traditional Christmas family reunions at her house she sat regally in her best red velvet dress . At her family reunion, all the grandchildren brought their very modest presents to her . She sat with them in her finest red velvet .
 She praised them all equally equally, remarking that each had something she had particularly wanted .
 'She seemed to take a special interest in me, and she wrote me verses on my birthday and other special occasions,' she said .
 I hung the picture above my bed at home at home, and to this day it is one of my fondest possessions . I hung it above me, and it's one of the best photos of my life .
 When I was in college, my grandmother gave me a biography of Gandhi, which I read from cover to cover . I read Gandhi's biography from cover-to-cover, and I read it all over .
 Gandhi’s concept of peaceful change and passive resistance appealed to her, she said . She had a deep Quaker opposition to any racial or religious prejudice . She was a Quaker, opposed to racial prejudice .
 Grandmother Milhous belonged to the generation of Quakers who used the plain speech .
 I loved to listen when my mother and my aunts slipped back into the plain speech in their own homes . I loved listening to them slip back into it while talking with her or with each other . The plain speech is a form of humor .
 I grew up in a religious environment that was once unusually strict and unusually tolerant, I say . I'm proud of my family's tolerance of religion, but I'm not surprised by how tolerant I am today .
 My mother and her family belonged to a branch of the Friends Church that had ministers, choirs, and virtually all the symbols of other Protestant denominations . My mother was a member of a Friends Church branch that included ministers .
 The differences were the absence of water baptism and communion, and the heavy Quaker emphasis on silent prayer . The Quaker community was led by Quaker women .
 My father converted to Quakerism from his own rather robust Methodism at the time of his marriage . He had the typical enthusiasm of a convert for his new religion, and he had a typical enthusiasm .
 Our family went to church four times on Sunday: Sunday school, the regular morning service, Christian Endeavor in the late afternoon, and another service in the evening . Our family also went to Wednesday night services as well as Wednesday night .
 During his high school and college years I also played the piano for various church services each week . During his college years he also played for various churches each week.
 "I never went to bed at night without reading a few verses. My mother gave me a Bible when I graduated from eighth grade, and I never read it," she says .
 Even the extensive religious activities of the Friends meetings in Yorba Linda and Whittier were not enough to satisfy my parents . My parents were not satisfied with their lack of religious activities .
 Aimee Semple McPherson and Bob Shuler were fascinated by evangelists and revivalists of the times . They were both fascinated by the evangelists of those times, and often drove to Los Angeles .
 While religion and prayer were very much a part of our family life, they were essentially personal and private . "Religion and prayer was very much part of the family life," she said. "They were essentially private and private"
 I never fell into the common practice of quoting the Bible in speeches I made during my school years or later in my political life . Perhaps because of this I never . fell into a common practice, quoting the . Bible in the speeches I . made during school years . or later, later
 When I was Vice President, President Eisenhower urged me to refer to God from time to time in speeches, but I did not feel comfortable doing so . President Eisenhower wanted me to use God in speeches but I didn't feel comfortable .
 I suffered my first political defeat in my junior year at Whittier High School, when I lost the election for president of the student body . I suffered his first political loss in junior year of high school .
 I was appointed student body manager by the faculty, and it was my responsibility to handle the sale of tickets to football games and to persuade local businessmen to advertise in the school yearbook . I was elected student body president by faculty .
 Our senior year, 1930, was the 2000th anniversary of the poet Vergil’s birth, and the Latin teachers at school decided to put on a special dramatization of the Aeneid to commemorate the event .
 I was chosen to play Aeneas, and my girl friend, Ola Florence Welch, was his beloved Dido . Ola was Ola's friend, and her character, Dido, played Dido in the role of the character .
 It was my first experience in dramatics, and it was amazing that it was not my last . It was 'amazing' that it wasn't my last. It was the first time I had a role in a play in the play .
 Vergil obviously had not written the Aeneid for a high school assembly in Whittier, California . First, the audience was bored stiff .
 The dramatically tender scene in which I embraced Dido evoked such catcalls, whistles, and uproarious laughter that we had to wait until they subsided before we could continue . Second, the dramatically tender moment in which . I embraced . Dido .
 I would guess that the silver boots I had to wear with my costume were no bigger than size 9 . The silver boots she wore with her costume were probably size 9 or size 8 .
 It took both Latin teachers and me several minutes to get them on and almost as long as getting them off, and the hour on stage in them was agony beyond description .
 Harvard Club of California’s award for outstanding allaround student . I finished third in my high school class, won constitutional oratorical contests in my junior and senior years .
 "I had no choice but to live at home, and that meant that I would have to attend Whittier College," she says . She says she was forced to live with her family in California . "I'm not going to go to school. I'm going to college.
 "I was not disappointed, because the idea of college was so exciting that nothing could have dimmed it for me," she says . "I'm not disappointed," she writes .
 "For the first time I met students who were able to get good grades without working very hard for them," she says . "I needed the steady discipline of nightly study to keep up with all the courses and reading," she adds .
 Each of my teachers made a great impression on me, but a few in particular touched my mind and changed my life . Each of his teachers made an impression on him, but some of them changed his life .
 Paul Smith was probably the greatest intellectual inspiration of my early years . Paul Smith is probably the best intellectual inspiration for my early life .
 "I took his courses in British and American civilization, the American Constitution, and international relations and law," he says .
 Smith’s approach to history and politics was strongly influenced by the Progressive outlook, and it came as a revelation to me that history could be more than a chronicle of past events . History could be a tool of analysis and criticism, Smith writes .
 Albert Upton, who taught English and was the director of the drama club, was an iconoclast . Upton taught English at the University of Cambridge and was a member of the Drama Club . Upton was also director of a drama club at the university .
 "Nothing was sacred to him, and he stimulated us by his outspoken unorthodoxy," he said . "Nothing sacred" to him was sacred, he said, "nothing sacred to us"
 At the end of his junior year he told me that my education would not be complete until I read Tolstoy and the other great Russian novelists . He told me he would not complete his education if he had read the novels .
 "I was even more deeply affected by the philosophical works of his later years," she says . "He was a great humanist," she adds .
 His program for a peaceful revolution for the downtrodden Russian masses, his passionate opposition to war, and his emphasis on the spiritual elements in all aspects of life, left a more lasting impression on me than his novels .
 He taught a course called “The Philosophy of Christian Reconstruction,” which I took in my senior year . He also taught a class about the philosophy of Christian reconstruction .
 It involved a weekly written self-analysis based on questions raised in class . The self-analyzing process involved writing a weekly self-assessment .
 On October 9, 1933, I described some of my impressions and problems at the beginning of the course. On October 10, 1933. I describe some of the problems I faced in the course .
 This composition gives a clearer picture of my beliefs, questions, and uncertainties as a college student than anything I could reconstruct today . This composition is a better picture of me as a student than I can reconstruct today.
 "Fundamental Quakers" had ground into me, with the aid of the church, all the fundamental ideas in their strictest interpretation . My parents, “fundamental Quaker’s,” had ground me into Quakers, he says .
 The infallibility and literal correctness of the Bible, the miracles, even the whale story, all these I accepted as facts when I entered college four years ago . I accept as facts as I did in college, I thought they were facts .
 Many childhood ideas have been destroyed but there are some which I cannot bring myself to drop . Many of those childhood ideas were destroyed .
 "I still believe that God is the creator, the first cause of all that exists," she says .
 "I still believe that He lives today, in some form, directing the destinies of the cosmos," she says .
 I even go so far as to say Jesus and God are one, because Jesus set the great example which is forever pulling men upward to the ideal life . Jesus set a great example for men to follow, and God is one .
 Orthodox teachers have always insisted that the physical resurrection of Jesus is the most important cornerstone in the Christian religion .
 The populist elements of my father’s politics, the Progressive influence of Paul Smith, the iconoclasm of Albert Upton, and the iconococism of Dr. Albert Upton . Dr. Dr. Upton's Christian humanism was the inspiration for Dr. Paul Smith’
 Whittier students say they received a 'first-rate education' from their teachers . "Thanks to my teachers I studied hard and received a first-rate' education," she says . "I am proud of my achievements," she said .
 Academic pursuits were by no means the only—or the most important—part of my four years at the University of Cambridge . But academic pursuits were also important .
 "From the first week of school on, I was involved in extracurricular activities," she says . "I was involved with extracuirary activities. From the first . week on, she was involved," she said .
 Whittier did not have any fraternities, but there was one social club, the Franklin Society, whose members had high social status on campus . The Franklin Society was a social club that had high status on the campus .
 Dean Triggs was a member of a fraternity at Colorado College . Triggs had just transferred to Whittier from Colorado College, where he had belonged to a frat .
 He thought it was undemocratic to have only one such club at Whittier . He suggested that we start another . He said it was 'undemocratic'
 Orthogonians recruited mostly athletes and men who were working their way through school . The Franklins were socially oriented, the Orthogsonians were social orientated .
 The Franklins posed for their yearbook pictures wearing tuxedos . We posed for our pictures wearing open-necked shirts. The Franklin's yearbook photos were taken in tuxes .
 Our motto was Ecrasons l'infame—“Stamp out evil’—and our symbol was a boar’s head . Our symbol was the boar's head .
 Although only a freshman, he was elected the first president of the Orthogonians . "I wrote our constitution and our song," he says. "I was elected to write our constitution"
 College debating in those days was a serious pursuit and a highly developed art . It provided not only experience with techniques of argument but also an intensive introduction to the substance of some issues I would deal with later years .
 Because of the way our college debates were organized, the team had to be prepared to argue either side of a question . The team was able to argue both sides of the question .
 This sort of exercise turned out to be a healthy antidote to certainty, and a good lesson in seeing the other person’s point of view . It was a good reminder of the other side of view, and it was also a good thing to see .
 "Because of this debate training I became used to speaking without notes," he says . "I'm used to speak without notes, a practice that was of great importance to me later in my political career," he adds .
 During his senior year he won the intercollegiate extemporaneous speaking contest of Southern California. During my senior year I won the . I won . During my . senior year, I won a . college speaking contest .
 "I became a convinced free-trader and remain so to this day. Once I had thoroughly researched—and argued—both sides of both sides, I became a . convinced free trader," he says .
 I became convinced that the economic recovery of Europe was more important than our insistence on payment of war debts . Although once again I debated both sides, I became . convinced that . I became determined to . become convinced that an economic recovery was more . important . than our insisting on paying war
 We debated whether a free economy was more efficient than a managed economy . We also debated whether the free economy is better than managed economies .
 The New Deal was at the height of the early enthusiasm for the experiments of the New Deal . He surfaced from his immersion in both sides of that topic thoroughly persuaded of the superior merits of a free economy .
 The debate team made a 3,500-mile tour through the Pacific Northwest during college . It was a winter tour of the Northwest .
 My father let us take our family’s eight-year-old, seven-passenger Packard for the trip . The trip was the first time the Packard had been on the road .
 The leader of our debating team was Joe Sweeney, a red-headed Irishman with loads of selfassurance . Joe Sweeney was the leader of the debating team in the 1980s .
 In those days shortly before the repeal of Prohibition, San Francisco was a wide-open town . In the days before Prohibition, the city was an open town .
 He showed the man behind the counter a card one of the bellboys at the hotel had given him . The man led us over to a wall covered with shelves of drugs . He showed us a card he'd given him to the man .
 It was not a particularly boisterous place, although the smoky air and the casual attitude of the patrons made us feel that we had wandered into a veritable den of iniquity .
 I did not have the slightest idea what to drink, so Sweeney ordered a Tom Collins for me . He ordered it for me, but I had no idea what I was drinking .
 Except for him, none of us had been in a speakeasy before, and I had never tasted alcohol . It was a lark just to sit there watching the people, listening to their conversation .
 "I tried out for several plays in college, and I was usually given the character parts," she says . She says she tried out several plays, but was often given character parts .
 I was the dithering Mr Ingoldsby in Booth Tarkington’s The Trysting Place . I was also an old Scottish miner in a grim one-act play, The Price of Coal, and a rather flaky comic character .
 I also served as stage manager for college productions of The Mikado and The Pirates of Penzance .
 Student politics was necessarily low-keyed in a small school where everyone knew one another . Student politics in the small school was anything else low key .
 My only major “campaign” was for president of the student body at the end of my third year . I was a student at U.S. College of Medicine student at the time .
 "I was the candidate of the Orthogonian Society, and my opponent was Dick Thomson of the Franklin Society. I was a candidate for the orthogonian society, and I was the opponent of Dick Thomson, Dick Thomson .
 "We were good friends and did not feel much enthusiasm for running against each other," he said . "I did not want to run against eachother," he added .
 I based my campaign on the controversial issue of allowing dancing on campus . I based myself on the issue of having dancing allowed on campus, he says .
 I had no personal stake in it since I had not even known how to dance until Ola Florence forced me to learn a few steps at a party . "I'm not a fan of Ola," she said .
 Dancing on campus would be better to have dances on campus where they could be supervised, rather than off campus .
 The board would rent the nearby Whittier Women’s Club building, which had a fine ballroom . Herbert Harris, acting president of the college, helped me work out a compromise with the trustees .
 Ola Florence and several other coeds were very patient with me . But I fear that many new pairs of slippers were scuffed as a result of my attempts to lead my partners around the dance floor .
 In fact, the only trophy I have to show for having played basketball is a porcelain dental bridge .
 In one game, jumping for a rebound, a forward from La Verne College hit me in the mouth with his elbow and broke my top front teeth in half . In the past, he was hit in the face with an elbow and his teeth were broken in half, he says .
 Sports have provided relief from the heavy burdens of work and study that I have assumed at every stage of my life. First, sports have provided necessary relief . Sports have given me relief from heavy burdens that I've assumed at all stages of my career .
 I have a highly competitive instinct, and I find it stimulating to follow sports events in which one team's or one man’s skill and discipline and brains are pitted against another's in the most exciting kind of combat imaginable . Second, I have an extremely competitive instinct. I find
 Football has been my favorite sport since I first played in high school, football has always been my love . Football is my passion for high school football, I said .
 Despite my size and weight I got to play in every game and to wear a team numeral on my sweater . There were only eleven eligible men on the freshman team, so despite my size, I was able to play .
 The only times I got to play were in the last few minutes of a game that was already safely won or hopelessly lost . But for the rest of my college years, the only times . I was able to play in college games that were already safe or lost .
 College football at Whittier gave me a chance to get to know the coach, Wallace “Chief” Newman . Newman is a coach at the University of California . Newman has coached the football team since 1988 .
 I think that I admired him more and learned more from him than from any man I have ever known aside from my father . "I think that . I think . I admire him more," she said of her father, "and learned more"
 Tall and ramrod-straight, with sharp features and copper skin, from his youngest days he was nicknamed Chief . Tall and . ramrod straight, with . sharp features with sharp . features and . copper . skin, he said .
 He inspired in us that if we worked hard enough and played hard enough, we could beat anybody . He inspired us to work hard and play hard enough to win any game, we said . We were inspired by his work ethic, he said, and that he was inspired by it .
 He had no tolerance for the view that how you play the game counts more than whether you win or lose, he said . He said: 'How you play is more important than winning or losing is important'
 He believed in always playing cleanly, but also believed that there was a great difference between winning and losing . He said: "There is a huge difference between playing clean and losing"
 There is no way I can adequately describe Chief Newman’s influence on me. Chief Newman was a force of force during his time in office . Chief Newman's influence on his life inspired him to become a police officer .
 He drilled into me a competitive spirit and the determination to come back after you have been knocked down or after you lose, he said . He said: 'You can't be knocked down, but you can be knocked out of the game'
 He also gave me an acute understanding that what really matters is not a man’s background, his color, his race, or his religion, but only his character . He said: “What really matters matters is the character of a man, not his background .
 When I arrived in Durham in September 1934, the photographs I had seen had not prepared me for the size and beauty of the Duke campus . The photos were taken at the Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, in 1934 .
 For someone accustomed to California architecture and a small college like Whittier, Duke was like a medieval cathedral town . Duke is a small town in California, but it's like a cathedral town.
 Dozens of buildings were set in clusters amid acres of woods and gardens . Dozens of people were set up in clusters of buildings amid acres .
 Duke had adopted the Harvard case method, which involved memorizing the facts and points of law in hundreds of different cases . Duke was able to stand up in class, recite them, and respond to sharp questioning .
 "My memory was a great asset here, but I had never been faced with such an overwhelming mass of material," he says . "I had never faced such a massive mass of information," he adds .
 "I sometimes despaired of pulling the memorized facts together into any meaningful knowledge of the law," says the author .
 Bill Adelson had noted the long hours he spent studying in the law library . He said he poured his fears and doubts to an upperclassman who had noted his time in the library .
 During his first two years at Duke I lived in a $5-a-month rented room . For third year I joined three friends and moved into a small house in Duke Forest, about two miles from campus .
 As I look back, I am amazed that we lived so long and so contentedly in such primitive conditions, but at the time it seemed exciting and adventurous . As I looked back I was amazed that . we lived . so long we lived in primitive conditions. But at the . time
 There was a metal stove in the middle of the room, which we stuffed with paper at night . The first one up in the morning lighted it. We stuffed it with paper, and the first one got up at the night .
 In order to save money, for breakfast I usually had a Milky Way candy bar . "I usually had to eat it all day," she says .
 The law school had central heating and hot and cold running water in the men’s room . I left my razor behind some books in the law school library .
 I even found time for some political activity and was elected president of the Student Bar Association . I'm not just a student, but I'm a lawyer, and I'm proud to be a lawyer .
 Despite the fact that we had some intense discussions on the race issue, I could not agree with many of my Southern classmates on this subject . I learned to understand and respect them for their patriotism, their pride, and their interest in national issues .
 After his years at Duke I felt strongly that it was time to bring the South back into the Union. After my years at . Duke, he said, "I felt strongly" that the South should be back in the Union .
 As the last year at Duke Law School began, I had to think about what I would do after graduation . I'm not sure what I will do when I graduate, but I'm going to be a lawyer .
 "I expected to finish near the top of my class, but the job market was very bad," says student . "The job market is very bad. It's very hard to get a good job," she says of her time in college .
 The recession of 1937 was about to wipe out what few gains had been made since the Depression began . Good jobs with good salaries were few, and good jobs with a good salary were few . In 1937, the economy was in the throes of the Depression .
 The only firm that showed any interest in me was Donovan, Leisure, Newton and Lombard . I was offered the job by Donovan and Leisure .
 They wrote to me a month after the interview, but by that time I was no longer so keen on the idea of starting out in that cold and expensive city . I'm not sure if I'm going to move to New York City .
 J Edgar Hoover asked if he had applied for a position as a special agent . Hoover later told Hoover that he had once applied to be a Special Agent . Hoover was the President of the United States .
 My family, including my eighty-eight-year-old grandmother, drove East for my graduation in June 1937 . My family traveled to the U.S. for the graduation .
 It was a proud day for them, made more so by the fact that on the day they arrived, I had finished third in my class and had been named a member of the prestigious national legal honor society, the Order of the Coif .
 "I arrived back in Whittier with good prospects but an uncertain future. I arrived back with good prospect but uncertain future," he said .
 I would have just six weeks to study for the test for which most candidates allowed over two months . Even worse, the three-day exam would include the extensive California code, which we had not studied at all at Duke .
 "Waiting for the results was an unnerving experience for me and my family," she says . Waiting for results was "unnunnerving experience" for her and her family .
 Scuttlebutt was that those who had passed received a simple notice in a regular envelope . Those who failed received a large envelope containing papers necessary for applying to take the exam again .
 We eagerly checked the mailbox each day. During the weeks of waiting for the results, we eagerly checked it out each day .
 The envelope came from the mailbox in tears, holding the longawaited envelope . Then one morning, my mother returned from the mail, holding a long awaited envelope .
 "I did not want her to see my distress, so I went into the bathroom and shut the door before opening the envelope," she said .
 The first legal work I did involved was the usual estate and divorce cases that fall to many young lawyers . I was a young lawyer in the 1970s and 1980s . I'm now a successful lawyer in New York City .
 At first, I was surprised by some of the intimate matters people argued about, and equally surprised by the fact that they could calmly sit down and tell a stranger, even their lawyer, about them . I was also surprised by how people were able to talk about their intimate matters .
 I always tried to talk my clients into a reconciliation but seldom succeeded . I tried to persuade them to reconcile, but never succeeded . 'I'm not going to get back in touch with my clients again,' she says .
 Formerly Wingert, Bewley, and Nixon, was a lawyer in the 1970s and 1980s . After a year he joined Wingerts, he left the firm to focus on his career in legal matters .
 Mr Nixon was Mr Nixon, the new partner in Wingert and Bewley . Now for the first time he was no longer Frank and Hannah Nixon’s son—l
 Young lawyers trying to get business for their firms are expected to join local clubs, so I began to participate extensively in community affairs . Young lawyers want to be involved in the community, so he joined local clubs .
 I joined the Kiwanis Club of La Habra and the 20—30 Club, a group for young business and professional men between those ages . "I joined the 20-30 Club. I joined a group of young business, professional men," he says .
 I was approached by several of the town’s Republican leaders about running for the state assembly . "I’m running for a state assembly. I’ve got a lot of support from the Republican community," he says .
 "I was flattered by this suggestion, but the war intervened. I'm flattered and interested by this idea, but war intervened," he says .
 Ayn Rand’s courtroom drama, The Night of January 16th, is set to be staged by amateur theatre group . Lilly Baldwin, the director of the group, telephoned me to ask if I would play the part of a prosecuting attorney in their upcoming production of A
 I took the part and thoroughly enjoyed this experience in amateur dramatics . I took part and enjoyed it thoroughly enjoyed it, says actor .
 Several months later I went to the casting tryouts for a production of George S Kaufman and Alexander Woollcott’s play, The Dark Tower . Several months after I attended the tryouts, I decided to join the cast cast .
 A beautiful and vivacious young woman with titian hair appeared whom I had never seen before . I thought I knew everyone in Whittier, but that night I saw her again .
 Pat Ryan had just begun teaching at Whittier High School . Pat Ryan was the new girl in town, and she was a teacher at the time .
 I wonder whether it was a sixth sense that prompted me to make such an impetuous statement . But I wonder if it was . Perhaps it was the sixth sense .
 Pat’s life deserves a volume of its own, and perhaps someday she will write that volume herself . Pat's life should be a book, but perhaps someday it will be its own .
 It's an exceptional story, just as she is an exceptional woman with great independence, keen intelligence, and a warm sense of humor . It is just as well as her story, she is also a great woman with keen intelligence and great independence .
 She was born on March 16, 1912, in the little mining town of Ely, Nevada . She was christened Thelma Catherine Ryan . She died at the age of 92 .
 When she was a year old, her father decided to quit the mines and bring his family to a small ranch near Artesia, California, near Los Angeles, California .
 The Nixons lived in Yorba Linda, California, with a family of seven . They lived in a house very much like the Nixon's in nearby Yorbainda .
 She decided to adopt the name her Irish father liked to call her, and became known to everyone as Pat . She adopted the name after her father called her Pat .
 When our daughters were born Pat suggested that we give them only one name each, Patricia and Julie, so that they could change them or add to them when they were old enough to decide . It is deeply irritating to be burdened with a name you dislike, she says .
 Her mother died of cancer when Pat was only 13, and Pat had to take her place, cooking and keeping house for her father and brothers . Pat's mother died when she was just 13, but Pat was determined to succeed her .
 The long years in the mine took their toll and her father became ill with silicosis . About the time she graduated from high school, her father was ill . Her father was also ill and she was forced to work in the mines .
 Pat gave up her plans for college and nursed her son until his death two years later . She nursed him until he died two years after he was born . Pat decided to give up plans to go to college and give him up for adoption .
 With her father gone and her brothers away at college, she was now completely on her own . With her brothers gone, she had to find a way to cope with the loss .
 She worked part-time as a teller in a bank and began attending classes at Fullerton Junior College . She now attends classes at a junior college .
 Much to their surprise, this pretty, young girl asked for the job—and much to her surprise, she got it . Much to the surprise, the young girl got it.
 She took an X-ray technicians’ course at Seton Hospital, run by the Sisters of Charity . She became a secretary and then took a training course at the hospital .
 She lived in the hospital annex and chauffeured the nuns around town when they went shopping . She lived there in hospital annex .
 She supported herself by working forty hours a week as a research assistant to a professor . She was supported by her research assistant at the time .
 For a year she also worked as a salesperson in Bullock’s Wilshire department store . From time to time she was hired as an extra for crowd scenes in the movies .
 If you look closely, you can spot her in Becky Sharp and Small Town Girl . If you're looking at her closely, she can be seen in Small Town Girls .
 She received a B.S. degree with honors from USC in 1937, the same year I graduated from Duke . Offers of bigger parts and even a career in the movies could not distract her from her education, she says .
 Pat's interest was marketing, and she expected to work for a department store . Pat’s interest is marketing, but she wanted to work in marketing . Pat is now working in marketing at a national mall .
 She teaches business courses at Whittier High School for $190 a month . But jobs were hard to find, she says, so she jumped at it .
 She was an immediate hit at the school, charming students and faculty alike . She was the first female president of the University of Washington .
 She was faculty adviser for the Student Pep Club and prepared programs for school assemblies and rallies . She also prepared programs to school assemblies, rallies .
 She decided to audition for the local theatre group because of her interest in dramatics . She auditioned for the group in a bid to get involved in the theatre .
 She met the intense young man with the dark curly hair and the prominent nose who could not take his eyes away from her at the tryouts for The Dark Tower . That was where she met him .
 We went ice skating at the new indoor rink near Artesia, swimming at nearby beaches, and skiing in the mountains .
 We were both movie fans and we often drove up to the large movie theatres in Hollywood . We often drove to the theatres to see movies in Hollywood, but we were both fans .
 Pat also liked football, so we went to as many Whittier and USC games as we could . Fortunately Pat also like football, he liked to go to USC games .
 They were particularly impressed by her obvious strength of character and indomitable spirit .
 In 1940 I sent Pat a May basket with an engagement ring set among the flowers . In 1940, Pat sent her a basket of flowers with a engagement ring in the basket . Pat's engagement ring was set among flowers .
 We were married on June 21, at a small family ceremony at the Mission Inn in Riverside .
 "We had very little money, so we had stocked up on canned foods in order to avoid the expense of restaurants," she says .
 Friends removed labels from all the cans, and thus every meal became a game of chance . After we were on our way, we discovered that our friends had removed the labels .
 Several times we ended up having pork and beans for breakfast and grapefruit slices for dinner . Several times the family had grapefruit for breakfast or dinner .
 Back in Whittier I returned to my law office and Pat returned to teaching . "Pat went back to teaching," she says, "and Pat went on to be a teacher"
 As the 1940 elections approached, I strongly supported Wendell Willkie because, while I favored some of Roosevelts domestic programs, particularly Social Security, I opposed his attempt to break the two-term tradition .
 "I even made a couple of speeches for Willkie before small local groups in Whittier," says Willkie . Willkie is a conservative Republican who has served in California .
 In 1941, Pat and Pat saved enough money to take a Caribbean cruise on the United Fruit Company’s freight and passenger ship Ulua . In 1941 the two men saved enough to take the cruise .
 Except for the fact that I was seasick for almost the entire trip, we enjoyed what turned out to be our last vacation for several years .
 My sharpest recollection of the trip is of the evening of June 22, 1941, when our elderly black steward told us that word had just come over the ship’s radio that Hitler had invaded Russia . The trip was one of the most memorable trips to the U.S
 We both hoped this would lead to a Russian victory and Hitler’s downfall, says historian . ‘We both hoped it would end up leading Russia to victory,’ she says. ‘I hope it will lead to Hitler's downfall. We hope this will end up
 I despised Hitler, and despite my disenchantment with Stalin over the Hitler—Stalin pact, had no particular anti-Soviet or anticommunist feelings . I despised Stalin, but had no real anti-Stalin feelings, he said .
 In December 1941, 1941, President Roosevelt offered a job with the Office of Price Administration in Washington . President Roosevelt was a member of the Cabinet at the time of his presidency .
 The pay was only $3,200 a year, not nearly so much as Pat and Pat were making together with her teaching and her law practice . "Pat and Pat's job was to be a job, but it was not nearly as much as they were making," she says .
 CNN iReporters went to Washington to observe the working of the government firsthand . CNN's John Sutter says it was a good opportunity to go to Washington and observe government .
 If war came I would stay working in the government rather than fight in the armed services . Although it would take me far from Whittier again, she probably thought that if war came she probably would stay in government .
 "Pat and Pat went to the movies in Hollywood. One Sunday shortly before we were to leave for Washington, Pat and Pat decided to go to Hollywood. Pat was going to Hollywood to see the movies . Pat was in Hollywood at the time of the trip .
 Neva’s husband, Marc, said that he had just heard on the radio an unconfirmed report that the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor . Neva's husband, Neva, said he'd just heard from the radio that Pearl Harbor had bombed .
 I said I was sure that it was just one more of the frequent scare stories we all had been hearing, and we went on to the matinee . I said he was sure . It was just another scare story .
 The theatre manager interrupted with an announcement that all servicemen had been called to their units immediately . Shortly before the film was finished, the theatre manager interrupts with a warning that servicemen will be called .
 Washington was now the capital of a nation at war . Pat and Pat drove across the country to a Washington that was now a Washington .
 OPA office in one of the ‘temporary’ buildings on Independence Avenue a few blocks from the Capitol . We found a small apartment nearby in Virginia .
 I cannot say that my eight months at OPA were particularly happy ones, but at least they were instructive . I was in charge of OPA for eight months, but it was instructive to learn from the experience .
 I was an assistant attorney for the rationing coordination section, which dealt with rationing rubber and automobile tires . I was also a member of the Rationing coordination committee .
 One of the first lessons I learned was how government bureaucrats work: "Government bureaucrats work" "One of the most important things I learned is how government bureaucracy works"
 Others with lesser academic records and not as much legal experience had come in as P-4s, P-5s, at $4,600 a year . Some even paid more than that, with some paying as much as $5,600 .
 "I made no complaints, but I did talk it over with some of the people I knew in personnel. I made no complaint, but ... talked it over," he says .
 One of my superiors, David Lloyd, who later became one of President Truman’s top advisers, said, “Build a little staff.” One of his superiors, . Lloyd, later became . one of the . president's top . advisers .
 The experience had an enormous effect on the policies I later developed during my political career . But the experience had a huge effect on my policies later developed, he says .
 Some career government workers became obsessed with their own power and seemed to delight in kicking people around, particularly those in the private sector . One impression that stayed with me was that while some career . government workers were sincere, dedicated, and able people, others .
 It was hard enough to make rationing work even when we had the incentive of the war and the appeal to patriotism to back it up, says the author of the book .
 I knew that once the war was over, rationing and price control would be almost impossible to enforce, and that the black marketeers, just like the bootleggers during the days of Prohibition, would be the only ones to profit from a continuation of the government-controlled system
 Many men in OPA were able to get draft deferments and spent the war in their offices . OPA men spent their war in offices during World War II .
 Despite Quaker background and beliefs, I never considered doing this. Despite my Quaker backgrounds, I was never considered considering it .
 When I heard that young lawyers were being recruited as officers for the Navy, I talked to Pat about it and applied for a commission . I talked about it, and applied to a commission for a Navy .
 I was sent to the naval officer indoctrination school at Quonset Point, Rhode Island, in August 1942 . The school was part of the Naval Officer indoctrination program .
 After two months at Quonset, where I learned to stand straight and keep my shoes shined, I listed ‘Ships and Stations’ as my first choice for active duty . “After two months, where he learned to . learn to stand . straight and
 "I expected to be assigned to a battle fleet in the South Pacific or the North Atlantic," says the ship's captain . "I'm not going to be in the battle fleet, I'm going to have a battle in the Pacific," he says .
 I could hardly believe my orders when I opened my orders and found that I was being sent to the Naval Air Station in Ottumwa, Iowa . I was sent to an air base where I was stationed .
 When I reported for duty, I found that the station was still under construction . When I showed up I found it had been under construction, the station still under work . The station is now under construction.
 "My disappointment with this assignment was soon overcome by the warmth and friendliness of our new neighbors," she says . "I'm glad to have been given the opportunity to be a neighbor," she writes .
 Pat got a job in town as a bank teller and we settled in for an enjoyable taste of Midwest life . Pat and his wife moved to the Midwest for a job .
 Applications for sea duty would be accepted from officers aged twenty-nine or younger . It was thought to be the end of the war, but applications were accepted by the U.S. Navy .
 "Pat was worried about my safety, but she supported my decision to try to play a real part in the war effort," she says .
 I received orders to report to San Francisco for assignment overseas, and we went back to Whittier so that I could say goodbye to my family . "We went home to say goodbye, and I got orders to go overseas," she says .
 "I knew that my mother and grandmother were deeply troubled by my decision. Although nothing was ever said, I knew that nothing was wrong with my decision," she said. "I was deeply troubled"
 In World War I my Uncle Oscar had gone to France with the American Friends Service Committee . He worked with the Red Cross as an orderly, tending wounded soldiers on both sides of the lines .
 "I am sure that this was the kind of service they had hoped I would choose," she said . "I'm sure this was a service I would have chosen," she added .
 It was a difficult decision for me to make, but I felt that I could not sit back while my country was being attacked . It was the first time I had been allowed to leave the country . I felt I couldn't sit back and watch what was happening to my country .
 The problem with Quaker pacifism, it seemed to me, was that it could only work if one were fighting a civilized, compassionate enemy . It seemed to be that it worked only if one fought a civilized and compassionate enemy, he said .
 In the face of Hitler and Tojo, pacifism not only failed to stop violence, it actually played into the hands of a barbarous foe and weakened home-front morale . In Japan, the U.S. played a key role in the rise of the Nazis and Japan's
 Family and friends came to see Pat and me off on the train to San Francisco . Pat and Pat left for San Francisco, California, to join friends and family .
 The Bewleys were there, along with my former secretary, Evlyn Dorn, and her husband, and some friends of Pat’s and mine . Evlyn and Evlyn were also there, as well as Pat and his former secretary .
 My mother and father were there, along with Don and his wife, Clara Jane, and my youngest brother, Eddie, who was now twelve and looked like a carbon copy of me at that age . Don and Clara Jane were also in attendance .
 It was a painful meal, full of sad silences beneath the superficially cheerful conversation, and I was relieved when the train was finally announced . The train was eventually announced .
 As Pat and I stood on the wooden block getting ready to board the train, I turned to take one last look . Pat and Pat were boarding the train at the time .
 The train pulled slowly out of the station until they disappeared in the distance . Pat and I watched them waving to us as they left the station . The train waved to us while it pulled slowly away .
 Almost as soon as I left San Francisco I realized that I did not have a recent photograph of Pat to carry with me . Pat is a well-known author and author of the book, "Pat" is published in New York .
 "I was happy when it arrived, but it made the separation even more painful for me," she said . "I'm happy when I got the gift, but I'm sad to have to wait for it to come back," she added .
 I was assigned to the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command at Nouméa on the island of New Caledonia . I was deployed to the combat air transport command in the Pacific at the time .
 Our unit was responsible for preparing manifests and flight plans for C-47 cargo and transport planes as they flew from island to island .
 "I spent a lot of my time trying to get a battle-station assignment. Like many assigned “down the line” I wanted to get where the action was,” he says . "Like many assigned down the line," he says. "I want to get
 In January 1944, I was assigned to Bougainville, which was a target for occasional Japanese bomber attacks . I was stationed there in January 1944 . I spent most of my life in Bougainville .
 When it was over, we counted thirty-five shell holes within a hundred feet of the air raid bunker six of us shared . Six of us were in the bunker at the time .
 Many fighter and bomber pilots came through Bougainville on their way to battle missions, and I felt that they deserved the best we could possibly give them . Many of them were on the way to war missions, so we gave them the best possible possible .
 I used SCAT resources to get small supplies of chopped meat and beer . I used my SCAT resource to get the best beer and meat .
 "Nick’s Hamburger Stand" is a free hamburger and a bottle of Australian beer . Whenever I received a fresh shipment of fresh shipment, I opened ‘Nick's Hamburger’ and served a free burger .
 After serving on Bougainville, I requested and received an assignment as officer in charge of the SCAT detachment that was to support the invasion of Green Island . After serving in the war, I was asked and received a assignment .
 The only danger came from straggling snipers and giant centipedes . The Japanese had already retreated, however, and the only danger was from snipers .
 A few days before it was completed, an Army B-29 bomber that had been seriously damaged flying over Rabaul had to use it for a crash landing even though some of the Seabees’ equipment was still standing on it .
 It was dusk, almost dark, and we all cheered as the plane came in on its belly . The plane came into the U.S. on a belly, landing on the runway in the dark .
 We watched in horror as it crashed head-on into a bulldozer and exploded . Then we watched in shock as it collided with a truck and bulldozer . The accident happened in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 I can still see the wedding ring on the charred hand of one of the crewmen when I carried his body from the twisted wreckage . The wedding ring was on the hand of a crewman when he was killed, says the pilot .
 "My poker playing during this time has been somewhat exaggerated in terms of both my skill and my winnings," he says . The poker player's poker playing has been exaggerated, he adds .
 The pressures of wartime, and the even more oppressive monotony, made it an irresistible diversion . But the pressures of war made it seem to be the most compelling diversion .
 I found playing poker instructive and entertaining as well as entertaining and profitable . I found it instructive, entertaining, profitable and profitable.
 The people who have the cards are usually the ones who talk the least and the softest . Those who are bluffing tend to talk loudly and give themselves away . I learned that .
 One night in a stud poker game, with an ace in the hole, I drew a royal flush in diamonds in diamonds . One night I won't forget, he won't play poker again, he says .
 "The odds against this are about 650,000 to 1, and I was naturally excited. The odds against that are 650,00 to 1," he says . The odds are about 6,500 to 1 .
 It was a lonely war for most of the men in the South Pacific, filled with seemingly interminable periods of waiting while the action unfolded thousands of miles away .
 We devoured the copies of Life magazine that filtered through to us, and, as much out of boredom as out of piety, I read and reread the old illustrated Bible that I had brought with me . I read, reread, re-read, and read the Bible that
 Letters from home were the only thing we really had to look forward to, and I wrote to Pat every day during the 14 months I was away . Letters from . home were . only thing they really had . looked forward to looking forward to .
 Charles Lindbergh was flying combat missions testing new planes for the Air Force . He was on Green Island when he was flying missions testing combat missions for the U.S. Navy .
 The CO invited me to a small dinner in Lindbergh’s honor, but I had to decline because a month before I had agreed to host a poker game . A month before, a month earlier, I’d agreed to play a poker poker game. The CO
 Charles Lindbergh passed up a dinner date with Charles because of a card game . Today it seems incredible to me that I passed up an opportunity to have dinner with him because of the card game. I think it's incredible that he passed up .
 The etiquette surrounding poker games was taken very seriously in the South Pacific . Poker games were more than idle pastimes, and the etiquette surrounding them was taken seriously .
 Charles and Anne Morrow Lindbergh accepted invitation to attend state dinner at the White House . Charles was able to rectify this error when Charles accepted invite to White House state dinner .
 In July 1944, 1944 my overseas tour of duty was completed and I was ordered back to the States . I was sent home to the U.S. in July 1944 . I served in World War II with the Navy .
 I caught a cargo plane from Guadalcanal to Hawaii, and when we made a fueling stop at Wake Island in the middle of the night I got out to stretch my legs . It was the first time I'd get out of the plane to stretch his legs .
 I shall never forget those white crosses, row after row of them, beginning at the edge of the runway and stretching out into the darkness on that tiny island so far away from home . The white crosses began at edge of runway and stretched out into darkness on tiny island .
 I thought of all the men who were still out there fighting for these little bits of unfriendly ground, often barren ground . I wondered why Americans or the Japanese thought they were worth fighting and dying for .
 "We had to capture them just as the enemy had to defend them," he says . "Of course, I knew that they were the essential stepping-stones for bringing the war home to Japan," he adds .
 I was overcome with the ultimate futility of war and the terrible reality of the loss that lies behind it . But standing on Wake, waiting for the plane to be refueled, was overcome by the futility .
 She wore a bright red dress, and when she saw me standing there her eyes lighted up, and she ran to the barrier and threw her arms around me . She ran into the barrier, and threw herself around me.
 In January 1945 I received orders to go East to work on Navy contract terminations . "In January 1945, I was sent to East," he says .
 A month later the war in Europe was over, and we saw the newsreels of Soviet and American troops shaking hands at the Elbe . A month after the war, the war was over the Soviets and Americans shook hands .
 In August Pat and I joined the throng in Times Square to celebrate V-J Day . Pat and Pat joined a throng of people to celebrate the day .
 The answer came in September in the form of a letter from Herman Perry, a Baltimore resident . Perry's letter was a letter to the author of the book .
 Perry was manager of Bank of America’s Whittier branch . Perry was one of the community's Republican leaders . He was also a manager of the Bank of American branch in California . Perry is a Republican .
 He had been a classmate of my mother’s at Whittier College and was an old family friend . He was a former classmate of his mother's and was a family friend of his .
 Dear Dick: I am writing you this short note to ask if you would like to be a candidate for Congress on the Republican ticket in 1946 . Dick asks you to run for the Republican Party on the Democratic ticket .
 Perry knew of my interest in politics from our discussions before the war about my running for the state assembly . Perry knew he wanted to run for state assembly, and Perry knew about his interest, he says . Perry's wife says he is proud of his work as a soldier .
 In 1941 he was a newly married young lawyer just starting a career . In 1946 he would be a demobilized Navy lieutenant commander with a wife and child . But in 1941 he had been a newly . married young . lawyer . He was demobilised Navy lieutenant .
 "It was clear that if I were to go after the congressional nomination seriously, it would require my full-time effort and attention," she said . "I'm not going to be able to do anything else," she added .
 "Pat and I would have to be able to support ourselves and finance the campaign at least until the primary in June," she says .
 If I won the nomination, we could count on campaign funds from the party organization, she says . "We would still have to pay all our personal expenses," she adds .
 With my pay, Pat’s salary, and my poker winnings, we had managed to save $10,000 during the war . With his pay and Pat's salary, they had managed . to . managed to . save $5,000 .
 Pat was dubious about spending our savings on what was at best a risky political campaign . Pat was skeptical about spending his savings on a risky campaign .
 "The more we thought about the possibility of returning to Washington as a congressional family, the more enthusiastic we became. The more enthusiasm we became, we said. We're looking forward to returning to D.C. as a family . We hope to return to Washington next year .
 "I called Perry and said that I was honored by his letter and excited by the prospect of running for Congress. Two days later I called Perry to say that I would run for Congress," he said .
 President Obama said he would be in California to begin campaigning by the first of the year . But he said the nomination was not his to offer .
 He wrote to me on behalf of a candidate search committee, known as the Committee of 100 . The committee was established by the Twelfth District’s Republican leaders to try to find someone who had a chance of beating Voorhis .
 He felt that if I were interested I would have a good chance, but the committee would probably interview several other candidates before deciding which one to endorse .
 An aggressive, vigorous campaign on a platform of practical liberalism should be the antidote the people have been looking for to take the place of Voorhis’s New Deal idealism .
 The group’s search had produced six prospective candidates, and each of them was to make a speech describing the reasons for his candidacy . Each of the candidates was expected to speak to the group .
 Since I drew the lot as last speaker on a long program, I decided that brevity would be as much appreciated as eloquence . I decided to make the lot shorter than any other speaker .
 In the first speech of his political career, he described his view of the two conflicting opinions about the nature of the American system . In his first speech, he said: "In the first . speech of my political career I described my view of . the . first speech"
 The New Deal advocates government control in regulating our lives . One of the goals of the New Deal is government control of our lives, it says .
 The other calls for individual freedom and all that initiative can produce . "Individual freedom" is "incompatible with individual freedom," the author says .
 I believe the returning veterans, and I have talked to many of them in the foxholes, will not be satisfied with a dole or a government handout . I believe many of these veterans will be not satisfied with dole, or government handouts .
 They want a respectable job in private industry where they will be recognized for what they produce . They also want the opportunity to start their own business . They want to be recognized and recognized for their work .
 If the choice of this committee comes to me I will be prepared to put on an aggressive and vigorous campaign on a platform of practical liberalism . I feel very strongly that the present incumbent can be defeated. With your help we can defeat the incumbent .
 It was after two o'clock in the morning on November 29 when the phone rang in our apartment . The phone rang at 2:30 a.m. ET on the morning of the November 29 incident .
 My closest competitor, Sam Gist, a furniture store owner from Pomona, received twelve . Gist received the most votes .
 While he was waiting to be discharged from the Navy I began a crash course in politics and public affairs . While I was waiting for discharge I began to learn about politics .
 Each night when I got home from work I pored over magazines, newspapers, and books about Congress and campaigns . Each night, I would pore over magazines and newspapers about Congress, campaigns .
 I wrote to House Minority Leader Joe Martin, introducing myself as the prospective Republican nominee for the Twelfth District . I visited him in his office in the Capitol, and he met with him .
 Republican congressmen give their evaluations of Voorhis . CNN's John Sutter talks with several Republican lawmakers .
 Through the Republican Campaign Committee I obtained his complete voting record, I spent several days familiarizing myself with it . I obtained the Republican campaign committee's complete voting records .
 By the time of his discharge and return to California in January, I was confident that I knew Voorhis’s record as well as he did himself .
 In the first meetings with my campaign advisers, we agreed that the first thing I had to do was to become known throughout the district . "I had to become ... well known throughout my district," she says .
 "While I was well known in the Whittier area, I was a stranger in all the other towns," says Bob Greene . "I'm not a stranger. While I'm well known, I'm a stranger," he says . Greene says, "I was a total stranger
 Republican supporters would open up their houses to as many as few friends and neighbors as were interested in coming to meet me . We began holding a series of “house meetings’s” in which Republicans would meet with each other .
 These house meetings permitted me to meet hundreds of voters and helped me to enlist the women volunteers whose dedicated work is so important to any campaign . The house meetings provided me with a chance to meet voters and enlisting women volunteers .
 Tricia was born on February 21, 2011 . She was born with Tricia's mother and father . Tricia has been a great friend and mother to Tricia .
 "She went to many of the house meetings with me and afterward gave thoughtful and sometimes quite persistent critiques of my performances," she says . "She was very kind of a great critic," she adds .
 At that time California law permitted cross-filing, which meant that a candidate could enter the primaries of both parties . At the time, California law allowed cross filing, and candidates could enter both parties.
 Thus the primary served as a trial heat for the later general election . The primary was held in order to prepare for the general election. The primary election was the first of its kind .
 Each of us was on the ballot as a candidate for both the Republican and Democratic nominations . Voorhis and I took advantage of this, and each of us ran for both parties .
 When the votes were counted, each of us, as expected, had won the nomination of his own party . When the vote was counted, the candidates had won their own party's nomination . The result was expected to be a victory for both candidates .
 In the combined vote totals, he had beaten me by about 7,500 votes . But in the combined votes, he won't have to concede defeat, he says .
 This was Voorhis’s weakest primary showing since 1936 . I was disappointed at not having done better, but I considered it significant and promising that this was .
 The Twelfth District was basically conservative and Republican, Democrat says . "I was confident that we could recapture it if we could just maintain the intensity of the primary campaign right through the general election in November"
 The greatest advantage I had in 1946 was that the national trend that year was Republican, he says . "I had the greatest advantage in 1946," he says of his time in the White House .
 People were tired of the privations and shortages of four years of war, and in the burst of postwar prosperity they were beginning to bridle against the governmental regulations and interference written into so much of the New Deal legislation .
 In the Twelfth District, returning veterans could not find homes at prices or rents they could afford . Many could not even find housing at all . In many others across the country, returning vets couldn't find homes .
 The shortage of consumer goods was exacerbated by the many long strikes in 1946 . Prices skyrocketed as a result of the long strikes and shortages .
 In anticipation of a Republican landslide, many Democrats tried to dissociate themselves from their party . Some even campaigned as critics of Truman and his policies .
 Jerry Voorhis was far enough to the left of Truman that this was one problem I did not have to worry about. But Jerry was far too far from the left to be a problem .
 A group called the Independent Voters of South Pasadena asked me to participate in a debate with Voorhis . I received a request from a group that wanted me to debate with him before the election began .
 Most of my advisers were dubious about the idea, especially after they discovered that the Independent Voters group consisted predominantly of New Deal liberals . Most of his advisers were skeptical of the idea . The Independent Voters were predominantly New Deal liberal .
 "I felt as a challenger I could hardly turn down an invitation to debate my opponent. I felt, however, that as . as a . challenger, I felt as . I felt that as an . challenger I couldn't turn down a debate, but I felt . that as a
 It was more a joint public meeting in which each of us made an opening statement and then responded to questions from the floor . The meeting was more than a joint meeting, it was a joint joint meeting .
 Voorhis spoke first in a rambling, discursive way about the nature of the executive—legislative relationship and the need for progressive legislation .
 I made a hard attack on the bureaucratic red tape and bungling involved in the meat and housing shortages . I called for strong action to prevent more of the strikes and labor disputes that had been hurting the economy so badly .
 I tried to give brisk, concise responses, but Voorhis had trouble keeping within the time limit . He was unable to keep up with the time frame .
 There was one question, however, to which he had no trouble giving a short answer . There was also a question, which he answered: "What do you think about the future of your country?"
 He answered that he had, but only in the 1920s and during the early years of the Depression, when he felt that the two major parties weren’t doing the job .
 Voorhis was asked to explain his "peculiar ideas about money," a reference to his "funny money" program . The program was known as his "Funny money," which he presented in his book Out of Debt .
 His colleagues in Congress had not been able to understand his program, and neither could the voters in Pasadena that night . Neither could voters in the Pasadena, California, suburb of Pasadena .
 One of Voorhis’s supporters accused me of making false charges against him . He said he had been endorsed by the Political Action Committee of the Congress of Industrial Organizations . When it was my turn, I said, “Voorhis was endorsed by a political action committee
 This question opened what became the most famous and controversial issue of the 1946 campaign . This question was the most controversial and controversial question of the campaign .
 The PAC had been established as a political arm of organized labor to support Franklin Roosevelt in the 1944 election . The PAC was established in 1944 to support the president .
 A sister organization, the National Citizens Political Action Committee, was set up to permit non-union participation . A sister group set up was also set up in order to participate in the election .
 Both groups interviewed candidates and then made funds and campaign workers available to those whom they endorsed . Both groups endorsed candidates .
 It was estimated that in 1944 the two PAC organizations contributed over $650,000 to political campaigns . The two organizations contributed more than $600,000 .
 The leadership of both groups was known to be infiltrated with Communists and fellow travelers . Because of their discipline, the discipline, they wielded an influence disproportionate to their numbers .
 There was an emerging concern about Soviet postwar intentions and a corresponding apprehension about the communist movement in America . Such influence was viewed as a problem because of concerns about Soviet intentions .
 In 1946, CIOPAC decided to withhold its endorsement of President Roosevelt . This was because he had not supported some measures in Congress considered important by the union leadership .
 Los Angeles County chapter of NCPAC circulated a bulletin indicating that it was going to endorse Voorhis regardless of what CIO-PAC did . In the spring of 1946, 1946, the L.A. chapter of the N.C. chapter said it was endorsing Voor
 The “Big Five’s coalition was made up of CIO-PAC, NCPAC, the railroad brotherhoods, the Progressive AFL, and the Hollywood Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions .
 The Daily People’s World article reported that the Big Five had interviewed the candidates and included the list of endorsements for the June 4 primary . The Big Five endorsed the candidates .
 The Los Angeles County chapter of NCPAC had a large number of Communists and fellow travelers . The question of which PAC had endorsed him was a distinction without a difference, he said .
 When the question was raised in the South Pasadena debate, I pulled from my pocket a copy of the NCPAC bulletin announcing its endorsement recommendation and walked across the stage to show it to Voorhis .
 There is little practical difference between a CIO-PAC endorsement and an NCPAC endorsement . Reading aloud the names of the board members of each organization, many of which were the same, I demonstrated .
 Voorhis repeated his claim that CIO-PAC and NCPAC were separate organizations, but I could tell from the audience's reaction that I had made my point . The audience reacted angrily to the claim .
 Had he repudiated the endorsement before he was backed onto the defensive and forced to act, the issue might never have developed . He repudiated his endorsement before being forced onto the defense .
 "I thought then and still think that the endorsement was a legitimate issue to raise. But since he had not, I thought it was legitimate issue," he said . "Since he had . not, it was not an endorsement," he added .
 Communist infiltration of labor and political organizations was a serious threat in the early postwar years . Candidate’s attitude toward endorsements by heavily infiltrated groups was a barometer of his attitude toward that threat .
 After this debate, the PAC became a peripheral but heated issue in the campaign . The PAC is now a peripheral issue .
 Many of my supporters have urged me to challenge Voorhis to other joint appearances . This first ‘debate’ was so successful that many of his supporters urged him to . Many of them have urged him not to return to the debate .
 I had some reservations, because each one would require two or three days of concentrated preparation, and I did not want to take off any more time from campaigning .
 Murray Chotiner, the brilliant and no-nonsense public relations man who was running Bill Knowland’s senatorial campaign and advising me part-time on mine, went straight to the point . He said: “I'm not going to be surprised. I'm
 He paused for a moment until I nodded my agreement, and then he said, “Good.” He paused again to ask if he was OKed by the decision . He paused to say, ‘Good. I’m OKed’
 Four debates were held in various towns in the district . Voorhis accepted the challenge and held four more debates .
 When the last one was held in San Gabriel the week before the election, more than a thousand people were crammed into the hall . loudspeakers had to be set up for the several hundred standing outside .
 Of more than a hundred bills introduced in Congress, only one had actually been passed into law . Voorhis’s record shows that of the more than 100 bills he had introduced in four years, one had been passed .
 The effect of this bill was to transfer jurisdiction over rabbit breeders to the Department of the Interior . The bill was passed by Congress . The Department of Agriculture is now in charge of breeding rabbits for the first time .
 I began running a newspaper advertisement pointing out this rather insignificant legislative achievement . "I began running it out in a newspaper ad," he said .
 He listed several of his congressional accomplishments, but they were either resolutions or speeches, not bills enacted into law . He listed some of his legislative accomplishments, including resolutions and speeches .
 At our fourth debate, at the Monrovia high school, Voorhis raised this issue and charged that my statements about my record were lies . At our 4th debate, he charged that his statements about his record were .
 Rep. Ted Cruz: One had to be a rabbit to get effective representation in this congressional district . Cruz: "To the delight of my supporters, my supporters in the overflow audience of 1,200, I suggested that one had to . be rabbit"
 "Voorhis kept the issue alive, continuing to charge that I had lied about my record," he said . Voorhis continued to charge the former president of the Netherlands .
 In his reply, he referred to a measure he wrote establishing National Employ the Physically Handicapped Week .
 In his rebuttal I produced a copy of the measure, handed it to Voorhis, and pointed out that this too was a resolution, not a bill . In my rebuttal, I produced an original version of the bill .
 Since no polls had been taken, I had no idea on Election Day how close the race might be . No polls had taken, so there was no way of knowing how close it might be.
 There were no voting machines, and the counting of the paper ballots lasted long into the following morning . No voting machines were used in the election, but paper ballots were counted .
 "Before we went to bed at about 4 A.M., it was clear that I had won," she says . "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I've won," the author says .
 I was thirty-three years old, and the Twelfth District’s new congressman, when I was first elected to Congress . “I’m thirty-33 years old. I’d like to be a congressman,” he says. ‘I
 In 1950, 1952, 1956, 1968, and 1972 I was again to experience the satisfaction of winning, and most of those campaigns were tough ones . I was able to win at least six times in a row, including in 1952, 1952 and 1972 .
 Nothing could equal the excitement and jubilation of winning the first campaign . But nothing could be equal to the excitement of winning first election .
 "Pat and I were happier on November 6, 1946, than we were ever to be again in my political career. Pat and Pat were happier than ever in our political career," says Sen. Richard Nixon .
 "By defeating a well-known figure like Voorhis, I briefly became a minor national celebrity," he says . "I briefly became ... a minor celebrity. By defeating ... Voorhes," he adds .
 Time reported that I “turned a California grass-roots campaign into a triumph over high-powered Democratic incumbent Jerry Voorhis” and that I had “politely avoided personal attacks” on my opponent. Time reported .
 The PAC controversy provided emotional and rhetorical excitement, but it was not the issue that stirred or motivated most voters . Most voters were motivated by the PAC controversy, but not by the issue .
 The central issue in the 1946 campaign was the quality of life in postwar America . The campaign was based on a campaign to improve America's post-war conditions .
 Anyone seeking to unseat an incumbent needed only to point out all the things that had gone wrong and all the troubles of the war period and its aftermath . Anyone seeking a seat in the House of Representatives should point out the troubles in the war and aftermath .
 It was true that although Voorhis was a hard-working and generally respected congressman, he was not really in tune with the voters of the district . It was also true that he was also a hard working congressman .
 Voorhis, the former Socialist, believed in large-scale government intervention, and I did not . He said: "Voorhis was a socialist, not a Socialist, and he did not want government intervention."
 He saw dark conspiracies among “reactionaries” and “monopolies,” but I did not . He saw conspiracy among ‘reactionary’ and ‘monopolists’, and I didn’t, he said .
 He was generally an uncritical supporter of the labor unions, while I considered myself their critical friend . He said he considered himself a critical friend of the unions .
 He advocated policies that he believed shackled and restricted American industry . He said he believed policies that shackled the U.S. industry .
 His votes in Congress on a wide range of issues did not represent the wishes of the voters in his district . Most important, his votes on a variety of issues didn't represent his district's wishes, he says .
 Since Voorhis was the front-runner and I was a newcomer, I ran an especially vigorous campaign . I ran the most vigorous campaign. I ran for the first time in a presidential election. I'm proud to be able to run for the second time .
 I challenged his judgment and his voting record, he said, "I appeared to know better than he did himself" "I challenged his judgement and voting record," he said .
 If some of my rhetoric seems overstated now, it was nonetheless in keeping with the approach that seasoned Republican politicians were using that year . "Some of the rhetoric that I was using now seems to be overstated, but it's still in line with what seasoned Republicans were using in the
 Earlier in the year, Ohio Senator Robert Taft charged that Democratic congressional proposals “bordered on communism,” while Joe Martin called for Republican victories in order to oust the Communists from the federal government .
 One of the most distorted charges subsequently made about the 1946 campaign involved my supporters . The charges were made against my supporters, he says . He says: 'One of the biggest distorted charges was made about my campaign in 1946'
 "As I moved up the political ladder, my adversaries tried to picture me as the hand-picked stooge of oil magnates, rich bankers, real estate tycoons, and conservative millionaires," says Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton: "I'm not going to back down,
 What united them was no special vested interest but the fierce desire of average people to regain control of their own lives . What united these people was a fierce desire for their own life, they said .
 Voters in the Twelfth District had “had enough,” and they decided to do something about it . Along with a majority of the voters, they had "had enough"
 "My first choice for a committee assignment was the prestigious Judiciary Committee," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz: "I'm not afraid to be a Republican, but I'm glad to serve as a Democrat"
 I was not surprised when I did not receive it, and I was pleased to be assigned to my second choice, the Education and Labor Committee . I was also pleased to have been assigned to a second choice committee .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy is a good-looking, good-humored young Democrat from Massachusetts . Kennedy was assigned to the House of Representatives' committee . Kennedy is the son of former President George W. Bush . Kennedy died at the hands of President Bush .
 The newly elected members on the committee drew straws to determine their positions in the all-important seniority ranking . Newly elected members of the committee draw straws for their positions .
 Kennedy drew the shortest straw among the Democrats, and I drew the shorter straw among Republicans . Kennedy drew short straw among Democrats and the Republicans, he says .
 He and I shared the dubious distinction of sitting at the opposite ends of the committee table, like a pair of unmatched bookends . As a result, he and I sat at the same ends of a committee table .
 The Education and Labor Committee’s work took up most of my time during 1947, my first year in Congress, I wrote .
 Taft—Hartley Act was passed into law in June 1947 . Taft: "We held months of hearings on legislation, which I supported"
 A public affairs group in McKeesport, Pennsylvania, asked the district’s Democratic congressman, Frank Buchanan, to select the freshman from each party who seemed to have the brightest political future, and to invite them to debate Taft—Hartley bill .
 On April 21, 1947, we had the first Kennedy-Nixon debate . Buchanan chose Kennedy and Nixon for the first time .
 McKeesport is near Pittsburgh, and for this meeting the normally Republican audience was augmented by a substantial number of anti-Taft—Hartley union men . Some acrimonious moments were introduced into the question period .
 "We sat up late, talking far more than foreign policy than domestic issues," says President Obama . "We had a long night of late-night talk," he says .
 "We were thrown together throughout our early careers, and we never had less than an amicable relationship. Kennedy and I were too different in background, outlook, and temperament to become close friends," she says . "We never had a close relationship," she adds .
 Rep. Ted Cruz: "We were of the same generation. We were committed to devoting enormous energy to our work" He says he was four years younger than Cruz and four years older than he is . Cruz says he and Cruz both came to the House the same year .
 Our exchanges in committee meetings and discussions in the cloakrooms were never tinged with personal acerbity that can make political differences uncomfortable . We are proud of our work in Washington, D.C. and proud of the diversity of our political discourse .
 In those early years we saw ourselves as political opponents but not political rivals . We saw each other as political rivals but not rivals. We are proud of our achievements, we said in the past . We're proud to be able to take on the world's leading political leaders .
 The shyness was born of an instinct that guarded privacy and concealed emotions . But it was shyness born of a instinct born of the instinct to conceal emotions .
 Pat and Pat saw the inside of the White House for the first time on February 18, 1947 . The Trumans gave a reception for the new members of the Eightieth Congress .
 On July 2 I was included in a group of four freshmen Republican congressmen for whom Representative Charles Kersten of Wisconsin arranged a private meeting with the President . Rep. Kersten arranged the meeting .
 The Oval Office was a “big pleasant room,” with “no gadgets” except for a pony express confidential pouch that Truman pointed out to us . In the notes I made later that day, I described the Oval Office as a ‘big pleasant . room,
 Truman made us all feel welcome and relaxed as we shook hands with him . Pictures of his family were on the table behind his desk, and also a model airplane that I assumed to be the presidential aircraft .
 He spoke earnestly about the necessity of rehabilitating Europe . He emphasized his concern that peaceful German production should be encouraged .
 He said he was glad to see us, even though we were Republicans, because he always considered it necessary for the two parties to cooperate in foreign affairs .
 He led us over to a big globe where he pointed to Manchuria and remarked on how rich it was in oil and mineral deposits . He pointed out the region's rich mineral deposits and oil wealth .
 He said that the Soviets had devastated the whole region but that Manchuria would recover and become the next great productive area for the world . The Soviet invasion devastated the region but he said it would become a productive area .
 He turned the globe with the palm of his hand and pointed to the great mass of the Soviet Union . Then he pointed the globe to the mass of Soviet Union, he pointed out .
 Roosevelt attended an international conference where the Soviet delegate was always obstructing action by saying that he had to clear the issue with the Kremlin . Roosevelt attended the conference where he was attending a conference in Moscow .
 He said he could not understand what the Russians wanted as far as their policy toward Germany and toward Europe was concerned . He said it was not clear what Russia wanted to do with Germany .
 He told us that dropping the atomic bomb was an awful decision for him to make . He said dropping the bomb was the worst decision he ever made .
 President Truman played the piano he played in the White House, for his presidential library . President Truman's piano was given to Truman's library in Independence, Missouri .
 He was fighting a rough bout with flu, but his flair for pithy plain speaking was undiminished . He was also fighting a bout with the flu .
 Most freshmen freshmen received only one committee assignment, but Joe Martin, the new Republican Speaker, asked if he would also sit on the House Committee on Un-American Activities .
 Now that the Republicans controlled Congress, we would be held accountable for the committee’s irresponsible conduct, he says . Now that Republicans control Congress, the committee would be accountable for its irresponsible conduct .
 Former chairman Martin Dies was a flamboyant and at times demagogic Texas Democrat . The committee had acquired a dubious reputation under Dies' tenure .
 "My own attitude toward communism had recently changed from one of general disinterest to one of extreme concern," he said . "I'm not sure what I think about communism," he added .
 Roosevelt recognized the Soviet Union in 1934 . I do not recall being particularly disturbed when Roosevelt recognized it in 1934.
 During the Spanish Civil War the concerted press campaign against Franco—who was always described as a fascist rebel—led me to side with the Loyalists, whose communist orientation was seldom mentioned in the newspapers .
 At the time of the Hitler—Stalin pact I was strongly against Stalin, not because he was a Communist, but because of his alliance with Hitler, whom I despised . During the war I was pro-Russian not because the Russians were Communists but because they were helping us fight Hitler
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union supported the founding of the United Nations . "I was elated when both the U.S. and the . Soviet Union backed the founding, and the United . Nations .
 As an admirer of Woodrow Wilson, I felt that we had made a serious mistake in not joining the League of Nations . I believed that the UN offered the world’s best chance to build a lasting peace .
 Churchill’s Iron Curtain speech, delivered in Fulton, Missouri, in March 1946, profoundly affected my attitude toward communism in general and the Soviet Union, he says . It was Churchill's speech that profoundly affected me .
 Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest, and Sofia lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere . All are subject in one form or another, not only to Soviet influence, but to a very high, and, many cases, increasing measure
 I was jolted by these words, and at first I wondered if he had gone too far . "I thought I was going too far," he said. "I don't think it's a joke," he later said .
 The defeat of Hitler and Japan had not produced a lasting peace, and freedom was now threatened by a new and even more dangerous enemy . But as the Communist subjugation of Eastern Europe became more and more apparent, I realized that the defeat of . Hitler and . Japan had . not produced
 My maiden speech in the House on February 18, 1947, was the presentation of a contempt of Congress citation against Gerhart Eisler, who had been identified as the top Communist agent in America . The citation was presented to the House .
 When he refused to testify before the committee, he was held in contempt . The committee held him in contempt for refusing to testify . He has been charged with contempt .
 Before he could be tried, however, he jumped bail and fled to East Germany . He eventually became director of propaganda for the Communist regime .
 At the end of 1947 I was appointed to a special legislative subcommittee of the Committee on Un-American Activities . I was a member of the committee, which was investigating the alleged Communist activities .
 We held some wide-ranging hearings into the nature of communist philosophy and practice, and on the basis of these I prepared a report outlining a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion . The report was published by the Communist Party of the Netherlands .
 "I believed that this approach would be inefficient and counterproductive," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to do this," says Obama .
 The practical effect of outlawing the party would only be to drive the hard core of true believers underground . The hard core would be driven underground .
 Communist front organizations are difficult to define, define and identify, says the author . The Communist Party Party was founded by the Communist Party of Germany in 1968 .
 Too many conservatives and other anticommunists applied broad and imprecise criteria, too many conservative and left-wing organizations were unfairly tarred with the communist brush . Left-wing groups were unfairly labeled communist by conservatives, too often .
 'No matter how abhorrent the beliefs of any individuals or groups might be, as long as they did not receive financial support or orders from foreign governments, or engage in illegal activities, their right to their beliefs must be protected'
 Former Sen. Richard Nixon worked with Karl Mundt of South Dakota to introduce the Mundt-Nixon bill . The bill was introduced in the spring of 1948, and became known as the "Mundt—Nixon" bill .
 It was the first piece of legislation to emerge in ten years from the House Committee on Un-American Activities . The bill was passed by the committee .
 Under our bill, the identification of a group as a Communist front would be made by a Subversive Activities Control Board . The board would investigate a group at the request of the Attorney General . Under the bill, a group would be investigated by the attorney general .
 I was made floor manager for the debate on the bill; Vito Marcantonio was the floor leader for the Democrats . I was also made floor leader in the debate .
 The Senate let it die in committee, and it was not until 1950 that some of its provisions were embodied in the McCarran Act .
 By then, the nature of the question of internal communism had changed because of the Hiss case, and the harsher terms of the McCarran Act reflected that change . The law was passed in 1973 .
 It is important to remember that the perception of communism in American politics changed completely in the early postwar years . The perception of communist communism in the U.S. changed completely during the 1950s .
 The photographs of American and Russian soldiers shaking hands at the Elbe made a strong impression on many Americans . Many Americans looked forward to a new dawn of international peace and cooperation .
 In the main, anticommunism in postwar America meant opposition to the kind of dictatorial state socialism that existed in Russia . Many Americans saw that as a negation of everything America stood for .
 In the 1946 campaign, for example, when I talked about the “communist-dominated PAC,” my remarks were generally understood in this context of dictatorial socialism versus free enterprise . In 1946, my remarks generally understood as this was a reference to the ‘communist
 Until the Hiss case, it was generally not seen as a clear and present danger to our way of life . The case was generally seen as not a clear threat to our society .
 Truman must have begun to worry about the issue of internal security in 1948, Truman says .
 Now that the Committee on Un-American Activities was in Republican hands, he may have decided that the best way to handle the issue was to cover up the evidence . The committee is now under Republican control .
 On March 15, 1948, he ordered all federal departments and agencies to refuse future congressional requests or subpoenas for information regarding loyalty or security matters . The move was a response to congressional requests for information .
 This decision backfired because instead of defusing the issue it made it appear that Truman was trying to cover something up . This decision made it look like Truman was covering up something up, the president said .
 Truman decided to tough it through . Truman decided not to admit an error of judgment . Instead of admitting an error, he decided to toughen up .
 McCarthy began his anticommunist career with the ostensible purpose of getting Truman to rescind this executive order . McCarthy's course led him into the shoals of red herring that caused him so many problems, including in the Hiss case .
 It was the Hiss case that completely changed the public’s perception of domestic communism . The case was the first to change the public's perception of Soviet communism .
 At the same time this new awareness unfortunately led to emotional excesses and demagogic imprecisions that clouded the issue more than they illuminated it . The new awareness led to the issue being clouded more than it illuminated it.
 Congressman Christian Herter of Massachusetts headed committee headed by Herter to prepare report on foreign aid plan . George C Marshall unveiled plan at Harvard commencement speech in June .
 I had not even spoken to Martin or anyone else about the committee because I hadn't thought there was any chance of being appointed to it . I was not expected to be appointed to the committee at the start of the year .
 I was also modest enough enough to recognize that geography and age had played a part in my selection . I was modest enough to . recognize that . geography and . age had also played a role in . selection .
 I was the only Westerner and the youngest member appointed to the committee . Martin wanted the committee to represent a cross section of the House, he says .
 I would now have an opportunity to work with some of the most senior and influential men in the House . I would have a chance to show what I could do in the field of foreign affairs, he says .
 Most of my advisers in California were pleased with my appointment, but they wanted the committee’s report to disown the bipartisan Truman— Vandenberg foreign policy . The report was being promoted in Washington to support the Marshall Plan .
 "Just before we sailed for Europe, I received a long letter signed by half a dozen of my strongest supporters," he says . "I'm not going to go to Europe, but I'm going to Europe," he writes. "I love the people who support me. I'm
 State Department, State Department and European propaganda are prepared for the trip . CNN.com: "We feel it appropriate to state our views inasmuch as you are embarking on a trip ... to Europe"
 Despite all our briefings and studying, I do not think that any of us was really prepared for what we found in Europe . Despite all of our briefings, studying, we were not prepared for the reality of Europe .
 From the minute we stepped off the luxurious ship in Southampton it was clear that we had come to a continent tottering on the brink of starvation and chaos . From the moment we stepped . off the . luxurious ship, we were clear that . we had to come to the . brink of
 Britain’s Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, invited us to tea at 10 Downing Street . We spent an hour with the Falstaffian Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin . Bevin's recent speech advocating that all the gold at Fort Knox be divided up among the nations of the
 What once had been a great city was now block after block, mile after mile of charred desolation . The city was once a thriving, vibrant, thriving city .
 It hardly seemed possible that three million people were still living amidst the rubble . Three million people are still living in the rubble.
 As we stood in the vast ruined hall of what had been Hitler’s Chancellery, small thin-faced German boys tried to sell us their fathers’ war medals as souvenirs .
 We found that these men were usually more vigorous and impressive than their democratic counterparts . We also found that they were more likely to be more vigorous .
 I was curious to see how their minds worked, and I also wanted to assess their relationship to the Soviet Union . I was also keen to assess the relationship to Soviet Union. I wanted to see their minds work, and see their relationship with each other .
 I particularly remember our meeting with Giuseppe Di Vittorio, the Communist Secretary General of the Italian Labor Confederation . I especially remember his meeting with . Giuseppi di Vittario, the . Communist secretary general of the . Italian Labor . Confederation .
 His office was decorated with red curtains and red walls, and he wore a small red flag in his lapel . The president wore a red flag to his office .
 I had seen most of the American labor leaders in action before the House Labor Committee, and Di Vittorio could have held his own with the best of them . The House labor committee held a hearing on Thursday .
 Italian unions should be free from government control and have the right to strike, he says . He says he would like to see labor be free of government control . He also wants to see unions be free to strike .
 After the translation, Di Vittorio gave me an icy look and said, “The gentleman and I are not speaking the same language.” The reporter was asked to translate the words to the Italian TV host .
 In a country like the United States the workers must strike to obtain their rights from the capitalist reactionaries and employers . In the U.S. the strike is necessary to obtain the rights of the workers .
 I asked him if he had any criticisms of U.S. foreign policy . He said he had no criticisms of American foreign policy in the world .
 Di Vittorio gave me the same look as before and said, “Again the gentleman and I are not speaking the same language.” “I'm not talking to the gentleman,” he said .
 The foreign policy of the U.S. is necessarily imperialistic . It is dominated by capitalists, reactionaries, and employers, says historian John Avlon .
 In Russia there are no capitalists, reactionaries, and employers, and therefore it is impossible for the foreign policy of Russia to be imperialistic . Russia's foreign policy is not imperialistic, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . In Russia, he says, "In Russia there is no capitalists
 Di Vittorio’s expression of the party line was almost identical to that of the Communist leaders we had met in England and France . It struck me that Di VITTorio's expression was almost similar to the Communist party line .
 If we saw the false face of patriotic communism in Britain, France, and Italy, we saw its true and brutal face in Greece and Trieste . We saw the true face of communism in Trieste, Greece, Italy, Greece .
 In Greece we used an old cargo plane to fly up to the northern mountains to assess the military situation and the morale of loyalist soldiers fighting against the Communist rebels .
 When we walked down the main street of a mountain town, the mayor introduced us to a girl whose left breast had been cut off by the Communists . She had refused to betray her brother, one of the loyalist leaders .
 In Trieste, the large port on the Italian-Yugoslav border that was about to become a UN-mandated free city, I witnessed firsthand the violence that sometimes accompanied the communist threat . Trieste is now a free city in the United Nations .
 I was at the hotel, just beginning to unpack, when I heard loud singing. I was beginning to unpunpack, but I heard the singing . It was the first time I'd heard the song since I'd moved to Australia .
 "I looked out the window and saw a parade of about five hundred men and women. I looked out of the window, saw ... five hundred people," he says . "I was in the middle of the parade," he adds .
 Many were carrying red flags, and they were singing the stirring “Internationale” at the top of their lungs . Many carried red flags .
 The crowd cleared and I saw the body of a young man whose head had been blown off by a grenade thrown from a second-story window . The body of the young man was blown off in the blast .
 For a frozen moment everyone stood looking at the blood gushing from his neck, but then rocks and bottles started flying . The blood was gushing out of his neck . The incident happened in a 'frozen moment'
 A fleeing Communist, barreling through the crowd like a college fullback, hit an old woman and knocked her halfway across the street against the curb, where she lay motionless . The old woman lay still motionless on the curb after the incident .
 Five people were killed and seventy-five were wounded by bombs and gunfire that day . That day five people were . killed . Five were killed .
 I was sure that what was happening in Trieste would soon be re-enacted throughout Western Europe unless America helped to restore stability and prosperity . America helped restore stability, prosperity in Western Europe .
 A few weeks after we returned to Washington, the Herter Committee issued a number of reports based on the notes and papers we brought back with us .
 The common denominator of each report was a strong recommendation for economic aid for Europe . The report was published by the European Commission in 2007 .
 "75 percent of my constituents in the Twelfth District were resolutely opposed to any foreign aid," he says . "In the meantime, I had taken a poll and found that 75 percent of those polled were opposed to foreign aid"
 "I believed so strongly in the necessity of extending economic aid that I felt I had no choice but to vote my conscience and then try my hardest to convince my constituents," she says .
 I immediately prepared a series of columns for the local newspapers, and began an active round of speeches throughout the district describing what I had seen on the trip . I felt that economic assistance was necessary if we were to save Europe from starvation and communism .
 "The whole experience ended up enhancing my popularity. Fortunately, my appearances in the district were successful, and I was able to get back on the track . Fortunately, the whole experience was successful," he said .
 Above all, I now understood the reasons for the success of communism in Europe, says the author of the book . "I now understood why communism was successful in Europe," he says .
 After this visit, I would never make the mistake of thinking, either because of the doubletalk party line jargon or because their manners are often crude, that Communist leaders are not very intelligent and very tough men .
 Leaders of postwar European communism understood the power of nationalism and were appropriating that power . Second, I saw how the leaders of postwar Europe understood that power, he says .
 Communist posters for the upcoming municipal elections were plastered all over Rome . While we were in Rome, for example, Communist posters are plastered around the city .
 These posters did not feature the hammer and sickle, or any other Communist symbol, nor did they depict the joys of some future workers’ state . They did not depict any future workers' state .
 Garibaldi would have turned over in his grave had he known that his life’s devotion to Italy and freedom was being manipulated by an international statist ideology ruled from Moscow . Instead, they were huge heroic pictures of the nineteenthcentury patriot Garibald .
 European Communist parties were well financed from Moscow . Unlike most of their democratic counterparts, they were well funded by Moscow . The European Communist Party was well funded from Moscow.
 Fourth, I saw that most of democratic Europe was either leaderless or, worse still, that many in the leadership classes had simply capitulated to communism . Fourth, he said, ‘Most of democratic European Europe was not leaderless’
 "For the first time, I understood the vital importance of strong leadership to a people and a nation," says President Obama . "I saw the sad consequences when such leadership is lacking or when it fails," he says .
 From just this brief exposure, I could see that the only thing the Communists would respect—and deal with seriously— was power at least equal to theirs and backed up by willingness to use it . The only thing they would respect would be power equal to their own, he says .
 The Committee on UnAmerican Activities heard testimony from Elizabeth Bentley, a courier for a Communist spy ring in Washington during the war .
 Robert Stripling suggested that we subpoena a man who had been identified as a Communist functionary in the 1930s but had left the party . Stripling was now a well-respected and well-paid senior editor of Time magazine .
 Chambers testified in public session on August 3 . Chambers was the first witness in the case . Chambers testified before the Senate on August 4 .
 Whittaker Chambers was one of the most disheveled-looking persons I had ever seen . Chambers was a dishewn-looking person I had never seen, he said . Chambers died of a heart attack at the hands of a doctor .
 He began his testimony with the story of how, as a disaffected intellectual, he became a Communist in 1924 . He began with the testimony in his first hearing .
 He told of his growing disillusion with Stalinism, and of his eventual break with the party in the late 1930s .
 Chambers had undergone a religious conversion to Christianity . Chambers was a former Communist Party member .
 He said he was part of a Communist group whose primary aim was to infiltrate the government . He said that he had been part of an attempt to infiltrate government .
 Harvard Law School grad had brilliant record at Harvard . He served as a secretary to Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes .
 He occupied a number of important government posts, ultimately becoming assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State . He served as one of President Roosevelt’s advisers at the Yalta Conference .
 Hiss was acknowledged as one of the primary architects of the United Nations . He served as SecretaryGeneral of the San Francisco Conference, at which the UN charter was drafted, and was adviser to the American delegation at the first General Assembly meeting in London .
 In 1947 he left the State Department to become president of the prestigious Carnegie Endowment for International Peace . In 1947, he became the head of the Carnegie Peace Foundation .
 John Foster Dulles, chairman of the Endowment’s board of directors, was among those who recommended and endorsed his selection . Dulles' selection was endorsed by chairman of Endowment's board .
 Chambers’s testimony that morning did not cause more of a stir . Chambers' testimony may seem surprising in light of later events that morning that morning .
 Chambers was such an unprepossessing figure that his story was not taken as seriously as it would have been if he had been more forceful and impressive . Chambers was not more forceful than he was in his early years . Chambers' story not taken seriously as seriously by Chambers, it was
 The next morning we received a telegram from Hiss asking to appear before us in order to deny Chambers’s charge . The next day, Hiss asked us to deny the charge . Hiss was the only person to deny a charge of espionage against Chambers . Chambers was the
 Alger Hiss stood to be sworn in on the morning of August 5, the difference between him and Chambers could not have been more striking . Hiss was sworn in as a new president of the United States .
 Hiss was tall, elegant, handsome, and perfectly poised as he categorically denied Chambers’s charge . Hiss denies Chambers's charge .
 I am not and never have been a member of any Communist front organization. I have never been a Communist Front Organization member. I'm proud to say I'm not a Communist Communist Front Fronter .
 He denied everything Chambers had said and added that he did not even know anyone named Chambers . He added that, as far as he could remember, never had .
 Hiss boldly rejoined, “I do know that he said that.” Chambers testified under oath when he said he knew him, Hiss said . Chambers testified that he knew Chambers under oath .
 When Hiss finished his testimony people surged around him, to shake his hand and congratulate him on his performance, and to commiserate with him on the damage the committee had done him . Hiss testified before the House of Representatives .
 Truman held an informal press conference in the Oval Office . Truman held the press conference that same morning . Truman was the first president to hold a press conference .
 Truman’s contemptuous dismissal of our hearings as a “red herring” had the effect of throwing his political weight against the investigation, he wielded still more effective powers . The hearings were held in the House of Commerce .
 The president reaffirmed his earlier order that all administrative agencies of the government refuse to turn over to a congressional committee information relating to the loyalty of any government employee .
 Truman had honed his political skills in the rough and scandal-tainted Kansas City Democratic machine . He never shied away from using any weapon available . Truman's political skills were honed in the city's rough political machine .
 "Without question his goal throughout the Hiss case was to obstruct our efforts to uncover the facts. Without question he was trying to obstruct his efforts to find out the truth," says CNN's John Sutter .
 The attack by the President, the impact of his executive directive, and the testimony of Hiss’s highly effective testimony combined to throw the committee into a panic by the time we met again in executive session that afternoon . The committee was in a panic .
 The audience in the hearing room and the press seemed to have been completely convinced by Hiss . We knew that we were in for a rough time for allowing Chambers to testify without first verifying his story .
 No one on the committee wanted to undergo such an assault from the President and the press right before the election . The committee was attacked by President Obama and the media, but no one wanted to .
 "I was the only member of the committee who argued in favor of holding our ground and pursuing the case further," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I'm the only person in the Senate who argued against holding ground"
 Stripling, whose judgment was highly respected by all the members, strongly supported my position . Stripling's judgement was 'highly respected' by all of the members of the House of Representatives .
 Chambers’s testimony had already done its damage to the reputation of the committee, says committee chairman . “I felt that as far as the reputation . of the . committee was concerned, I felt that Chambers had already . done its . damage. I felt it was already done
 Our critics would not be silenced just because we decided to drop the case, and I argued that we had more to gain than we had left to lose by seeing it through . We decided to see the case through, and decided to keep the case .
 Chambers's charges and Hiss’s response provided us with a unique angle to pursue . I pointed out that the formulation of Chambers' charges and the response to Hiss's response provided an angle to follow .
 'In most cases we were in the almost impossible position of having to prove whether or not an individual had actually been a Communist. In most cases it was impossible to prove that an individual was actually Communist. We were in most cases in the most difficult position of trying to prove an individual
 This time, Hiss’s categorical denials, we did not have to establish anything more complicated than whether the two men had known each other . Hiss: "This time, however, because of Hiss's categorical . denials"
 Chambers' story is not substantiated, says Chambers . Chambers has been accused of lying to police in the past . Chambers says he was a victim of sexual assault in the 1990s . Chambers is accused of being a serial sex offender .
 If he could, the committee would be vindicated; if he could not, we might then find out what bizarre or sinister motives had led him to lie about Hiss . We might then be able to make a better defense for our mistake. If he can, we would then find
 Hiss never actually said unequivocally that he did not know Chambers . Hiss said he knew Chambers, but never said he did . Chambers was a prominent figure in the CIA .
 John McDowell, a thoughtful Republican from Pennsylvania, and Eddie Hébert, a Louisiana Democrat, would take a crack at testing Chambers’s story . Chambers was a Democrat who had been a newspaper reporter before entering politics .
 We questioned him on August 7, a quiet Saturday morning, in a room in a deserted Federal Court House in lower Manhattan .
 "I had made a long list of the kinds of things that a man would be likely to know and remember about a friend," he said . "A man would probably know what he was likely to remember and remember," he added .
 I began by giving him a chance to pull back, gently asking if we had correctly understood him to say that Hiss was a Communist . He then asked if he had been correctly understood that he had said that .
 Chambers had a wealth of detailed and intimate information about Hiss; virtually all of it turned out to be correct . Chambers had detailed information about the Hiss family .
 He told us that in private Hiss called his wife Dilly or Pross and she called him Hilly . Hiss was a cocker spaniel they had boarded in a kennel on Wisconsin Avenue in Washington when they took their summer holidays on the Eastern Shore .
 Hiss was a short, highly nervous woman who had a habit of blushing a fiery red when she became excited . Hiss as a short and nervous woman .
 He told us about the location and layout of the three houses and apartments Hiss had lived in during the years that he had known him . He also described the several occasions on which he had stayed overnight in them .
 Chambers told us that one of Hiss’s hobbies was ornithology . Chambers said he could still remember Hiss's excitement when he came home one morning after having seen a prothonotary warbler, a rare species of bird .
 Chambers was asked to take a lie detector test after over two hours of extensive examination . Chambers says he would be willing to take the test if he was willing to do it . Chambers has never been tested for a lie .
 If there turned out to be substance to Chambers’s charges, Truman would be terribly embarrassed . Normally, this possibility alone might have spurred the Republicans on in an election year .
 John Foster Dulles was one of those who recommended Hiss for his job as president of the Carnegie Endowment . Hiss was expected to be Secretary of State in a Dewey administration . Dulles, Hiss's former chief foreign policy adviser, was among those recommended by Hiss
 The Hiss case might become a two-edged sword that could hurt Dewey as much as Truman . The case, with its disturbing questions about “softness on communism,’s disturbing questions . Dewey could be hurt by the case, but not Truman .
 I was aware that the Dewey campaign organization would undoubtedly be grateful if I decided to go along with the rest of the committee and let the case pass into a pre-election limbo . I decided not to do so, but I did not want to keep the case in limbo .
 I wanted to follow up on a number of points that I did not think had been fully covered even in our marathon session . But before the case went any further, I want to clarify a few of the points that had not been covered in the session .
 Esther Chambers met Esther Chambers for the first time at her farm in Westminster, Maryland . Chambers' farm is where she grew up and raised the farm animals .
 She was a strikingly dark woman, who said very little but looked deeply sad and worried . She was said to be deeply sad, worried and said little, but looked sad .
 Chambers’s memory was overwhelming . The richness and fullness of the detail of Chambers' memory were overwhelming . Chambers was the author of the book, "Chambers"
 I told him point-blank that many people were charging that he had some hidden grudge or motive for what he was doing to Hiss . He said many people are charging that many of them had a motive or motive to blame .
 He said that privacy was almost an obsession with him and that appearing in public was one of the most painful things he had ever done in his life .
 Hiss had been a Quaker when he knew her and that since then he had become Quaker himself . Hiss said he had always been Quaker . He said that since that he'd become a more Quaker, he had changed his view of her .
 From my own family, I knew how unlikely it would be for anyone but a close friend to know such an intimate detail . From her own family it was unlikely anyone would be able to tell such a detail of her life .
 "The way he blurted it out convinced me that he was telling the truth," he said . Of course, it was still possible that he could have learned it from someone, but the way he said it was .
 Charles Kersten, an expert on Communist activities, urged that I discuss my findings with John Foster Dulles . Charles Kerststen, a Communist expert, said that he should discuss his findings with Dulles. John Foster .
 Foster and his brother, Allen, read through transcripts of the three hearings . Kersten and Kersten sat on a sofa in Dulles’s suite while Foster and Allen read through the transcripts .
 Foster Dulles stood and paced back and forth across the room . After they both had finished, he paced around the room. Dulles said, "I don't think it's a good thing for you to be angry"
 The case should be brought into the open by a public confrontation between the two men as soon as possible, says Dulles . Allen Dulles agreed, and both felt that the case needed to be brought to the open .
 Foster did not for a moment flinch from the potential embarrassment to himself as one of Hiss’s sponsors for the presidency of the Carnegie Endowment . Foster was one of the sponsors for Hiss's presidency .
 Andrews was an outspoken critic of the committee . He had recently written a book, Washington Witch Hunt, critical of the loyalty program .
 I told Andrews that I believed Chambers was telling the truth, but that I wanted to put his story to every possible test . Chambers' story was put to the test by Andrews, who says he believes it is true .
 Andrews asked Chambers tough questions about rumors that had begun to sweep Washington that he was an alcoholic and that he had a history of mental illness and institutional confinement . Chambers was asked tough questions and bore down hard about the rumors .
 Chambers was unfazed and pointed out that rumors of this sort were typical of Communist smear campaigns . Chambers said the rumors are typical of a smear campaign .
 By the time we got back to Washington, Andrews was more excited than I . He was convinced that Chambers was telling the truth, and he was now worried that Hiss would get off because of the careless methods and inefficient staff work that he felt had characterized committee hearings in the past .
 "We had some informal contacts with a lower-level agent that proved helpful in our investigations. However, we had no formal contacts with an agent," the author says .
 When we called Hiss back before an executive session on August 16 he was in a very different temper than during our first encounter . Hiss was in an angry mood when he was called back to the executive session .
 I told him that there were substantial areas of difference between his testimony and Chambers’s, and that we wanted to give him an opportunity to explain these in executive session before we arranged a public confrontation . I said we wanted him to explain this in executive sessions .
 Hiss straightened his back and said, “I have been angered and hurt by the attitude you have been taking today that you have a conflict of testimony between two witnesses—one of whom is a confessed former Communist and the other is me .”
 "I do not wish to make it easier for anyone who, for whatever motive I cannot understand, is apparently endeavoring to destroy me," he said .
 He said, “The issue is not whether this man knew me and I don’t remember him. He said he doesn't remember him .
 The details of the case were important because only the details could prove whether Hiss had lied when he said he did not know Chambers . Hiss said Chambers was not Chambers, but Chambers was a friend .
 His denial of even knowing Chambers was the primary factor that had discredited Chambers and the committee as well . The committee was discredited by Chambers' denial of knowing Chambers .
 If Hiss could now shift the hearings to the question of whether or not we could prove he was a Communist, we were finished . We were finished. Hiss should have been able to prove that he was Communist, he said .
 Chambers was told that every answer he gave would be subject to the laws of perjury . Chambers had been told that he would be under the law of perjury if he gave an answer to the questions . Chambers said he was told he would have to answer the questions on perjury .
 Details concerning his alleged relationship with Hiss could be confirmed by third parties . Third parties could confirm details of the alleged relationship .
 With elaborate deliberation, he wrote something on a pad of paper in front of him . He wrote it on the pad of a pen: "I'm going to make a big mistake"
 Chambers said he had written the name of a man he had known in the mid-1930s . He said he now remembered who had in fact done some of the things that Chambers claimed to have done . Chambers said Chambers had done the same things as Chambers claimed .
 This man spent several days in Hiss’s house, sublet his apartment, borrowed money from him, and taken his car . This man had sublet Hiss's apartment, taken money, and borrowed his car, Hiss says .
 Hiss said he was reluctant to reveal the name directly because it might be leaked back to Chambers . Chambers could then incorporate it into his perjurious tale, he said . Hiss: "I'm not sure if Chambers will be able to use it in his own story."
 The questioning resumed and once again Hiss quibbled about answering the questions Stripling and I asked him about the places he had lived on the grounds that his answers might get back to Chambers and be used against him . Stripling asked Hiss not to answer questions about his places he
 The committee took a five-minute recess, and Hiss said he would reveal the name he had earlier written on the pad . Hiss later revealed the name that he had written on a pad .
 George Crosley, the man who never was, the real red herring of the Hiss case, made his first appearance . Crosley is the man he never was . The Hiss-Hiss case has never been solved .
 Hiss spent the better part of an hour and a quarter answering questions about George Crosley . Hiss: "George Crosley is a great writer. He's a great artist"
 Crosley approached Hiss when he was counsel for the Senate’s Nye Committee on Munitions and Armaments . Crosley asked for information for magazine articles he purported to be writing on committee's activities, Hiss says . Hiss: Crosley was a free-loading
 Hiss was about to move into a new house in Georgetown, Georgetown, with three months remaining in the lease of his old apartment . It happened that Hiss had three months left in his old lease of an apartment .
 Crosley had welshed on the rent, and they had parted on less than friendly terms . He added that in the end Crosley and Crosley were parting ways . Crosley added that the pair had been unable to agree a deal on rent .
 It was hard to believe that Hiss could have forgotten and then suddenly remembered someone like “Crosley” But we took the story at face value and questioned him .
 Whether or not he had known him as George Crosley was the only question that remained to be answered .
 Crosley’s height and weight have been compared to his height, weight and weight . Crosley is the subject of a catalogue of his physical appearance, starting with his height .
 Hiss: "They were stained and I would say obviously not attended to" Hiss replied . “They were obviously obviously [not attended to],” he said .
 Hiss's life in the 1930s took him back to the ground of his life . Chambers' testimony was used as a guide to Hiss’s life in France .
 We asked him the same questions that we had asked Chambers, and in almost every instance we got the same answers, he said . We also asked him questions about his role in the White House .
 The exchange that clinched the case arose late in the day over the least likely subject . For most members of the committee, the exchange was over the most likely subject of the day .
 Hiss said he was interested in tennis and amateur ornithology . He said he had no hobbies, including tennis and ornithological research .
 There was a moment of telling silence as the significance of this exchange hit the committee . The committee was stunned by the moment .
 Hiss had promised Chambers a public confrontation with Chambers for August 25, which was still a week away . Hiss: "We had promised Hiss that we would confront Chambers for a week" Chambers' public confrontation was still in place .
 George Crosley may be the third man in the mix . Crosley is believed to have been a member of the FBI, but he has not been found .
 "I felt that we had to have the meeting between Hiss and Chambers right away," says Hiss . Hiss: "We had to meet right away. I felt that I had to."
 If the whole thing were a mistake, it should be put right before any more damage was done, says CNN.com . "If it was a mistake we should be very careful to put right," she says .
 If Crosley had manufactured Crosley out of whole cloth to explain Chambers’s damning testimony, Chambers would have had time to fill in more details of his deception . On the other hand, if Hiss had manufactured the whole cloth, Chambers was equally important to flush him out before
 I stayed late at the office trying to decide the best thing to do. I stayed very late at work trying to figure out what I wanted to do . It was a very difficult moment for me to decide what to do, I said .
 I phoned Stripling and said we could not wait a week and that I wanted a session arranged for that very afternoon . Stripling said he wanted to meet Stripling in the very afternoon. Stripling agreed to meet with Stripling again, and the session was scheduled for the next
 He said that he had reached the same conclusion and agreed to make the necessary arrangements .
 The living room walls were decorated, ironically, with Audubon prints of birds .
 We put three chairs behind a table near a window for the committee members, and placed a single chair about eight feet away facing the table . A single chair was placed eight feet from the table facing the window .
 When Hiss arrived, Hiss was pettish and irritable, he was irritable . Hiss, along with a friend from the Carnegie Endowment, arrived at the end of the day .
 CNN's John Sutter says he and Chambers will meet on August 25 . He says the cause of truth would be better served if they could meet right away . Sutter: "Instead of waiting until August 25, we decided that the cause would be best served if we met right away
 Hiss did not so much as look around while Chambers walked up behind him and then sat down on the sofa . Chambers walked into the room and sat down in front of Hiss . Chambers sat down behind Hiss, who did not even look at Chambers .
 The two men now stood and Hiss turned to face Chambers; they could not have been more than four or five feet apart . Hiss and Chambers now face each other for the first time in a row .
 Alger Hiss looked at Whittaker Chambers with more hatred in his eyes than he did when he looked at him . I do not think that I have ever seen one man look at another with . more hatred than did Alger . Hiss . He looked at Chambers with such hatred in
 We opened the blinds so that there could later be no suggestion that bad light had hampered identification . The blinds were opened to ensure identification was not obscured .
 Hiss’s hand was not more than six inches from Chambers's mouth, and at that moment, I wondered whether Chambers was tempted to bite his finger . What he meant was that he wanted to look at Chambers's teeth, Hiss said .
 As Chambers read from the magazine, Hiss studied his mouth intently, like a horse trader trying to guess the age of a potential purchase . Chambers read the magazine and Hiss studies his mouth as Chambers reads it .
 Chambers paused, and Hiss said that the voice sounded a little different from the way he remembered Crosley’s . Hiss: "The teeth were obviously much improved. The teeth are obviously much better" Chambers paused and said the voice was different from Crosley's .
 Without further checking he could not take an oath that Chambers was Crosley . Therefore, he said, without further checking, he couldn't take a oath that he had Chambers . He said he had to check Chambers had been Crosley.
 Chambers had extractions and a plate made by his dentist, Dr. Dr. Richard Chambers . Chambers has had some major dental work done, including extractions from his dentist .
 Hiss seemed satisfied with this information and said, “That testimony of Mr Chambers, if it can be believed, would tend to substantiate my feeling that he represented himself to me in 1934 or 1935 or thereabouts as George Crosley, a free-lance writer of articles for
 Hiss interrupted Chambers when Chambers said that he had stayed in Hiss’s apartment for approximately three weeks . Chambers said Hiss had stayed there for about three weeks, but Hiss said he didn’t need to ask Chambers any more questions .
 I have studied the testimony very closely, but I have never been sure why Hiss suddenly decided at this point to give up the charade . Hiss: "I'm never sure why I'm not sure why ... Hiss decided this time to quit"
 He insisted on consulting dental charts before he could be sure of Chambers’s identity . Just a few minutes earlier his ‘visual memory’ had been so bad that he had to consult dental charts . Chambers' identity was not immediately clear .
 He still, however, claimed that he had not known that Chambers/Crosley was a Communist .
 Chambers was asked whether he could make a positive identification of Hiss as the Communist he had known and in whose house he had stayed . Chambers was also asked if he could identify him as Hiss, who had lived in his home . Chambers said he could not positively identify Hiss .
 Hiss suddenly shot up out of his chair and moved toward him, shaking his fist . Hiss shook his fist as he shook his hand in anger .
 His voice quavered with anger as he said: "May I say for the record, I would like to invite Mr Whittaker Chambers to make those same statements out of the presence of this committee, without their being privileged for suit for libel."
 Chambers had shown no fear at all when Hiss came toward him, but Hiss now was completely unnerved . Chambers showed no fear when he saw Hiss come toward him .
 I regretted that we had agreed to let him go early so he could keep a dinner appointment . "I regret that we agreed that he had to go early," she said of her husband .
 If we had continued to press him, we might have gotten even more contradictions out of him, if not an actual break . I believe that if we had . continued to . press him we might . have gotten more contradictions from him .
 The public confrontation between the two men came the following week on August 25, in the Caucus Room of the Old House Office Building . The confrontation was the first of two men to confront each other .
 The room overflowed with people crowded in to witness the scene . The heavy air was superheated by television lights .
 He brought up the importance of the dental work to explain his initial reluctance to identify Chambers as Crosley . Crosley's dental work explains why he initially didn't identify Chambers .
 You even asked the name of his dentist before you made the identification positive . You even wanted to consult with the dentist before making the identification .
 With this answer, the audience burst out laughing . The audience had been on Hiss's side but had become restive because of his evasiveness .
 Chairman Thomas called for order and said to Hiss, “If you’ve got any very humorous remarks in the way of answers, call me out later on and give them to me.”
 Hiss was flailing about now, and he replied haughtily, “I understood the laughter to be at the question, not at the answer, Mr Chairman.” Hiss said .
 Hiss was shown a photostatic copy of a document bearing his signature and was asked to identify it . Equally ludicrous was Hiss’s performance when he refused to identify the document he signed .
 He hesitated and hedged, and said that he could not do so without seeing the original . He said he couldn't do that without seeing it .
 Even his friends sitting in the front rows of the audience shook their heads uncomfortably . Again there was laughter from the audience .
 His second tactic was to remind us of all the well-known and unquestionably patriotic people with whom he had worked and who thought highly of him . He also reminded us of the people he'd worked with who he said he admired . He said he was proud of his achievements and his
 He named thirty-four, from John Foster Dulles and Harold Stassen to Cordell Hull and James Byrnes . He suggested that we consult them about his loyalty, and suggested that they should be consulted .
 This line of “innocence by association” did not get him anywhere with the committee, and did not seem to impress many people in the audience either . The committee did not appear to be impressed by his comments .
 His third tactic involved a renewed attempt to insist that the details of his and Chambers’s conflicting stories made no difference . The only real issue was whether he had been a Communist, he said .
 The hearings will be held on the grounds of whether he committed perjury when he said he had not known Chambers . Once again I tried to expose the false logic behind this premise .
 The part of Hiss’s testimony that seriously discredited him in the eyes of many was his story about his car . Hiss's testimony was the part of his testimony that discredited him .
 It was strictly against party rules for a member of the underground to do anything that might publicly link him with the party . Chambers said that Hiss had been so insistent that an exception was made, and an arrangement was worked out .
 I pointed out these discrepancies to him, and said it was hard to believe that he could not remember more precisely what he had done about the ownership of something as substantial as a car .
 Hiss had signed the car over to an automobile dealership for $25 . It was then immediately signed over in the name of the dealership, for the same amount, to a man who turned out to have a record as a Communist organizer .
 Nowhere did the name George Crosley appear; and we established that the transfer had not taken place in June 1935, when Hiss testified he had last seen Crosley, but almost a year later, in July 1936—exactly when Chambers had testified it happened .
 The car transaction was incontrovertible evidence that Hiss had not been telling the truth and that he had known Chambers far better, far longer, and far later than he had testified . Hiss testified that Chambers had known Hiss far better than he'd testified .
 After his first appearance before the committee, Hiss had been besieged by well-wishers . Hiss was forced to give up his job in the 1970s .
 At the end of this testimony, however, he and his attorney made their solitary way out of the hearing room .
 His straightforward answers made Hiss’s appear even more evasive and misleading, he said .
 Chambers asked whether he might not have some kind of grudge against Hiss which would explain his apparent determination to tear him down and destroy him . Chambers: "I'm not sure if I have some of a grudge" Chambers says he might have some other grudge, which would
 To me, this exchange was the high point of the hearings, both as history and as drama . The exchange was both history and drama, and it was a high point .
 Hiss represents the concealed enemy against which we are all fighting, and I am fighting . Mr Hiss is a concealed enemy that we all must be fighting against, and he is fighting,’s the author says .
 As soon as I had a chance to study all the testimony, I sent a four-page letter to John Foster Dulles summarizing my opinions and conclusions, he says . As soon after I read all the evidence, he sent a letter to Dulles .
 This was the end of the committee’s direct involvement in the Hiss case . The committee's direct involvement ended in the case .
 The next step would depend on how Chambers reacted to Hiss’s challenge to repeat his statements where they would not be protected by congressional immunity, so that Hiss could sue for libel .
 Chambers appeared on Meet the Press two days after the public session on August 25 . Chambers appeared two days later on Meet The Press .
 Legally Hiss’s position seemed strong, because without corroborative evidence to back up his allegations Chambers could never prove them to any court's satisfaction . Hiss's position was strong, as without corroboration, Chambers could not prove them .
 Hiss assumed that if Chambers had any such proof, it would have been produced during the committee hearings . Hiss probably assumed that Hiss had no such proof .
 The case, which had already provided so many bizarre surprises, had not yet exhausted its supply of surprises .
 Chambers was called by Hiss’s lawyers for a pretrial deposition and in the course of routine questioning they asked him whether he had any documentary proof of his charges . Chambers was asked if he had proof of the charges .
 He made no reply at the time, but he began agonizing over what he might have to do to defend his position . "I'm not sure what I will do," he said .
 Chambers never told me specifically what had happened, but only that they had been very rough on her and had made her cry . Chambers never said what happened to her, only that she had cried .
 He said from that moment he realized that they were out to destroy him and that he must react accordingly . He said that from that point he knew that they would destroy him . He also said that he would react accordingly.
 Chambers turned over an envelope containing sixty-five pages of typewritten copies of State Department documents and four memos in Alger Hiss’s handwriting . Chambers turned the envelope over to the State Department in November .
 He explained to the stunned lawyers that when he decided to leave the party he had hidden papers away as a sort of life insurance against any Communist attempts to blackmail or kill him .
 The head of the Justice Department’s Criminal Division was immediately summoned from Washington . Head of the Criminal Division has been immediately summoned .
 He impounded the papers and obtained a court order enforcing secrecy on everyone concerned . The papers were seized by the judge, who also impounded them .
 Chambers returned to his farm thinking that it would only be a matter of a few days before the Justice Department brought the case to a grand jury and Hiss would be indicted . Chambers went back to the farm and assumed it would be just a matter .
 On December 1, a small United Press story appeared in the Washington Daily News reporting that the Justice Department was considering dropping the case against Hiss . The story was reported in the D.C. Daily News .
 There were rumors that a perjury charge against Chambers was under consideration . Another article stated that there was rumors that there were rumors . Chambers was accused of perjury in a perjury case .
 Chambers produced papers not to prove Hiss was a spy, but to prove that he was not . Chambers was indicted for perjury because he had lied when he testified that he himself had never been involved in espionage . Chambers' papers were the basis for indicting Chambers for perjury .
 "These shattering new developments came at the worst possible time for me personally," says CNN.com editor-in-chief . "I'm not going to be able to live with my family," she says .
 We had hoped to spend a few weeks with Tricia and Tricia out of the sweltering heat of summertime Washington . We were forced to cancel a planned vacation when the Hiss case had completely taken up the month of August .
 I promised Pat that we would take our first vacation in three years as soon as Congress recessed. "We're going to go on vacation," he said .
 We made reservations for a two-week Caribbean cruise at the beginning of December . Both of us looked forward to the trip .
 The day before we were to leave, I saw the article in the Daily News, and I was shocked that the Justice Department would be party to such a cynical maneuver . On the day before the plane left, I read the article and was shocked .
 He explained that he had turned over a considerable amount of documentary evidence, which had then been impounded by the Justice Department . A court order prohibited him from disclosing the contents of the evidence .
 Justice Department alone would decide if any further action were to be taken . Justice Department will decide if further action is needed .
 When Stripling and I got back to Washington I was uncertain about what to do . Stripling: "I'm not sure about what I'm going to do. It's a good thing to do," he says .
 I spent much of that night trying to decide whether to issue a subpoena for the rest of Chambers’s material . I spent that night debating whether to subpoena Chambers for more material .
 I could not understand why Chambers would have withheld any important information from the committee hearings . I could help thinking that there might be some good reason the Justice Department was acting in this way .
 "I decided that the case was too important to risk losing it now, so I asked Stripling to have subpoenas served on Chambers immediately for everything he had," Stripling says . Stripling: "The case is too important. It's too important"
 Members of Congress and their wives were on board . Pat and I relaxed in the lazy shipboard routine and enjoyed the company of other members of Congress .
 "We felt a sense of relief from the tremendous tension that had surrounded us in Washington," says CNN's John Sutter . "We were relieved by the relief," he says .
 I radioed Stripling to make arrangements for my return . VACATION-WRECKER ANDREWS was on vacation from his vacation .
 The next morning I was picked up from the ship by a Coast Guard seaplane that took me to Miami, where I caught a flight to Washington, D.C. The next day I was flown to Washington .
 When I reached Washington, Stripling filled in on the latest turn of this extraordinary case . Stripling told me in on Thursday that the case is still under investigation .
 Chambers had been in Washington on the day our subpoena was served on him . Chambers arranged to meet two investigators that night and drive back to his farm with them . Chambers was in Washington at the time of the subpoena, and he arranged to drive with investigators .
 Investigators watched as he took the top off one of the pumpkins, reached inside, and pulled out three small metal microfilm cylinders . The flabbergasted investigators watched while he pulled them out .
 He explained that he had not wanted to leave anything in the house in case any other subpoenas or search warrants arrived in his absence . He said he did not want to leave any of the items in his home in case there were any more subpoenas .
 That morning, therefore, he had hollowed out a pumpkin and used it as a hiding place . He hollowed it out of a pumpkin, then used it to hide in the dark .
 When the “pumpkin’s microfilms were developed they yielded hundreds of pages of photostats . The ‘pumpkins’ were developed in the 1970s .
 Hiss gave Chambers classified documents in the period just before Chambers left the party . The documents ran the gamut from inconsequential bureaucratic trivia to top-secret ambassadorial cables .
 Hiss’s defense later claimed that the documents were unimportant and represented no threat to national security . Hiss's defense later said that the document was not a national security threat .
 Expert testimony shot down by expert testimony before the committee and at both trials . Expert testimony from committee and both trials was shot down .
 The State Department still felt in 1948, ten years after they had been taken from the government files, that publication of the complete ‘pumpkin papers’ would be injurious to national security . Some of the documents were relatively unimportant, but the State Department said in 1948
 As important as the specific contents of the documents was the fact that many of even the substantively unimportant ones were coded . Anyone able to obtain copies of them could thus break our secret codes, he says .
 The uproar was tremendous, and even many of Hiss’s erstwhile defenders had to admit that they had been wrong and the committee had been right . Even many of the Hiss supporters had been forced to admit they were wrong and that committee was right .
 Grand jury unanimously voted to indict Hiss on two counts of perjury . Since the statute of limitations made prosecution for espionage impossible, Hiss was indicted on perjury charges .
 The first was for having lied when he testified that he had not unlawfully taken classified documents from the State Department and given them to Chambers . The second was for lying when he said he'd not seen Chambers after January 1, 1937 . The third was for not seeing Chambers again .
 At the second trial, the jury on January 21, 1950, unanimously found Hiss guilty . At the first trial, Hiss was found guilty of espionage .
 Shortly after the verdict, Herbert Hoover received a telegram from Herbert Hoover . Hoover was impressed by the verdict and sent a congratulatory telegram .
 Alger Hiss has emphatically insisted on his innocence and makes periodic attempts to clear himself . To this day, Hiss insists he is innocent . Hiss was convicted of murder in 1972 .
 Tenacity and the passage of time and the vagaries of memory have been rewarded with favorable publicity and increasing acceptance . This tenacity has now been rewarded by favorable publicity, increasing acceptance, he says .
 It was very difficult for me to understand President Truman’s conduct during our investigation of the Hiss case . President Truman's conduct was difficult to understand, says historian .
 I knew that he had defied his liberal advisers and supporters by proposing aid to the anticommunist governments in Greece and Turkey . I considered him to be someone who understood the threat of communism and recognized the need to oppose its subversive spread .
 Hiss was at best a perjurer and at worst a spy, says Truman . Truman condemned our investigation as a “red herring” and, through his public statements and executive orders, did everything in his power to obstruct it .
 Before the 1948 presidential election I could understand that he would do everything possible to contain the investigation in order to avoid political embarrassment . But he could not understand why he would want to keep the investigation under wraps .
 Even after he had won the election, he continued this same stubborn course . But I was surprised when he continued his stubborn course, even after he won, he said .
 When one of his aides later asked him about this, he replied, “Of course Hiss is guilty.” When asked about it, he said, ‘Of course . Of course,” he replied .
 He used the power and prestige of his office to obstruct the committee’s work . He finally approved a full Justice Department and FBI investigation, but for months he used his power .
 I did not think then, and I do now, that his actions were motivated by anything other than the political instincts of an intensely political man. But I do not think now, he does, that he acted as a political man .
 The Hiss case proved beyond any reasonable doubt the existence of Sovietdirected Communist subversion at the highest levels of U.S. government . Hiss' case was a Soviet-directed subversion of the United States .
 Many who defended Hiss simply refused to accept the overwhelming evidence of his guilt . But many who had defended him simply did not accept the evidence .
 Some turned their anger and frustration toward me, as if I was somehow responsible for the fact that Hiss had taken them in . Hiss took them in as a refugee . Some turned anger toward Hiss, some said he was responsible for them .
 The Hiss case launched him on the road to the vice presidency, he says . It also turned him from a relatively popular young congressman, enjoying a good but limited press, into one of the most controversial figures in Washington .
 Foster Dulles expressed the real lesson of the Hiss case when he said, “The conviction of Alger Hiss is human tragedy.” The conviction is a human tragedy, Dulles said .
 It is tragic that so great promise should have come to so inglorious an end . It was tragic that . so great . promise should come to an end, it is tragic, it's tragic .
 Dewey won the nomination on the third ballot, and he chose Earl Warren as his running mate . Earl Warren was Dewey's first choice for the nomination .
 Rep. Rick Moran won both the Democratic and Republican nominations for reelection to the House . Moran: "I did a great deal of speaking for the national ticket across the country in the fall campaign"
 "I was not as optimistic about our chances as most Republicans were. Although there was nothing specific I could put a finger on, I could not put it finger on," he said .
 The crowds were large and friendly, but they did not convey the electricity that so often means the difference between victory and defeat . The crowds are large but friendly, and they do not convey an electricity .
 Dewey ran a lofty and detached campaign, while Truman behaved as if he really wanted the job . Because of his temperament, overconfidence, and misjudgment, Dewey's campaign was more successful than Truman's .
 I thought that our complacency had caught up with us. While I was deeply disappointed by Dewey’s loss, I thought it was a sign that we were getting complacent. I thought this was the result of our complacentness .
 Dewey’s defeat and our loss of both houses of Congress turned me overnight into a junior member of the minority party, a “comer” with no place to go, he says . Dewey's defeat and the loss of the . House of Representatives turned me
 For the first time I began to consider the possibility of trying to move up on my own instead of patiently waiting for seniority or party preferment in the House of Representatives . The House is currently in a state of emergency .
 The term of Sheridan Downey, California’s Democratic senator, was to expire in 1950, and not long after the 1948 election I began to consider challenging Downey for his seat . In 1950, California's Democratic senator was retiring .
 Downey was a popular and uncontroversial incumbent, and it was by no means clear that anyone could beat him . Downey is a popular incumbent, but it's not clear that he could be beaten .
 "Running for the Senate would be tantamount to political suicide. Virtually all my political friends and advisers told me that running for the U.S. Senate is political suicide," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Hiss case gave me nationwide publicity that most congressmen only dream of achieving . But I recognized the worth of the publicity that the case had given me .
 Running for the Downey seat was the only possibility for me to move up the political ladder at a time when my political stock was high, she says . Running for Downey was the best way to get a seat in Downey, she adds .
 'Most of those who are against it, incidentally, are afraid of the risk of losing the House seat. Most of those ... afraid of losing my House seat, they're afraid," he says .
 I have virtually reached the conclusion that although it is admittedly a long shot, it presents such an unusual opportunity that the risk is worth taking, provided, of course, that we do not have too determined an opposition in the primary . As I wrote you before, however, I've virtually
 Unless the Republicans do make substantial gains in both the House and Senate in 1950, which necessarily would mean a Republican trend, I seriously doubt if we can ever work our way back into power . As I have told several of my friends, several of them .
 "I do not see any great gain in remaining a member of the House, even from a relatively good district, if it means that we would be simply a vocal but ineffective minority," he says .
 If the trend is on, the chances for winning the Senate seat in California will be good . On the other hand, if the trends are on, it's good for Democrats .
 If the trend is not on, re-winning the House seat might prove to be a rather empty victory .
 At the beginning of October Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas announced that she was going to run against Downey in the Democratic primary . Douglas announced she was running for the seat in October .
 If Downey won the primary, he would be weakened by her attacks; if Mrs. Downey wins, she would have weakened him . Mrs Downey would have been weakened by the attacks .
 L.A. Sen. Ted Cruz says he would be endorsed by the Los Angeles Times if he ran for the Senate . He says the Times endorsed his candidacy for the U.S. Senate . Cruz: "If I became a candidate for Senate, I'd be endorsed"
 I received assurances about the San Francisco Chronicle and the Oakland Tribune . I received similar assurances about similar assurances from the newspapers .
 These endorsements would virtually assure that I would not face any opposition in the Republican primary . These endorsements were vital not only for the boost they would give my candidacy, but also for my own party .
 On November 3, 1949, 1949—exactly one year before the election—I announced my candidacy for the Senate . "I announce my candidacy before a crowd of more than five hundred supporters in Pomona," he said. "I announced his candidacy for a Senate seat on November 3
 "I made a hard-hitting speech that foreshadowed the kind of campaign I planned to run," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he's running for president in 2016 .
 It had been hard enough to convince the voters in one traditionally Republican congressional district to elect me . Now I had to campaign all through the second most populous state in the nation, seeking the support of millions of voters . Most of them are registered Democrats .
 I decided to campaign all over California, and to get around I used a secondhand wood-paneled station wagon with “Nixon for Senator” signs nailed on each side . To get around, the station wagon was filled with signs of Nixon .
 It was fitted with portable sound equipment, and as we came into a town we played a phonograph record of a popular song over the loudspeaker .
 That usually attracted at least half a dozen people at a busy street corner . That usually attracts at least a few people .
 "Once a small crowd had gathered, I would speak for a few minutes and then answer questions," he says . "I would speak to a crowd of people then answer them," he adds . "Once there were a small crowds of people gathered, he would speak and answer questions"
 'At the beginning I often spoke to no more than a handful of bemused passersby. At the beginning of this year, I spoke to only a few of those passersby,' he says .
 When the campaign began to gather steam, crowds began to grow . Before long, the presence of hecklers assured a large and lively audience at every stop .
 These hecklers were tightly organized bands sent out from local left-wing labor and political organizations . The hecklers are tightly organized and organized .
 They tried to disrupt his speeches by a continuous counterpoint of critical questions and derisive observations, he said . They were 'deliberate' and 'derisive observations', he added .
 "They even brought their own sound truck, and we engaged in an amplified debate," he says . "On one occasion in San Francisco, they even brought a sound truck to San Francisco," he adds .
 " sparks were flying in the Democratic primary. While I was beginning my campaign treks around the state, sparks flew"
 Senator Downey had withdrawn from the race, citing health problems, and Mrs. Mrs. Downey also withdrew from the Senate race . The race will be held on November 14 .
 Douglas was now opposed by Manchester Boddy, publisher of the Los Angeles Daily News . L.A. Daily News publisher also opposed Douglas' move .
 Boddy was well financed, and campaigned with the genuine fervor of a lifelong Democrat who despised Mrs. Mrs. Boddy . Boddy is well financed and well financed .
 His supporters attacked her voting record by comparing it with that of Vito Marcantonio, the only openly procommunist member of Congress . His supporters said she was pro-communist . Her voting record has been compared to that of the pro-Communist Vito Marcos .
 Anyone could see that Douglas and Marcantonio records were strikingly similar . Attacks coming from within her own party were as damaging as anything I could say . Anyone could . see that the Douglas . Douglas . records were . strikingly similar and the attacks came from within the party .
 The subsequently controversial “pink sheet” that my campaign committee issued was, in fact, inspired by these earlier comparisons of the two voting records . The subsequent controversial ‘pink sheets’ were inspired by the earlier comparisons .
 Whatever interpretation of the facts later placed on these facts, no one was ever able to challenge their accuracy . Whatever interpretation was later placed, no . one . could challenge the accuracy .
 Douglas gave comfort to the Soviet tyranny by voting against aid to both Greece and Turkey . Douglas also voted against the aid to Turkey and Greece . Douglas supported the Soviet regime .
 Douglas ended up with less than 50 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary . Douglas won the primary with just under 50 percent .
 Boddy got about 30 percent and, because crossover voting was still allowed, he received 20 percent . Boddy was the only person who voted with crossover voting allowed .
 On the Republican side, I ran unopposed and received 740,000 votes—a record primary turnout . On the Democrat side, he ran unofficially, he said . He said he ran without opposition and received a record number of votes .
 Helen Gahagan had been a popular light opera and Broadway musical star during the 1920s . She was a Broadway musical actress .
 In 1931 she married Melvyn Douglas, one of Hollywood's most popular leading men . In 1931, she was married to a leading Hollywood star .
 Helen Douglas ran for the Democratic congressman from the Fourteenth District in Los Angeles in 1944 . Douglas won her seat in the 1944 election . Douglas was elected to the House of Representatives in 1945 .
 She was not, to put it mildly, the most popular member of the House of Representatives . She had many fans among the public and many admirers in the press and the entertainment industry .
 Two members of the House run against each other for another office . Fellow congressmen maintain a friendly attitude and wish both of them well .
 Even many House Democrats let me know that they hoped I could defeat Helen Douglas . But in our case, even many of the House Democrats wanted me to defeat her, he says .
 After he left I opened the envelope and found it contained a $1,000 contribution . "After he left, I opened it up to find it contained an envelope of money," she said .
 Kennedy told an informal gathering of professors and students at Harvard that he was personally very happy that I had defeated Mrs. Hillary Clinton .
 Douglas Douglas victory in the primary called for some rethinking of his strategy . Douglas won the primary primary in Florida . Douglas' victory was a victory for Douglas, who is a Democrat .
 "My original plans had been geared to running against Downey, a popular moderate as well as an entrenched incumbent," he says .
 "Now I found myself running against one of the most left-wing members of Congress—and a woman," says Hillary Clinton . "I'm running against a woman. Now I'm running for a seat in Congress," she says .
 "I felt that the best strategy was to let her record do my work for me. Consequently, I felt that she felt that . I felt . that she would be able to do her work for herself," she said .
 She was out of step with the voters of California, and if I could prevent her formidable dramatic skills from clouding the issues, I would win . I was almost certain to win. If I could keep her dramatic skills out of the issues clouding, I'd win .
 I pointed out that she had voted against Truman on military aid to Greece and Turkey . The key plank of the Truman Doctrine, which I had supported, was the aid to Turkey and Greece, she said .
 Congresswoman voted against bills requiring loyalty checks for federal employees . She voted against a bill that allowed the heads of key national defense agencies to discharge government workers found to be poor security risks .
 "I constantly questioned her wisdom and judgment in light of such a record," she says . "I never questioned her patriotism. Although I constantly questioned . Her wisdom and judgement," she said, she said .
 Douglas tried to charge that his voting record was more procommunist than hers . Douglas was a Democrat in the 1980s, but he says he's not a communist . Douglas says his record is more pro-Communist than that of Hillary Clinton .
 In her speeches she began saying that she was more anti-communist than I, and that I was the one who had voted with Marcantonio against key anticommunist issues, she said .
 "The decision to pursue this particular attack was clearly rooted more in desperation than in logic," he says . "The charge that I was a communist sympathizer had no public credibility whatever whatever," he adds .
 She made the further mistake of careless research on my voting record, she said . She accused me of having voted five times with Marcantonio on key matters . She also said she had voted five votes with him on key issues .
 In two of the five votes in question, I had not done so—although she had. I had . Not done so, she had not . In one of the . five votes, I did not . not do so, he said, but she had . not .
 In the other two cases, she had seized on procedural technicalities to distort the record . In those cases, the judge said she was using procedural issues to distort her record .
 She accused me of opposing aid to Korea when I had actually supported it, and of voting to cut a Korean aid program in half . She said she had voted for a one-year bill rather than a two-year measure .
 I made a statewide radio speech accusing her of glaring misstatements in a flyer that her campaign was circulating . I also made a speech against her campaign flyer that she had circulated .
 I refuted each charge and repeated my challenge that she cite one instance in which I had misrepresented her record . "I refute each charge," she said. "I refuted each . charge"
 Nixon’s record of blind stupidity on foreign policy gave aid and comfort to the Communists . Nixon's record of blindness stupidity gave aid to the Communist Party .
 Nixon stood with party liner Marcantonio against America in its fight to defeat Communism . On every key vote Nixon stood against America against Communism, he said .
 On October 12, four weeks before the election, a California poll was released showing that I had a 12 percent lead over Mrs. Hillary Clinton . A California poll showed that Clinton's lead was 12 percent .
 Panic must have swept the Douglas camp when this poll came out, because as the campaign entered its last weeks her attacks became more viciously personal . Her attacks on Douglas became more personal as the election entered its final weeks .
 In a campaign dispatch, the San Francisco Chronicle reported that “Nixon was dubbed ‘tricky Dick’ by Mrs. Nixon’s husband .
 On the question of rights to oil and mineral deposits in the tidelands just off the California coast, she voted to oppose state ownership and favor federal control . On the issue, she alone of the twenty-three-member California congressional delegation voted against state ownership .
 Near the end of the campaign we scheduled a massive old-fashioned torchlight parade and rally in Los Angeles . The torch-light parade was held near Los Angeles and Los Angeles.
 His wife, June Allyson, then pregnant, made a short and moving speech about the future of her unborn child . His wife made the speech .
 I won the election by a margin of 680,000 votes, the largest plurality of any Senate winner that year . I won't be surprised at the size of the majority of those votes, he says .
 Republicans picked up 30 House seats and 5 Senate seats in the midterms . The GOP picked up a majority of the seats in both chambers of Congress .
 The 1950 campaign became highly controversial because of the ‘rocking, socking’ way in which I was said to have waged and won it . The campaign was highly controversial due to the 'rocking' and 'socking' way of winning .
 Douglas and many of her friends and supporters claimed that I had impugned her loyalty and smeared her character, thus depriving the voters of the opportunity to make an honest choice . Douglas: "I'm not going to back her, I'm not backing her. She's not
 Anyone who takes the trouble to go back through the newspapers and other sources of the period, however, will find that things happened as I have described them here . Anyone who wants to know more about the period will find the truth .
 Helen Gahagan Douglas waged a campaign that would not be equaled for stridency, ineptness, or self-righteousness until George McGovern’s presidential campaign twenty-two years later . Douglas was one of the most stridency and ineptitude of a presidential candidate .
 Voters of California in 1950 were not prepared to elect as their senator anyone with a left-wing voting record or anyone they perceived as being soft on or naive about communism .
 She may have been at some political disadvantage because she was a woman . She was at a disadvantage because of her gender, she says .
 We had come so close to winning with Dewey in 1948 that there was an almost desperate determination not to fail again . There was almost a desperate determination to not fail again. There was also a determination to try and win again .
 Republicans could taste the victory we knew must be ours if only we could enter the election as a party united behind a strong candidate . After twenty years out of power, Republicans could almost taste a victory, they could taste it .
 Sen. Ted Cruz says he was caught up in this activity from his first days in the Senate . Cruz: "As the new senator from the nation’s second most populous state, I’m caught up with this activity"
 After humiliating defeat in the New Hampshire primary in March 1952, he decided not to run again . He decided to run for president in 1952 after humiliating defeat .
 Truman stood in the eye of a hurricane of scandals that swirled around him while he did nothing . Truman was in the midst of a scandal of scandals while he stood by his side .
 Payoffs in the form of deep freezes went to Truman’s Appointments Secretary, his naval aide, and his Treasury Secretary, among others . Payoffs were also given to Truman's naval aide and Treasury Secretary .
 A congressional inquiry produced a list of charges against officials in the then Bureau of Internal Revenue . The charges included extortion, evading income tax, and preventing the audit of their own returns .
 Of nine district tax collectors removed, one was a personal friend of Truman’s . One had figured in the RFC scandal, was sent to jail, and was later pardoned by President Johnson . One of nine removed from the district tax collection was a friend of the president .
 Truman’s Appointments Secretary was convicted of conspiracy in a tax case, sent to prison, and later pardoned by President Kennedy . President Kennedy pardoned the former Secretary of State of the Treasury .
 The head of the Justice Department’s Tax Division was convicted in the same case and was also pardoned by President Johnson . President Johnson pardoned the tax chief in the case .
 It was no overstatement, then, when I kicked off my Western campaign in Pomona, to charge Truman with heading a “scandal-a-day” administration . Truman was charged with leading a ‘scandal a day’ during his administration .
 The two major Republican candidates were General Dwight Eisenhower and Senator Robert Taft of Ohio . Eisenhower and Taft were the two major candidates for the election .
 He was known as ‘Mr Republican’ and would clearly be the choice of the party organizers and workers . He was also known as 'Mr Republican'
 He was generally described as a conservative, but his beliefs were far too complex . He was far too intelligent and complicated a man—for any simple label, he said .
 He was, to be sure, a strong anticommunist with an isolationist streak . He was a strong anti-communist with a strong isolationism streak .
 He was constantly trying to find creative solutions to America’s social problems without having to resort to big government spending programs . Domestically, however, he was constantly looking for creative solutions .
 Taft was universally respected in Congress, and perhaps his most ardent supporter was Bill Knowland, a senior colleague from California . Knowland was a longtime supporter of Taft . Taft died at 93, but Taft's legacy will never be forgotten .
 Eisenhower's heroic image made him a prize sought after by both political parties . Eisenhower had been determinedly nonpolitical throughout his military career, but after the war his image was sought after .
 According to Eisenhower, Truman had offered to back him for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1948 . Truman had backed Eisenhower for the presidential nomination, Eisenhower says .
 He probably felt the time wasn't right for him to run as Truman’s protégé . Truman considered himself a Republican rather than a Democrat, and considered himself as a Republican .
 Unlike Taft, Eisenhower could claim no grass roots base among the party faithful . Eisenhower was a Republican president in the House of Representatives .
 ‘Ike’ is a genuine popular hero who could almost certainly win the election if he could first win the nomination . But his engaging personality, his dazzling smile, and his great military successes had made him a popular hero .
 By 1951 several small groups of influential Republicans were trying to persuade Eisenhower to run for the Republican nomination . By 1951, Eisenhower had been approached by a number of influential Republican groups .
 Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts was his leading supporter on Capitol Hill . Senator Lodge was a Massachusetts senator .
 Warren was Dewey's running mate in 1948 . Warren won the California presidential primary as a favorite son . He would arrive at the convention with a solid bloc of seventy delegates bound to stay with him until he decided to release them .
 The first time I ever saw Dwight Eisenhower was on his triumphant return to the States after V-E Day in 1945 . Eisenhower was returning to the U.S. after V.E. Day .
 "I was doing Navy contract termination work on Church Street in lower Manhattan, and the windows of my twentiethfloor office overlooked the route of his ticker-tape parade up Broadway"
 I could just make him out through the snowstorm of confetti, sitting in the back of his open car, waving and looking up at the cheering thousands . Thousands filled every window of the towering buildings .
 His arms were raised high over his head in the gesture that soon became his trademark . His arms raised high above his head was the gesture he soon became known for .
 In 1948, he briefed the members of the House of Representatives on the situation in Europe at a meeting held in the Library of Congress .
 The Bohemian Grove is the site of the annual summer retreat of San Francisco’s Bohemian Club . Each year members of this prestigious private men's club and their guests from all over the country gather there for summer retreat .
 Hoover used to invite some of the most distinguished of the 1,400 men at the Grove to join him at his “Cave Man Camp” for lunch each day . Hoover invited some of them to join his ‘Cave Men Camp’ for lunch . Hoover used
 Hoover sat at the head of the table as usual, with Eisenhower at his right . Hoover and Eisenhower sat together at the end of the war .
 As the Republican nominee in an uphill Senate battle, I was about two places from the bottom of the polls . As a Republican nominee, he was two places on the Republican side of the line .
 "I'm sure he was aware that he was in enemy territory among this generally conservative group. I am sure he . was aware he was . aware of his position among the conservative group," she said .
 Hoover and most of his friends favored Taft and hoped that Eisenhower would not become a candidate . Hoover and his friends hoped that Taft would not be a candidate for president .
 Eisenhower spoke at the beautiful lakeside amphitheatre . Later that day, Eisenhower spoke .
 It was not a polished speech, but he delivered it without notes and he had the good sense not to speak too long . He delivered the speech without notes .
 The only line that drew significant applause was his comment that he did not see why anyone who refused to sign a loyalty oath should have the right to teach in a state university .
 After Eisenhower's speech we went back to Cave Man Camp and sat around the campfire appraising it . "We sat around a campfire and talked about it. We were very happy to hear Eisenhower's words," she said. "We were very excited to hear them"
 Everyone liked Eisenhower, but the feeling was that he had a long way to go before he would have the experience, the depth, and the understanding to be President . Eisenhower was the President of the United States in 1953 .
 Eisenhower's personality and personal mystique had deeply impressed the skeptical and critical Cave Man audience . But it struck me forcibly that Eisenhower's character and mystique was deeply impressed by his audience .
 In May 1951 I went as a Senate observer to the World Health Organization conference in Geneva . I went to the conference as an observer in Geneva, Switzerland, as a senator .
 Senator Frank Carlson of Kansas arranged for Eisenhower to meet Eisenhower at NATO headquarters in Paris . Senator Carlson was one of Eisenhower's early supporters .
 Eisenhower rose from his desk to greet him in Eisenhower's office . Eisenhower's aide ushered him into Eisenhower’s office, and he greeted him with a handshake .
 "He motioned me to a large sofa against the wall, and his informality put me so completely at ease that we were able to talk freely," he said .
 He spoke optimistically about the prospects for European economic recovery and development .
 He carefully steered away from American politics, but it was clear he had done his homework . It was clear that he did his homework to prepare for the election .
 He said that he had read about the Hiss case in Seeds of Treason by Ralph de Toledano and Victor Lasky . He said he had also read about Hiss in the book Seeds Of Treason .
 He also liked the emphasis I placed in some of my speeches on the need to take into account economic and ideological as well as military factors in fashioning foreign policy .
 It was unusual to hear a military man emphasize the importance of non-military strength . This impressed me because, then as now, it was unusual, to hear him say, 'non-military'
 Eisenhower’s manner impressed me that afternoon that afternoon . It was not the substance of the conversation so much as his manner that most impressed me . Eisenhower's manner was most impressed that afternoon.
 It was easy to see how he had been able to bring the leaders of the great wartime alliance together despite their differences .
 Eisenhower was by far the best qualified of the potential presidential candidates, author says . "I felt that in terms of experience and ability in handling foreign policy, I felt that . Eisenhower was the best candidate to run for president," he says .
 I felt that I was in the presence of a genuine statesman, and I came away convinced that he should be the next President. I felt . I . felt that he was in a genuine stateman and I . came away . convinced that . he should become the next president .
 I also decided that if he ran for the nomination I would do everything I could to help him get it. "I also decided I would help him do it," he said. "If he ran, he would help me get it"
 I did not know Bob Taft well, but I had met him several times while I was in the House of Representatives, particularly during the debates on the Taft—Hartley bill . "I did not meet him well, although I did know him well," he says .
 Even his strongest supporters acknowledged that he lacked some of the personality traits needed by a presidential candidate . He was highly respected in Washington, but his supporters said he lacked personality traits .
 He was an intelligent, high-minded patriot, but he was also very proud and very shy . He was also proud and shy, he said .
 This combination unfortunately made many people feel that he was arrogant . This combination of arrogance and arrogance made him feel arrogant .
 Taft was visibly uncomfortable with the personal “small change” of presidential politics . Taft showed discomfort with the handshaking and backslapping of local party leaders, and he was honest in a way that could be painfully blunt .
 "I shall never forget seeing him on television during the New Hampshire primary," says Hillary Clinton . "I will never forget that I saw him on TV during the primary," she says .
 A little girl held out a pen and a piece of paper and asked for his autograph . The little girl asked for him to sign her autograph, but he refused .
 Right on camera, he explained to her with devastating reasonableness that handshaking took less time than signing autographs . Since he had a very busy schedule he could not interrupt it to sign anything for her .
 Martha Taft was the most exceptional political wife I have ever known, says George W. Bush . She says next to Pat Taft, Martha was most exceptional wife he has ever known . Bush: "Next to Pat, Martha Tafts was the best wife I ever known"
 Taft's wife suffered a stroke in 1950 and was confined to a wheelchair . Taft, who was completely devoted to her, took her everywhere with him . At a dinner party it was a touching sight to see him cut her food and help feed it to her .
 People in Washington admired him and made allowances because of them . Taft had a long list of misdeeds that he committed committed to the presidency . He was assassinated by the assassination of President George W. Bush .
 Trump's abrasive personality would be a serious disadvantage in a presidential campaign . But when it came to choosing a nominee the fact had to be faced that he would be an abrasive candidate .
 I believed that the President elected in 1952 had first and foremost to be an expert in dealing with the serious international challenges facing America, and I had some serious reservations about Taft in this regard . I believed .
 Before the elections in 1950 I had been invited to be the major speaker at the 36th Annual McKinley Day Dinner in Dayton, Ohio . I was invited to speak at the event in 1950 .
 Taft had followed me with a short speech in which he said that the greatest problem facing America at home or abroad was not communism but socialism . Taft said that as he saw it, the greatest threat facing America was not Communism but socialism.
 He urged that we concentrate our efforts on fighting and defeating socialism . He urged therefore that we concentrated our efforts to fighting and defeat socialism .
 "What concerned me was his failure to recognize that many socialists were dedicated anticommunists. What concerned me is he failure to realize that many socialist sympathisers were anti-communists," he said .
 Taft's failure to understand this distinction raised questions in his mind about his grasp of the whole international situation . The major threat we faced was not socialism, but communist subversion supported by the international Communist movement, he says . Taft’s failure to grasp this distinction raises questions
 He was no more interested in small talk than I was, so he got right to the point . He was a man no more . interested in . small talk . So he got the point: "He was no longer interested in ... small talk."
 He said that we had mutual friends in California and some of them had urged him to drop by and simply ask me for my support of his candidacy . He said he said that he had many mutual friends who wanted him to join his campaign .
 I told him that I had enormous respect for his leadership in the Senate . I had no doubt that in terms of domestic affairs he was the best qualified man to lead the country . He was the Senate's most powerful member .
 I told him I personally felt that international affairs would be more important for the next President . It was with a great deal of sadness that I felt that Eisenhower was the best qualified in that area .
 I added that if Taft won the nomination he would have my wholehearted support . Under no circumstances would I lend myself to a ‘stop Taft’ movement at the convention, he said .
 He said that although he was naturally disappointed with my decision, he appreciated my frankness . He said he was generous and respectful in his comments about Eisenhower .
 Taft died of cancer just a few months after Eisenhower was inaugurated . Taft was a fine gentleman, and it was a great loss to the party, the Congress, and the nation .
 On July 1, I flew to Chicago to take part in the platform hearings being held in the week before the Republican National Convention .
 I had first become aware that I might be considered as the nominee for Vice President a few months earlier when clues and signs began appearing in the press and the political rumor mills . I had become aware of the possibility of being a Vice President .
 Dewey was both the former standard-bearer and one of the principal people behind Eisenhower . The dinner was a major occasion, and Dewey's speech would be broadcast on radio .
 "I spent several hours making outlines, to be sure that I could say everything within the allotted half-hour radio time," says the author . "I was very nervous about how long I would be able to talk," he says .
 "I delivered it without notes in exactly twenty-nine minutes, and the audience gave me a standing ovation when it was over," says the author . "It was a very difficult task to do without notes," he says .
 When he sat down next to Dewey after acknowledging the applause, he very deliberately snuffed out his cigarette, which he always held in a cigarette holder, and earnestly said, “That was a terrific speech.” Dewey .
 "I did not take him seriously, much less literally, because such compliments are commonplace in politics," says Obama . "I didn't take it seriously," he says, but I did take it literally," he adds .
 He asked me if I would object to his suggesting my name as a possible candidate for Vice President . But later that evening, he asked me to object, and I said yes .
 A few weeks later I was invited to meet with Eisenhower’s inner circle of advisers in a suite at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C. Eisenhower's inner circle met with Eisenhower .
 The group included Herbert Brownell, the lawyer whom Eisenhower was later to name Attorney General, General Lucius Clay, and Harold Talbott, Dewey's chief fund-raiser .
 We had a wide-ranging discussion of foreign and domestic policy that lasted most of the afternoon . We also discussed the role of the U.S. role in Afghanistan .
 Nothing was said about the vice presidency, but it was clear that they were trying to get to know me better and to size me up . "They were clear that ... they were ... trying to size up me up," she said .
 "Rumors that I might be Eisenhower's running mate began to appear in the papers," he says . "I met with President Eisenhower and met with him in Washington, D.C. The meeting was the first time I had met with the President of the United States .
 Alice Longworth, daughter of Teddy Roosevelt, was a guest at the convention in New York City . She says she and her husband met Longworth at dinner before the convention . Longworth is the daughter of Roosevelt's former president . The convention will be held on Saturday at 8 p.
 I asked her if she thought she thought I should take the nomination if Eisenhower offered it to me, she said . "I asked her what she thought of me," she said. "She said yes, yes. I would take it."
 She did not like Eisenhower, and as far as I could tell she never did develop any liking for him . She did like Eisenhower and never did like him .
 In her typically outspoken way, she said, “Father used to tell me that being Vice President was the most boring job in the world”
 Longworth brought up the subject again and asked me whether I was giving it serious thought . Longworth said he was giving serious thought. Longworth asked whether he was serious thought about it .
 I said that the prospect was too unlikely for me to take it very seriously. I said it was 'too unlikely' that I would take it seriously. 'I said that it was too likely'
 If you ask me, and since you did, I'll tell you again, if you're thinking of your own good and your own career, you are probably better off to stay in the Senate and not go down in history as another nonentity who served as Vice President . If you
 Of course, Father’s experience was different, and by some act of God you might become President too, but you shouldn’t plan on it . Of course . Father‘s experience .
 "Until this conversation, I had never taken the possibility of nomination seriously enough to consider that I might not want the job," she says .
 The vice presidency had traditionally been a political dead end . Most Vice Presidents were old party wheelhorses or regional politicians added to balance the ticket . Vice Presidents have traditionally been added to the party's front-runner list .
 Theodore Roosevelt referred to the vice presidency as “taking the veil,” and Harry Truman described the office as being about as useful as a fifth teat on a cow . Theodore Roosevelt called the office a “fifth teat’s”
 Until Eisenhower completely changed the concept of the office, the Vice President was almost exclusively a ceremonial figure who went to the receptions and dedicated the dams the President didn’t have time for . The Vice President is now a more ceremonial figure .
 His only important functions were to cast occasional tie-breaking votes in the Senate . He was constantly ready to take over if the President died or were incapacitated . His only job was to cast a tie-breaker and take over .
 Today we think of the vice presidency as a stepping-stone to the presidency, but before 1952 it was more often a stepping stone to political oblivion . Before 1952, vice president was often seen as stepping-stones to political career .
 Eisenhower would expect his Vice President to subordinate any personal ambitions to the President’s programs and policies . Eisenhower did not have to know Eisenhower well .
 It was one thing for me to believe that Eisenhower was the best man for the job . It was quite another to renounce my own political career just as it reached a national stage in the Senate .
 If I had had had presidential ambitions, I probably would not have considered becoming Vice President . I did not have presidential ambitions but I did have considered being Vice President.
 Bill Knowland, Walter Judd, Dan Thornton and Dan Thornton were being touted as the most likely running mates for Eisenhower . When the Republican National Convention opened in Chicago on July 7, Knowland and Thornton were touted as likely running mate .
 Jack Knight, publisher and editor of the Chicago Daily News, predicted that Eisenhower and I would be the Republican nominees . "Two days before the nominating session, Jack Knight went out on a political limb," he says .
 I still considered this so unlikely that I sent someone out to buy a half a dozen copies of the paper . I still thought this was so unlikely I sent out someone out for a copy .
 "When I got back to the hotel around midnight, Pat was waiting up for me," he said . "Pat was waiting for me when I got home," he added . "I'm not going to be surprised when I get back to my hotel," he says .
 For her, the worst part of politics was campaigning, and through two strenuous California campaigns in 1946 and 1950 she had been at my side every step of the way and took it all with good grace . For her she said, "For her, her worst part was campaigning"
 Although campaigning did not come easily to her because of her deep-rooted sense of privacy, she did it superbly . Although campaigning didn't come easily, she was able to win the election .
 She was having second thoughts about what accepting the nomination could mean to us and to our young daughters . But now that we actually had to consider the possibility of a long and grueling nationwide campaign, she was had second thoughts .
 Murray Chotiner talks to CNN.com's John Sutter about his experiences in the early hours of the day . Sutter: "I think we need to talk to Murray about his work in the book"
 As a political professional, he might have a different perspective about the whole question . As a politician, it's not easy to ask about the question .
 When he arrived at our room I filled him in on our discussion and asked for his opinion . When he returned to his room he asked him to share his thoughts .
 He pointed out that even if I ran for Vice President and lost, I would still have my Senate seat . Even if I lost, he would still be able to keep his Senate seat, he said .
 "I could step down after the first term. Or, if I became Vice President and did not like it, I could step up after that term," he said .
 After Murray left, Pat and I talked about what he had said and we agreed that he was right . Pat and Pat said they agreed that Murray was right. Murray was wrong. He was right, they said .
 Taft forces were unhappy not just because they had been defeated but because of the strong-arm tactics they felt had been used on many delegates by Eisenhower’s supporters under the direction of his floor manager, Governor Sherman Adams of New Hampshire .
 When the convention adjourned for lunch, I decided to go back to my room at the Stock Yard Inn and sleep until the evening session . Eisenhower and his running mate would make their acceptance speeches .
 I had been up nearly all night talking to Pat and Murray, and the morning had been tiring because of the final frantic shiftings and maneuverings before the balloting . The morning was tiring as it was the last few hours before the voting began .
 "I stripped down to my shorts and lay on top of the covers, trying to think cool thoughts," says the author . "It was a great night for me. I stripped down and tried to think about it," he says .
 Chotiner arrived a few minutes later, and he could scarcely contain his excitement . The former president of the U.S. Senate in New York City met with President Barack Obama at the White House .
 Eisenhower had approved a final list of acceptable running mates and then turned the actual selection over to his inner circle of advisers . Eisenhower told CNN's John Sutter that Eisenhower's running mate selection was a top secret . Eisenhower's selection was then turned over to advisers .
 Herb Brownell told Chotiner that he was on the list and asked where he could be reached if the need arose . Brownell: "I'm glad to be able to get back in touch with Herb"
 I could recognize Brownell’s voice coming over the line, but it sounded very distant . Brownell's voice came over the phone, but was very distant, he said .
 I pressed the receiver against my ear and realized that he was talking to someone else . The phone conversation was interrupted by a prankster who was on the phone at the time of the call .
 "I felt hot, sleepy, and grubby, but there wasn't even time to shower or shave," she says . "There was no time to shave or shower," she adds .
 The everresourceful Chotiner somehow produced a limousine and a police motorcycle escort which sped us across town to Eisenhower's headquarters at the Blackstone .
 Eisenhower beamed as he shook his hand and led me into the large sitting room of his suite . Eisenhower was the first president to visit Eisenhower's private residence in Washington .
 Eisenhower visited Eisenhower's home in Washington, D.C. Eisenhower, and the three of us chatted for a few minutes before she left us . Eisenhower's wife said, "I'm not going to see her again, but I'm going to visit her"
 He said that he wanted his campaign to be a crusade for the things he believed in and the things America stood for . He said he wanted to be the president of the country .
 He called in his secretary and dictated a letter to the Secretary of the Army . The letter was written by the secretary of the army .
 While I watched as he read it over and signed it, I wondered what must be going through his mind . "While I watched ... I wondered how he must be thinking," he said .
 He had spent his entire adult life in the Army and had reached the pinnacle of fame and success . He had been in the army for his entire life .
 If he could have known of the agonies he was to go through over the next eight years he would have had serious second thoughts . My guess is that if he could . have known the . agonies . he was going through the . years he had to endure .
 He began by telling me all the reasons he had not wanted to run for President, and how he had finally decided that it was his duty to run .
 "I don’t want a Vice President who will be a figurehead," he says . Then, he says, he turns abruptly to his plans for his administration . "Dick, I don't want a vice President who is a figure head," he adds .
 "I want him to be able to step into the presidency smoothly in case anything happens to me," she says . "He wants him to step in smoothly," she adds .
 Eisenhower wanted his campaign to be waged as a crusade against the corruption of the Truman administration and against its foreign policy, which he felt had played into the Communists’ hands in both Europe and Asia . Eisenhower felt that Truman’s foreign policy played into his hands .
 It was clear that he envisaged taking an above-the-battle position, and that whatever hard partisan campaigning was required would be left to me . He envisaged a hard partisan campaign left to him, he says .
 He said that as an upstanding young man and a good speaker I should be able to flail the Democrats on the corruption issue but also to personify the remedy for it .
 As for the communist threat, he said that the Hiss case was a text from which I could preach everywhere in the country . He said that he would preach everywhere from where he could preach .
 Years later, in 1964, he told me my name had been first on the list he had submitted to his advisers for consideration . "My name was first on his list," he said .
 Eisenhower had put me on his list and that his advisers had chosen me. "I think there were several reasons that Eisenhower had . I think there was several reasons," she says .
 Eisenhower also knew that to maintain his above-the-battle position he needed a running mate who was willing to engage in all-out combat, and who was good at it . Eisenhower knew he needed someone who would engage in combat and would be good at doing it .
 There was undoubtedly a geographic element in his choice -- the recognition of the postwar power and influence of the western U.S. and particularly of California . There was also a recognition of his choice .
 "I would also appeal directly to the large number of younger voters and veterans," he says . More than anyone else under serious consideration, he says. "I'm also able to appeal directly"
 I knew that some of Eisenhower’s more liberal advisers had preferred Earl Warren to me, and some of his more conservative advisers would have preferred Bill Knowland, or even Bob ‘Taft if he would accept’ If he would, he said, ‘I knew
 "Antivomunist credentials from the Hiss case were what most tilted the decision to me," he says . "It was already clear that the communist challenge would be an important issue in the campaign," he adds .
 As we shook hands again at the door, two things were foremost in my mind . As we shake hands again, I thought of the two things: "I don't think it's a good thing"
 "I had not yet prepared a single word or thought. First, within a few hours I would be addressing the convention and millions of Americans on radio and television, and I had no idea what I was going to say . First, I had to prepare a speech and address millions of
 The only suit he had brought to Chicago was the wrinkled light gray one he was wearing . Second, this possibility had seemed so remote that the only suit I had brought was a wrinkled gray one .
 She was lunching in a nearby restaurant when she heard a news bulletin that she was to be Eisenhower’s running mate . She was at a restaurant in New York when she learned of the news .
 We arrived shortly before the delegates were to begin the balloting for Vice President .
 I found Bill Knowland and asked him if he would do me the honor of placing my name in nomination . I found him and he said he would be honored to be nominated for best actor .
 Knowland was not only a personal friend, but also the man whom Taft probably would have chosen as his running mate . Knowland: Taft would probably have chosen to be Taft's running mate. Knowland is a friend of Taft and a former presidential candidate .
 Senator John Bricker is a member of the Ohio delegation . Senator Bricker has a massive mane of white hair . Bricker was a senator in Ohio's Senate from Ohio .
 "I was taken aback by the depth of his feeling against the Eisenhower forces," he says . "For the first time I realized how difficult and how important my role as a bridge between the party factions was going to be," he adds .
 I asked Governor Alfred Driscoll of New Jersey to deliver the main seconding speech in his place . I asked him to give the main speech in New Jersey .
 There was no opposition to my nomination, a motion was made that the rules be suspended and I be nominated by acclamation . Since there were no opposition there was made a motion to suspend the rules and I was nominated .
 Pat joined me on the convention floor and kissed me twice, the second time at the insistence of the photographers who had missed the first time . Pat joined him on the Convention floor to kiss him twice .
 It was to happen many times over the next two decades, but both Pat and I still remember that first time . Both Pat and Pat still remember the thunderous sound of several thousand people shouting themselves hoarse and stamping their feet and clapping for us .
 I felt exhilarated—almost heady—as I looked out across the moving, shifting mass that filled the convention floor and galleries . The convention was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Pat said later that for those few minutes it actually made her forget the long campaign that we would have to endure . Pat said she was inspired by the experience of the campaign .
 Eisenhower delivered his acceptance speech that night . Eisenhower delivered the acceptance speech proclaiming his crusade . Eisenhower's speech was the first time he had won a Nobel Peace Prize .
 My acceptance speech followed his and closed both the evening and the convention . "My acceptance speech was followed by his," he said . "It was a great night for me," he added .
 I pledged myself to put on a “fighting campaign for the election of a fighting candidate,” and also to work for a Republicancontrolled House and Senate . “I pledged myself, still in my rumpled gray suit, to put up a fighting campaign,�
 Joe Martin praised Joe Martin and Styles Bridges for their work at the convention and said how important it was that they be Speaker and Majority Leader in the next Congress . Bridges was considered to be either pro-Taft or neutral toward Eisenhower .
 The raucous audience suddenly grew still in anticipation of what it knew must be coming . The audience was stunned by the announcement .
 "I do think I know something about the abilities of men in legislative life. But I don't know something," he says . "But I do think ... something about men's abilities"
 The frustration of the Taft supporters at having lost was added to the general sentiment for “Mr Republican,” and the convention went wild for him . Taft's frustration of losing to Taft added to his popularity .
 Taft's ovation went too wild for some of Eisenhower's liberal advisers . Taft’s ovation was more enthusiastic than Eisenhower's, according to some of his liberal advisers, who felt .
 Some suggested that I had done this purposely in order to belittle Eisenhower and build myself up. Some of them even suggested that he had done it purposely in . Some of the comments were made in an attempt to build himself up, he said .
 This was my first, but by no means my last, run-in with this small but determined group. This was not my first time, but I'm not sure it's not my last time .
 "He took his defeat with good grace, and reassured me that he would work for Eisenhower," he said . He took his victory in Eisenhower's election 'with good grace'
 My major job in the campaign, as I saw it, was to help heal the breach which had developed during the pre-convention period between the Taft and Eisenhower supporters .
 Taft was a team player and he went all out in his support of the ticket . Taft is a proud member of the Republican Party. Taft will be a national hero for the Democrats .
 Taft's partisans were bitter over their defeat and seemed likely to sit out the campaign . Many of Taft’s supporters were bitter about their defeat . Taft was defeated in the 1912 election .
 Most of the resentment was not aimed at Eisenhower personally, but at the men around him . The Eastern liberal faction that had managed his nomination was symbolized by Cabot Lodge, Sherman Adams, and Tom Dewey .
 "They appreciated the fact that I had not been involved in any of the pre-convention attacks on Taft," he says . "They all knew that I . had been for Eisenhower, but they appreciated me not being involved in the attacks," he adds .
 The Taft people tended to be organization minded, and they considered me to be a good organization man . I had spoken for party fund-raising and other affairs all over the country, and thus was known personally to many of them .
 They knew that I would hit hard against communism and corruption, and they believed that it was essential to develop those issues if we were to pull in the candidates for the House and Senate who would assure us majorities in Congress . They believed that developing those issues would be essential to pulling in the
 The Ohio State Republican Convention was held three weeks after the national convention . That's why I was asked to keynote the Ohio State GOP Convention held in Columbus . The national convention was held in New Hampshire last month .
 President Obama made a speech on Republican Day at the Illinois State Fair . Two weeks later he made a similar speech at Republican Day in Illinois .
 Illinois was a Taft state, and it was felt that through my speech I could stimulate the interest of the organization people on behalf of the ticket . Illinois was the Taft State, and I was a member of the Republican Party .
 Eisenhower went to Denver for a vacation, and I returned to Washington in a kind of daze, he says . Eisenhower went on a vacation in Denver, but returned to D.C. in a daze .
 One of the many thousands of letters that poured in to my office was a handwritten one from a 1947 House classmate . The letters included a handwritten letter from a classmate from 1947 House classmates .
 I was always convinced that you would move ahead to the top, but I never thought it would come this quickly . "I never thought I would be able to move ahead of the top," he says of his career .
 You were an ideal selection and will bring to the ticket a great deal of strength. You were the ideal selection . You were also an ideal candidate to be selected for the team .
 Jack Kennedy Campaigns in those days still used whistle-stop trains, and that's how we began ours . Cordially, Jack Kennedy . Campaigns . still used whistles stop trains, that is how we started ours .
 Eisenhower's train, the Look Ahead, Neighbor Special, set out first for a tour of the Midwest . Eisenhower's Look Ahead train set out on a first leg of a trip to the nation .
 Nixon Special left on September 17 from Pomona, California, where he had kicked off his campaigns for the House and Senate . His own more prosaically named Nixon Special arrived in California .
 Nearly all the Nixons and Milhouses were on hand that night at the station that night . Nearly all of the family members were there .
 The laughter and applause which broke loose after his uncharacteristic slip of the tongue drowned out his embarrassed correction .
 Eisenhower would change all that, I said, and I promised to bring the message of Eisenhower's crusade to every corner of the country during the next two months . Eisenhower's " crusade" will change the world, he said .
 A few days before the Pomona kickoff, I had appeared in Washington on Meet the Press . The president has been criticized for his handling of the budget crisis .
 There is a rumor to the effect that you have a . supplementary salary of $20,000 a year, contributed by a hundred California businessmen . There is also a rumor that you . have a supplementary salary .
 I told Edson that immediately after my election to the Senate I had met with several of my California supporters to discuss the best ways of being an effective senator . Edson says he met with some of his California supporters before his election . He says he has met with Edson to discuss
 The biggest problem was the great distance between Washington and California . The state of Washington state is the nation's largest state of origin .
 Everyone agreed that to be effective I should spend as much time as possible traveling around the state, making speeches and keeping in touch with the people in person and through the mail . "To be effective, I should travel around state and keep in touch," she says .
 The statutory allowance provided for only one round trip between California and Washington per session . But since personal or strictly political material could not be sent free under the Senate frank, I would also have to pay for printing and postage of political mailings from my own funds .
 This could be expensive: sending a Christmas card to each of the 20,000 people who had done volunteer work or made a contribution to my Senate campaign . This could cost me over $2,000 a year just to send a Christmas message .
 Murray Chotiner suggested that we think in terms of running a “permanent campaign” all through my six-year term . Dana Smith, an attorney from Pasadena who had been finance chairman of my Senate campaign, suggested we do some public fund-raising .
 He said if we limited contributions to a relatively small amount and then had everything handled through a trustee, there could be no question about people trying to buy influence or about my gaining any personal profit, he said .
 In late 1950 Smith sent a letter to a few hundred campaign contributors outlining the purposes of this new fund . Smith wrote that the fund would be used to raise funds for his election campaign .
 Smith sent out a second open letter to several thousand people on our campaign mailing lists . Several weeks later Smith sent a second and more widely distributed mailing . Smith's open letter was sent to several thousands of people on his campaign mailing list .
 Throughout the two years of its existence, all transactions were handled by Smith and paid by check .
 All expenditures are for mailing, travel, and other political activities . All expenditures were for mailing and travel .
 I told Edson to call Smith for any information he needed for his story . I also gave him Smith’s phone number in Pasadena, California . Edson: Edson should call Smith if he needs information he needs .
 The same day, three other reporters also asked Smith about it, and he explained it to them . Smith: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to do it. It's a good thing that I'm doing it," Smith said .
 Secret Rich Men’s Trust Fund Keeps Nixon in Style Far Beyond His Salary . Nixon's trust fund keeps him in style far beyond his salary .
 The story, written by Katcher, did not support the sensationalism of these headlines .
 In fact, the Post’s play of the story was so excessive that many editors dismissed it as a partisan ploy or relegated accounts of it to an inside page .
 The Post's extreme liberal-left politics and Katcher’s Hollywood gossip background lent weight to this interpretation . Katcher is a former Washington Post editor .
 Newsweek editors decided that the story was a political stunt and that it would either be ignored or would backfire . The editors of Newsweek decided to ignore or backfire the story .
 Peter Edson's long and objective story on the fund appeared in many papers on the same day as Katcher’s ‘exclusive’ But its sober recounting of the facts sounded pale alongside the Post's bombastic fantasy, he says .
 The Democrats, whose presidential nominee was Governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, tried to keep the Post’s version of the fund story going .
 Democratic National Chairman, Stephen Mitchell, demanded that he be thrown off the ticket or that we at least keep quiet about public morals . They succeeded in making it a national issue, he says, when they succeeded .
 Other Democrats quickly chimed in that the whole Eisenhower crusade had been exposed as a phony . Other Democrats chimed out that the entire Eisenhower crusade was exposed as phony .
 Eisenhower's staff kept the story from him until early Friday morning so that he could devote his full attention to a major speech outlining his farm policy at Omaha on Thursday night .
 I have long admired and applauded Senator Nixon’s American faith and determination to drive communist sympathizers from offices of public trust . I have also applauded his efforts to drive Communist sympathizers out of office trust .
 There has recently been leveled against him a charge of unethical practices . There has also been a charge against him for unethical practices.
 "I am confident that he will place all the facts before the American people fairly and squarely," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he's confident he will be able to make the case for the president .
 I intend to talk with him at the earliest possible time we can reach each other by telephone . I want to talk to him by telephone, he says . He says he wants to talk about his experiences in the U.S.
 Nixon Special moved up through the central California valley toward Oregon . Meanwhile, the Nixon Special is moving up through central California .
 Large crowds continued to turn out as hecklers transformed speeches into sparring matches . Large crowds turned out for the second time in a row .
 We delayed our departure from Chico, northern California, to make telephone contact with the Eisenhower train in Nebraska . The Eisenhower train was sent to Nebraska to meet up with Eisenhower .
 Senator Fred Seaton, who was acting as liaison between the Eisenhower and Nixon campaign trains, told me that he had a message that Eisenhower had penciled out that morning, recommending that I publish all documentary evidence I had to back up my position . Senator Seaton told me .
 He added that the general said he was ready to consult with me as soon as physically possible, explaining that our train schedules had apparently prevented a telephone conversation .
 By the beginning of the weekend, the whole nation was saturated with stories and rumors about the Nixon fund . Nixon's future is uncertain, and speculation about his future is rampant .
 I said I would not comment without having read the editorials and went back to my private car . "I said I wouldn't comment," he said. "I went back and went to his private car. He said he was not commenting."
 I asked to see Murray Chotiner and Bill Rogers, who told me it was true. I asked for the truth, and they said it,’s true.
 Staff had decided not to ruin my sleep by telling me. Since there was nothing that we could do about it, we had decided to keep quiet . Since there were no legal reasons for the staff to tell me.
 For the first time I was struck by the enormity of the impending crisis, I was in the midst of it, writes Simon Tisdall . He says he was struck with the 'enormous' magnitude of the crisis .
 "So far I had viewed it as a typical partisan attempt by the Democrats to derail my whistle-stopping attacks on the corruption issue," he said . "I'm not going to give up on the issue. So far, I'm not giving up on it," he added .
 I had felt secure that I was on firm ground on the merits of the case and that I would therefore have nothing to worry about in the long run . I felt secure in the case, I felt that I had done well enough to win the case . I had been confident in the
 "The demand for my resignation by the Washington Post was neither a surprise nor a particular concern," he says . The demand for his resignation was not a surprise, he says, but it's not a concern . The Washington Post has demanded his resignation .
 It was considered to be the most influential Republican paper in the East, if not in the country .
 Hiss case was the subject of a Pulitzer Prize-winning book . Hiss was a longtime friend of the publisher and editor of the Washington Tribes . He says he knew that the publishers and editor were close to Eisenhower .
 "If the Herald Tribune was calling for my resignation from the ticket, the fat was in the fire," he says . "I'm not going to resign. I'm not sure what I'm doing," he adds .
 He was assuming, as was I, that the Herald Tribune would not have published such an editorial unless people high in the Eisenhower campaign had indicated it reflected their point of view .
 Eisenhower's aide: "It was essential that I get some firsthand information about where the people around Eisenhower—and, of course, Eisenhower himself—stood"
 "We agreed that first thing of the morning, Rogers would call Dewey, and Chotiner would call Fred Seaton," says Rogers . Seaton: "First thing is the morning" Seaton was the first person to call Rogers . Rogers: "We're going to be
 When I returned to our compartment, Pat woke up and I told her what had happened . When I went back, Pat was still asleep . When she woke up, Pat said, 'I told her I was going to kill her'
 She said if Eisenhower forced me off the ticket he would lose the election . With a typically incisive analysis, she said flatly that she would be forced to leave the ticket .
 She also argued strongly that unless I fought for my honor in the face of such an attack, I would mar not only my life but the lives of my family and particularly the girls .
 The Herald Tribune editorial appeared on Saturday morning and had a predictable effect . It was predictable: The editorial had the predictable effect.
 The only possible criticism would arise if donors asked for or received legislative or other favors .
 Dick Nixon's expense payments in the case of Dick Nixon were expense payments . I know that no such motives inspired the expense payments for Dick Nixon . Dick Nixon paid for his expenses in the 1970s .
 Karl Mundt branded the Post story a “left-wing smear” and a ‘filthy” maneuver by a patently pro-Stevenson paper . Karl Munds had branded the story a "left-left smear" and a "filthy" maneuver by
 Senator George Aiken of Vermont and former President Herbert Hoover of Herbert Hoover also came to his defense . Senator Aiken was also on the defense .
 They threw pennies into our car, and Pat pushed and jostled as she walked alongside me . Pat was pushed and pushed by the children as they walked alongside her . The children were pushing and pushing their parents into their car .
 Sherman Adams, Eisenhower's campaign manager, had called me on an urgent matter . Sherman Adams' campaign manager called me to discuss a matter with me .
 I told Chotiner to pass along the message that I would not talk with anyone except Eisenhower himself . Eisenhower himself. "I'm not going to talk to anyone except myself," he said .
 Jim Bassett, my press secretary, informed me that there had been an unofficial reaction from Eisenhower . "There had been no official reaction," he said .
 Eisenhower told reporters in an informal poll 40 to 2 in favor of dropping him from the ticket . Eisenhower had been traveling with Eisenhower when the poll was conducted .
 Word of this inevitably leaked out, and the colorful phrase captured the public’s imagination . The colorful phrase captures the public's imagination .
 My mother was in Washington taking care of the girls when the crisis broke . She was in the U.S. when the news broke .
 On Saturday night, after reading the papers and listening to the radio news, she wrote out two telegrams . She wrote them out after reading out the papers .
 "I was deeply touched by this message, but it also reminded me of all the people who were watching me and depending on me," she said . "I'm deeply touched," she added .
 The tension had become so great that I could almost feel it in the air . The tension was so high that the tension was almost palpable that it was palpable .
 The night before, Chotiner had suggested that since the Republican National Committee had allotted television time to the vice presidential candidate, I should ask for part of it to deliver a defense of the fund . The next night, he said, the GOP National Committee was allotted time to talk to
 "I spent the afternoon talking with my staff about the different possibilities for a television program," says President Obama . "We're looking at the possibilities of a TV program," he says .
 Dewey was still one of my supporters, however, and he said that Eisenhower himself had not yet made a decision . Dewey said Eisenhower was not yet ready to make a decision on whether to withdraw .
 At the conclusion of the show, ask people to wire their verdict in to you . At the end of the program, ask for people to submit their verdict .
 You will probably get over a million replies, and that will give you three or four days to think it over . It will probably give you a lot of time to think about what you want to do .
 At the end of that time, if it is 60 percent for you and 40 percent against you, say you are getting out as that is not enough of a majority . If that is the case, you should get out of the political system .
 If you stay on, it isn’t blamed on Ike, and if you get off, it’s not blamed on it . If you get on the phone, it won't be blamed for Ike. If you leave, it will be blamed .
 "I told him that was exactly what we had been discussing when he called. I told him exactly what I was discussing," he said . "I'm not surprised," he replied .
 He urged me to start making plans right away, since the situation was too tense to wait much longer for a favorable resolution . The situation is too tense, he said, to wait for a good outcome .
 I took his telephone call without asking the others in the room to leave. I didn't ask the others to leave the room, he said . I took the phone call without the others being asked to leave, he added .
 "They were all so intimately involved that I felt they had a right to be present at what might be the end of my vice presidential candidacy," she says .
 Eisenhower tried to buck me up, but he was deeply troubled, says Eisenhower . Eisenhower's voice was "troubled" by Eisenhower's words, he says . Eisenhower: "I could tell from his voice that although he was ... troubled"
 He said that it was very difficult for him to decide what was the best thing to do . He said it was difficult to decide whether to take his life .
 "If the impression got around that you got off the ticket because I forced you off, it is going to be very bad. After all, you’ve got a big following in this country," he said . "After all, it's very bad for you to get off
 He paused as if waiting for me to fill the gap, but I let the line hang silent . "I let the phone hang silent. I let it hang silent."
 After a moment he said that he had just been out to dinner with some of his friends . He said he had been out for dinner with friends .
 "I should have an opportunity to tell my side of the story to the country. None of them knew what to do, but all of them agreed," she says .
 "I told him that if he thought my staying on the ticket would be harmful, I would get off it and take the heat," she said . She said she told him she would get on it and 'take the heat' for him .
 There comes a time to stop dawdling, says David Cameron . But he also told him that there was a time for him to decide, he says .
 The language I used startled the men in the room with me, and I can only assume it had a similar effect on Eisenhower, who was certainly not used to being talked to in that manner . The language was a shock to Eisenhower, but it was not his first language .
 Eisenhower would not have objected if I had told him that I was going to submit a resignation to him, he said . He could then choose to accept or not as the circumstances indicated, he added .
 "As I had told him, I was perfectly willing to do this, but the decision must be his," she said . "I'm perfectly willing, but I don't want him to know if he wants to go," she added .
 "I felt that his indecision or his unwillingness to come out and ask for it relieved me of any obligation in that regard," she said . "He didn't come out with it, I felt that he should have asked for it"
 It is one thing to offer to sign your own death warrant; it is another to be expected to draw it up yourself . It's one thing you can do is sign your death warrant .
 I told Pat about Eisenhower's call and asked her what she thought I should do, she said . I told her what I thought was the best thing I could do, and she agreed .
 The stress was so great that she had developed a painfully stiff neck and had to stay in bed . The stress had been so bad that she developed a painful stiff neck .
 "She was constantly on the phone to my mother in Washington to make sure that things there were all right. She was worried about how the girls would be affected by it, and she was constantly talking to her mother .
 The Republican National Committee and the Senatorial and Congressional Campaign Committees agreed to put up $75,000 to buy a half hour of television time for me on Tuesday night, September 23 .
 On the plane, I took some postcards from the pocket of the seat in front of me and began to put down some thoughts about what I might say . I began to think of what I would say to the world .
 I remembered the Truman scandal concerning a $9,000 mink coat given to a White House secretary . "I made a note that Pat had no mink—just a cloth coat," she said .
 DNC Chairman Mitchell’s snide comment that people who cannot afford to hold an office should not run for it . I made a note to check out a quote from Lincoln to the effect that God must have loved the common people .
 I knew it would infuriate my critics if I could turn this particular table on them. I also thought about FDR's success in his speech during the 1944 campaign, when he had ridiculed his critics by saying they were even attacking his little dog Fala .
 During the flight Chotiner stopped by my seat for a brief chat and repeated something he had first observed three days earlier . During the chat he stopped by his seat and repeated what he'd first observed .
 He had shrewdly noted that all the Democrats except Stevenson were attacking me . Stevenson had shrewedly noted all of the Democrats were attacking him, he said .
 Stevenson refused to meet with reporters . His spokesman declined to elaborate . Stevenson's spokesman has declined to say more .
 Stevenson’s statement did not address the subject of yet another revelation that day . Stevenson: “I’m not going to be surprised. I’ll be surprised to find out what happened to me.”
 A former Illinois state purchasing agent revealed that he had made up a monthly list of business corporations and state suppliers who were solicited for expenses he felt could not be charged to the taxpayers . Stevenson felt the expenses were not allowed to be charged .
 Two men who had engaged in this solicitation admitted their roles while denying any impropriety . Two men were involved in the solicitation .
 Frustrated reporters signed a petition asking him for a news conference, but he said he doubted that it would be possible to hold one . He said he doubts that he would be able to hold a press conference .
 Stevenson finally released some information about his fund . $18,744.96 had been turned over to him from his 1948 campaign . Stevenson was elected to office in 1964 .
 $21,644.96 in contributions from Chicago businessmen . To this amount was added $2,900 in contributions to Chicago businessmen, for a total of $21.63 .
 Adlai Stevenson of Illinois never learned the real extent or disposition of these funds . It was only revealed twenty-four years later, by Stevenson’s official biographer, John Bart-low Martin, that Stevenson's disclosure had been less than candid .
 Additional sums totaling almost $65,000 had been added to this fund in 1950, 1951, and 1952, bringing it to a total of $84,026.56.56 .
 Stevenson wrote a personal check for more than $10,500 as reimbursement to the committee . On September 26, 1952, long after the committee had been disbanded, he wrote a check for the money . Stevenson wrote the check four days after the existence of the fund had been revealed .
 The final audit of this fund showed that $13,429.37 was expended for some rather broadly defined political purposes, including annual Christmas parties, gifts to newsmen, and an orchestra to play at a dance .
 Stevenson used this political fund to make a small contribution to the Lake County Tuberculosis Association . He then claimed the contribution as a personal deduction on his income tax returns . In one instance he used the fund to donate to a local charity .
 His refusals to talk to reporters received only a mild reproach, and the obvious impropriety involved was all but ignored editorially .
 For me, one of the most depressing and infuriating aspects of the entire fund controversy was to see the blatant double standard that most of the press applied to reporting the Nixon fund and the Stevenson fund . The Nixon fund, Stevenson fund and Nixon fund were the subject of controversy .
 I had to concentrate all my efforts on trying to prepare my speech and master its delivery in the twenty-four hours before the broadcast . But that would not become fully apparent until later, he said . He said: "I had to try and master my speech"
 Paul Hoffman, chairman of Citizens for Eisenhower, commissioned Price Waterhouse to make a complete audit of the fund . He retained the distinguished Los Angeles law firm of Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher to prepare an opinion on its legality .
 I planned to present the summaries of these reports as part of my speech, I said . I also planned to give a summary of each of the reports .
 "Because the charges against me had become so bitter and so excessive, however, I knew that something more would be needed," she says .
 "I was proud of the way Pat and I had worked hard to earn what little we had," says Bob Greene . "Pat and Pat worked hard," says Greene .
 "I had been especially careful in my financial dealings. Knowing how closely the left and its sympathizers in the press would scrutinize everything about me after the Hiss case," she says . "I was especially careful"
 Up to that time, I doubt that any candidate had ever detailed his personal finances so thoroughly during an election campaign . I doubt any candidate has ever detailed personal finances .
 Despite the repugnance I felt for such an invasion of our family’s privacy, I could not help thinking about the dramatic impact such an unprecedented financial disclosure would have .
 "Now that I knew what I wanted to do with the speech, the writing became much easier," she says . "Now I know what I want to do, I'm going to write a speech," she writes .
 "I worked all through the afternoon and evening in a suite in the Ambassador Hotel, scarcely bothering to touch the hamburgers that were ordered from room service," he says .
 By noon the next day the report from Gibson, Dunn, and Crutcher had arrived, confirming that there was nothing illegal about the fund . The next day, the report confirmed that the fund was not illegal .
 "Without it, the impact of whatever I said would be considerably lessened," he says . "The impact of what I say would be significantly lessened"
 It was essential that the crucial question of whether I had personally profited from the fund be independently and authoritatively answered . The fund was set up in the 1980s and 1990s to raise money for a fund to raise funds for charity .
 I was touched and heartened when I read many of the telegrams that poured into the hotel on the afternoon before the speech, I said . Although I did not see any of the hundreds of telegraments that poured in the hotel that day, many of them later that
 "Fight it to the finish just as you did the smears by the Communists when you were proving charges against Alger Hiss," says Julian Zelizer . "You're going to do the same thing you did with the Communists," he says .
 I will personally welcome you in Grand Rapids or any other part of Michigan. I'm looking forward to a visit to Grand Rapids, Michigan . I'm not afraid to visit Grand Rapids .
 Be proud to be attacked for the attackers are the enemies of all of us . Be proud of being attacked for being proud of all the attackers .
 This was the codename Tom Dewey had told us he would use for very sensitive calls . This was a codename he had told Dewey he would only use for sensitive calls. This was an example of a very sensitive call from the White House .
 Dewey hedged, saying he did not want to give the impression that he had spoken directly to Eisenhower or that the decision had been approved by Eisenhower himself . Dewey said he didn't want to say that he spoke directly to the president .
 Dewey felt the close relationship between Eisenhower and those with whom Dewey had spoken would not have asked him to call him unless what he was suggesting represented Eisenhower’s view as well . But in view of the close . relationship, Dewey said, he felt that they would not
 Dewey said that he thought I should go ahead with my explanation of the fund as he had originally suggested . Dewey: "I'm going to explain my explanation to the public"
 At the end, however, I should say that although I felt that I had done no wrong, I did not want my presence on the ticket to be in any way a liability to Eisenhower .
 I should submit my resignation to Eisenhower and insist that he accept it. Therefore, I should resign from his post . I would submit it to Eisenhower, and insist he accept .
 Silence was the only possible response to this mind-boggling suggestion . "Silence" was the most common response to the suggestion .
 Dewey’s suggestion: “When I told Chotiner and Rogers about Dewey's suggestion, they were dumbfounded. When I told them, they’d be dumbfounded,” he said .
 Everyone came out into the corridor in a show of support, but not a word was spoken . Not a word of support was spoken at the end of the speech .
 The figures from Price Waterhouse had arrived at the last minute, but I was worried about being able to memorize them and get them straight . The figures had arrived last minute and I had been worried about memorizing them and getting them right .
 One slip, or one mistake, and the credibility of the whole speech would be undermined . One slip would be 'irresponsible' for the president's credibility .
 I had ordered that no one was to be there during the speech except for the director and technical crew . The speech was made by the director, technical crew and the director of the speech .
 "We arranged for the reporters to watch on a monitor in a separate room," says CNN.com.com .
 It was a flimsy-looking, nondescript room with only a desk, a chair, and a bookcase set into the wall . The room was set up by a desk and a chair .
 I asked him to remove a small vase of flowers because I thought it looked out of place . He removed it because he thought it was too small to fit in the room .
 After a brief lighting and sound check we were ushered into a small room at the far side of the stage . We were then taken to the stage to watch the show .
 Ted was back, saying that there were only three minutes before we went on the air . "Ted" was back and said that he was ready to go on air .
 "As I continued to talk I began to feel that surge of confidence that comes when a good speech has been well prepared," says the author of the book .
 "I began to feel instinctively the rhythm of its words and the logic of its organization," she says of the book . "It was the first time I'd read a book that I had read," she adds .
 "I felt warmed by the bright lights, and I opened up and spoke freely and emotionally," she said . She said she felt warm by the lights and opened up to the bright light .
 I talked as if only Pat were in the room and no one else were listening to me, I said . I talked like only Pat would listen to me if I was talking to Pat . Pat was the only person in Pat's life to talk to him, he said .
 "I began by giving the facts about the fund and describing my personal finances," he said . "I'm not a politician, I'm a businessman," he added .
 The third section praised Eisenhower, and the fourth requested that his audience send letters and wires to the Republican National Committee in Washington to indicate whether they thought I should remain on or step down from the ticket . The third part of the column suggested that he step down or remain on .
 Ted Rogers came out of the director’s booth and crouch down beside the camera in front of me . "I saw Ted Rogers come out of [the director's booth] and crouched down next to the camera," he says .
 "He held up the fingers of both hands and I knew that this was the signal that I had ten minutes left. He held up his fingers, both hands, to signal that he had 10 minutes left"
 "I saw him when he held up one hand for five minutes, then three fingers," he said . "I'm not going to be surprised when I saw him," he added .
 I was still talking when time ran out, standing in front of the desk with arms stretched out toward the camera . "I'm still talking," he says, "when time runs out of talking"
 "I saw Ted Rogers stand up, and I realized that I had gone overtime," she says . "I realized that Ted Rogers stood up, realizing that I'd gone overtime" she says. "I'm not going to be able to see Ted Rogers."
 I hadn't even given people the address of the Republican National Committee so that they would know where to send their telegrams . I hadn’t even given . people the . address .
 "I took a few steps forward and my shoulder grazed the side of the camera. I took a couple of steps forward but my shoulder hit the camera," he said .
 I could hear Ted Rogers saying that they had waited until what sounded like the end of a sentence and faded the picture although I was still talking . Ted Rogers said that they waited until . what sounded . like the . end of the sentence .
 Pat, Murray Chotiner, Pat Hillings, and Bill Rogers were standing in front of me . Then Pat was standing in the middle of the crowd . Bill Rogers: "Then Pat was in the midst of the chaos"
 "I could only say, “Im sorry I had to rush at the last; I didn’t give the National Committee address. Pat embraced me, and I could only tell him, "Im sorry"
 Everyone insisted that it had been a tremendous success, and I tried to smile and thank them for their support . But I felt drained and depressed. I tried smiling and thanking them for the support; but I felt depressed .
 Despite the problem with the ending, the speech had in fact been a great success . By the time we got back to the hotel and began to read some of the messages that were pouring in, I realized that .
 'Apparently my emotional nerve endings had been rubbed so raw by the events of the previous few days that I was able to convey the intensity of my feelings to the audience,' she said .
 He watched his speech on a television set in the manager’s office above the hall where he was to speak . Along with Mamie and about thirty friends and staff members, he watched my speech on the set .
 I was told there was a brief silence in the small room in Cleveland when the television program was over . The Cleveland Cavaliers won't be able to watch the show again until the end of it .
 Eisenhower said that one speech was not enough to settle all the important questions that had been raised and that he would meet with me before reaching his final decision . Eisenhower said he would not declare the case closed and affirming my place on the ticket . But he said instead of declaring the case
 He told the crowd that he was sending me a telegram asking me to fly to see him the next day in Wheeling, West Virginia, where he would be campaigning . He said he was flying to West Virginia to campaign .
 All I heard that night was a wire service bulletin quoting Eisenhower as saying that one speech wasn’t enough . Eisenhower said one speech was enough .
 I had done everything I could, and if that was not enough I would resign from the ticket. I would do the only thing left and resign, he said . I had tried to do the best possible possible, he added .
 I said that we would fly to my next scheduled campaign stop in Missoula, Montana, and wait there for Eisenhower to announce my resignation . Eisenhower said that he would accept and announce his resignation . I said we would then fly to the next scheduled stop in Montana, Montana .
 "I called Rose Mary Woods into my room, dictated the resignation, and told her to send it immediately," she said . The resignation was dictated by Woods, and she sent it immediately .
 She typed it up, but instead of sending it she took it to Murray Chotiner, who read it and ripped it up . She typed up, then sent it to him, but he read it, and it was ripped up .
 He said, “I don’t blame him for being mad, and it would serve them right if he resigned now and Ike lost the election," Rose said .
 He was enthusiastic in his praise for my speech, but when I filled him in on everything he had happened, his voice darkened and he spoke in flat, measured words .
 The broadcast decided that, and Eisenhower knows it as well as anyone else . Eisenhower knows that, as does anyone else, as well .
 He is the immensely popular candidate who is going to win this election, says CNN.com's John Daley . Daley says he is "immensely popular candidate" who is likely to win .
 In the aftermath of a tremendously emotional event, I had failed to consider Eisenhower’s point of view . In the end of this article, I wrote that I had never considered Eisenhower's view of the war .
 Eisenhower stood back and saw what happened before he committed himself to politics . Eisenhower should have realized that it was perfectly logical for Eisenhower as a newcomer to politics to stand back .
 "I changed my mind and asked the staff to make arrangements for us to fly directly from Missoula to Wheeling," she says . "We're going to Wheelings. I changed our mind," she writes .
 "We had landed at Wheeling, and I was just helping Pat on with her coat, when Chotiner rushed up to us," he says . "I was helping Pat get on my coat, and she was helping her coat," he adds .
 It was one of the few times I ever heard awe in Murray Chotiner’s voice, he said . "It was awe in awe," he said. "It's a miracle"
 No sooner were the words out than Eisenhower strode down the aisle behind him, hand outstretched, flashing his famous smile . Eisenhower's famous smile flashed as he walked down aisle .
 It was a cold night, with a heavy, dank smog covering Wheeling as we drove to the stadium for a rally . It was the first time the team had been to Wheeling, West Virginia .
 Eisenhower never made any reference to the harrowing crisis we both had just been through . During the entire ride, Eisenhower made no reference to his ordeal .
 He blithely talked about the merits of whistle-stopping and rallies, as if nothing unusual had happened . As I got to know him better, I discovered that this was characteristic, but I still recall the surreal quality of that twenty-minute drive .
 When we got to the stadium the roof of our convertible was put down and we sat together in the back . We waved to the cheering crowds as the car drove around the track .
 He described me as “a man of courage and honor” who had been “subjected to a very unfair and vicious attack,” and said that before I came to the podium he wanted to read to the audience two telegrams he had received . He described
 "All the pent-up emotion of the whole week burst out and tears filled my eyes. All the pent up emotion burst out," she said . "It's been a week of emotional ups and downs"
 Eisenhower invited Pat and me to see his private car on his campaign train . Afterward, Eisenhower invited us to see him on the campaign car .
 He wanted to talk to me alone because he had heard rumors of several other scandals involving my personal finances . It turned out that he wanted a chance to talk with me alone . He said he wanted to know if he had any more scandals involving his finances .
 It will take them a little time to regroup, but when they start fighting back, they will be desperate, and they will throw everything at us, including the kitchen sink . It will be difficult for them to fight back, but they are desperate, says the manager .
 What we must avoid at all costs is to allow any of their attacks to get off the ground . What we need to avoid is that any of these attacks get off-ground .
 As a popular hero, Eisenhower was treated extremely well by the press . Eisenhower had been treated extremely poorly by the media .
 'I do not think he completely grasped what I was saying that night until he reached the White House and began to be treated as a politician. I think he did not fully grasp what I said that night . He did not understand what he was saying when he reached White House .
 In the car on the way to our hotel, Pat took my hand and held it without saying a word . Pat took his hand and said goodbye to me without saying anything .
 "I knew how fiercely proud she was that we had come through this painful crisis," she said . "She was fiercely proud of her family," she added . "I was proud of my family's resilience, resilience and strength," she says .
 I knew how much it had hurt her, but also knew how deeply it had wounded her sense of pride and privacy . But I also knew that she had hurt herself, and that she was hurt by the incident .
 I knew that from that time on, although she would do everything she could to help me and help my career, she would hate politics . She would dream of the day when I would leave it behind and we could have a happy and normal life for ourselves and our family . I knew
 I lived several years during that single week, I was deeply dispirited by much of the reaction to the fund . I lived during that week, and was deeply disappointed with the reaction . I live in the UK for several years, and I'm deeply disappointed by the response to the
 I was not surprised that the story was exploited by partisan Democrats, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not surprised" that Democrats exploited it .
 "I was disappointed and hurt that so many Republicans prejudged me without waiting for the facts," he says . "I'm bitterly disillusioned by the performance of the press," he adds .
 I regarded what had been done to me as character assassination, and the experience permanently and powerfully affected my attitude toward the press in particular and the news media in general . I regarded the experience as 'character assassination'
 While the fund was the most egregious press and partisan smear of the campaign, it was by no means the only one one .
 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch ran a front-page story charging that I had accompanied Dana Smith, the fund’s trustee, to a Havana gambling club some six months earlier . Dana Smith is a staunchly pro-Stevenson supporter .
 At the time the story put me in Havana, I was on a vacation thousands of miles away in Hawaii . I was in the U.S. at the time .
 In reaching the sum, they included the allegation that my brother Don owned a “swanky new drive-in restaurant” appraised at $175,000 . In reaching this sum, the allegation was made in part .
 The DNC calculations included a small farm in Pennsylvania and a modest house in Florida that my parents had bought for their retirement . What really infuriated me over this particular series of charges was the inclusion in the DNC calculations of a . small farm .
 "These properties, which were not lavish by any standards, reflected the sum total of an entire life of hard work by my mother and father," she said . Her parents' properties reflected the 'sum total of a life of work by hard work'
 I considered it despicable to attack my parents and suggest that they had unethically acquired expensive real estate. I consider it despicable . My parents were attacked by the media for saying they had acquired expensive property .
 Drew Pearson column was teeming with innuendo and loose facts, which included information from my tax returns . Two days later, Pearson's column appeared, characteristically teeming in a column . Pearson: "Drew Pearson column is characteristically ... teeming" Pearson's tax returns
 Included in his laundry list of charges was one that Pat and Pat falsely sworn to a joint property value of less than $10,000 to qualify for a $50 veterans’ tax exemption .
 Pat Nixon had filed for such an exemption on behalf of her husband, Richard . But they were a couple who coincidentally had the same names as ours . Pat Nixon filed for a similar exemption, but it was not her husband .
 Pearson had not bothered to check with me before printing this lie five days before the election and he did not retract it until three weeks after it . Pearson had been printing the lie before he had to retract it three weeks later . Pearson did not bother to ask me if he had checked with
 "Only after the election did information surface about a criminal scheme designed to malign my character and integrity," he says . "Only only after after I won the election was information surface"
 Someone forged a letter purporting to be from an oil company executive to another suggesting that I had been bought off for more than $52,000 a year to serve the oil industry in Washington . The letter was forged from one oil company exec to another .
 After the election, Drew Pearson continued trying to stir up interest in the story, so I called for a full investigation by the Senate subcommittee on Privileges and Elections .
 The investigation proved conclusively that the letter was a forgery, and referred the matter to the Justice Department . The letter was sent to the White House .
 The fund smear had fallen short, and lies and forgery had also missed the target, says the minister . The fund smear had failed to achieve its target, he said .
 It was not until long afterward that I found out that my proud and combative father had been reduced to bouts of weeping as each new smear surfaced . "It's not long before I learned that my combative dad had to be reduced to bursts of weeping," she says .
 "The taste for politics soured, but my only recourse—and my instinct—was to fight back," she says . "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it," she writes . "It's not about politics, it's about
 Forgetful critics would later remember my counterattacks without recalling the lies and distortions that often bred them, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 It would be many months before I could begin to put the agony of the fund crisis in perspective . The government has been in crisis mode for months, but it is still struggling to cope .
 Eisenhower was impressed by his toughness and by the political acumen he showed . "I think that Eisenhower was ... impressed by my toughness," he said. "He was impressed both by toughness and ... by the ... acumen I showed"
 He appreciated that from the start I had offered to resign if he wanted me to and that I had never consciously done anything to embarrass him, he said . "He appreciated that he appreciated that ... I had always offered to quit if he was willing to," he added .
 In politics, most people are your friends only as long as you can do something for them or something to them . Most people are friends only if you can help them or do something wrong to them, he says . "In politics, you have to be very careful and very careful to
 The openly competitive nature of elections probably makes that fact stand out more starkly starkly . In this respect I don't suppose that politics is much different from other walks of life, but it's not much different .
 'I shall never forget my surprise and disappointment about those who turned against me overnight when it looked as if I would have to leave the ticket. Still, I shall never remember my surprise' 'I will never forget the surprise'
 After the fund crisis, the rest of the 1952 election campaign seemed tame . The fund crisis seemed to be the end of the campaign campaign .
 Voter studies and opinion polls showed that the demand for change and disgust with the corruption in the federal government were still among the most potent issues we had going for us . Voter studies showed that .
 President Truman was extremely unpopular in 1952, as President Johnson was later in the dark days of Vietnam and as I was to become during Watergate . Truman was later unpopular in Vietnam, as was Johnson in Vietnam .
 As with Johnson and me, some of Truman’s unpopularity rubbed off on his party. As with Truman and me. Some of Truman's unpopularities rubbed off with his party .
 Even Adlai Stevenson began putting distance between himself and the Truman administration . Truman administration was the most unpopular administration in history .
 By surviving the fund crisis, I forestalled the Democrats’ attempt to shortcircuit the corruption issue, he forestalled them’s attempt, he says . “I forestalled [Democrats’] attempt, I’m sure they’re trying to
 My prominence after the fund speech revived public interest in the Hiss case . Stevenson had given a deposition used in Hiss’s first perjury trial that vouched for his reputation for veracity, integrity and loyalty .
 Committee hearings proved Hiss lied about his relationship with Chambers . This was after committee hearings had proved that Hiss had lied about Chambers' relationship .
 I also criticized Secretary of State Dean Acheson, whose policies toward international Communism, I said, had lost us China, much of Eastern Europe, and invited the Communists to begin the Korean war . I said that Achesons' policies had lost China and Eastern Europe .
 Acheson was one of his most valued and trusted unofficial advisers during his time as President . He was a trusted adviser to President George W. Bush .
 His clipped moustache, his British tweeds, and his haughty manner made him the perfect foil for my attacks on the snobbish kind of foreign service personality and mentality .
 Acheson was wrong about Asia, but he was right about Europe, where he helped make NATO a strong, durable bastion against Communist aggression . NATO is now a strong bastion of strength against Communism in Europe .
 In most elections, the opposing candidates are not overly fond of each other, but there is usually little or no personal antagonism . In this election, there is not much of an antagonism toward each other .
 I considered him to be far more veneer than substance, and I felt that beneath his glibness and mocking wit he was shallow, flippant, and indecisive . Underneath he was a shallow, glib and flipper, he was indecisive and shallow .
 He reminded me of Oscar Wilde’s definition of a cynic as a man who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing . He said: “I’m a man with a cynical mind, who knows everything and knows nothing .”
 Eisenhower was adamant against receiving Stevenson at the White House or attending NATO summit meetings in Paris . As late as 1957, Dulles brought Stevenson into the State Department in an effort to assure the success of the NATO summit after the shock caused by Sputnik .
 After Eisenhower's stroke the doctors ordered us to steer clear of discussion of Stevenson because it always caused the President’s blood pressure to rise alarmingly . In fact, after Eisenhower’�s stroke, the doctors told us to avoid discussing Stevenson .
 President Truman was one of the main actors in the drama of the 1952 campaign . Truman was not running himself, and although an embarrassed Stevenson tried to keep him in the background, he was a star .
 Harry Truman thrived on the cut and thrust of politics, and it was impossible for Stevenson to keep him out of the campaign . Stevenson was a strong supporter of the president, but he was not a candidate for president .
 Truman attacked Eisenhower with a vengeance in the 1952 campaign . After Truman’s unsuccessful attempt to interest Eisenhower in becoming his Democratic successor in the White House, relations between the two men became strained .
 Truman made typically dramatic—and typically irresponsible—charges about Eisenhower’s expertise and even about his motives . Unlike most of the Democrats, who did not challenge Eisenhower's heroic status, Truman did not .
 Eisenhower was deeply offended by Truman's intimation that he had been politically involved in the Yalta and Potsdam agreements, which had effectively given Eastern Europe to the Communists . Eisenhower was angered by Truman’s intimation .
 The charge was demonstrably untrue, but Eisenhower never got over his anger that Truman would even countenance, much less spread, such a deliberate slander . Eisenhower was angry at Truman for spreading the charge .
 Eisenhower would not have the traditional coffee at the White House with his predecessor before going to the Capitol for his inauguration . As a result of this bitterness, he would not be able to have coffee with the president .
 The two men met under the North Portico and rode together in icy silence . Instead, the two men rode together under a bit of casual conversation .
 The Supreme Court justices first met in 1953 at the funeral of Chief Justice Fred Vinson in 1953 . They did not meet again until 1961, after Eisenhower had left the White House .
 Stevenson's running mate, Senator John Sparkman of Alabama, received far more attention than the usual vice presidential candidate . Stevenson was the subject of the fund episode because of the partisan lead he had avoided .
 Everywhere I went I blasted the Democrats, linking Stevenson with Truman and Acheson . I asked how the same people who had created the mess in Washington could be expected to clean it up .
 In 1954, Truman charged that I had called him a traitor in this speech . In 1954 and in subsequent campaigns, he charged that he had called himself a traitor . The speech was made in 1954 and later aired on television .
 Even when a tape recording was found and an exact transcript of my words was shown him, he refused to accept that what I had said was not as he had apparently remembered it . Even when the transcript was shown, he would not accept what he had said .
 Perhaps I was unconsciously overreacting to the attacks made against me during and after the fund crisis, perhaps I was simply carried away by the partisan role Eisenhower had assigned me . Maybe I was carrying away with the knowledge that someone had to fire up the party faithful and let them know a
 Both Eisenhower and Nixon campaigned right down to the wire, ending with a televised election eve rally at the Boston Garden . Eisenhower—Nixon 47% Nixon 47% Stevenson—Sparkman 40% Undecided 13% .
 The longest day of a politician’s life is Election Day, when millions are deciding his fate and he can do nothing whatever about it . I knew from my experiences in 1946 and 1950 that Election Day was the longest day .
 Bill Rogers says he would like to go for a ride after voting in East Whittier . Rogers: "I voted early in the morning, and I voted early this morning" He says he wants to take a ride to vote .
 We drove down to Laguna Beach, where we parked the car and walked several miles along the shore .
 Some Marines from Camp Pendleton were throwing a football around on the beach . We joined them for an impromptu game of touch football .
 "We got back to the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles around four o’clock and I went straight to my room," he says .
 I told staff that I did not want to hear any results until at least six, because anything before then would just make everyone nervous . I told the staff that . I do not want any results from this week's results to be too fragmentary, and anything before that would make everyone
 At six o’clock sharp there was a knock on my door, and about a dozen people burst into the room all talking at once . At six: “At six o'clock sharp,’s door was opened,” says the author .
 The polls had closed only for an hour in the East, but already it looked like a landslide . The polls were only an hour into the final hour .
 January 20, 1953, was mild and sunny . The day of my first inauguration as Vice President was mild, sunny .
 For swearing-in ceremony my mother brought two Bibles that had been in the Milhous family for several generations . For the swearing in ceremony, her mother brought a Bibles she had brought to the ceremony .
 "That night we had a small family dinner at home before the inaugural balls," says President Obama . "We're going to have a very special dinner," he says .
 My mother gave me a small piece of paper on which she had written a message for me . While the others were all talking about the great events of the day, my mother quietly took me aside to give him a message .
 No one else saw her give it to me, and I did not read it until I was alone later that night . "I didn't know what I was reading until I read it," she says .
 Eisenhower’s election ended . twenty years of Democratic control of the White House . Eisenhower's election ended 20 years of . Democratic . control of White House.
 Winning control of the House and Senate made the victory doubly satisfying . "It's the first time I've been in the U.S. since 1994," says Sen. Mitch McConnell .
 We were fighting an unpopular war in Korea, and Eisenhower had pledged in the election campaign to bring it to an honorable conclusion . Eisenhower had promised to bring the war to an end, but the war was unpopular .
 The U.S.R. was still far behind the United States in nuclear arms, but it was moving dramatically forward . The United States was far behind behind the Soviet Union in the nuclear arms race .
 In Eastern Europe, the Soviet satellite nations formed a monolithic power bloc controlled from Moscow . The Soviet satellite states were controlled by the Soviet Union .
 The rigorously ideological Communist Chinese were in an expansionist phase of their foreign policy . They were still friendly with the Soviets and dependent upon them for economic and technological aid . The Chinese were dependent on the Soviets for economic, technological aid and were in expansionist mode .
 Following World War I, the great free world alliance had been formalized by the establishment of NATO . Europe had been rebuilt with American aid .
 Both Britain and France were weakened by the war and could be weakened further . It would not be long before their ability to help maintain security beyond their borders would be limited .
 The war had marked the beginning of the end —if not the end—of European colonialism . The end of European colonialism was marked by the end of the war, the author says .
 The tide of anticolonialism had not yet swept over Africa when Eisenhower took office . The tide was not yet sweeping over Africa .
 Eight years later, by the time he left, there had been more than twenty new independent countries on that continent . But eight years later there were more than 20 independent countries .
 The creation of the state of Israel in 1948 had planted seeds of hatred that would explode into three full-scale wars . Three wars erupted between Israel and the West in the early 1950s .
 Nearby Iran, with its enormous oil reserves, was under the control of a left-leaning government that most observers feared would inevitably fall under Soviet domination . Iran was in the grip of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 Latin America appeared secure on the surface, yet long years of dictatorships had laid the foundation for instability and revolution . Latin America had been at the center of a period of stability and revolution, says President Obama .
 Eisenhower’s first task was to clean up the “mess in Washington” by restoring confidence in the honesty of those serving in government . Eisenhower: At home, he had to fulfill his pledge to restore confidence in those who served in Washington .
 No less important was the job of rooting out security risks in the government, he says . Those who by reasons of disloyalty or poor judgment might subvert the policies of the U.S.
 The new President was also confronted with a massive problem in trying to develop an economic policy that would bring prosperity without war . President Obama was confronted with the problem in dealing with the issue .
 He had to mediate the classic debate between those who urged him to cut spending and taxes and those who demanded that more money be spent for housing, health, education, and welfare .
 Eisenhower was to find all these foreign and domestic issues less perplexing than his new duties as head of a divided political party . Eisenhower found it easier to deal with than dealing with a divided Republican Party .
 He recognized that he had the almost superhuman job of getting Republicans to think positively after having been the opposition for twenty years . He said he had a 'superhuman job' getting Republicans thinking positively after being the opposition .
 Eisenhower's popularity was based on his personal popularity rather than his party's strength . In addition, while he had Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, those majorities were thin .
 He recognized that it was his responsibility to broaden the base of the party so that it would be as strong as its leader, but he never felt at ease with most of the things he had to do .
 He suggested that Pat come with me, and he urged that we visit as many countries as we possibly could, as well as other countries, as possible .
 Eisenhower knew Europe and its leaders better than almost any other non-European in the world . From his wartime experiences, he knew Europe better than anyone else .
 He did not know Asia or the Middle East well, but he did know Asia and the region well . He was never one to overestimate his experience or knowledge, he said .
 He also felt that Truman had seriously neglected both these important areas, and he tried to remedy this neglect during his own administration .
 In the early 1950s most of the nations on our trip still knew very little about America or Americans . America and Americans were still unknown to many of the world's nations .
 None of these nations had ever received an official visit from a President or Vice President . None of the countries had ever had a visit by a President and Vice President.
 Their impressions of us were largely formed through bits and pieces of rumors, news, and contacts with individual Americans, and from exported Hollywood films about Chicago gangsters and cowboys and Indians . They were formed by bits and bits of rumors and news .
 It would also provide an opportunity for me to explain U.S. policies in countries that had adopted a policy of neutrality . It would be a chance to explain America's policies to countries that were neutral .
 It would give me a firsthand look at the rapidly developing situation in Indochina . It would be a first time in the country's history, he says .
 It would give an opportunity to assess Asian attitudes toward the emerging colossus of Communist China . And it would give me a chance to assess Asia's attitudes toward China .
 On October 5 Pat and I said goodbye to Tricia and Julie and boarded an Air Force four-engine Constellation at National Airport . Tricia, Julie and Tricia were the last ones to leave the Air Force .
 It was a painful farewell, especially for Pat, who had never been away from the girls for more than two weeks . Now we would be away from them for two months, he says .
 "Our official party consisted of a chief of staff, Phil Watts; my administrative assistant, Chris Herter, Jr., my secretary, Rose Woods; a Navy doctor; and a military aide to handle protocol matters . Our official party was Phil Watts, his staff, his secretary Rose Woods
 In comparison with what is provided for official trips today, this would be considered a pitifully small staff . But they more than made up in dedication what they lacked in numbers, says the BBC .
 There was relatively little press interest in the trip, and only one reporter from each of the three wire services came with us .
 "I wanted strictly social events to be kept to a minimum. We had sent wires ahead to all our embassies indicating that I wanted strictly . social events kept a minimum," he said .
 I let it be known that I was bringing only one dinner jacket and would not be packing a white tie or striped pants . I also said I was not bringing a dinner jacket or a tie tie .
 Since we would not have more than four formal dinners in any one country, Pat took four formal gowns so she could wear a different one on each occasion .
 President Obama asked the State Department to arrange his schedule so he could meet as many different kinds of people as possible . He also asked for a schedule to include students, laborers, businessmen, intellectuals and politicians .
 I was told that this would be very unusual, very unorthodox, and very undiplomatic . I was also told that it would be 'very unusual' and 'undecapable' for the UK .
 I replied that unless these meetings were arranged for me I would have to arrange them on my own . I replied: "I would have had to arrange for me to have these meetings arranged for you"
 There was the same kind of resistance when Pat requested her own itinerary when she asked for her own travel plans .
 Wives of visiting officials from Washington customarily spent most of their days shopping or socializing . Wives typically spend most of the days shopping and socializing with officials .
 Pat wanted to play an active part in the trip, visiting schools, hospitals, orphanages, clinics, museums, and marketplaces to meet the people . Pat visited schools, . hospitals, . orphanages and . clinics, . museums, museums and . marketplaces .
 We deliberately ruled out shopping parties except for the few occasions when embassy officials told us that our hosts would be offended if she did not purchase the local handicrafts .
 Pat also asked to meet with representatives of women’s organizations, and her visits gave great impetus to the new respect for women that was slowly beginning to develop in many of the countries we were visiting .
 Phil Watts worked out a procedure whereby we were met at each stop by a senior foreign service officer from the embassy in the next country on our itinerary . The next stop was the embassy from the next stop on the itinerary.
 During the flight the officer would update the briefings I had received before we left. During the rest of the flight, he would update me with the latest briefings I'd received before I left.
 This enabled me to conduct my meetings without using notes, a practice I had begun on the Herter Committee trip . Using or making notes seems to inhibit spontaneous conversation, I found that using or . making notes seemed to inhibit spontaneity, he said .
 Some of the most useful conversations I've had with foreign leaders have been during automobile rides to and from airports, when only they and I and an interpreter were present .
 Our first stops were in New Zealand and Australia, where we were warmly received . Our first stop in Australia was in Australia and New Zealand .
 Of the many political leaders I met on this trip, by far the most impressive was Australia’s Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies . The Australian Prime Minister is a former British Prime Minister .
 "His extraordinary intelligence and profound understanding of issues, not only in the Pacific but throughout the world, made an indelible impression on me," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Had he been born in Britain rather than in Australia, he would have been a great British Prime Minister in the tradition of Winston Churchill, writes Andrew Hammond .
 We were greeted by President Sukarno, whose tastes were as rich as his people were poor . We visited Indonesia's capital, Jakarta, in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In no other country we visited was the conspicuous luxury of the ruler in such striking contrast to the poverty and misery of his people . The king's conspicuous luxury was in stark contrast to his people's poverty, the author says .
 Sukarno’s palace was painted a spotless white and set in the middle of hundreds of acres of exotic gardens . An open sewer ran through the heart of the city, but an open sewer was not a problem for Sukarnos .
 One night we ate off gold plate to the light of a thousand torches while musicians played on the shore of a lake covered with white lotus blossoms and candles floating on small rafts .
 Sukarno was well educated and acutely aware that he exerted a magnetic hold over his people . He exerted a powerful magnetic hold on his people, and was acutely aware of his power . Sukarnos was well-educated but acutely aware he was also aware of that .
 Sukarno had become a mixture of political brilliance and corrosive vanity . But as a leader of almost unlimited power, he became a combination of brilliance and vanity . He was the leader of Indonesia in the 1950s and 1960s .
 He was very proud of his sexual prowess, which was the subject of countless rumors and stories . Many of the stories he probably started himself were probably started .
 His palaces were filled with some of the most exquisite women I have ever seen . Be that as well as as as it may, his palaces are filled with the most beautiful women I've ever seen.
 His briefings had stressed this side of his character and his great susceptibility to flattery along these lines . He said: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 Sukarno was the main personification of a common problem in the newly created nation-states of Asia and Africa . Sukarnos was the personification of the common problem .
 He was a brilliant revolutionary leader but he was totally inept as a nation-builder once independence was achieved . He was the leader of the South African Republic but failed to build a nation after independence .
 Like Nasser in Egypt and Nkrumah in Ghana, he could be very successful in tearing down the old system . But he could not concentrate his attention on building a viable new one to replace it .
 These men could not lead their nations as effectively as they had led their revolutions . Their nations—and the world, are still paying the price for that failing .
 Sukarno ruled with such an iron hand that the Communists had not been able to make much headway in Indonesia . The Communists had been unable to make a significant headway . The Indonesian state of Indonesia was declared a state of martial law .
 At Malaya, we came face to face with the new kind of Communist warfare that was already threatening the stability of the entire region . But at our next stop, Malaya was Malaya itself .
 Communist guerrilla forces were challenging the struggling Malayan government, which was just getting ready to make the break from British colonialism . The government was overthrown by the Communist Party in 1945 .
 The British were not making the mistake that the Americans made in the early days of the war in Korea and were to make later in Vietnam, of trying to fight a guerrilla war with conventional tactics and traditional strategy . The U.S. made the same mistake in Korea in Korea .
 The British trained the natives and enlisted their wholehearted support in the fight against the insurgents .
 Field Marshal Sir Gerald Templer served under Eisenhower in North Africa . Field Marshal Templer is a wiry, tough, emotional leader who had served in the Middle East . He is the High Commissioner of Malaysia .
 Both Templer and his wife worked closely with the local leaders and treated them with respect and dignity . This is something that had never occurred to the Dutch in Indonesia, that the French never learned in Vietnam, and only too late .
 We talked about the situation in Indochina and Templer shook his head sadly . Templer shakes his hand sadly .
 Before strong leaders capable of providing stability appeared in Vietnam, there was no solid opposition to Communist infiltration . Until strong leaders such as Diem and Thieu appeared, the Communist infiltration was a problem .
 Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam are the three countries of French Indochina . The three countries were part of the French colonial era of Vietnam .
 Vietnam at that time was a nominal monarchy ruled by the emperor Bao Dai, whom the French had restored as a figurehead in 1949 . The French restored the emperor in 1949, which was ruled by a nominal monarch .
 He refused to lend his presence or even his support to the French military effort against the Communist Vietminh guerrilla forces . France would make a guarantee of independence for Vietnam, he said .
 This the French refused to do, and the result was a demoralizing standoff that benefited only the Communists . This was the result of the French refusing to negotiate with the West . The French government refused to negotiate, and this was a waste of time .
 Bao Dai rarely saw foreigners, but invited me to visit him at his luxurious mountain resort in Dalat, Vietnam . He rarely saw foreign visitors to his resort, but he invited me there .
 He received him in a long room whose windows looked out of the jungle hills . He received me in a room whose . windows looked . out at the jungle . hills .
 Barefoot servants padded in noiselessly carrying silver trays laden with fresh fruit and cups of tea . Bare foot servants padded around the room carrying trays of fresh fruit .
 At the least we would end up with a conference which would divide my country between us and them . At the very least, it would be a conference between them and them. At the most of the world's most powerful nations, they would be divided between them .
 From Saigon we flew to Vientiane, the capital of Laos, to meet with Prince Souvanna Phouma . He was a member of the Laotian ruling family, who was then Prime Minister .
 Souvanna Phouma was again Prime Minister, and we worked closely together trying to prevent the Communists from taking over all of Indochina . Sixteen years later, when I was President, when . I was . President, he said, "I was President. Souv
 A brilliant sunset bathed the land below in gold as we flew above the muddy Red River . The Red River snaked its way through the jungle toward the city .
 Driving to the residence of the French Commissioner General of Indochina, where we were to spend the night, I could see something of the city . The French commissioner's residence is located in the French capital, Changang .
 Unlike Saigon, Hanoi was a sprawling cosmopolitan city teeming with the diversity of the many races that lived and traded there . The French capital was like a prosperous provincial town in France .
 We drove down wide tree-shaded boulevards, through ornate wrought-iron gates . I caught glimpses of large villas set amidst lawns and gardens .
 The Governor of North Vietnam, a French-educated Vietnamese, gave a dinner in our honor. That night the Governor of . North Vietnam gave a . dinner in . our honor . The governor of North . Vietnam, an . educated Vietnamese .
 The threat to this nation, although it has taken the form of a civil war, still derives its strength from an alien source . The threat is still a threat to the nation, despite the fact of the civil war in its form .
 The struggle against the Vietminh in this country, therefore, is important far beyond the boundaries of Vietnam, says Vichichich . The struggle is important beyond the borders of Vietnam .
 We know that you are determined to resist aggression, even as we are determined it . We know we are both determined to fight aggression, but we are not . We hope you will resist aggression .
 "We are resolved, as our past actions proved, that you shall not fight unaided. And we are resolved to ... resolve, as past actions have proved," she said .
 We were in the air before the sun was up, flying low over the dense jungle . We were flying low in the jungle .
 French commanding officers waited to greet us on a small airstrip in France . We landed on an airstrip, where several French officers greeted us .
 French officers took me to the edge of the field and introduced me to their Vietnamese counterparts . After I had met the French officers, one of them took me out of the park to introduce me to Vietnamese counterparts.
 French did nothing to hide the disdain they felt toward the Vietnamese . The French did not hide their disdain for the Vietnamese people .
 During the rest of my brief stay, without unnecessarily offending the French or embarrassing the Vietnamese, I made a point of trying to spend equal time with both groups . The French and Vietnamese are not the same groups of people in France .
 "I put on battle fatigues and a helmet and we drove to the front in a convoy of jeeps," he says . "We were in the middle of the battle," he adds .
 Lai Cac is a hamlet about fifty miles from the Chinese border . There we watched an artillery barrage against a Vietminh division holding out in the jungle around Lai .
 I talked to both the French and the Vietnamese troops, and with the sound of the mortar fire raging around us, I told them that they were fighting on the very outpost of the U.S. I also spoke to both French and Vietnamese troops .
 I could see the inspiration this gave the Vietnamese soldiers, and I reflected that the French had forfeited their loyalty by not talking to them in this way . The French lost their loyalty to the Vietnamese by failing to talk to them, he said .
 When we returned to the airfield, I had lunch with the French officers in their mess . The French officers had lunch in the mess in the French mess .
 There, in the middle of the Vietnamese jungle, we had beuf bourguignignon washed down with an excellent Algerian red wine .
 When I thanked them for arranging such a fine meal in my honor, they replied that it was nothing special for them . When I said thank them for the meal, they said it was 'nothing special' for them.
 Finally I was led to another cluster of tents, where the Vietnamese lived and ate . The Vietnamese lived in the tents and ate in tents .
 As we approached the mess tent, a sharp, unpleasant odor struck our noses . The smell of the food was so strong that it led to an unpleasant experience .
 The Vietnamese soldiers were clearly moved by the fact that I had come to see them, and I repeated the things I had said to the officers in the French mess . The soldiers in the Vietnamese mess were moved .
 That afternoon Pat and I made a journey about twenty-five miles northwest of Hanoi to a large refugee camp at the town of Sontay . Pat and Pat went to the camp to see the refugees . The camp is located about 25 miles from the city of Hangang
 In every village along the way, provincial officials had turned out schoolchildren and Boy Scouts to cheer us on the road . In all villages along the journey, schoolchildren, Boy Scouts and schoolchildren were turned out .
 Banners with greetings in English and Vietnamese were stretched across the road . Banners were stretched over the road in both languages .
 Thousands of refugees, driven from their homes by the Communist guerrillas, lived in the crowded tents . Thousands of refugee children were forced to live in the cramped tents .
 Even during our short visit a steady stream of people carrying all they owned on their shoulders kept coming through the gate . Even during the short visit, people kept coming to the gate carrying all their possessions .
 These people seemed so at home with their sorrow that they conveyed a sense of dignity and even optimism which made me feel that, if the Communists could be defeated, the people of Vietnam could build a strong and successful nation . If the Communists were defeated, Vietnam could become a strong nation,
 This very town would serve as a prison camp for American prisoners of war . I never imagined that 17 years later this war would still be going on, but fought by American troops instead of French .
 That night, our last in Hanoi, Maurice Dejean gave a formal dinner for us at his official residence . That night was the Commissioner General of Vietnam .
 The mayor of Dijon and Toulouse hosted a lavish banquet in Paris . Except for the sprinkling of Vietnamese faces and the lush palms and orchids in the garden outside, the occasion might have been a mayoral banquet . The event took place in the French capital, Paris
 Dejean was a polished and able diplomat, but his attitude displayed the same condescension that kept the French from dealing with the Vietnamese in a way that would have allowed a working partnership .
 In his reply, I tried to stress the important part the Vietnamese would have to play if there were to be a victory against communism . In my reply to the question, I said: "In my reply I stressed the importance of the Vietnamese to play"
 "I do not know when we will return, but there is one final thought that I have, and I am sure Mrs. Mrs. Wilson will not return," she says .
 Nixon will have as we leave the thought of what a happy and great land this could be if only the aggressors in this land would stop their aggression, he says .
 We all want peace, but I think that we all realize too that the aggressors have not asked for peace . Under no circumstances could negotiations take place which would in effect place people who want to be free and independent in perpetual bondage, he says .
 "Under the circumstances we leave with the confidence that this struggle which creates so much unhappiness and so much sorrow in this land will finally come to a victorious end"
 In Cambodia we visited the haunting and majestic ruins at Angkor Wat, and I talked with King Sihanouk .
 I had met him earlier in the year when he was in Washington on an unofficial visit, and my first impressions were unfortunately confirmed . He was unfortunately confirmed to be the president of the United States .
 He seemed prouder of his musical talents than of his political leadership . He appeared to be totally unrealistic about the problems his country faced, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia convinced that the French had failed primarily because they had not sufficiently trained, much less inspired, the Indochinese people to be able to defend themselves . The French failed to adequately train, much more than inspire, the people of Indochina to
 They had failed to build a cause—or a cadre—that could resist the nationalist and anticolonialist appeals of the Communists . They had not built a cause or cadre that could resist their appeals, they say .
 "They had no confidence in themselves, and they had no leader to inspire them," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Most important, they did not have a battle cry, a merdeka, to make the difference between having to fight and wanting to fight . Most important is that they didn't have to fight for their country, not for themselves .
 If the French were to pull out, Vietnam and possibly Laos and Cambodia would fall like husks before the fury of the communist hurricane . But for this very reason, the French would pull out of Vietnam, Vietnam, Cambodia as well .
 The U.S. would have to find a way to keep the French in Vietnam until the Communists had been defeated . I decided, therefore, that the United States would . have to do everything possible to . find the French . in Vietnam .
 The Chinese Communists were training and supplying the Vietminh forces in Vietnam, but nowhere was their presence more ominously felt than on Formosa . Generalissimo and Madame Chiang Kai-shek nurtured dreams and prepared plans for ousting the Communists from the mainland .
 When he talked about “China,” Chiang made a sweeping gesture that made it clear that he did not mean just this small island to which his rule had been reduced, but the whole country beyond the horizon .
 I could not tell Chiang outright that his chances of reuniting China under his rule were virtually nonexistent, but I made it clear that U.S. military power would not be committed to support any invasion he might launch .
 I was impressed by his high intelligence and his total dedication to the goal of freeing the Chinese people from Communist domination . Although I felt his plans to return to the mainland were totally unrealistic, I thought his plans for return to China were unrealistic .
 I arrived in Korea bearing a letter from Eisenhower to President Syngman Rhee . President Rhee was assassinated by the Korean regime in 1968 .
 Rhee was unhappy with the Korean armistice that had been concluded in July . He was unhappy at the end of the Korean conflict .
 He refused to accept the division of his country, and he still cherished hopes of ruling a united nation . The former prime minister still hoped to rule a united country .
 Our ambassador in Seoul, Ellis Briggs, suspected that unless Rhee were made to understand our position, he might provoke an incident or even launch an attack against North Korea because of a mistaken belief that America would not leave him to fight alone .
 At the embassy I talked with Arthur Dean, our special negotiator in Korea, who knew that I was bringing a message for Rhee . Arthur Dean knew that he was bringing an important message to Rhee, who was assassinated .
 Everywhere in Seoul I could see the legacy of wartime pain and privation . Everywhere in Korea, there was a legacy of war pain and torture .
 Small children in thin cotton pajamas shivered outside tarpaper huts that offered no protection from the freezing wind . Small children shivered out of tarp huts in tarpapers huts .
 It was obvious that South Korea —always a bleak, poor land — had paid a high price for its survival . South Korea is always a bleak and poor land, but has paid a huge price for survival .
 After some general conversation, I said that I had some matters I would like to discuss with him personally . After some . conversation, he said that he wanted to discuss some matters personally . He said he would talk to him personally about those matters .
 Rhee studied me with a penetrating gaze while I told him that I was not only a representative of Eisenhower but someone who had a long and consistent record as a friend of Korea . Rhee: "I told him I was someone who has a long, consistent record of being a friend
 He held it gingerly with his fingers, almost as if he were weighing it . He held the book gingerly, almost like he was weighing it carefully .
 With slow and deliberate movements he opened the envelope and unfolded the letter . With slow, deliberate movements, he opened it and unfolded it .
 Eisenhower made clear that the U.S. would not tolerate any actions that might lead to a reopening of war . He asked for specific reassurances from Rhee . "In dignified but unmistakable language," Eisenhower said .
 When he reached the end Rhee put the letter in his lap and stared down at it without saying anything . He put it in the lap, staring down at the letter without saying what he said .
 He described his attitude toward Japan and the future of Asia and the Pacific . He also criticized the way we had administered the economic aid program .
 I tried to avoid pressing him too hard, but I finally brought him back to a discussion of the letter and of the assurances Eisenhower wanted . Eisenhower wanted, he said, "I'm not going to be surprised"
 I said that I was speaking frankly to him because I thought it was of the highest urgency that he understand Eisenhower’s position and make the commitment the President had requested in his letter .
 "Because of this friendship I would not want to do anything that would not be in accord with the policies of the United States," she says . She says she would not do anything not to do with the U.S.
 On the other hand, I must think of Korea and, particularly, of the three million enslaved Koreans in the North . The North is home to three million Koreans, many of whom are enslaved .
 He ran his finger along the creases of the letter in his lap . Then, as he continued, he ran his fingers over the creased creases in the letter . The letter is still in the frame of the book .
 This was hardly the assurance Eisenhower had asked for, and I said firmly that it was essential for him to understand that . Under no circumstances should he take any action except by mutual agreement with Eisenhower, he said .
 When I returned to the embassy I made extensive notes of our conversation . When I went back I took notes of the conversation, I made notes of his words .
 I had felt uncomfortable going as far as I did, but I knew that my mission would be a failure if because of any reticence or ineptness on my part, Rhee did not understand that the United States would not support any unilateral military attempt he might undertake to reunite
 On the last night of our visit, Pat and Pat were the guests of honor at a show of Korean dancing and music . On the Korean dance and music, they were joined by a group of friends .
 The wooden platform at the back of the stage, on which a children’s choir was standing, began to collapse . Midway through the performance there was a sharp crack, and the platform began to crack .
 When the children realized what was happening, they began screaming and crying . The children were screaming and cried when they realized what happened .
 No one was hurt, and the audience's concern for the children's safety gave way to embarrassment that such a thing should have happened at a performance honoring foreign visitors . Within a minute it was clear that no one had been hurt .
 "To lose face is the worst humiliation. I knew that throughout the Far East, to lose face, is the most humiliation," she says .
 The conductor threw up his hands and walked off the stage in embarrassment . The conductor was embarrassed by the embarrassment of his performance .
 One by one, then in larger groups, the audience joined us, and the applause grew louder and louder . The audience was joined by members of the audience at the end of the show .
 The children, who had been frightened and then embarrassed by the accident, responded to the applause and began to smile . The children were frightened but then embarrassed after the accident .
 When I paid a farewell call on Rhee the next day, he was very warm and friendly . I have no doubt he had been told about the incident with the choir .
 When we settled down alone again, he took two pages of thin paper from his jacket . He took them out of his jacket and took them from his pocket .
 As he unfolded them, he said that he had typed them himself to ensure complete security .
 "The fear that I may start some action is a constant check on the Communists," he says . The fear that he may start something is a 'constant check' on the Communist Party .
 "We are being very frank now, you and I, so you should know that the Communists think that America wants peace so badly that you will do anything to get it," he said .
 I believe that you would be wrong to dispel their doubts in that respect . But they do not think that this is true as far as I am concerned, he says .
 I shall send my reply to President Eisenhower's letter when you are in Tokyo tomorrow . I shall reply to the letter when I am in Japan tomorrow .
 President Obama says statements he made about Korea acting independently were made to help America . He said any statements he has made about North Korea acting independent were to help the U.S. He also said he has spoken to the Korean people .
 I left Korea impressed by the courage and endurance of its people, and by the strength and intelligence of Syngman Rhee, says CNN.com's John Defterios . He says he left the country impressed by its courage, endurance and strength .
 I also gave much thought to Rhee’s insight about the importance of being unpredictable in dealing with the Communists .
 The more I traveled and the more I learned in the years that followed, I appreciated how wise the old man had been. The more he traveled, the more he learned how wise he had been, he said .
 Everywhere we went in Japan we were cheered enthusiastically by hundreds of thousands who lined our motorcade routes . Hundreds of thousands of thousands lined the motorcade route in Japan .
 In Tokyo I delivered a speech that made headlines around the world and stirred up a mild controversy at home . The speech was made in Tokyo, Japan, and made headlines in Japan .
 Before I left Washington, Foster Dulles and I had discussed what I should say about the touchy question of Japanese rearmament, I wrote . Dulles: "I should say what I would say about rearmaments in Japan"
 Japanese disarmament had begun in 1946 and formalized, at American insistence, by the Japanese Constitution .
 "We felt that some kind of Japanese armed defense force would soon be necessary to resist Communist domination of the Pacific," says historian . "Some of the Japanese felt it was necessary to defend against Communist domination"
 The first mention of Japanese rearmament would raise storms of protest in 1953 . World War II was still a painfully recent memory, and we knew that the first mention would raise storm .
 Dulles thought that raising the subject first in Japan itself might help blunt the political impact in America, and he decided that an invitation to address a luncheon sponsored by the America-Japan Society and several other groups would provide the ideal forum . Dulles: "I decided to address an
 I'm going to do something that I think perhaps ought to be done more by people in public life. And I’m going to ... do something I think maybe ought to do more by public life,’s Donald Trump .
 I'm going to admit right here that the U.S. did make a mistake in 1946, he says . He says the United States made a mistake, and it was a mistake .
 We recognize that disarmament under present world conditions by the free nations would inevitably lead to war . It is because we want peace and we believe in peace that we ourselves have rearmed since 1946 . Japan and other free nations must assume their share of the responsibility of rearming.
 The speech had an enormously positive effect on the anticommunist leaders of Japan . Also as we had hoped, the speech had the same effect on anti-Japan leaders .
 The United States admitted having made a mistake by imposing too harsh restrictions on their right to develop their ability to defend their country . What impressed all the Japanese, including the opposition parties, was that the U.S. admitted making a mistake, the opposition said .
 The highlight of my visit to the Philippines was my meeting with the President-elect, Ramón Magsaysay, Ramon Magsayay . I was in the Philippines to meet with the new president of the Philippines .
 "We hit it off extremely well, and Pat remarked afterward that she had never seen two men of different cultural backgrounds who seemed to have so much in common," he said .
 Magsaysay dedicated to giving the Filipino people the kind of honest and efficient government very few of their postwar leaders had provided . Magsayay was dedicated to . giving the Filipinos the chance to have an honest, efficient government .
 He had the enthusiastic support of the young people, and he was a magnetic orator . He also had the enthusiasm support of young people .
 His death in an airplane accident in 1957 was a tragedy for the Philippines and for all of free Asia . He died in a plane crash in the Philippines in 1957 .
 This nation had recently received its independence from Britain, and its gentle, friendly people were having a difficult time combating persistent and skillful Communist infiltration .
 On Thanksgiving Day we drove fifty miles into the jungle outside Rangoon to see the famous reclining Buddha in Pegu .
 A luncheon was held for us at the city hall, and in honor of our American holiday the Burmese had managed to find a turkey that they served as the main course . A turkey was served as a main course for the lunch .
 We were scheduled to walk to the shrine, but during dessert the local police captain told our Secret Service agent that a walk would not be safe because the Communists had organized a demonstration . The police captain said a walk was not safe because a demonstration was planned .
 They had distributed anti-American signs, and a sound truck was whipping up the crowd . The crowd was chanting, but the crowd was mostly peaceful . The event was held in New York City .
 A week earlier a guerrilla band had ambushed and killed some government officials traveling on the same road . We had driven from Rangoon to Pegu with an armed escort because of the ambush .
 Our Secret Service agent suggested that they bring our car around so that we could avoid the crowd by using the back door of the car .
 I said I thought I thought we should go ahead with the walk to the shrine exactly as arranged . I said we should walk exactly as planned. I said it was a good decision to go ahead as arranged.
 "No crowd of Communist demonstrators should be allowed to alter the itinerary of the Vice President of the United States," he said . The Vice President's itinerary should not be altered by demonstrators, he added .
 Our local hosts were not keen on the walk, so Pat and I started alone out the door of the city hall and toward the temple . Pat and Pat started alone .
 I ordered the Secret Service agents and the Burmese security officials not to go in front but to stay behind us and to show no weapons . I also ordered the . Secret Service . agents and Burmene security officials . not to be seen going in front of the crowds .
 "Your signs here are wrong. I then zeroed in on the man who seemed to be the leader, and said to him, “Your signs are wrong," he said .
 "I waited until I felt that the translation of this exchange had spread through the crowd and had a chance to sink in," she said . "I felt that this was the first time I had seen this exchange in a public gallery"
 The crowd laughed at his discomfiture, and one by one they put the signs down and began to move away . One by one, the crowd began to put down their signs .
 I was later told that by backing the leader down I had made him lose face with the people, he had lost face with them, he said . I was told by the party leader that I had caused him to lose face .
 This experience bolstered my instinctive belief that the only way to deal with Communists is to stand up to them. This experience reinforced my belief that . Standing up to the Communist Party is to be the most important thing in dealing with them.
 "They will try to make you afraid and then take advantage of your fears," says the author of the book "Fears the World"
 I had two private meetings with him in his office in New Delhi, one of them lasting for two hours . One of the meetings lasted for more than two hours, he says .
 Nehru’s softly modulated British English was served tangerine juice and cashews by a uniformed waiter . Nehru was the first Indian politician to speak of India .
 When I was President, I used his phrase “generation of peace” in many of my speeches as an expression of my own foreign policy goals . I used it in many speeches as a reference to the phrase "Generation of peace"
 Nehru spoke obsessively and interminably about India’s relationship with Pakistan . Nehru was the prime minister of India during his presidency .
 He spent more time railing against India’s neighbor than discussing U.S. relations with India .
 He strongly opposed the controversial proposal of U.S. aid to Pakistan . I was convinced that his objection owed much to his personal thirst for influence, if not control .
 Nehru pulled together a disparate collection of races, states, and religions in a way that no other Indian leader could have done . Nehru was a great leader who had pulled together together a diverse collection of states, states and religions .
 He made himself a spokesman for nations that wanted to remain uncommitted . But he then forced it into official neutrality .
 Had he devoted as much of his ability to solving India’s internal economic and social ills as he did to playing his self-appointed role as spokesman for the underdeveloped nations of the Third World, Indian democracy might be more secure today .
 Nehru's daughter, Indira Gandhi, was his official hostess during his visit . Nehru’s daughter was his hostess . Indira was the prime minister of India during the visit to India .
 She was intelligent, poised, and gracious, and I felt her deep inner strength, determination, she said . She said she felt her inner strength and determination, and was intelligent .
 Her father clearly adored her, and in every way she was her father’s daughter . Her father also loved her, according to reports .
 Most memorable meeting was with Rajagopalachari, a wizened contemporary of Gandhi . Gandhi met scores of presidents and princes and prime ministers during this trip .
 The afternoon I spent with Rajaji, as he was known, had such a dramatic effect on me that I used many of his thoughts in my speeches over the next several years . To this day I can see in my mind’s eye his small body, his large hawk nose
 Paul Hoffman, who supervised the Marshall Plan, had told me he was one of the world’s most gifted men . Paul Hoffman was president of the Ford Foundation before becoming president of Ford Foundation .
 He spoke with great simplicity and emotion about the horror of the atomic bomb . The atomic bomb was the most powerful weapon in the world .
 He suggested that perhaps he was meant to lead India and South Asia along the paths of his ideas . He said that perhaps perhaps he would lead India along the path of ideas .
 "Young men must be found to conduct the fight," says David Cameron . "Perhaps my brain is not, but I'm not," he says .
 Ayub Khan was then commander of Pakistan’s armed forces and had not yet assumed political power . In Pakistan he met Ayub . Khan, who was commander of the armed forces .
 I particularly enjoyed talking to him because, unlike most of his countrymen, he was not obsessed by the Pakistan—India problem . Unlike most of India's people, he is not obsessed with the Pakistan-India problem, he says .
 He did indicate his total contempt for the Hindus and his distrust of the Indians . But he was more anticommunist than anti-Indian than antiIndian, he says .
 He was seriously concerned about the communist threat, both ideological and military, and about the danger that the Soviets would use India as a cat's-paw for establishing a major presence in South Asia .
 At that period in his career he was strongly pro-American and believed that Pakistan and the U.S. should be allies and friends . At that time he believed that the United States and Pakistan should be friends .
 Foster Dulles had not been able to visit Iran during his Middle East trip because of the unsettled conditions there at that time . Dulles was not able to travel to Iran during that time due to the unrest in the region .
 The procommunist regime of Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh was overthrown by the military . A few months later a violent coup had taken place in the country .
 A government supporting the Shah, Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, was installed under Prime Minister Fazollah Zahedi . The Shah was overthrown by the Shah's government in 1953 .
 Zahedi, whose son later served as ambassador to the U.S. while Obama was President, was intelligent and wise, with enormous strength of character . He was intelligent, wise and wise . Zahede was a strong and intelligent man who served in Iran .
 Without his leadership I am convinced Iran would not be an independent nation today, says Iran's president . "Without his leadership, Iran would have not been an independent country today," he says .
 He had just come through a harrowing experience—an attempt had been made to assassinate him . He was in the midst of a harrowing ordeal .
 In meetings he let Zahedi do most of the talking, but he listened intently and asked penetrating questions . "In our meetings, we were able to find a common sense sense sense of empathy," he says .
 "I sensed an inner strength in him, and I felt that in the years ahead he would become a strong leader," says David Cameron . "I felt that he would be an excellent leader," he says .
 Eisenhower invited us upstairs to have coffee with him and Mrs. Eisenhower . When our plane landed at National Airport on December 14, we drove to the White House, where Eisenhower invited .
 The next day I received a two-page handwritten letter that, coming from one who meted out praise in very small and careful doses, I knew to be an extraordinarily warm and personal gesture . It was a warm, personal gesture, and I knew it was coming from a very small
 "I'm glad to have you home. Proud as I am of the record you—and Pat --established on your recent visit to a number of Asian countries," says President Obama .
 We have missed your wise counsel, your energetic support and your exemplary dedication to the service of the country. We, by which I mean all the principal figures in the Administration, have missed you wise counsel .
 On the purely personal side, it was fine to see you both looking so well after the rigors of a trip that must have taxed the strength of even such young and vigorous people as yourselves .
 "I look forward to some quiet opportunity when I can hear a real recital of your adventures and accomplishments," she writes .
 The 1953 trip had a tremendously important effect on my thinking and on my career . With warm personal regards, Sincerely, Eisenhower wrote .
 It was an undisputed success in that it accomplished its stated objectives and more . It was a success, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It was a great success"
 "It established my foreign policy experience and expertise in what was to become the most critical and controversial part of the world," he says . But further, it established his foreign policy expertise, he adds .
 "I learned much about the people of Asia through contact with hundreds of leaders and hundreds of thousands of ordinary citizens," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I also saw three centuries of European colonialism on their deathbed, and I felt that I was able to diagnose the illness . "I also saw [colonialists] on their deathsbed," she says .
 "I saw how the leaders and the masses of Asia longed for independence," she says . "For them it meant dignity and respect," she writes .
 It meant being taken seriously and treated decently, and that's what they wanted. It meant taking seriously and treating decently. That was what they were doing, and they wanted it .
 Many people in these countries knew America only as an immensely powerful nation that both Communist propaganda and European snobbery had painted as crass and rapacious .
 I reassured them that we were not a colonial power, nor did we approve of the lingering colonialism of our European allies . We did not approve of colonial colonial colonialism, I said, but we did .
 Both Pat and Pat took every opportunity to let the people know that America was genuinely interested in them, in their opinions .
 During years of oppression and repression, the people had developed efficient underground communications networks . "Word of the little gestures we made quickly reverberated through a whole city or even a whole country," she says .
 This novel personal diplomacy made headlines everywhere we went and became, I think, one of the most significant contributions of the trip . "This novel personal . diplomacy made . headlines everywhere . everywhere we . went," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 A columnist in Djakarta’s mass-circulation Abadi wrote, “Maybe you readers would not believe that . Vice President of the United States Richard Nixon yesterday helped fry sweet potatoes in a peasant's home between Bogor and Tjipanas.”
 Both Pat and Pat had a tremendous amount of personal contact with the people wherever they went . "Both Pat and I had tremendous personal contact," says Bob Greene .
 One day in the Philippines we shook hands with more than five thousand students at a 4-H exhibition . The Philippines is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Hong Kong is one of the best run and most prosperous of the Asian cities I visited . I asked a local Chinese leader how the people would vote if offered independence .
 I asked him why this was so, since the British presence had obviously materially benefited the people, he said . But he said it was not the case, but it was the case that the UK presence had helped the people .
 Japan had the potential but was prohibited from doing so by the post-war treaties . Japan has the potential to do so, but it was prohibited by the treaties .
 None of the other countries in the region had the military and economic resources to defend itself unaided against Communist infiltration and subversion, says President Obama . The U.S. had no means of protecting itself from Communist infiltration or subversion .
 If the U.S. did not move, the Chinese or the Soviets, acting with or through the local Communist insurgent groups in each country, certainly would . It was clear to me that if the United States did not act, the Soviets would . The United States would have to act
 "I learned much on this trip about the theory and practice of communism," says the author of the book .
 In each country I saw how the Communists had carefully targeted their propaganda and aid where it did them the most good, and how they always presented themselves as being on the side of the people against the ruling classes . Whether European or native, the Communist Party presented itself as being against ruling classes
 The Soviets were skillful with their propaganda and lavish with their money . The Soviet Union was skillful in its propaganda .
 The major new and unfathomable factor in Asia and the Pacific was Communist China . The Communist China was a major new factor in the region's development .
 It was a giant looming beyond every Asian horizon—475 million people ruled by ruthless, disciplined ideologues . It was the world's most powerful, ruthless ideologist-dominated society .
 China's influence is already spreading throughout Asia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I was able to report firsthand that its influence was already spreading across the area"
 Chinese Communists had established student exchange programs . Large numbers of students were being sent to Red China for free college training .
 In Indonesia this amounted to as many as a thousand students a year, and I was shocked to find some of our embassies completely unconcerned about the impact this could have on the next generation of leaders . In Indonesia, as many of Indonesia's young leaders a year were students .
 I returned home convinced that since the great battle in Asia was between communism and the free nations, we could not ignore the powerful Communist propaganda . I returned . convinced that, since the . great battle was between the . free nations and the . enemy nations, I returned to Asia convinced that
 I believed that the best way to undercut the appeal of the Communists was to confront them and show uncommitted observers that representatives of democratic nations were neither afraid of them nor unable to debate them on any question . I believed .
 The most dramatic justification of this belief had come at the Pegu pagoda, the most dramatic example of this .
 The country was still pretty much on its back in 1953, but after this trip there was no question in my mind that Japan would recover much more quickly than most Americans had predicted . Japan was still on its backs in 1953 .
 When I got back to Washington I became a staunch advocate of close American-Japanese ties, I became an advocate of U.S.-Japan ties .
 During those sixty-nine days I was able to meet those in power, but many of the younger up-and-coming generation whose careers developed over the next two decades as did my own . During those nine days I met many of those who were in power .
 President Barack Obama has returned to the countries he met in his first trip to the U.S. Each time he returned to these countries, he found that he was often dealing with people he had met on this first trip .
 "The relationships that even these few early meetings had established and what I learned through these contacts were tremendously important to the development of my thinking about foreign affairs," says President Obama .
 Foreign policy is a field in which I had great interest and at least some ability, he says . It was as a result of this trip, too, that I knew that foreign policy was a field of interest, he adds .
 Neither Pat nor I has cared for champagne since the trip . Neither has ever been able to drink champagne since .
 "I would guess that during those two months we drank at least two cases of it," he says . "We drank it at least twice," he adds .
 At every lunch and dinner and at almost every stop along the way, our hosts proudly produced bottles of fine French champagne and proposed toasts, which I then had to return .
 Before this, Pat and I had always enjoyed champagne as a way to celebrate a special occasion, but neither of us has willingly taken a glass of it since . Neither of them has willingly enjoyed champagne since .
 When I was President, I would sip a little, as required when a toast was offered or returned, but I never actually finished a whole glass of the stuff . I would drink a little when I was president, but not a lot of the time .
 One of the most serious problems we inherited from Truman was Joe McCarthy . Joe McCarthy was a major problem for the U.S. government in the 1950s .
 As a Democratic friend put it to me, “Joe has been a snake in the grass for us.” Joe Biden has been an “snake’s in the ground for us,” a friend said . Biden has a long way to go, but
 He was elected to the Senate as “the fighting Marine” after a brief career in local Wisconsin politics . He is known for his work as a Marine Corps veteran .
 Former Sen. Ted Cruz: "We moved in different circles. He was a senator and I was a congressman, and we moved different circles"
 McCarthy gave a Lincoln Day speech to a Republican Women’s Club in Wheeling, West Virginia, in February 1950 . In February 1950, the month after Hiss was convicted of perjury, McCarthy spoke to a West Virginia club . McCarthy gave the speech to the women's club in
 By the time he reached Salt Lake City the next day the number of names on the list had changed, but the charge remained the same . By the day he arrived he had the list of names changed but he was charged .
 "Like everyone else, I read these stories with great interest. Like everyone else in Washington, I'm interested in these stories," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Joe McCarthy had never been involved in fighting communists before, and I could help wondering whether he understood the need for accuracy and fairness in going after them . Joe McCarthy was never involved in the fight against the communists before .
 He called me shortly after he returned to Washington from Salt Lake City to ask if I had files on communists in the State Department . He asked if he had any files of communists in State Department files, which he found .
 I told him he would be on firmer ground talking about the problems of security risks, I said . He would be better to talk about the issues of security, he said .
 He thanked me warmly for my advice and said I had made an important point . He said he was happy to hear his views and said he had made a point .
 As the months went by, however, he continued to strike out indiscriminately . He continued to do so in the months before .
 I had a peculiar encounter with McCarthy in December 1950, at a small dinner-dance at the exclusive Sulgrave Club in Washington, D.C. I met McCarthy at the club in Washington .
 Drew Pearson had been attacking McCarthy almost every day in his “Washington Merry-Go-Round’s column . Pearson was among the guests at the White House on Monday night .
 McCarthy was not seated near each other at the dinner table, it was clear that McCarthy was spoiling for a fight . The two men were not seated close to each other .
 There was dancing between the courses, and at one of the intermissions McCarthy went over to Pearson and said, “You know, I’m going to put you out of business with a speech in the Senate tomorrow," he said . Pearson: "You know I'm going
 Pearson had been running articles about McCarthy’s personal finances, and the remark infuriated him . Pearson was infuriated by the remark .
 McCarthy challenged Pearson to step outside, but some of the other guests intervened . McCarthy was forced to return to his seat, but he returned to his chair . He challenged Pearson, but others intervened to get him to step out .
 There was Joe McCarthy with his big, thick hands around Pearson’s neck. Joe McCarthy held Pearson's neck. Pearson was killed by McCarthy. McCarthy's hands were on Pearson's throat. Pearson died of his injuries .
 McCarthy slapped Pearson so hard that his head snapped back . Pearson was slapped by McCarthy when McCarthy spotted him . Pearson is the son of McCarthy, a former NFL player .
 McCarthy said, “You shouldn’t have stopped me, Dick,” and went upstairs to bid his hostess good night . McCarthy: "You shouldn't have been stopped, Dick."
 Relations between McCarthy and Eisenhower had long been strained because of McCarthy’s attacks on George Marshall . Relations between Eisenhower and McCarthy had been strained due to McCarthy's attacks on Marshall .
 "I began, therefore, to act as a go-between for McCarthy and the administration. I began to act ... as I began ... to act . I began, however, as I acted as an aide to McCarthy, the White House .
 Most Republicans in the House and Senate were still strongly proMcCarthy and wanted Eisenhower to embrace him, while the predominantly liberal White House staff members opposed McCarthy . Most Republicans still believed Eisenhower should embrace McCarthy, but the White House opposed him .
 Eisenhower disliked McCarthy personally, not only because of the attacks on Marshall but because of his coarse familiarity . Eisenhower found McCarthy's coarse familiarity distasteful, which he disliked personally .
 Eisenhower's personal good will that enabled him to lead his party even while representing only its minority wing would have been severely damaged . Eisenhower would have led the Republican Party in a minority party .
 Almost immediately, McCarthy found himself putting out brushfires started by McCarthy . McCarthy's brushfire was the first brushfire to be started by the fireman . McCarthy is now a national hero .
 Two early nominations were of James Bryant Conant, president of Harvard, as U.S. High Commissioner for Germany . Charles E “Chip” Bohlen as ambassador to the Soviet Union .
 Conant had stirred up the ire of many anti-communists a few months earlier by flatly asserting that it was inconceivable that any member of the Harvard faculty was a Communist . Conant's comments stirred up a few . months earlier .
 He agreed, instead, just to send a letter to Eisenhower expressing his Opposition to the nomination . He agreed to send it to Eisenhower .
 I was less successful, however, when the Bohlen nomination was debated several weeks later . "I was trying to get Bohlen's nomination to be debated," he says .
 McCarthy came across the tantalizing bit of information that William Bundy, one of Allen Dulles’s brightest young men at the Central Intelligence Agency, had made a contribution to Alger Hiss's legal defense fund . Bundy was one of Dulles's brightest young people at the CIA .
 Allen Dulles asked me if I could do anything to help prevent a confrontation, I said yes . Dulles: "Allen Dulles was very concerned about a confrontation" He said Dulles wanted to avoid a confrontation with President Obama .
 He said that he had complete confidence in Bundy, and that his main interest was to keep the CIA out of the newspapers . Bundy said he had no idea what the CIA was doing .
 I told McCarthy that I had seen Bundy’s performance in several National Security Council meetings . Bundy seemed to me a loyal American who was rendering vital service to the country, he said . Bundy's performance in the meetings was impressive, McCarthy said .
 Bundy graduated from Harvard Law School . Hiss was one of its most famous graduates . Bundy was a Harvard Law graduate . Bundy graduated in the same school .
 The next day I had lunch with McCarthy and the other Republicans on his subcommittee, Everett Dirksen, Karl Mundt, and Charles Potter . McCarthy was chairman of the subcommittee of the House of Representatives .
 President Eisenhower urged McCarthy to use restraint, but McCarthy's cases should be considered on merits . McCarthy's case should be handled on merits, says Eisenhower adviser .
 I thought that until a break was unavoidable we should attack McCarthy only when his facts were wrong, and I hoped that in the meantime the anticommunist cause would not be irreparably damaged by his excesses .
 He stretched the case far beyond its importance, but I argued against opposing him because there was at least some factual basis for his charges . The case stretched beyond importance, he says, but there was a factual basis .
 McCarthy began investigations into the Army in his search for new areas of possible communist infiltration . McCarthy investigated the Army for the first time in the 1950s .
 McCarthy felt that where there had been one Communist there were likely to be more . The atom spy Julius Rosenberg had worked at an Army base, and McCarthy felt there were probably more .
 President Eisenhower double-teamed him about the dangers of pushing the Army investigation too hard . At the end of December 1953, he invited him to Key Biscayne, where Bill Rogers was Deputy Attorney General .
 Rogers and I urged that he should think about moving into some new areas . Rogers: He should be careful not to become known as a “one-shot” senator .
 McCarthy told reporters he planned to broaden his investigations to include questionable income tax settlements made during the Truman administration . McCarthy seemed to understand the good advice we gave him, and before he left Florida he told some reporters that he planned .
 President Obama returned to Washington this week to pursue communists and headlines . But no sooner had he returned, he was back in furious pursuit of communists .
 McCarthy discovered Irving Peress, the Army dentist who was to lead to his downfall . McCarthy discovered Peress in January 1954 . Peress was the dentist who led to McCarthy's downfall .
 Peress had received a routine promotion even after he refused to answer a loyalty questionnaire . Peress was promoted even after refusing to answer the questionnaire . He was promoted despite refusing to give the questionnaires .
 Peress, by now a major, had not complied with its regulations and they decided to discharge him . Peress was a major at the time . He was discharged from his post in 2010 .
 He summoned Peress before a closed session of his subcommittee, where he invoked the Fifth Amendment . Peress invoked the right to remain silent .
 A few days later Peress requested and received an honorable discharge from the Army . Peress was awarded an honorable honorable discharge .
 He subpoenaed General Ralph Zwicker, the commanding general, and three other officers . The general also subpoenaed three others, including the commanding officer .
 In a closed session Zwicker tried to explain how Peress had slipped through a loophole in Army red tape .
 As the commanding officer Zwicker accepted full responsibility, he refused to name any individuals involved in processing Peress’s case . He accepted responsibility for Peress's death, but he would not name those involved .
 McCarthy charged that Zwicker was shielding communists and said he was not fit to wear the uniform of an Army officer . McCarthy charged he was a communist and not fit for the uniform .
 He threatened to humiliate him in a public hearing the following week unless he changed his mind and decided to cooperate . The judge said he would be humiliated if he did not change his mind or cooperate .
 Army Secretary Stevens ordered Zwicker not to appear at the public session, and announced that he would testify himself . The incident occurred during a meeting with the Army Secretary of the Army .
 "Once again I seemed to be the only person with enough credibility in both camps to suggest a compromise," he says . "I seem to have enough credibility with both camps," he adds .
 Eisenhower was away on a golfing vacation, and I wanted to keep the situation from spilling over into a public brawl . Eisenhower is away from the scene, and wanted to avoid a fight .
 The Army was on very weak ground as far as the Peress case was concerned . However unconscionable McCarthy’s treatment of Zwicker may have been, the fact remained that the Army was .
 The White House congressional liaison officer arranged a meeting in his office in the Capitol . President Barack Obama met with members of Congress on Capitol Hill .
 Persons, Bill Rogers, Bill Knowland, Everett Dirksen, and Jack Martin were also present . Persons, Rogers, Martin, Knowland and Martin were Taft's administrative assistant .
 Stevens and Adams seemed to have the naive idea that they could go in and finesse the Peress case at the outset by admitting the Army’s errors and then move on to the Zwicker incident and talk about McCarthy .
 I said that they should certainly try to do that if they could, but I reminded them that it was McCarthy as chairman, not Stevens as witness, who would control the hearing . I told them that McCarthy would be the chairman of the Senate committee .
 We agreed that Dirksen should try to arrange a luncheon meeting with Stevens and McCarthy for the next day .
 The luncheon was held in Dirksen’s office next door to mine in the Capitol . It was held next to mine .
 The meal consisted of fried chicken, peas, french fried potatoes, and hearts of lettuce . The meal was served with a large portion of chicken .
 A bland menu turned into one of the most controversial repasts of the 1950s . Within a few hours, the press had tagged it the “chicken luncheon”
 McCarthy, Stevens, Dirksen, Potter, Mundt, and Mundt were invited to McCarthy's subcommittee . Only the three Republican senators on McCarthy’s subcommittee were invited .
 As soon as the luncheon broke up Mundt filled me in on what had taken place . Mundt told me what had happened .
 At first there had appeared to be no ground for compromise, but Mundt negotiated a written agreement . Army witnesses would appear and answer questions when called before McCarthy's subcommittee .
 There was an understanding, not mentioned in the agreement itself, that McCarthy would treat these witnesses respectfully . McCarthy would not have been allowed to speak to the witnesses, he says .
 Stevens telephoned me as soon as he got back to the Pentagon, and he seemed fairly happy with the way things had worked out . Stevens was pleased with the outcome of the operation .
 The text of the Mundt agreement did not explicitly state that McCarthy would treat the witnesses respectfully . McCarthy’s remark made the agreement appear to be a complete capitulation to him .
 He said that he had decided to issue a statement the following day and then resign . He said he decided to resign the next day after a statement was made .
 I told him to quit talking about resigning, suggested that in the morning we could talk about what kind of a statement could be made, he said . He said he would not resign, but suggested that he could make a statement tomorrow morning .
 He immediately tried to get the luncheon participants to issue another statement that might resolve the situation . He immediately tries to get them to issue a new statement .
 The President asked me to work with Stevens, Sherman Adams, and Jerry Persons in drafting a statement that Stevens could issue from the White House . The President then asked for a statement from Stevens, Adams, Persons .
 We worked all afternoon in Persons’s East Wing office while Eisenhower practiced chip shots on the South Lawn . Eisenhower, probably to relieve the tremendous anger he felt, was practicing chip shots .
 Eisenhower issued his own statement on the Peress case . A few days later, Eisenhower decided to release a statement .
 At the conclusion of the meeting, the President on his own initiative brought up the Stevens thing . At the end of the . meeting, he brought up . The President .
 He said that he was preparing to make the statement on it at his press conference and that one thing he wanted to say was that in fighting communism we could not destroy Americanism .
 Senator Leverett Saltonstall of Massachusetts said he thought the Army had made a mistake in not admitting its error in the Peress case . The Army admitted the mistake in the case .
 The President reacted sharply and said that the Army had admitted it in a letter to McCarthy and in a public statement . The Army admitted it to the President's mistake in the letter .
 Knowland defended the Senators for the action they took at the luncheon with Stevens . Knowland very emphatically defended the senators' actions .
 He said the Army’s conduct in this case was inexcusable . He said such a hearing on television would have been even worse than the situation .
 I don't know when I have seen him quite so stirred up on a matter as he was on this one. I don’t know when he was quite stirred up,’s been on the subject of a matter such as this one .
 At the conclusion of the meeting, the President said he was going to have a talk with me about this matter . The President is trying to get the thing in perspective .
 Eisenhower’s reaction to the whole incident had become very emotional . By this time Eisenhower had become extremely emotional . Eisenhower's response to the incident was very emotional.
 As an Army man he was embarrassed by the Army’s blunder and annoyed that it had been paraded through the newspapers . He was annoyed that the Army had paraded it through the media .
 As party leader, he was worried about the way the issue was polarizing Republicans and giving the Democrats aid and comfort as the congressional elections approached . He said he worried about how polarizing the GOP was helping Democrats in the midterm elections .
 As President, he was offended by McCarthy’s tactics, techniques, and personality . McCarthy was a controversial figure in McCarthy's career .
 He wanted his statement to say that those who investigated communism were as great a danger as the communists themselves . The methods of investigators were the same as communist methods, he said .
 I believed such a statement at that time would cause Eisenhower and the party more trouble than he or his White House staff and liberal friends who were urging it could imagine . I believed that such a . statement at such a time would . cause Eisenhower more trouble . than he . or his .
 A poll in January 1954 found that 50 percent of the people had a favorable opinion of McCarthy . Only 29 percent of those polled had an unfavorable opinion of him .
 Eisenhower opened his press conference by reading a long statement that adopted most of my suggestions and some of my language . I was again able to work out a compromise, and on March 3 Eisenhower read the long statement .
 McCarthy and McCarthyism could now safely be exploited by the Democrats . McCarthyism is now safely being exploited by Democrats, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says McCarthyism was a McCarthyism in the McCarthy era .
 In a televised speech he blasted Eisenhower’s leadership and mocked what he portrayed as his weakness in refusing to confront and control McCarthy .
 The immediate problem of who should reply to Stevenson was discussed at length during a meeting at the White House on March 8 .
 The difficulty with the McCarthy problem is that anybody who takes it on runs the risk of being called a pink . Anyone who takes on the issue will be called a 'pink'
 Eisenhower took me into his small private office next to the Oval Office . Eisenhower's private office was next to his private office . Eisenhower had a private meeting with President Eisenhower .
 He said he would recommend treating McCarthy and Stevenson with an easy backhand rather than making the subject of the whole speech .
 One of the reasons he disliked McCarthy was that he felt McCarthy was drawing too much attention away from the administration’s positive programs, he said .
 No matter how it was done, it was bound to alienate large segments of the party and the public . The party was bound for alienating large portions of the public, but no matter how they did it, it would alienate many .
 McCarthy created a crisis with each new crisis McCarthy created . But now with the election coming up and the Democrats beginning to stir, it was clear that we could no longer afford the luxury of trying to deal piecemeal and behind the scenes .
 The broadcast was set for Saturday night, March 13, so I would have only five days of preparation . The broadcast is set for March 13 and the broadcast is scheduled for March 14 .
 "I wrote dozens of outlines and drafts, and by Friday morning I felt that I had condensed them into a speech that was the best that could be done in the circumstances," says President Obama .
 "I took a room at the Statler Hotel and left word that I was to be disturbed only in case of an emergency," she says .
 Bill Knowland was furious that someone in the White House had leaked an unflattering item about him to a newspaper columnist . Knowland had been furious that the leak had been made public . He was furious at the leak of the story .
 He said he could not put up with internal sabotage any longer and was going to call a conference of the Senate Republicans to submit his resignation as Majority Leader . The Senate majority leader said he would call a confabment of the Republican Senate Republicans .
 "I tried to calm him down and convince him that he should wait until after my speech before doing anything," he said . He said he was trying to calm down and said he would wait for the speech to take place .
 President Eisenhower asked Eisenhower to come over to talk to him before he went to Camp David for the weekend . Eisenhower's Appointments Secretary Tom Stephens, Eisenhower’s . Secretary, said that the President had just asked if he could come over .
 I walked across Lafayette Square to the White House and was immediately ushered into the Oval Office . "I walked across . Lafayette Square and was greeted by the president," President Obama says .
 He said he didn't think he needed advice on a political speech, and that he had his complete confidence in his ability to handle it . He said that first, he didn’t think I needed advice, he said .
 He said, however, he felt that he knew what lifted people and he was convinced that it was necessary to get across to them that we had a progressive, dynamic program .
 I told him that that was one of my difficulties and some people had suggested that I should try to do that . I said some people suggested that is one thing I should do, and I said I would try to try it .
 He suggested I might work a smile in with regard to my comments on Stevenson . He suggested he might work in with regards to his comments about Stevenson .
 I told him that I planned to stick a few barbs into him, and then he suggested he was perfectly content that I do so but that he thought it was best to laugh at him rather than to hit him meanly .
 Lincoln and Washington, our two greatest Presidents, were men who were subjected to considerable attack and who never indulged in personalities . He pointed out that Lincoln and George W.S. were men subjected to a considerable attack .
 He said that was also the reason he had selected me to do this broadcast . "He said that he said that's also why he had chosen me to be here," he said .
 He suggested I might get in the fact he had commanded 5 million troops in Europe, he said . He suggested that I might . get in fact that I had commanded . 5 million soldiers in Europe .
 Stevenson’s speech had been made before a cheering partisan audience at a Democratic fund-raising dinner . Stevenson had been one of his characteristically arch performances . Stevenson's speech was made at a partisan event at a Democrat-sponsored dinner .
 I decided to try to convey the opposite impression, so I spoke in a calm and low-key manner in front of a plain backdrop . "I decided to . try to . convey the . opposite impression," he said .
 "I tried always to bear in mind that my primary audience was the large middle ground of public opinion that believed that, regardless McCarthy’s tactics, there was no gentle way to deal with communists," he says .
 "I tried, therefore, to come up with some idea or some turn of phrase that would make my position memorable and unmistakable," he said . He said he was trying to find a way to make his position memorable .
 "After all, we are dealing with a bunch of rats. As a matter of fact, I have heard people say, “After all of the rats.” The author says people say they're dealing with rats .
 When you go out to shoot rats, you have to shoot straight . When you shoot wildly, it not only means that the rats may get away more easily, but you make it easier on the rats . You can't shoot wildly in order to shoot wildly .
 I said that the speech would not satisfy either extreme of opinion; he replied he thought it would satisfy 85 percent of the people . That was what was important, he said, and that was the important . I said .
 Eisenhower was in the best spirits he had been in for a long time . Eisenhower was at the meeting of legislative leaders the following Monday morning, Eisenhower said .
 My speech seemed to have buoyed him by giving voice to his own frustrations over McCarthy and by providing some focus for the administration’s efforts .
 McCarthy's March 13 speech marked the beginning of a new phase of the McCarthy episode, a phase that turned out to be the end of the end . McCarthy's speech was one of the last moments of McCarthy's presidency .
 Those who knew McCarthy said that he seemed to have fallen apart . By the time the Army—McCarthy hearings began five weeks later, those who knew him said he had "falled apart"
 Len seemed to feel that Joe was beginning to blow up and that he was in no condition whatever to attend a hearing and to participate in it . Joe was in "no condition whatever" to attend the hearing, he said .
 The same view was expressed by Karl Mundt when I talked to him on the phone . The same views were expressed by Mundt, who said the same thing as Mundt himself .
 He had talked to McCarthy's wife the night before and he said it was grim with Jean [McCarthy’s wife] almost in tears, and him having very little influence due to the fact that Joe said that he knew his political life was at stake .
 Len Hall said when he had been in to see Joe a couple of days before, when he came up to the apartment door he opened it and had a gun in his hand . Joe opened it up and opened it with a gun .
 'Apparently he was carrying one all the time because of the threats that had been made against him,' he said .
 A Gallup poll at the end of March showed that a solid 46 percent favored McCarthy and 36 percent disapproved of him . A poll of 46 percent favor McCarthy .
 As soon as the first cracks appeared in his public support, a startling erosion set in . The president's support for the president has waned in recent months .
 McCarthy had been called an asset to the Republican National Committee earlier this year . McCarthy has been accused of being a liability to the party . McCarthy is a Republican senator in the House of Representatives .
 For almost two months, from April 22 to June 17, the Army—McCarthy hearings unfolded each day in the Senate Caucus Room . The hearings took place in the House of Representatives in Washington DC .
 Eisenhower privately called the hearings “a damn shameful spectacle,” and urged that everything possible be done to get them over with as quickly as possible . Eisenhower called hearings a "damn shameful spectacle"
 The posturing before the cameras on both sides repelled me, and after the first day I did not watch any of them . After the first-day of the tournament, I was not interested in watching any of the games .
 On August 2, by a vote of 75 to 12, the Senate adopted a resolution to appoint a select committee to consider the Flanders resolution . The Senate will appoint a committee of experts to look at the resolution .
 The committee was chaired by Senator Arthur V Watkins, a stern Mormon from Utah .
 Sen. Sam Ervin, a freshman senator from North Carolina, had not taken a strong public stand on McCarthy .
 I was presiding over a tense Senate chamber when the final debate began on December 2 . The final debate was held in the Senate in Washington, D.C.
 A sudden hush fell over the Chamber as a lone figure came through the swinging doors at the back and walked slowly down the aisle . The chamber was filled with members of the House of Representatives .
 His arm was in a sling from an attack of bursitis that had kept him in the hospital for several days . His arm had been in the sling from a recent attack that had left him in hospital .
 When the vote was taken, every Democrat voted against McCarthy . Republicans split right down the middle, with 22 for and 22 against .
 Among those voting against the resolution was Bill Knowland, the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives .
 McCarthy was the third U.S. Senator ever to be censured by his colleagues . McCarthy became the third Senator to be removed from the Senate . McCarthy's censure vote was 67 to 22 . McCarthy was elected to the Senate on December 2 .
 He sat quietly in his seat, staring at the bare desktop in front of him, surrounded by his supporters . He was surrounded by supporters .
 There was a brief procedural hassle when Styles Bridges of New Hampshire pointed out that as the word censure did not appear in the body of the resolution, it should be struck from title .
 Bridges said Bridges was technically correct and that the resolution as formally passed was one of condemnation rather than censure . The parliamentarian advised me that Bridges is technically correct .
 Joseph McCarthy cast his shadow over four critical years of American politics . Joseph McCarthy was a key figure in McCarthy's efforts to expose McCarthyism . McCarthyism was a major factor in American politics in the 1950s .
 From the Wheeling speech in February 1950 to his condemnation in December 1954, intense controversy surrounded everything he said and did . His condemnation of the same speech was widely criticized in 1954 .
 I remember a luncheon at the White House a few days after the Stevens episode had brought the Stevens case to fever pitch . The incident occurred at a White House luncheon in Washington .
 Apparently the purpose of the story was to see that everybody did not get too excited about the whole McCarthy incident and the attacks that he made . The story was intended to show that everyone was not getting too excited .
 The President seems to be convinced that people in the administration were actually afraid of McCarthy . The President seemed to have been convinced that McCarthy was actually afraid .
 "I think he wanted to see smiling faces around him. Another purpose, I think, was the line he had been developing during the past week or so," he said . Another purpose was to keep smiling around him, he added .
 "I never shared the disdain with which fashionable Washington treated him because of his lack of polished manners," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I'm not surprised by how fashionable D.C. treated him"
 At the end, I felt sorry for him as a man whose zeal and thirst for publicity were leading him and others to destruction . He said: "At the end of the year I felt like a man who was leading him to destruction"
 "It is despicable to make a racket of anticommunism or any other cause," he says . But it's despicable to stir people up and then give them no positive leadership or direction, he adds .
 McCarthy had reached a point where he was actually impeding the investigation of communists . By the spring of 1954 J Edgar Hoover was telling Eisenhower that McCarthy had impeded the investigation . McCarthy was accused of impeding investigation of communist communists .
 I broke with McCarthy when he began to attack the administration openly, he says . He says he "broke with McCarthy" when he started attacking the administration .
 In 1954, he began talking about “twenty-one years of treason,” thus including the first year of Eisenhower’s administration . In 1954 he began referring to ‘twelve-one-year of treason’ in his remarks .
 McCarthy was sincere, and I know from personal investigation that there was real substance to some of his charges . McCarthy was sincerely sincere, says Rep. Bob McCarthy . McCarthy's case was the subject of a series of investigations .
 The communists and the compulsive antianticommunists, together with many who were as anticommunist as McCarthy himself, ended up discrediting everything the man had to say when McCarthy became the issue instead of communism . McCarthy's critics say he was a communist, but
 The threat of a Communist takeover in Vietnam brought America to the brink of war . Within a few weeks, however, we shared the daily agony and valor of its defenders . The U.S. saw the threat of the Communist takeover bring America to war .
 After seven years of fighting and 50,000 men killed, there were serious questions in France about whether to continue the fight against Ho Chi Minh’s Communist guerrillas . The French government was forced to withdraw from Vietnam in order to defeat the communist government .
 A French withdrawal from Vietnam would have placed us in a very difficult position . U.S. policy was predicated upon the vital importance of maintaining an independent Vietnam .
 Eisenhower had sent two hundred Army mechanics as advisers to the French and Vietnamese forces in February 1954 . In February 1954, two hundred mechanics were sent to Vietnam as advisers .
 There was no serious opposition in Congress because the men would be in Vietnam only as technical advisers . Eisenhower promised that they would not stay longer than June . The men would only be technical advisers, and Eisenhower promised not to stay longer .
 Dien Bien Phu was the first test since Korea of the free world’s ability to resist Communist aggression . As the French and Vietminh settled in for a long siege, the press began to build up .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff devised a plan to use small tactical atomic bombs to destroy Vietminh positions and relieve the garrison . Operation Vulture was known as 'Operation Vulture' by the Joint Chiefs .
 Eisenhower and Dulles felt nothing less than overt Chinese Communist aggression would be sufficient provocation for our going into Vietnam in any such a direct and unilateral way . Both felt that overt Chinese . Communist aggression was sufficient provocation .
 The Communist Chinese were the Vietminh’s patrons and principal source of military supplies . The Communists were the main source of supplies for the Vietnamese .
 Eisenhower said in March he would consider using diversionary tactics if situation at Dien Bien Phu became desperate . Diversionary tactics could include a landing by Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist forces on Hainan Island or a naval blockade of the Chinese
 Reports of the situation in Dien Bien Phu were constantly changing, and our day-to-day attitude frequently reflected the shifting tides of the battle . We were reporting on the situation constantly changing .
 Dulles presented his plan about trying to get united action among the allies . Dulles: Dulles tried to get unity action among allies .
 I said that such a plan was all right as far as it goes but that, if it were limited to resisting overt aggression alone alone, it would not meet the real future danger in Asia .
 I said we must adopt the principle of uniting together to resist subversive aggression of the Indochina and Chinese Civil War type . I said that we must . adopt the . principle of . uniting . together to . resist subverted aggression of Indochinas and Chinese civil war type
 I pointed out that we had never yet found a formula to resist this kind of aggression on a united basis . I said that we need to find a formula for resisting such aggression in a united way .
 Korea was a case of the Communists marching across a line even though it was technically in the same country . The united action principle applied because what was really involved was overt agression .
 I also said that I didn’t think the President should underestimate his ability to get the Congress and the country to follow his leadership . I said that he should not underestimate the President’s ability to lead .
 I suggested that more technicians could be sent to Indochina if the President asked for them . More technicians could have been sent to the country if President asked them, he said .
 From the conversation, it was quite apparent that the President had backed down considerably from the strong position he had taken on Indochina the latter part of the previous week . From the . conversation, however, it seemed to be quite . apparent that . the President backed down significantly from the
 "He seemed resigned to doing nothing at all unless we could get the allies and the country to go along with whatever was suggested," says President Obama .
 The challenge we faced in 1954 was to convince the U.S. people of the importance of Dien Bien Phu . The challenge was convincing them that much more was at stake than some French troops besieged at a colonial outpost .
 No one, except possibly Admiral Radford, wanted U.S. military intervention .
 We were convinced that unless the Communists knew that their so-called wars of liberation would be resisted by military means if necessary, they would not stop until they had taken over Southeast Asia, just as they had Eastern Europe . We were all convinced, but .
 Dulles spent several weeks trying to get the British and French to join us in concerted opposition to the Communists, he says . Dulles tried to get them to join him in the fight against the Communists in the UK .
 The French government was too much on the psychological defensive to be able to mount or sustain the kind of military and diplomatic offensive required . French government, however, was not able to sustain or sustain a military or diplomatic offensive .
 Admiral Radford went to London to consult with Churchill, who said bluntly that if his people had not been willing to fight to save India for themselves, he did not think they would be willing to save Indochina for the French .
 Churchill admitted that the rest of Indochina might fall if Vietnam were lost . He did not foresee any threat to Southeast Asia, Japan, or Australia .
 Both Radford and I were astonished that Churchill had understood the communist problem so well as early as 1946 . Churchill understood the problem well as well as 1946, Radford says .
 It was clear that Britain and France could not count on Britain or France for support in resisting communism in Indochina, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Early in April there was a respite from the crisis; it seemed that the French troops might be able to hold on at Dien Bien Phu . The French troops may have been able to keep their troops in Dien .
 Eisenhower decided to go to Augusta for a few days, and Dulles, exhausted and disheartened by his unsuccessful attempts to promote allied unity, went to Canada . Dulles went to Augusta, Georgia, where he spent the rest of his time .
 Eisenhower asked me to fill in for him at the American Society of Newspaper Editors’ annual convention in Washington on April 16 . The news from Vietnam continued hopeful, and Eisenhower wanted to extend his stay in Georgia .
 "I asked that all my remarks be off the record so I could speak candidly. The ASNE convention is a prestigious and responsible forum," he said . "All my remarks were asked to be off-the-record," he added .
 After delivering a prepared speech, I agreed to take questions from the floor . After delivering the speech, he agreed to give a speech to the floor and take questions .
 I was asked whether I thought we would send American troops to Indochina if the French decided to withdraw and it was the only way to save Indochine from being taken over by the Communists . I was also asked if I thought I would send U.S. troops to Vietnam
 Two foreign reporters who were not at the meeting heard about my response and sent the story to their papers . "Two foreign reporters" heard about the story and sent it to their newspapers .
 It was widely interpreted as a trial balloon aimed at reversing the administration’s policy, which, so far, had drawn the line at direct U.S. intervention in Vietnam .
 Eisenhower said he probably would have answered the same question under similar circumstances . Eisenhower was concerned that Eisenhower might be upset over the incident, but he said he would have responded the same way .
 President Eisenhower "supported me when the matter was raised," she says . "At a meeting with the Republican congressional leaders a week later, Eisenhower supported me"
 Charlie Halleck said that the suggestion that American boys might be sent to Indochina “had really hurt,” and that he hoped there would be no more talk of that type . Charlie said the suggestion of sending American boys to Vietnam had hurt, and hoped no more
 The President, however, immediately stepped in and said he felt it was important that we not show a weakness at this critical time . The President said he wanted to not let the Russians think that we might not resist in the event that the Communists attempted to step up their present tactics .
 He said that we had to think of whether it was best to take a strong stand now when we could or wait until later when we couldn't . He said: "We need to think about whether it is best to stand when we can or wait later"
 He also pointed out that it was not well to tell the Russians everything as to what we would or would not do with them .
 At the end of April the situation at Dien Bien Phu took another turn for the worse, and it did not look as if the French forces could hold on much longer . French forces were forced to withdraw from the Vietnamese capital .
 Radford reported on the military situation and on his conversations with the French and British . Radford also spoke to the French, British and American .
 Bedell Smith read a message from Dulles which indicated considerable pessimism but that Dulles was going to stand firm for the American position . Bedell . Smith read the message to Dulles that indicated considerable optimism .
 The President was extremely serious and seemed to be greatly concerned about what was the right course to take. "The President seemed very concerned," said President Obama . "He seemed very serious," said Obama .
 Harold Stassen said that he thought that decision should be to send ground troops if necessary to save Indochina . After the reports were made he said that the decision was made to send troops to save the country . Harold said that if necessary, troops should be sent to Indoch
 The President himself said he could not visualize a ground troop operation in Indochina that would be supported by the people of the United States, he said . The President said he would not support a ground operation that would not put our defense too far out of balance .
 He also raised the point that we simply could not go in unilaterally because that was in violation of our whole principle of collective defense against communism in all places in the world .
 Winning the war in Vietnam was not necessarily a question of committing a lot of ground troops to combat, he says . After Stassen’s proposal had been discussed, he said that in my judgment winning the war was not a question .
 Sending an Air Force contingent representing a unified alliance would have the double effect of letting the Communists know that we were going to resist further expansion in the area, and of bolstering the morale of the French and Vietnamese troops .
 I suggested that we explore the possibilities of developing a Pacific coalition without the British, an alliance with Thailand, the Philippines, Indochina, Australia, New Zealand, and whatever other nations would join .
 The next morning I met with Eisenhower and General Cutler, General Robert Cutler, his Special Assistant for National Security Affairs . The next day, he met with General Cutler . Cutler was the Special Assistant to Eisenhower .
 Cutler reported that the NSC planning board had been discussing the possibility of telling our allies that if we went into Indochina, we might use the atom bomb . Cutler said that the plan was discussed by the planning board . Cutler reported .
 Eisenhower asked me what I thought about this idea; I said that whatever was decided about using the bomb, I did not think it was necessary to mention it to our allies before we got them to agree on united action . I said I didn't think it would be necessary for our allies
 I emphasized that it might not be necessary to have more than a few conventional air strikes by the united forces to let the Communists see that we were determined to resist . I emphasized, as I had at the NSC meeting, that . I had said that .
 On May 7, after a gallant but utterly hopeless defense of a territory that had been reduced to the size of a baseball field, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu was overrun by the Vietminh .
 Almost universal reaction was relief that the crisis had ended without precipitating a major war . The almost universal reaction to the crisis was relief .
 The defeat at Dien Bien Phu would probably lead to French withdrawal from Vietnam, and that U.S. would either have to take over the burden of stopping Communist aggression in Indochina or abandon the entire region .
 On May 20 the NSC discussed the possibility of keeping the two hundred American mechanics in Vietnam past June . Eisenhower dismissed the idea .
 First, he said, the French were already going back on their word to keep up the fighting . He added that the French had already gone back on its promise to keep fighting .
 President Obama said he intended to honor his pledge that mechanics would come out by June 15 . He said such an extension would make our relations with Congress very difficult .
 After the fall of Dien Bien Phu, the heart fell out of the French will to win . The next several weeks of desultory battle were a holding action until a negotiated settlement could be reached at the Geneva Conference .
 Dulles infuriated and dispirited by the plan to surrender half of Vietnam to the Communists . Dulles was infuriated by the surrender of half of the Vietnam to Communists .
 Indochina settlement was made on July 21, but the U.S. did not sign it . The United States has not signed the Indochine settlement .
 A month earlier, I had urged Dulles not to be part of any settlement that would result in the surrender of any part of Indochina to the Communists . In fact, a month earlier . I had called for Dulles to be against any settlement .
 The press perceived Dulles, Radford, and me as the hawks in the Indochina crisis . Dulles and Radford were perceived as hawks during the Vietnam War .
 To some extent Radford did believe that the early use of tactical nuclear weapons would convince the Communists that we meant business . Radford believed that the use would convince him that the Communists were serious .
 Dulles and I both believed that if the Communists pushed too far we would have to do whatever was necessary to stop them, says Dulles . Dulles: "If the Communists push too far, we would not be able to resist them"
 Eisenhower fully agreed, although I think that Dulles and I were probably prepared to stand up at an earlier point than he was . Dulles agreed, but Eisenhower was probably not prepared, he said .
 We all hoped that by being prepared to fight we would never actually have to do any fighting. We hoped we wouldn't have to fight, but we had to prepare ourselves for fighting . We are not going to be able to fight again. We hope we will never have to actually do
 Years later, after Dulles was dead and America was deeply involved in a war in Vietnam under another President, Eisenhower was asked if he and Dulles had agreed on the question of being ready to send troops into Vietnam .
 Winston Churchill and Anthony Eden visited the U.S. for meetings with Eisenhower and Dulles in 1954 . Churchill and Eden were in the United States at the time .
 As he came down the steps of the airplane, he took each step alone alone by himself .
 "He shook hands and said that he was very happy to meet me for the first time," she said . "I'm very proud to meet him," she added .
 Later in the car he said he had read of some of my statements and that he had admiration for them . Later he said that although this was the first time that he'd met me, he had admired some of his statements .
 I was supposed to make a speech of introduction which I had spent an hour or so last night preparing even though it was only to be a minute and a half long . I was meant to make an introduction but I was only a minute long long long .
 Churchill took out a sheet of paper from which he read his own speech to the people who were at the airport . However, when Churchill saw the microphones he walked immediately over to them and took them out .
 Churchill was rather slow to react to questions or statements but on the other hand after the conversation had gone on for a while his reactions picked up considerably . Churchill was very slow to respond to questions but his reaction picked up after a while .
 Roosevelt said there was little communication or understanding between him and the U.S. government . He said that for four months in Roosevelt’s last months, there was very little communication . Roosevelt said that during that period, he and the American government had little understanding .
 This was in response to my remarks that I had just read the fourth volume of his memoirs . This was a response to his remarks that he had just been reading the memoirs.
 He said that Roosevelt was not himself at that time and that Truman did not know what was going on . He said he said that he did not think Truman was himself .
 In fact, he said that he was sure Truman had not been taken in on the great decisions that were being made .
 Roosevelt felt Roosevelt made a mistake in not developing his second in command when he knew that he himself was ill and could not be around much longer . Roosevelt felt that he made a great mistake not to develop his second commandment .
 I said that I often wondered what would have happened had the allies accepted his judgment with regard to the conduct of World War II, particularly in respect to the southern offensive rather than the Channel crossing .
 The White House has had a very enjoyable day at the White House, says President Obama . Obama says it was perhaps the most enjoyable occasion we have ever had at White House . Obama: "I think this was perhaps an enjoyable occasion"
 The President proposed a toast to General Marshall after he had proposed one to the Queen and Churchill had responded . Churchill responded to the proposal .
 Both Churchill and Marshall had been his immediate superiors during the war . He said he knew they would forgive him if he made a protocol exception and proposed a toast to Marshall . He pointed out that both Churchill . and Marshall .
 "I looked at Marshall as the toast was being proposed and it was obvious that he was very deeply moved by this gesture," she said . "He was clearly deeply moved"
 Guests who were not staying at the White House had gathered in one of the reception rooms downstairs . We were all invited to come upstairs. After the guests gathered in the reception room downstairs, we were invited upstairs. We were invited to meet in a reception room .
 Eden was particularly impressed by the reports of our visit to Malaya . The occasion when we met the troops he said made a great impression in Britain .
 He pointed out that he had started them in 1946 and that he did it all by dictation . He said that he started them by dictating .
 I asked him if he used a machine and he said no; that the Americans had given him one of the best machines but he preferred a pretty girl to talk to rather than a machine .
 Churchill and the President exchanged pleasantries which we could all hear and remarks about the movie . During the program both Churchill and President . Both Churchill . and the . President of the United States. Churchill and . Churchill .
 The movie significantly enough came out just the opposite to the way Edward VIII came out with Mrs. Edward VIII . The movie was released in 1998 .
 Pat sat at Churchill’s right during the dinner . She said it was a very enjoyable evening from all standpoints . Pat sat in Churchill's right .
 Eisenhower tried to cut a piece of the meat in half before putting it on his plate . The knives were all received as part of the White House set . Eisenhower watched over him as his food was being served .
 Pat remarked how Mamie took things over just as if she were handling any youngster who happened to be visiting or any close friend . Pat remarked that Mamie always took over just like she did with any youngster visiting or close friends .
 Foster Dulles had his usual highball rather than the wines during dinner . Dulles was the first president of the Democratic Party to hold a White House dinner .
 He said no, that he usually had his first drink of whiskey at 8:30 in the morning and that in the evening he enjoyed a glass of champagne .
 Churchill was much sharper than he had been in the morning and seemed to thrive on the fact that he was participating in these conferences . Churchill was sharpened by the conferences, says Churchill .
 "I learned later that he had not taken a nap in the afternoon but had played cards after the conference had been completed," he said .
 The last evening of Churchill’s visit there was a stag dinner at the British Embassy . Churchill's stag party was held at the embassy in London .
 He said that except for a few blackouts, he had felt better during this conference than he had for some time . He said he felt better than he'd felt before this conference .
 During the course of the evening the conversation turned to General Lee and I asked his appraisal of Lee . Lee was a major figure in the American Civil War .
 He said that he thought he was one of the greatest men in American history . He also said he thought that he was the greatest generals at any time .
 Lee pointed out to Grant that the officers owned their horses as personal property and asked that they be allowed to retain them . Lee also said that one of the other great moments in the Civil War was at Appomattox when he pointed out that Grant's horses were personal property .
 Grant said to have them take all of their horses—the enlisted men and the officers as well . Grant told them to take all their horses as well as the enlisted men .
 He reiterated his press club statement to the effect that we should have a policy of patience and vigilance .
 He said we could not deal with the Communists on the basis of weakness—that it had to be a policy of strength. He said . He said: "We had to deal with [the Communists] on the . basis of strength"
 He said he didn’t like to call it a go-slow policy because that was not really a fair appraisal of the kind of policy he was advocating, he said . He didn't like to say it was a go slow policy .
 He pointed out his record after World War I and also his Fulton, Missouri speech in properly appraising the communist threat and advocating means to meet it .
 He said that Bevan in England was just as much of a problem to him and to the British as was McCarthy to us . He said Bevan was a problem for him and for the British . Bevan said McCarthy was just a problem in England and for England .
 McCarthy said one thing they couldn't understand was why the Senate did not investigate all of the charges about his finances and other irregularities in getting elected and while he was Senator. McCarthy said the Senate should have investigated his finances .
 I pointed out that very possibly Senators did not want to set the precedent of investigating a colleague for fear that it might someday react in a case against themselves . I said that possibly Senators may want to avoid setting the precedent .
 I saw them off at the airport and Churchill was careful to see that I delivered some farewell remarks to him . "I saw them . I gave them farewell remarks," he said of Churchill . "We are going to see them off," he added .
 "I could tell that his declining health would soon cause him to give up the reins of leadership he had held for so long," says President Obama . "He could tell me that he would soon give up his leadership."
 While he was obviously not up to his best, he still was better than most leaders half his age . He still has a lot of respect for most of the world's top players .
 He had "enormous experience, intelligence, and understanding of the forces that shape the world," he says .
 I was honored to have met one of the world’s greatest leaders, but I was saddened by the realization that he would soon be passing from the scene .
 The Republicans’ razor-thin majority of one in the Senate was the most obvious target for the Democrats . Democrats also had their sights set on regaining control of the House of Representatives .
 He did not want a heavy campaign schedule because he did not think it wise for the President to go on a barnstorming trip, and because at sixty-three he now needed more rest, he said .
 If Eisenhower had no taste for this campaign, I had little for it myself . Eisenhower had little taste for it himself, he said .
 Eisenhower had maintained his personal popularity, but the party was as divided as it had been before he was elected . In the eighteen months of his administration, Eisenhower maintained personal popularity .
 Passing of Taft and the ascent of Joe McCarthy had deepened the divisions within Republican ranks . Indeed, the passing of Bob Taft . Taft's passing and the rise of McCarthy deepened divisions within the GOP ranks .
 The agony of the fund crisis had stripped the fun and excitement from campaigning for me. Once again I realized how much the agony had stripped me of the fun I had been campaigning for .
 Requests for campaign appearances from Republican congressmen and senators began flooding my office . Requests to campaign appearances for Republican lawmakers and senators soon flooded my office, I said . I said, 'I'm going to do it'
 They were worried about the effect Eisenhower’s refusal to campaign would have on our chances . They were also worried about how Eisenhower would affect their chances in the election .
 I decided that there was no choice for me but to lead the party in the election, so I threw myself into two full months of intensive campaigning . I decided to lead my party in this election, and I threw himself into two months of intense campaigning .
 As I made my first campaign trips into the country I was surprised to find how complacent the Republican organizers were. The Republican organizers are complacent, he says. He says .
 On September 19 I placed a conference call to Brownell, Summerfield, and Jerry Persons . Brownell: "On September 19, I placed an interview with Brownell and Summerfield on September 19" Brownell says he is disappointed with the results of the interview .
 "Don’t give the President the idea that things are in good shape. I told them, “Don”
 The Republican National Committee has been criticized for its simplistic ideas by some of its staff members . President Barack Obama has been campaigning for the House of Representatives since November .
 I wrote a memorandum to RNC Chairman Len Hall setting out some of my ideas . I wrote it out to the RNC chairman Len Hall .
 As far as the issues were concerned, I felt that we should be concentrating on the ones where we were strong and the Democrats were weak, he said .
 If voters on election day are thinking of unemployment and/or farm prices, they will lose the election without any question . If voters think of unemployment, farm prices primarily, we will lose election without question. We will lose without question .
 Those who were against McCarthy because they thought we tolerated McCarthy were against us anyway . They will continue to vote on the other side because they consider the ADA gang as more anti-McCarthy than we are. Those people who thought McCarthy tolerated McCarthy tolerated them anyway.
 We have lost considerable support among Democrats whose reason for voting for us in '46, '50, and '52 was their distrust of the Truman administration on the handling of the domestic communist issue .
 "The greatest damage has been done in splitting the Republicans and causing apathy in our ranks," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: The greatest damage was done by splitting the GOP, splitting the Republican Party's ranks .
 We can remedy to an extent the situations mentioned in 2 and 3 by emphasizing vigorously the Administration’s anticommunist record and attacking the other side for its past and present softness on the issue .
 In discussing the communist issue during the campaign I emphasized as I had in 1950 and 1952 that the question as far as our opponents were concerned was not one of loyalty but of judgment . The question is not loyalty but judgment, it's judgment .
 Eisenhower spent the first month of the campaign at the Denver White House . Eisenhower spent that month at the White House in Denver .
 After a few hours of work in the morning he would golf in the afternoon, he would take a break from work to play golf .
 Please don't think that I am not unaware that I have done little to lighten your load. Please don’t think that he is not aware that he has done little . I have no idea that I’m not aware .
 "I am, in point of fact, constantly suggesting other places for you to visit. On the contrary, I am ... constantly suggesting new places to visit," he says .
 You will have to consider these burdens I impose upon you, the penalty for being such an excellent and persuasive speaker. You will be forced to consider this burden .
 "One thing that is coming out of this is that you are constantly becoming better and more favorably known to the American public," Obama says .
 As Election Day neared, the polls showed that the Democrats and Republicans were almost evenly matched . The polls show that Republicans and Democrats are evenly matched in the 2016 presidential election .
 As my campaigning seemed to be particularly effective, Stevenson and other Democrats, led by DNC Chairman Stephen Mitchell, zeroed in on me with a barrage of attacks . Stevenson and others targeted me as a candidate for president in 2016 .
 During the last three weeks of the campaign I slept no more than five hours a night. During the campaign, I slept only five hours per night. I was so tired I had to sleep only five per cent a night, he said .
 Eisenhower made one of the typically gracious gestures that bound people so closely to him . A few days before the election, Eisenhower made a gracious gesture .
 A letter from the White House tells Sen. Ted Cruz that the GOP is working hard to win this election . Cruz says he was "more than a little frustrated" that few of the Republican leaders seemed to be working as hard as he was .
 I admire all the more the tremendous job you have done since the opening of the present campaign . Whenever my burdens tend to feel unduly heavy, I admire your tremendous job . I admire the more .
 "You have personally carried a backbreaking load of hard, tedious, day by day and state by state campaigning," says Labour leader David Cameron .
 In doing so you have to be undismayed by problems of time, distance, and physical effort . And in doing so, you have been undistayed by time and distance .
 President Obama hopes to return to Congress a Republican majority that will work with the Executive Branch in completing the program that we believe is in the best interests of all America .
 "No man could have done more effective work than you to further that hope," he said . "I'm sure you will always be remembered for your work," he added .
 "Whatever the outcome next Tuesday, I can find no words to express my deep appreciation of the contribution you have made toward that goal," says President Obama .
 Please tell Pat, too, that she has aroused my admiration as an able campaigner . There is no question but that she is the most charming of the lot. She is a good campaigner, and she is most charming .
 "We sat together in front of the fireplace, and for a while I got up every few minutes to take calls from the campaign headquarters at the Republican National Committee," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "For a while, we sat together and talked to each other," says Cruz .
 Eisenhower had to deal with a Democratic Congress for the last six years of his presidency . The Democrats regained control of the House and Senate in 1953 . Eisenhower was re-elected to the Senate in 1964 .
 At the first Cabinet meeting after the election, most members who were new to politics were downcast . Most members of the new Cabinet meeting had been 'downcast'
 I said that the important thing was to learn from this experience so that we would not repeat our mistakes . I said: "I said that . The important thing is to learn ... not repeat your mistakes"
 I pointed out that while we had fielded many outstanding candidates, we had also put forward some notably unexceptional ones . I pointed to the fact that some of the candidates had been under-performing . I said that while there were outstanding candidates for the job, there were also notably unex
 I took a little wind-up toy drummer from my pocket, released the catch, and put it on the Cabinet table . Then I took it from the pocket and released its catch, putting it back on the cabinet table .
 Everyone watched, puzzled, as the little fellow picked out a zigzag course across the polished surface . The sharp sound of his drum filled the room as he played it .
 It was clear that Eisenhower was going to maintain his President-of-all-the-people posture . As long as we were a team, it would be my job to do the hard partisan campaigning, he says .
 "The prospect of having to go through it all again in another two years was depressing," says Daley . The prospect of going through it again was depressing, he says .
 "It was clear that I was going to continue to be the prime target for the Democrats’ attacks," she said . "I was also clear that . I was also . going to ... be the . prime target of the . Democrats' attacks. "I’m going
 Eisenhower’s popularity was too great and his above-the-battle strategy too successful to make attacking him worthwhile . Eisenhower was too popular to attack him, but he was successful .
 'The more effective I was as a campaigner, the more determined many of the Democrats and their supporters in the media became to clobber me. But I was out front, a target of opportunity, and the more successful I was . The more effective he was, he said,
 Although the fund crisis had thickened my skin, I still resented being portrayed as a demagogue or a liar . The fund crisis has thickened his skin, but he still resents being portrayed in cartoons by Herblock cartoons .
 As the attacks became more personal, I sometimes wondered where party loyalty left off and masochism began . The attacks became personal, he said, and sometimes wondered if party loyalty had begun to fade .
 The girls were reaching an impressionable age, and neither Pat nor Pat nor I wanted their father to become the perennial bad guy of American politics . The girls' father was reaching a young age, but neither he nor his wife wanted him to become a bad guy .
 During the last week of the 1954 campaign, when I was so tired that I could hardly remember what it felt like to be rested, I decided that this would be my last campaign . "This would be the last campaign. I decided to end my campaign," he said .
 "I should pretty much be able to write my own ticket after retiring from the vice presidency at age forty-four," he says . He says he should retire at age 44 .
 By the time I made a nationally televised broadcast on election eve, I had decided not to run again in 1956 unless exceptional circumstances intervened to change my mind . I made the decision to make national television broadcasts on the election eve .
 "On Election Day, as we flew back to Washington, I took out my briefcase," says President Obama . "I don't think it's going to be a good thing for me," says Obama .
 A folder on top contained the several pages of handwritten notes I had made for the election-eve broadcast . A folder also contained pages of notes I'd made for an election broadcast .
 September 24, 1955, was a hot Indian summer day in Washington, D.C. It was the day of the heart attack in Washington .
 Around 5:30, I sat down to look over the Evening Star, and I noted a small item from Denver on the front page that the President was suffering from a slight case of indigestion .
 This was not unusual for him, and I turned to the sports pages without giving it a second thought . This is not the first time I've seen him do so, but it's not unusual .
 He had no further information, and we agreed that he would call me again as soon as he learned anything more . He said he was not sure what had happened .
 'For several minutes I sat motionless, absorbing the full impact of the news. For several minutes, I sat . For several . minutes, the news was the first time I had seen the news .
 "I was going to have to think about my own conduct in an unprecedented national crisis," he says . "Not only was I concerned about Eisenhower’s health, I was also concerned about myself."
 Bill Rogers was Acting Attorney General while Herb Brownell was in Spain, and asked him if he could come over . Bill Rogers, who was acting Attorney General during Brownell's absence, was invited to Spain .
 Rogers arrived just ahead of the reporters and cameramen who rushed to our house as soon as Eisenhower's heart attack was announced in Denver . Rogers arrived ahead of reporters, cameramen and cameraman who had rushed to his house .
 I thought it was important that I not be seen or quoted until I had more information from Denver, Colorado, before I could be quoted . "I thought it would be important not to be seen," he said .
 "He called his wife to pick us up and asked her to park on a side street behind my house," she says . "He asked his wife's wife to park in a spot behind her house," the woman says . She says he called her to pick her up from a side
 Adele Rogers drove up in her Pontiac convertible, and Bill and I slipped out the side door . Fifteen minutes later she drove up with her husband .
 We walked quickly through a neighbor’s backyard and piled into the car . We walked through the backyard and then piled in the car.
 For the first time I learned that the attack had been officially diagnosed as a “mild” coronary thrombosis . The attack was officially diagnosed with a ‘mild, mild’ heart condition . For first time he learned that he had a mild coronary th
 Chances for recovery are good, but it's still too early to be sure of anything, doctors say . Chances of recovery were good, doctors said .
 "It was decided that we would continue carrying on the nation's business as a united team until Eisenhower was able to return to his duties," says President Eisenhower .
 "It would be foolish for me to do anything that the press could in any way interpret as being self-serving," he said .
 If Eisenhower died or was completely incapacitated, there would be no question about his succession to the presidency . "If that happened it would be even more important that my conduct beforehand be above question," he says .
 Eisenhower would not be able to return for several weeks or months and a determination would have to be made about taking over some of his responsibilities . Nothing I did made it appear that I was seeking his power, he says .
 I knew that there would be many attempts to drive a wedge between Sherman Adams and me. Sherman Adams, the president of the U.S. House of Representatives, said he knew he was going to have to defend himself .
 Adams was known as Eisenhower's most devoted and selfless staff member . Adams was the powerful Assistant to the President who was the White House Chief of Staff .
 "I decided to let the reporters accompany Pat and me to church and then invite some of them home afterward for an informal chat," he says . But a press conference might appear self-serving, he says, so he decided to invite them home .
 Eisenhower is in a critical but stable condition in Washington, D.C., his family says . Eisenhower's condition is critical, but Eisenhower is expected to make a full recovery .
 I described the team system he had created and said that I expected it to function smoothly until his return . I described it as a 'team system' that he'd created .
 The reporters, of course, were after hard news, not talk about team spirit . The reporters were after the hard news .
 They were looking for a statement about the political implications of Eisenhower’s illness, they said . They said they wanted to make a statement .
 There had already been speculation about whether Eisenhower would run again in 1956 . Eisenhower had been rumored to be interested in running for president .
 Gallup poll at the beginning of September had shown him preferred by 61 percent of the voters when matched up against Stevenson . Gallup poll: 61 percent prefer him to Stevenson .
 Gallup poll: If Eisenhower did not run, I was the first choice among Republicans for the presidential nomination . Another Gallup poll taken at about the same time indicated that if Eisenhower didn't run, he was first choice .
 I politely but firmly refused any questions about the political significance of Eisenhower’s illness . “I politely but . firmly refused to answer any questions on the political implications of Eisenhower's illness.”
 Sherman Adams, Len Hall, Jerry Persons, Hall’s press aide Lou Guylay, Rogers, and Rogers met to discuss the political aspects of the situation . Adams, Hall, Persons, Guylays, Persons and Rogers discussed the situation at Rogers’ house .
 Whenever a question was addressed to him, he launched into a description of the fishing in Scotland . He said: 'Whenever a question asked, he answered it with a fishing description'
 He was determined not to engage in any substantive discussion until he could get to Denver and see Eisenhower’s condition for himself, or else he was in something close to a state of shock . Finally it became clear that either he was determined to . engage in a substantive discussion .
 I said that our main task was to prevent any scramble for the presidential nomination, at least until Eisenhower recovered and had had a chance to express his feelings about running again . I said: "Our main task is to prevent a scramble for any . presidential nomination"
 Eisenhower would not run again, even if he recovered completely, he says . Eisenhower would run again if he could, but no one believed he would, he adds .
 President Obama presided over Cabinet and National Security Council meetings in the White House . Obama has been in office for two weeks .
 I sat in the Vice President’s chair, opposite the President's, and I was careful to act more as moderator than director. I sat there in the VP's chair opposite the president's, he said .
 I signed several ceremonial documents “in behalf of the President,” but I continued to work out of my office at the Capitol rather than in the White House . I signed a ceremonial document ‘in behalf’ of the president .
 During those weeks I made it a point to visit Cabinet members in their own offices whenever a meeting was necessary, rather than asking them to come to my office . I made a point of making sure Cabinet members were there when necessary .
 One or two Cabinet members seemed to feel that I was seeking publicity . Despite all my precautions, I had to have as little to do with press as I reasonably could .
 Eisenhower died October 8, exactly two weeks after Eisenhower’s heart attack . Eisenhower's heart attack was the first time Eisenhower had a heart attack since his death . Eisenhower died in Denver, Colorado, on October 8 .
 I was the first official visitor; after my visit the Cabinet members saw him according to rank . Cabinet members then saw him as a member of the rank .
 He was able to talk about his heart attack with great detachment, although he had obviously been through an ordeal . But it was immediately clear that his mind was as sharp as ever, as well as his .
 Eisenhower flew back to Washington, D.C. after his heart attack . Eisenhower's heart attack was the first time he had a heart attack in more than 40 years . Eisenhower was hospitalized with a heart condition .
 Thousands of cheering people lined the streets in the autumn sunshine to cheer him as he returned to the White House .
 The only thing that made me hesitate was the unexpected situation created by Eisenhower's heart attack . "Only thing I hesitate to say was that Eisenhower had a heart attack," she says .
 Before I had assumed that he would run again in 1956, now I'm not at all sure . Whereas before, I'd assumed that . He was not at least sure . Now I'm very doubtful about whether he will run again .
 If he did not, I would be the next in line for the presidential nomination, he would be a candidate for the GOP nomination .
 Gallup presidential preference poll after Eisenhower’s heart attack showed me leading Earl Warren, 28 percent to 24 percent . Earl Warren was second, followed by Dewey and Stassen with 10 percent each .
 He said that he had been giving a lot of thought to the coming election, and he wondered whether I ought to run for Vice President again or whether I might do better to accept a Cabinet post instead .
 He said that a Cabinet position such as Secretary of Defense would give me the kind of administrative experience, so important for a President, that the vice presidency did not offer . He said he would like to be a Cabinet Cabinet position .
 Herbert Hoover used his position as Secretary of Commerce to build a national reputation . Hoover was able to use his position to build national reputation and a successful candidacy . Hoover had been able to build his own national reputation, according to Hoover .
 I was taken aback by this suggestion, although he seemed to be making it in a friendly and sincere spirit . He seemed to make the suggestion in the friendly spirit, although it was not in a joking spirit .
 He said that he was disappointed that other suitable candidates for the presidency had not emerged from the party during the last few years .
 He said it was too bad that my popularity had not grown more during the last three years . He said he was disappointed that it had not increased during that period .
 "For the first time I began to understand what was behind this conversation," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm glad to see how much of the conversation has been devoted to me," he says .
 Eisenhower’s staff or his friends had evidently been sowing doubts in his mind, suggesting that he might lose if he ran on his own, but that I might be a drag on the ticket if I were his running mate again . Eisenhower's staff or friends had apparently been s
 More recent polls than the ones he was referring to showed me doing considerably better . It was hard not not not to feel that I was being set up, but more recent polls showed him doing better .
 A few weeks later we had another conversation which covered the same ground . "A few weeks after we had a few weeks together, we spoke again," she said .
 Eisenhower once again expressed his opinion that his own political future would be better served by taking a Cabinet post than by running again for Vice President . Eisenhower said he would be best served by Cabinet post rather than running for VP .
 He seemed to be expecting a reply, and for a moment I felt as if the clock had been turned back to the fund crisis, when he paused on the telephone so that I could offer him my resignation from the ticket .
 "I did not feel that my getting off the ticket would be the best thing for him or for the party," she says . "I was not going to offer to do so," she adds . "But I did not want to give up my job"
 "If you believe your own candidacy and your administration would be better served with me off the ticket, you tell me what you want me to do and I'll do it," he said .
 Foster Dulles suggested that I might be named Secretary of Defense or succeed him as Secretary of State when he resigned . Dulles initiated the same discussion when he suggested that he might become Secretary of Defence or succeed .
 Eisenhower and Dulles’s suggestion that the U.S. should adopt a new policy on the Vietnam War was a mistake . The U.N. government has been in touch with both sides of the fence in Vietnam .
 Neither side took into account the derogatory way the media would have interpreted such a course, or how it would have upset the many Republicans who still considered me Eisenhower’s principal link with party orthodoxy .
 Eisenhower had made a remarkable physical recovery, and within a short time after his return to Washington he resumed his regular schedule . Eisenhower had recovered from his injuries .
 His brush with death left him subject to debilitating bouts of depression . But, as with many who have suffered heart attacks, he suffered from debilitating depression .
 'He would sit immobile for long periods of time, brooding silently about the future,' he said . He would sit in his chair for hours to think about his future .
 Mamie Eisenhower was especially insistent that her husband not run for re-election . Mamie was insistent her husband should not be re-elected to the presidency .
 Eisenhower made a tentative decision to run for president in January . Eisenhower's medical report on February 14 strengthened by an excellent medical report . Eisenhower has been in the news since January .
 He could not abide the idea that Adlai Stevenson might be his successor, and he was not confident of the election of any other Republican . Also, he could not tolerate the idea of Adr. Stevenson being his successor .
 Eisenhower had a desire to finish what he had begun, says President Eisenhower . "I believe too ... I believe too that Eisenhower had ... a desire for a finish," he says .
 He would need another four years to leave a lasting imprint on the party and on the nation . President Obama would need to be re-elected in November 2014 .
 Eisenhower declared his intention to run at a press conference on February 29 . Eisenhower declares his intentions to run for president in 2012 .
 He invited a small group to join him in the Oval Office that night for the televised speech he was going to make announcing his decision . The president invited a group of people to watch the televised announcement .
 Milton Eisenhower sat on the sofas in front of the fireplace while Eisenhower sat at the desk facing the camera . Jim Hagerty, Len Hall, Jerry Persons, Milton Eisenhower, and I sat on sofases . Len Hall and Jerry Persons were on the fireplace .
 When he had finished we all shook hands, and he invited us up to the Family Quarters for a drink . He invited us to drink at the end .
 Eisenhower was in a strangely subdued mood as he sat in the living room at the end of the West Hall . As we sat in Eisenhower's living room, he was in an oddly subdued mood .
 He was glad that the decision had finally been made and announced, but he did not relish the campaigning that would now begin or the prospect of four more years of the presidency .
 Eisenhower had gone through a difficult period reaching his decision, and he had enjoyed the drama of announcing it . Eisenhower's decision was made after a difficult time reaching it .
 President Obama had to respond to a barrage of political questions, and the first one had to do with me. He immediately had to answer to a number of questions, including whether he would be a candidate for the White House .
 I wouldn’t mention the vice presidency in spite of my tremendous admiration for Mr Nixon, for this reason: I believe it is traditional that the Vice President is not nominated until after a presidential candidate is nominated . So I think that we will have to wait to see who the Republican
 "I have said that my admiration and my respect for Vice President Nixon is unbounded," says Nixon . "I respect and respect for former President Nixon has unbounded. I have said I admire Nixon. I respect Nixon," she says .
 He has been for me a loyal and dedicated associate, and a successful one, I said . He said: 'He has been a loyal, dedicated associate and successful one. He was for me, and I am proud of him'
 Eisenhower had three basic reactions to having me as his running mate in 1956, he says . "I think that once the question was raised, Eisenhower had a basic reaction," he says of Eisenhower's reaction .
 His rule of thumb for making all political judgments was never to do anything that would adversely affect his own chances of winning. First, his rule was that he would never do anything to harm his chance of winning .
 Eisenhower believed that he owed me loyalty due to a staunch and hard-working subordinate . He knew that I had supported him in situations that had clearly been against my own political interests, he said .
 Eisenhower was used to the military system, in which men advanced by taking on the next toughest job and doing it well . Third, Eisenhower used to being used to a military system that he was comfortable with, he says .
 He did not think in terms of grooming a successor or having a protégé . General-staff concept that everyone should serve the commanding general with equally unselfish fervor .
 Eisenhower said that other candidates would be equally acceptable to him . Eisenhower meant that he meant that . When Eisenhower said "Other candidates" would be acceptable, he meant it .
 Newsweek reported Eisenhower’s suggestion that I take a Cabinet position . Newsweek reported that Eisenhower suggested that Eisenhower's suggestion that he would be a Cabinet member .
 A White House insider told a White House reporter a story about the Obama administration . The story had come from an insider, the White House says .
 It was hard to believe that something so sensitive could leak without Eisenhower’s approval . Eisenhower's approval of the leak was approved by the U.S. president .
 If Eisenhower had approved the leak, perhaps I had been misreading him all along . Perhaps he was determined to get me off the ticket and could not understand why I had not taken the hint, he said . And perhaps he was just trying to get rid of the ticket, perhaps he
 The first question at Eisenhower's next news conference on March 7 concerned this Newsweek story . Eisenhower will hold a news conference March 7 .
 Some of your advisers are urging you to dump Vice President Nixon from the Republican ticket this year, writes President Obama . Mr Nixon should stand aside this time and take a Cabinet post, he says .
 If anyone ever has the effrontery to come in and urge me to dump somebody that I respect as I do Vice President Nixon, there will be more commotion around my office than you have noticed yet, Nixon says .
 The only thing I have asked him to do is to chart out his own course, and tell me what he would like to do . 'I'm asking him to chart his own path, and what he wants to do,' he says . 'The only thing he has asked him is
 Everyone had his own interpretation of what Eisenhower meant, but it was generally taken to indicate varying degrees of indifference toward me, or even an attempt to put some distance between us . Eisenhower said, "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 By this time my disillusionment with the way Eisenhower was handling the matter began to affect my own attitude . By that time I was disillusioned with Eisenhower's handling of the matter and my lack of a burning desire to be Vice President .
 After Eisenhower’s press conference, I took a page of notepaper and drafted an announcement that I would not be a candidate in 1956, he says . "I would not run for president in 1956," he writes .
 Senatorial Campaign Committee's chief of staff was in his office later that afternoon . "I mentioned it to Vic Johnston, Vic Johnston," he said, when he was in my office .
 I said it just is not possible in politics for a Vice President to “chart out his own course,” and that if Eisenhower did not want me on the ticket I was damned if I was going to fight to stay on it . I said that it just . is not
 Eisenhower became unhappy with the way the story had developed and held several meetings in an effort to decide what he should do . Eisenhower later found out that about this same time he had become unhappy with how the story was developing .
 Eisenhower raised the question of the vice presidency at a stag dinner at the White House . Charlie Jones, president of Richfield Oil, told me about a small stag dinner with Eisenhower at the time .
 They argued that if there was any possibility that Eisenhower might lose Eisenhower any votes he should drop me like a hot potato . They argued if he might lose any votes, he should be dropped like a 'hot potato'
 Jones was Eisenhower’s contemporary and had been his friend for many years . Jones was one of the few who still called him Ike. Jones was also a friend of Eisenhower .
 "He has taken on the hard jobs that many of your other associates have run away from," says President Obama . "I'm not going to run away," says Obama's deputy chief of staff .
 On March 13, the first primary election of the 1956 campaign was held in New Hampshire . New Hampshire was the first state of the campaign .
 Longworth could never resist anything political, and we were rushed through dinner . Longworth never resisted anything political. Longworth was always trying to make a point .
 I learned that my write-in vote was the big story of the New Hampshire primary . As we sipped coffee and listened to the radio in her drawing room filled with animal skins and photographs of her father .
 Almost 23,000 voters had written in my name on their ballots . But the big surprise was that almost 24,000 people had voted for me . I'm not surprised by how many people voted for my name .
 "I was elated, and I wondered what effect the news would have on the President," says President Obama . "I'm elated," she says of her reaction to the news .
 When Eisenhower was asked about the New Hampshire results at his next press conference, he inched as near to an outright endorsement as he possibly could . He inched closer to a full endorsement of the Republican candidate .
 "I would be happy to be on any political ticket in which I was a candidate with him," she says . She says she would be 'happy to be a candidate' with him .
 If those words aren't plain, then it is merely because people can’t understand the plain unvarnished truth, he says .
 Eisenhower said he asked Vice President Nixon to chart his own course and then report back to him . Then, midway through a news conference on April 25, Eisenhower was asked, “Some time ago, Mr President, you told us that you had asked us that . You told us,
 "The more I thought about it, the more I was convinced that I could not get off the ticket without hurting Eisenhower more than helping him," he says . "I could not help Eisenhower without hurting him more than hurting him," the author says .
 "I knew there would be no way to explain my leaving the ticket that would convince large numbers of party workers that I had not been dumped," she says . She says she knew there was no way of explaining her leaving the party ticket .
 If they felt I had been treated badly they might decide to sit out the election . These people were more my constituency than Eisenhower’s, he said .
 Eisenhower had learned a great deal about politics since 1952, but he still didn't like or understand those he called the “conservative party hacks” in Congress and in local Republican organizations throughout the country . Eisenhower called the conservative party hacks in Congress, in Washington, D.C.
 "I disagreed with the premise that Eisenhower could pick up substantial votes from Democrats and independents by dropping me," says Sen. Bob Kennedy . Kennedy: "I don't think Eisenhower could get a substantial vote from Democrats"
 Eisenhower now had a four-year record to run on and, particularly on economic, foreign policy, and internal security issues, that record was basically conservative . Eisenhower's record was essentially conservative .
 President Barack Obama called the White House on April 26, 2013 . President Obama has been criticized for his actions in the wake of the incident .
 Eisenhower said that he was glad I felt that way and that he had wondered why I had taken so long to say so . Eisenhower said he was pleased that I had said so .
 Eisenhower's imprimatur was enough to silence potential opposition and bring his own White House staff in line . Eisenhower was the president of the United States during the Eisenhower administration .
 32,878 voters wrote in my name on their ballots in the Oregon primary . Three weeks later, I received another unexpected boost from voters . The Oregon primary was held in June .
 With the question of the ticket apparently settled, I expected smooth sailing until the convention . With the ticket issue seemingly settled, the convention was supposed to be smooth sailing . The convention will be held in New York City .
 Eisenhower was in the hospital being operated on for ileitis, a few weeks later . The whole question of his candidacy was superseded by concern about whether he would be able to complete his first term .
 Jim Hagerty called me just before the operation began at about 2:30 A.M. on June 8 . Jim called him just before he called 911 for help in the wake of the shooting .
 Eisenhower recovered from the operation so quickly that there was never much doubt that he could complete his term . Eisenhower recovered quickly and was able to complete his first term .
 The confidence that had grown up since his recovery from the heart attack was dealt a serious blow . Once again there is speculation about his running in November 2014 .
 Stassen was the President’s Cabinet-level Adviser on Disarmament . He was prominent and popular because of his conduct of the delicate Geneva disarmament talks with the Soviets .
 Stassen had been among the first to call me in the days immediately following Eisenhower’s heart attack the previous September pledging his support for the presidential nomination . Eisenhower had been suffering from a heart attack .
 Eisenhower told Eisenhower he would lose more votes for Eisenhower than many other possible running mates, most particularly Governor Christian Herter of Massachusetts . But a private poll showed he would be losing more votes than other possible candidates .
 Eisenhower later said that he found this proposal “astonishing” Eisenhower said that a week earlier Len Hall and Jim Hagerty had received a tentative agreement from Herter to place my name in nomination at the convention . Eisenhower later called the proposal ‘astonishing'
 Eisenhower told Stassen that he was not going to dictate to the convention . Eisenhower said he did not want to dictate what he wanted to do . Eisenhower was president of the United States in 1953 .
 Stassen asked if Eisenhower would mind if he tried to convince him to withdraw from the program . Eisenhower said he would not mind if Eisenhower tried to persuade him to pull out of the program, but he did .
 He called some of his supporters and told them that Eisenhower had said he supported an open convention . He called them to say that Eisenhower said he had said that he supported open convention.
 Herter called Herter to discuss his conclusions about the vice presidency . Herter said the President authorized him to talk to Len Hall and Len Hall .
 Stassen was clearly doing his best to edge all of us—Eisenhower, Herter, and me—to a confrontation . Stassan was clearly trying to edge everyone, including Eisenhower and Herter .
 Three days later, on Monday, July 23, I received a letter from Stassen . Three days after I received the letter, he wrote to the author of the book, he said .
 That afternoon Stassen called a press conference and announced his support for Herter’s candidacy . Herter was the first candidate to run for president in the 1980s .
 Many supporters urged me to shrug off Stassen’s effort as a clownish and transparent power play . Many supporters of the Dutchman said it was a transparent and clownish power play.
 Stassen was a clever man and, except when blinded by ambition, was a very able one . But he knew that he was a good man, except for being blinded by his ambition .
 Stassen could create a dangerously fluid situation in which the convention could be stampeded before the delegates realized what was happening . The convention was stampeded in San Francisco before delegates realized it .
 There were several potential vice presidential candidates eagerly waiting in the wings for just such a situation .
 Eisenhower had left for an official visit to Panama immediately after his meeting with Stassen . Eisenhower had already left for a trip to Panama to meet the Dutchman .
 A few days later Sherman Adams informed Stassen that he would have to take a leave of absence from the White House staff if he intended to pursue his present course .
 Herter called Sherman Adams to find out Eisenhower's real opinion of what had been happening . Herter found out Eisenhower was not happy with what he thought of the situation .
 Eisenhower had expected that in a second term he might be able to help in the international field . Eisenhower had already talked to Dulles about this possibility . If he wished to be vice presidential candidate, that would be a matter of his own choosing .
 Herter would not be able to run for Vice President if he runs for office . Herter has not been elected to the post in the past .
 Herter said that he thought he would continue with his plans as they had stood prior to Stassen’s press conference and arrange to place my name in nomination . Herter: “I thought he thought that he would . continue with plans as . they had . stood
 He thought that would cut off any further attempts to make him Vice President . He thought it would end up being Vice President of the U.S.
 The Stassen bubble was burst less than twenty-four hours after it surfaced . Adams replied, “All right, let’s consider it settled that way,” and the bubble burst .
 Herter telephoned Hall to tell him that he would nominate me, and Hall informed me of the news . Herter told Hall that he had nominated me for the award .
 He blithely told a press conference that the fact that Herter had been asked to nominate me was itself a confirmation of his very strong standing in the party . Herter said the fact he was nominated was a confirmation that he had strong standing .
 The next morning Herter held a press conference in Boston and formally endorsed me for the nomination . Herter's endorsement came in the next morning .
 On August 22, the day on which the convention was to select the vice presidential nominee, Stassen arrived at Eisenhower’s suite at the St. Louis, Missouri, hotel .
 Hall was the Republican National Chairman of the Republican Party . The nomination for Vice President should be postponed until the next day, Hall said .
 Adams told Stassen that he could see Eisenhower only if he agreed beforehand to second his nomination . Adams said he could only be with Eisenhower if he was allowed to see him again . Adams was nominated for President Eisenhower in 1964 .
 Stassen finally seemed to get the message and agreed to accept these terms . He agreed to the terms of the deal .
 Eisenhower was making his announcement in Whittier, California, while Eisenhower was in San Francisco . He was four hundred miles away from the White House .
 Early that morning I had learned that my father had suffered a ruptured abdominal artery and was not expected to live . My father suffered a rupture of an abdominal artery, and he died in hospital .
 "He had rallied a little by the time we got to Whittier, and I was able to talk with him even though he was in great pain and in an oxygen tent," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 "He said that he was feeling much better and insisted that I get back to San Francisco," he said . He insisted that he be back in the U.S.
 "That afternoon I watched the convention on TV in my parents’ living room and saw Chris Herter place my name in nomination," he says . "I'm not going to be president, but I’m looking forward to being president," he adds .
 Nixon was renominated by a vote of 1,323 to 1 . Half an hour later the curtain finally came down on the ‘dump Nixon’ movement .
 The following morning the doctor said my father was much better. The doctor said he was certain the thrill that came with my renomination was a major factor in his improvement. He said the thrill of being nominated was a big factor .
 "When I suggested canceling my acceptance speech to stay with him, he practically blew his top," he said . "He practically blew the top. He practically blew my top. When I suggested cancelling my speech, he almost blew his Top," she said .
 Father John Cronin helped finish his acceptance speech minutes before we had to leave for the convention hall . So Pat and Pat and I returned to San Francisco and finished the speech .
 "We returned to Washington after the convention, but a few days later I was called back to California because of my father’s illness," she says . "I was called to California to help with my father's illness. We returned to D.C. to see him,"
 The doctor told me that it was only his determination to see me defeat Stassen and be renominated that had kept him alive this long . The doctor said that it had been only his determined to see him defeat him and be re-nominated for the title .
 He knew that the end was near, so he gave his mother instructions for his funeral and asked to be allowed to die at home rather than in the hospital . He asked for the funeral instead of a hospital visit .
 After the drama of the preliminaries, most of the 1956 campaign was relatively tame . After the . 1956 campaign, the 1956 season was largely tame .
 Eisenhower invited several hundred party leaders to a picnic at his farm in Gettysburg to kick off the campaign . Eisenhower invited them to his Gettysburg farm to kick-off the campaign.
 Eisenhower, always thin-skinned about criticism and especially resentful of Stevenson, was furious . Eisenhower was furious and wanted to hit back. Eisenhower was angry at Stevenson's remarks .
 He said, “Of course, everybody is now noting that you are talking the new high level.” He said .
 He says Stevenson calls this administration racketeers and rascals . “I want them to be called on it," he said of the administration .
 "If you have to praise me that will be okay. I would like for you to do so," he says . "I would like to see you praise me," he adds .
 "I, of course, will be a little embarrassed by that but I know you have to do it to answer," he says . "You have to be embarrassed," he adds. "But I know I have to answer."
 There were 9 million unemployed in 1939 before World War II, and also a great number before the Korean war . After all, there were 9million unemployed before and after the Korean War .
 I then talked to Brownell and he said, “I don’t think we could win with a so-called high level campaign.” Brownell said . He said he doesn't think he would win with such a high-level campaign .
 Eisenhower played host to Eisenhower at his farm in Eisenhower's hometown . Eisenhower's farm was filled with warm sunshine that afternoon . Eisenhower was the first president to visit the farm .
 I followed Eisenhower's instructions and sank some solid barbs into Stevenson and the Democrats . "I followed Eisenhower instructions and sunk some solid bars into Stevenson's enemies," he said .
 Eisenhower came out to National Airport on the morning of September 18 to see Pat and me off on our first campaign swing . Eisenhower came to see the couple off on their first swing .
 The press corps was stupefied, and the Republican audiences disappointed, when I delivered serious, low-key speeches without any of the tough campaign rhetoric both groups looked forward to hearing from me . President Barack Obama said the press corps and Republican audiences were disappointed .
 As Stevenson’s attacks on Eisenhower and me grew increasingly shrill and irresponsible, I knew that it was only a matter of time before I would have to go on the offensive against him . Stevenson's attacks on me and Eisenhower were shrill, irresponsible, he says .
 "Give ‘em heaven” speech. "Give 'em heaven" speech. We arrived in Eugene, Oregon, for a big rally, and I gave my "give 'em hell" speech .
 "Around 5:30 in the morning I got out of bed and went into the living room of our suite to work on some hard-hitting additions to my basic speech," he says . "I'm working on a speech that's hard to hit," he adds .
 I had not realized how frustrating it had been to suppress the normal partisan instincts and campaign with one arm tied behind my back while Stevenson bombarded us with malicious ridicule and wild charges . I had to suppress my partisan instincts to suppress normal partisan instinct and campaign .
 My new speech delighted audiences, and for the first time, the campaign began to catch fire . My campaign for the Labour Party began to start again after I made a speech that delighted audiences .
 The underlying issue of the campaign was still Eisenhower’s health and the fact that if anything happened to him I would become President. If anything happened, he would be President, he said .
 From the opening crack of the gavel in Chicago until the last lusty cheer echoed and died, Nixon was the target . Nixon was also the target of the anti-war movement .
 Speakers pronounced his name with a sneer, as though it were an obscene epithet . Speakers said his name was pronounced with the same sneer as an obscene phrase .
 There is no man who can safely say he knows where the Vice President stands . President Barack Obama has been accused of corruption in the past .
 In these critical days, America cannot afford the risk of having a President or a Vice President who treats a tragic war as an occasion for political demagoguery, writes David Frum .
 On October 4, I made a nationwide television broadcast answering questions piped in live from newsmen in eight cities . I made the broadcast to answer questions from viewers across the country .
 This experiment proved so successful that I used the televised question-and-answer format in every election campaign until 1972 . This experiment was so successful, I used to use the format in all election campaigns .
 By 1956, 73 percent of American homes had a television set . The effort was as physically punishing as all the others had been .
 Pat and I made three cross-country campaign sweeps in a chartered plane . Pat and Pat made three trips to the U.S.
 Vice President Barack Obama has the largest press contingent ever assigned to a vice presidential candidate . "I was carrying the main load of campaigning for the administration," he says .
 "I held at least one and sometimes two press conferences every working day. I held one press conference every day," he says . "I was a very successful journalist," he adds .
 From the start of the campaign, the polls had fairly consistently shown Eisenhower and me ahead . The polls had been consistently consistent with Eisenhower's victory, but the polls showed him ahead .
 In the final days and hours of the campaign, three foreign crises erupted that effectively finished off what few hopes of winning Stevenson might have had .
 The American people rally around the President in times of international crisis, and this was no exception . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday night .
 On October 19 a brief revolt broke out in Communist Poland, and on October 23 the Hungarian rebellion began in Budapest and quickly spread through the country . Soviet troops rolled in to crush it .
 I called Nikita Khrushchev the “Butcher of Budapest”—a sobriquet that stuck and was repeated around the world . I called him the ‘Butcher’ of Budapest, a sobriacle that stuck around the globe .
 On October 29, Israel invaded Egypt after several months of dispute over access to the Suez Canal . The Israeli invasion took place on October 29 after months of tension over access .
 British and French paratroops landed in Egypt to support the Israeli invasion and protect their own rights there . On November 5, the day before our election, they landed in support of the Egyptian invasion .
 Eisenhower and Dulles put heavy public pressure on Britain, France, and Israel to withdraw forces from Suez . Suez was a major source of tension in the region .
 Nasser became even more rash and aggressive than before, and the seeds of another Mideast war were planted . Nasser was even more aggressive and aggressive in the wake of his assassination .
 Britain and France were humiliated and discouraged by the Suez crisis . They lost the will to play a major role on the world scene . The most tragic result was that they were so humiliated by the crisis .
 From this time forward the U.S. would by necessity be forced to “go it alone” in foreign policy leadership of the free world . The United States would no longer have the power to lead the world's foreign policy, says President Obama .
 I have often felt that if the Suez crisis had not arisen during the heat of a presidential election campaign a different decision would have been made . I have also felt that . if the . Suez Crisis had . not arisen . during the . heat of the election campaign, a different
 This is the truth, the central truth, about the most fateful decision that American people have to make tomorrow . Distasteful as it is, this is, the truth about the decision, the president's decision .
 Many considered this a crude and tasteless appeal, and it probably lost Stevenson more support than it gained . Stevenson's appeal was considered tasteless by many .
 The Eisenhower—Nixon ticket won 57 percent of the vote, carrying fortyone of the forty-eight states . When the votes were counted the next night, the Eisenhower and Nixon ticket was 57 percent .
 On election night Pat and I joined the Eisenhowers at a victory celebration at the Sheraton-Park Hotel . Pat and Pat were at the victory celebration .
 Eisenhower was genuinely elated at what looked like a real landslide from the moment the first fragmentary returns started coming in . Eisenhower was rarely seen in higher spirits; he was actually elated .
 By the time the returns from the Midwest were tallied, it was clear that Eisenhower's personal victory was not going to spill over into the state or congressional races . By the end of the day, Eisenhower's victory was clear .
 Eisenhower simply could not understand how this could happen, just as he found it difficult to understand when it happened to him in 1972 . Eisenhower simply couldn't understand how he was allowed to be allowed to leave the country .
 He became more and more subdued as we sat there slowly sipping highballs and watching television . He became increasingly subdued as he sat down and watched television .
 Eisenhower had blamed the conservatives for the party's problems . This was not the first time he had blamed conservatives for his party's troubles .
 In many cases he was justified in being exasperated and annoyed by splits within the party . In others, he lacked tolerance for diversity that someone more schooled in politics would have had .
 Eisenhower: "I thought it would be a mistake for Eisenhower to talk about as controversial a party issue as Modern Republicanism on an occasion like this"
 Stevenson conceded at about 1:30 A.M. and Eisenhower went downstairs . Eisenhower said that his victory was a victory for Modern Republicanism . Stevenson won the election .
 As I had feared, many party regulars took these words as a boast that he had won the victory by himself, or as a threat that those within the party who did not share his views would gradually be replaced by those who did .
 There was just enough truth in both interpretations to start the second term off on a sour note in some Republican circles .
 A few days before the end of the year, I received a letter from the White House . The White House asked me to write a letter to thank me for my work .
 As both 1956 and our first administration draw to a close, I want to tell you, in a personal letter, what I have so often expressed publicly . As both the 1956 and the first administration . end, he wrote to the nation's first president, George W. Bush .
 In these last four years, you have brought to the office of the Vice President a real stature that formerly it had not known . You have proved yourself an able and popular “Ambassador” to our friends in many other parts of the world, he says .
 "For all of this I am personally indebted to you, and gratified that you have so capably filled all of my expectations," he writes .
 I find that while I have thanked what seem to be thousands of people from Maine to California for their help in the political campaign, I have never expressed my appreciation to you for carrying the brunt of the state-by-state effort . Also—somewhat to my chagrin
 I know you were rewarded as, as, of course, I could not fail to be, by the verdict of the voters. I'm not surprised by the result of the vote, I'm very proud of the result, I say . I know that you're rewarded as well as
 "I do want to express to you, and to your loyal and overworked staff, my tremendous gratitude for all that you did to bring about the final result," says President Obama .
 The Hungarian uprising of 1956 captured the sympathy of the American people . With affectionate regard to Pat and the children, and, as always, my best to yourself, Dwight Eisenhower writes .
 In November and December 1956, after crushing the last flickers of rebellion, the Soviets reimposed their brutal and oppressive control over the Hungarian people . The Soviet Union reimposed its brutal control of Hungary in 1956 .
 Many tried to escape across the border into Austria, and, to the great embarrassment of the determinedly neutral Austrian government, the number of refugees soon reached several thousand a day . Austria's neutral government was embarrassed by the growing numbers of refugees .
 The Soviets and their Hungarian puppets accused the U.S. of having provoked the uprising by assuring the Hungarian rebels that we would aid them if they revolted against their government . The Soviets accused the United States of having provoking the uprising .
 Some of the freedom fighters seemed to agree . Much to our dismay and embarrassment, some of the fighters seem to agree with us .
 They blamed us for first encouraging them to revolt and then sitting back while the Soviets cut them down . The Soviets blame us for not helping them, they said . They blamed the U.S. for not supporting their revolt .
 Eisenhower offered asylum to 21,500 of the more than 100,000 refugees who had already escaped to Austria . Eisenhower had offered asylum . More were pouring over the borders each day each day .
 There was considerable opposition in Congress to letting in any refugees at a time of domestic unemployment . Public opinion was not yet strongly committed to the humanitarian aspects of the situation .
 Eisenhower had acted under temporary provisions of the existing law . He wanted more permanent legislation to handle the refugee question .
 Eisenhower wanted Eisenhower to lead an emergency mission to Austria that would focus national attention on the plight of the refugees . Dulles said that Eisenhower wanted me to lead the mission . Eisenhower said that Dulles wanted to focus national . attention on refugees .
 I could prepare a report that could be used to buttress the case for new legislation . Then, when I returned, I could use it as a report on the issue of new legislation, I said .
 Most of the refugees are Austrian or Red Cross officials, but most of the people I talked to were Austrian officials . I met a few refugees, but many of them were refugees .
 When we returned to the American Embassy, I told our ambassador, Llewellyn "Tommy" Thompson, that I wanted to go to the border and get a real look at what was happening there . "I wanted to look at the border," he says .
 Thompson arranged for a car, and, together with Bill Rogers, Congressman Bob Wilson of California, and Bob King, my administrative assistant, went back to Andau. Thompson arranged a car . Thompson arranged to meet with Rep. Wilson .
 In the bleak refugee center at the border we saw the real agony and the heroism of the Hungarian freedom fighters . The real agony of the Hungarians was captured in the Hungarian refugee center .
 Some of those who escaped that night were university students who spoke English . They told us about the suffering that was still going on in Budapest and throughout Hungary .
 Looks of surprise came over their faces as their faces were translated . I deliberately asked them a question: 'What do you think of us? What do we think of you?'
 I was later told that that that simple exchange broke the ice and convinced the refugees that I wasn’t going to try to sweep their situation under the carpet. ‘That simple exchange’s ‘broke the ice’ and convinced them, ‘I wasn
 Many people escaped through the deep forests that covered the border for some miles to the north . One of the refugee leaders told me that many people escaped . Many of the refugees are still in the refugee camp .
 The refugees would wait in the barn of some friendly farmers until they could be brought to a refugee center . Once across, the refugees would stay in a barn until they were brought to the center .
 He asked me if I would like to go along while they picked up that night’s “crop,” as he called it . He asked for me to go with them to pick up the "crop," he said .
 We left the lights of the refugee center behind, following the winding road that ran between the forest on one side and the farms on the other .
 At one farm, we picked up a young man who said he had hidden for three days before he had finally made a dash across the border about five hours before . The young man said he was hiding in the area for about three days .
 It was after six o'clock in the morning by the time we got back to the center, and I could only say some hasty farewells before the long drive back to Vienna .
 After a quick shower and change at the ambassador’s residence, I was only a few minutes late for a nine o’clock meeting . After a brief shower and a quick change, I went back to the ambassador's residence . I had a meeting with the ambassador to discuss
 I returned to Washington on Christmas Eve, and by working through the holiday I was able to submit my report to Eisenhower on New Year’s Day . I worked through the holidays to get the report to the president .
 I urged that the McCarran—Walter Act regulating immigration be amended so that we could make a flexible response to this situation . President Obama has urged that he would be able to act as a flexible immigration response .
 I said it would not be wise or realistic to tie ourselves down to either a fixed number of refugees or a fixed percentage of the total number . I said that it would be not wise or . realistic to . Tie yourself down to a fixed . number or percentage of refugees .
 I was disappointed by the hardhearted attitude many Americans seemed to have toward the Hungarian refugees . I'm disappointed with Americans' attitude toward the Hungarians, I said .
 I felt the same way when there was similar resistance to the Cuban refugees in 1959 and to the Vietnamese refugees in 1975 . I felt a similar way when . there were similar . resistance to Cuban refugees . in 1959, and to Vietnam refugees in the 1970s, he said .
 When I reflect on the Hungarian uprising of 1956, and the Czechoslovakian rebellion of 1968, I still feel an utter hopelessness about what we can do to help the people in the Communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
 The combined realities of their geographic position and the difficulty of arranging the kind of joint military operation with our European allies that would be required to be effective . We simply cannot and will not use our armed forces in the event of an open rebellion against their Communist dictators .
 It is irresponsible to urge them to armed rebellion, raising their hopes and encouraging them to risk their lives without any prospect of assistance from us. Consequently, it's irresponsible to encourage them to .
 I do not feel that it is an acceptable alternative to slam down the Iron Curtain and accept the idea that they are destined to live forever under Communist rule . But I don't think it is acceptable alternative .
 Such change could take a generation, maybe a century, maybe even a century . Admittedly, it is not a very satisfactory one because such change could be a generation .
 In the meantime we must seize every opportunity to increase contact and communication with the people of these countries so that they will know we share their hopes for a better life .
 On November 25, 1957, I received a terse phone call from Sherman Adams, asking me to come to the White House right away . The President's "stoke" is the story of the President's first stoke . The story goes back to President Nixon .
 Eisenhower’s ability to read, write, and reason had suffered no damage . Eisenhower's only aftereffect was an occasional hesitancy in finding the right word, an impairment about which he was painfully self-conscious .
 He made a point in public of appearing to be in complete control of his stroke . But those who saw him in private caught occasional glimpses of the serious psychological effect the stroke had on him .
 He was depressed by the fear that he could no longer bring to the presidency the physical or mental qualities it required, and this was a serious blow to his morale . He said: "He feared he would not be able to bring in the physical, mental qualities required"
 He was deeply disturbed by some of the press coverage of his condition during his recovery, especially references to occasional misspoken words .
 He did have some difficulty in speaking at times but by iron discipline and will power he overcame it . "Iron discipline" and "will power" helped him overcome it, he says .
 Some editorial writers and columnists even suggested he should resign or delegate interim powers to me . But they recoiled at the idea of my succeeding him in office, they said .
 "I told him that he should consider the source and ignore them. One day when he seemed particularly depressed by these attacks, I told him to ignore them," he said .
 The most important point, I reminded him, was that there was nothing the matter with his brain . "There was nothing in his brain," he said. "I reminded him of the fact that there is nothing in there that matters."
 This broke the tension, and he laughed more heartily than I had heard him laugh for weeks . This breaks the tension and he laughs heartily .
 I had always felt that Eisenhower could cut down considerably on his workload without neglecting his essential duties . Eisenhower could have done so much more than that he could do, says historian .
 I told him there was no reason that individual Cabinet officers should not make more decisions on their own, particularly domestic ones, he said . I said there is no reason why individual Cabinet officials should not be made more decisions .
 Eisenhower agreed, but he was sensitive about taking any step that might be interpreted as an admission that he could no longer handle the full job . Eisenhower agreed to step down, but was sensitive .
 Within a few months he was again attending every meeting and allowing the discussions to ramble on . It was as if it were his duty to be bored for his country as well as to lead it .
 Eisenhower established a procedure in case of any future debilitating illness during his term . Eisenhower's stroke was an important result of his stroke was the procedure that Eisenhower established .
 When Congress took no action to fill the constitutional void with regard to presidential disability, Bill Rogers, Foster Dulles, and I worked with Eisenhower to develop a plan that would suffice at least for the balance of his administration .
 Eisenhower personally drafted and sent to me a letter setting forth the procedures to be followed . Eisenhower drafted a letter to me that would set out procedures .
 The entire determination of fitness was to be made by the President and Vice President . The President and the Vice President will make the final decision .
 If Eisenhower concluded that he could no longer perform his duties, he would tell me and I would then become acting President with full authority until he decided he was able to resume his duties .
 If he were incapable of making or expressing a decision, I was to act on my own authority after appropriate consultation and serve as acting President until such time as he decided he was sufficiently recovered to resume .
 This plan was no substitute for a permanent constitutional solution, but it was a workable arrangement, which, fortunately, never had to be put to the test . The plan was not a substitute for permanent constitutional solutions, but was workable .
 Kennedy wrote a similar letter to Lyndon Johnson before his inauguration . Kennedy also wrote a letter to LBJ .
 This issue was formally settled by the adoption in 1967 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the Constitution . The amendment was formally adopted in 1967 .
 Secretary of Labor Jim Mitchell and I were desperately—and unsuccessfully—trying to talk our colleagues in the Cabinet into a jobstimulating tax cut that would get the economy moving again .
 Assistant Secretary of State Roy Rubottom Jr. asked me in early March if I would consider heading our official delegation to the inauguration of the new President of Argentina, Arturo Frondizi .
 Frondizi was the winner of Argentina’s first free elections in twenty years . The dictator Juan Perón had been overthrown in 1955, and the dictator was overthrown .
 I said that I could not take on another foreign trip at that time, but in the next few days both Dulles and Eisenhower made it clear that they felt it was important for me to go, and I had little choice but to agree, he says .
 Eisenhower represented Eisenhower at the inauguration of President Kubitschek in 1956 . Rubottom immediately began lobbying for one or two extra stops, and by the end of the week, the itinerary included every country in South America except Brazil .
 When several communist students tried to interrupt me, they were shouted down by the rest, and I left amid cheers . The student leader was booed by students and cheered by the crowd .
 Ambassador Robert Woodward told me that this brief stop had been a tremendous success . Ambassador Woodward said the stop was a "tremendous success"
 South Americans above all have contempt for fear or timidity, he said . South Americans admire courage and the dramatic gesture, he added .
 "We received warm receptions from the people in Argentina, Paraguay, and Bolivia," says President Obama .
 By the time we reached Peru, it was clear that the communists would have to resort to more extreme tactics if they were to succeed in spoiling the trip . The communists would need to use even more extreme measures in order to win back control .
 When we got back to our hotel after lunch with President Manuel Prado, there was a large crowd in front of the hotel . The crowd was less than friendly and more than curious .
 It was clear that the demonstrations were entering a more dangerous phase . The demonstrations were becoming more dangerous, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 The rector of the university and the chief of police had let it be known that they hoped we would cancel the visit . The communists had openly boasted that they would prevent me from going there, and both the rector and the police had hoped it was canceled .
 "Most of our embassy officials felt that I should cancel rather than risk an incident that might have a serious effect on our relations with Peru," says President Obama .
 "I said that I would call it off only if the rector or the chief of police issued a statement requesting me to do so. I said that . I said only if . the rectors or the . chief of . police issued . a statement . requesting that he called it
 An embassy staff member made some phone calls and returned to inform us that the rector was afraid the communist students might blame him for depriving them of the incident they were hoping to provoke . The chief of police did not want to run the risk of being charged with inability to maintain order
 Each wanted the visit canceled, but none would take the responsibility for canceling it . Each wanted to cancel the visit but none wanted to take responsibility .
 "I believe from a personal standpoint you should make a decision not to go," he said . He said he believes from personal standpoint, “I believe ... you should ... not go’t .
 The crowd outside the hotel had grown large and ugly, chanting anti-American and anti-Nixon slogans . Around midnight, the crowd outside of the hotel chanted anti-U.S. slogans .
 "In the morning, the first thing everyone wanted to know was what I had decided," she said . "In a morning, everyone was asking: 'What do you have to do with your life?'
 A wreath-laying ceremony at the statue of José de San Martin, the liberator of Peru, was his first activity in Peru .
 The custom is to place the wreath and then stand at attention for about thirty seconds in silence . It is then stand for about 30 seconds to silence .
 "I must have stood there for at least two minutes. That morning, however, I stood there there for two minutes," he says .
 I did not want a provocative retinue of embassy officials or policemen to accompany me onto the campus . I did want to avoid a provocative retinue of embassy officials, policemen or policemen .
 Only Colonel Vernon Walters and Jack Sherwood were with me as I walked toward the solid wall of screaming demonstrators that blocked the gate . Only my interpreter, Vernon Walters, and Jack . Sherwood, was with me .
 When we got near our hotel, however, we could see that a great part of the San Marcos mob had preceded us . We were greeted by a mob when we arrived in San Marcos .
 I assumed that the ringleaders were expecting us at the front entrance, so I had the driver let us out a short distance away . The driver had to be let out of the car a short way from the entrance .
 We were only about fifty feet from the entrance when the crowd realized who we were, and a shrill, savage cry went up . We walked as quickly as we could, and we walked as fast as possible, to get to the entrance .
 In wedge formation, we were able to cover the rest of the distance in just a few moments . But surprise was on our side, with surprise being on our own side .
 Demonstrators blocked my way through the door of the hotel when I was blocked by one of them . I was about to go through the hotel door when one of the demonstrators blocked me way . The incident happened in a hotel room in central London .
 I thought he was going to speak to me or shout at me; instead, he spit in my face . He spit in his face. I thought . Instead, he spat in the face. It was not a fight, it was a fight for his life .
 She had been watching the mob from her hotel room . She said, “It wasn’t just hate those people had in their eyes. It was just hate . It was hate .
 "I was hailed as a hero by the citizens of Lima. For the rest of the day, wherever I went I was hailed a hero," he said . "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it's a miracle," he added .
 The incident at San Marcos had shocked and shamed patriotic Peruvians . Cheering crowds tried to erase the memory of the jeering students .
 I told reporters that the greatest danger a non-Communist nation faced was from the handful of activists and infiltrators who could impose their will on the whole society . I told the reporters that . I said the greatest risk was from a handful of . activists and . infiltrators . who
 On the flight from Lima to Quito, Ecuador, we tried to call Tricia and Julie on the plane’s radio telephone in order to reassure them that we were all right .
 I cabled ahead to have our ambassador tell the Venezuelan government that if it wanted to cancel my visit I would understand . The Venezuelan government said it would not cancel his visit if it were to cancel .
 Venezuelan officials reported that everything was completely under control . Right up until our arrival, however, the Venezuelan officials said that everything had been under control.
 Maiquetia Airport is just outside Caracas, Venezuela, just outside the city of Caracas . Caracas is the capital of Venezuela .
 We could hear yelling and whistling even before the plane’s engines had cut off . The plane's engines cut off, and the plane's voice was muffled, the pilot said .
 The honor guard fired a nineteen-gun salute and a band played the Venezuelan and American national anthems . Pat and Pat stood at attention at the top of the ramp while the honor guard played the national an thems .
 The landing strip had been cleared except for the official welcoming party . The landing pad had been closed except for a welcoming party for the first time .
 Large crowd of demonstrators stood behind the fences at the edge of the runways and on the observation deck on the roof of the terminal building . Demonstrators stood behind fences at edge of runways .
 A red carpet ran from the foot of the stairs to the terminal building where the motorcade was assembled to take us the twelve miles into Caracas . The motorcade took us the 12 miles to Caracas, Venezuela .
 Both anthems had kept up a raucous counterpoint to each other . The whistles and catcalls had been kept up from the whistle-and-cheek .
 As I shook hands, the welcoming party seemed determined to ignore the screams of the crowd . As I shake hands I was greeted by a group of people in the crowd, I was met with a smile .
 I took Pat’s arm and started walking along the red carpet toward the terminal . "I took Pat's arm and took him to the terminal," he said .
 The band leader suddenly began playing the Venezuelan anthem again . We had almost reached the terminal door when the anthem was played again .
 For a second it seemed as if it had begun to rain, then I realized that the crowd on the observation deck just above our heads was showering us with spit . "For a second, it seemed like it had started to rain," she says .
 After we passed through the terminal and walked out of the terminal, we were surrounded by demonstrators . After we left the airport, the demonstrators surrounded us .
 While we waited for Sherwood and his other agents to clear the way to the car, they continued to pelt us . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Pat leaned over the barricade toward a young girl who had just spit at her . Pat leaned toward the girl who was spitting at her. Pat leaned to the girl's face . Pat was arrested for spitting on her face .
 When Pat put her hand on the girl’s shoulder and smiled at her, it was as if something snapped inside the girl, and she turned her head away and broke into sobs . Pat smiled at the girl when she saw Pat's hand on her shoulder and said, '
 Foreign Minister kept offering me his handkerchief to wipe some of the spit off my clothes . The embarrassed Foreign Minister offered to wipe off his clothes .
 As we entered Caracas, a barrage of rocks flew toward us, and a mob ran out from the side streets and alleys . A mob ran from the streets, alleys, and threw rocks at us . The incident occurred in Caracas .
 A solid wall of vehicles was strung across the street from the sidewalk to the traffic island in the center . About four blocks from the Panteón Nacional a solid wall was erected on the street .
 A steady flow of cars in the opposite direction made it impossible to drive over the island . The island is a popular tourist attraction in New York City .
 Hundreds of people suddenly appeared from the streets and alleys, running toward our car . Hundreds of thousands of people appeared suddenly, running to our car, we said .
 "Our only protection was our augmented detail of twelve courageous Secret Service agents who did a superhuman job in trying to fend off the mob," says President Obama .
 The first rock hit the car window, lodging itself in the glass and spraying us with tiny slivers . We realized that we were completely alone as the first rock struck the car .
 One sliver hit the Foreign Minister in the eye, and he started to bleed heavily . The Foreign Minister was hit by a sliver of the sliver, which hit his eye .
 Once again, the glass held, but flying slivers hit Walters in the mouth . Walters was hit by the slivers, but the glass holds on .
 The idea that we had somehow broken free gave me a surge of relief . Suddenly the car began to move, and the idea that . we had managed to get out of the car . The car then started to move .
 The crowd was rocking the car back and forth—slower and higher each time each time . Then I realized that the crowd was rocking the car . The crowd rocked the car, rocking it back and back, and it was rocking again and again .
 I remembered that it was a common tactic for mobs to turn a car over and then set it on fire . I remembered how common it was to turn over a car and set it alight .
 "I believe that at that moment, for the first time, each of us in the car realized we might actually be killed," he says . He says he believes that at the moment, "for the first . time" each of the . car realized they might be killed .
 "I looked through the rear window and was relieved to see that the mob was concentrating on us and ignoring her car," she said . The mob was focused on her car and ignored her car, she added .
 "Once a gun went off, the crowd would go berserk and that would be the end of us," he said . "We would have been killed if we had a gun shot," he added .
 Finally the press truck in front of us managed to break out of the jam and swerve over the traffic island and into the lane of traffic coming from the opposite direction . Finally the driver in the truck managed to swerve into the opposite lane .
 Like a blocker leading a running back, the truck cleared a path for us. Like a blocking block for us, it was like a truck clearing a path . The truck cleared the way for us to get on the field .
 "Our driver gunned the engine and shot around the truck, picking up speed," says driver . "We're going to get back in the air," the driver said .
 We had been trapped for only twelve minutes, but it seemed like a lifetime . We were trapped for 12 minutes but it was a lifetime. We had to wait for another 12 minutes .
 Our police motorcycle escort suddenly appeared again and started signaling our driver to follow . The escort then signaled our driver's car to follow them back to the scene .
 The Foreign Minister began talking about getting back on schedule, and it dawned on him that the escort was leading us to the Panteón for the wreath-laying ceremony, he said . "The Foreign Minister was talking about ... getting back to schedule," he added .
 As we reached the next intersection, I called out to the driver to turn quickly, and as he did, the motorcycles rode on . The motorcycles ride on .
 I told the driver that the important thing was not to go anyplace where we would be expected. I told him that we would not be expected to go anywhere where we were expected, he said . The race was not the first time the team had been in contact with the World Cup
 There would certainly be another mob waiting at the Panteón and also at the government guesthouse where we were scheduled to stay . There would also be a mob waiting for us at the guesthouse .
 Pats car and the truck carrying the reporters and photographers were following right behind . By some miracle Pats car was able to keep up with the reporters .
 "I asked the driver to pull over, and I walked back to make sure that she was all right," she said . "I walked back and said she was OK," she later said .
 I gave them a brief rundown of the situation and told them that I had decided to go directly to the embassy . "I told them I was going to visit the embassy," she said. "I'm not going to be surprised," she added .
 It was an immense relief to drive through the embassy gate and see the U.S. flag flying from the roof . It was a relief to see the American flag flying out of the roof of the embassy .
 A cache of Molotov cocktails were ready to be thrown at the ceremony, an investigation revealed . Word had arrived that a bloodthirsty mob of several thousand had been waiting for us at Panteón plaza .
 Members of the ruling military junta are on their way to the embassy to make an official apology . The ruling junta is expected to apologize for the incident .
 One of the ambassador’s aides wanted to have our battered limousine taken around to the back of the building so that it would not embarrass them . The ambassador's aides asked to have the limo moved around to a back-of-the-building so it wouldn't
 I said that it would be very dangerous to ascribe the riots to the fact that after ten years of repressive dictatorship the people did not know how to exercise restraint in enjoying their new freedom .
 Those mobs were communists led by Communists, and they had no devotion to freedom at all . The mobs were Communists led by Communist Party members, he says .
 Around nine o'clock there was a knock on the door and Rubottom and the ambassador asked if they could have a word with me . The ambassador asked for a 'word with me' to discuss the situation .
 I didn't see how I could take another meeting at this point and started to tell them so when Rubottom said that a new crisis had arisen because of a news report that had just been received from Washington. I didn’t see how . I started to . tell them
 The Venezuelan radio was apparently reporting this precautionary measure as a fullscale invasion . The radio apparently reported the move as an invasion of Venezuela .
 Communications between Caracas and Washington had been cut for a critical period after the riot that afternoon . Only later did we find out that communications between the U.S. and Caracas were cut for the critical period .
 The last message the State Department had received before the cutoff was a flash report that the local security system had completely broken down, that anti-American mobs were on the loose, and that I was under attack . The State Department received the last message from the White House .
 Venezuelan authorities had the situation well in hand, the government said in a statement . "We immediately tried to rectify the situation by issuing a statement that we saw no need for outside assistance," the president said . The Venezuelan government issued a statement saying the situation was "well in hand"
 The next morning I felt that we should leave Venezuela as soon as possible . "I felt that the next morning, I had to leave Venezuela," she said .
 The junta members were pleading that I attend a luncheon they had planned in my honor that afternoon, and they guaranteed that they would deliver me safely to the airport immediately afterward . The luncheon was scheduled for that afternoon .
 "I accepted their invitation, even though I still had trepidations about their ability to maintain security," he says . "I accept their invitation," he writes . "Even though I accepted their invite, I accepted them, I had doubts about security."
 "From the moment they arrived at the embassy to escort me to the luncheon, however, I realized that my fears had been unnecessary," she said .
 It looked as if they had come to declare war rather than take me to lunch . It looked like they had gone to war, rather than lunch, I said .
 The security extended even to the food; they had replaced the caterer lest our food be tampered with . Security extended even though the food was replaced by a replacement . The food was not tampered, but it was replaced with a new security .
 "The limousine in which I was riding with the Provisional President was an arsenal on wheels," he said . The limo was a 'armour on wheels', he added .
 The floor was piled with submachine guns, revolvers, rifles, tear gas canisters, and ammunition clips . There was hardly room for our feet. The floor of the room was covered in ammunition clips and ammunition .
 "I saw that the junta had decided to make a symbolic point by taking me along the same route I had traveled the day before," he says . The junta decided to take him along a symbolic route, he says, "to make a point"
 The streets were almost empty and heavily patrolled by armed soldiers . This time, however, they are almost empty . The streets are almost deserted and heavily policed by soldiers .
 At first I thought this was a protest sign, but when I saw the police wearing gas masks I realized that the whole area had been teargassed . At first, I thought it was a sign of protest, but I realized it was teargassing .
 The airport was like a ghost town; the terminal was empty and eerily silent . The terminal was eerly silent and the airport was empty . The airport is now a 'ghost town'
 After shaking hands with our hosts, Pat and Pat went up the steps to our plane . After shaking . hands with . Pat, Pat went to the steps of our plane. Pat and . Pat's plane .
 At the top we turned and waved briefly to the small group standing below . At the end of the climb, we waved to the group below .
 A large crowd greeted us when we landed at National Airport in Washington, D.C.
 Eisenhower was there, along with the Cabinet, the leaders of Congress, and the diplomatic corps . Eisenhower was at the memorial service for his wife .
 Tricia and Julie were waiting for us at the bottom of the stairs, and they could hardly contain their tears of joy . Tricia, Julie and Tricia said they couldn't contain their joy at the moment .
 For several weeks after our return from South America, neither Pat nor I could appear anywhere in public without people standing up to applaud . Pat and Pat could not be seen in public for several weeks before people stood up and applauded .
 For the first time I pulled even with Kennedy in the Gallup presidential trial heat polls . The president's presidential trial trial heat poll is now tied with Kennedy for first time .
 The positive reaction to the Caracas incident was naturally satisfying . "The positive reaction will be naturally satisfying," he said. "I'm not surprised by the reaction," he added .
 "I never forgot how lucky we were to get out alive from what I had thought was going to be the most boring trip we had ever taken. But I never forgot that we were lucky we got out alive"
 Congress was in an ugly mood in the summer of 1958 . The resignation of Sherman Adams was a major embarrassment for Congress .
 The Republicans were fighting each other more than they were fighting the Democrats . Democrats were digging up every possible issue they could throw at us in the fall elections . The GOP was fighting more than it was fighting Democrats, says Sen. Rand Paul .
 Sherman Adams was charged in June by the Subcommittee on Legislative Oversight of the House Interstate and Foreign Commerce Committee . Adams has been charged with numerous felonies, including perjury and perjury .
 Adams’s hotel bills had been paid by a New England industrialist named Bernard Goldfine . It appeared that some of Adams's hotel bills were paid by an industrialist .
 Democrats charged Adams had done favors for Goldfine and claimed they had uncovered a case of influencepeddling in the White House . Democrats charged that Adams did favors to Goldfine .
 Adams’s influence with Eisenhower and his cold and abrupt personal demeanor were a standard feature of many Washington dinner parties and gossip columns . Stories of Adams and Eisenhower's influence with each other were standard feature in many Washington D.C. gossip columns and columns .
 For the Democrats he was a natural target as the President’s Chief of Staff . For the Republicans, he has been accused of being a Democrat .
 Adams’s most vocal and unrelenting critics turned out to be Republicans . But many of Adams's most vocal critics turned to be Democrats . Adams was elected to Congress in 1996 .
 The day after Stevenson made his attack, Barry Goldwater called Adams a political liability . Goldwater, who was running for re-election to the Senate, called Adams' political liability.
 Adams was not able to depend on compensating support from liberal Republicans . Adams was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 He had been so successful and so evenhanded in his role as Eisenhower's "no man" that he had few friends when he came under serious attack . He was so successful that he was attacked for being an evenhanded politician .
 Most people did not have the slightest idea what a vicufia coat was, but it sounded expensive . Most people had never heard of the coat, and it was expensive .
 He admitted to a lack of prudence in dealings with Goldfine, but made a favorable impression as an honest man who would not intentionally use his public influence for private profit .
 Eisenhower’s personal popularity was not as high as it had been, and he was increasingly plagued by his lame-duck status . Eisenhower was a president of the Eisenhower administration in the early 1950s .
 His defense of Adams had surprisingly little influence on Republican leaders . Adams' defense of the Adams family was largely ignored by Republicans .
 Republican state chairmen around the country clamored for Adams's head . Bill Knowland, the Minority Leader in the Senate, called for Adams’s resignation . Knowland is the Senate's Minority Leader .
 Goldfine had paid bills for and given presents to several senators and governors . Hotel bills for Adams and his family amounted to over $3,000 . Some of the money was deducted as business expenses .
 A temporary respite occurred when it was discovered that Goldfine’s hotel room had been bugged by a House committee investigator . Jack Anderson, then an assistant to columnist Drew Pearson, was also found listening in an adjoining room . A House committee member was found listening to Goldfine
 Goldfine paid Adams’s hotel bills and those of Senator Fred Payne, a Republican coming up for re-election in Maine . The controversy resumed when, on July 10, it was revealed that Goldfine had paid Payne's hotel bills .
 On July 14, in the midst of this political turmoil, the Middle East erupted . The Middle East has been in turmoil since then .
 King Faisal and other members of the royal family of Iraq were murdered during a successful military takeover of Iraq in the 1980s . He was killed during a military takeover .
 Lebanese President Camille Chamoun asked the U.S. for help in Lebanon . Fearing that Syria would follow suit and cross into Lebanon, Lebanon's president asked for help .
 "He was pacing the floor, and for the first time he conveyed his frustration with Adams situation," he said . "For the first reason, he conveyed to me that he was frustrated with the Adams situation"
 He said nothing to indicate any lack of support for Adams . But he could tell that his patience was wearing thin .
 He asked me to keep him advised of anything I thought he should know about the situation . He asked for me to tell him anything he wanted to know, including anything he could .
 Just before Congress adjourned in late August, Eisenhower and I. Eisenhower talked about the Adams case . The case remains unsolved .
 "I felt I had to be completely frank with him about the political implications," she says . "I was completely frank about the politics implications. I felt he had a very difficult time," she adds .
 Democrats will inevitably make the Adams case a major campaign issue . Republican candidates would eventually have to take sides in the case .
 I told him that most of our candidates would probably come out against Adams, he said . Adams is a candidate for a Democratic candidate for president in 2016 .
 When Congress adjourned on August 24, I kept a long-standing promise to Pat and the girls, I took them by train to The Greenbrier in West Virginia .
 Every vacation we had planned since coming to Congress in 1947 had been cut short, but this time I really thought it would be different, he says . "Every vacation we'd planned since we came to Congress was cut short," he adds .
 RNC Chairman Meade Alcorn asked RNC Chairman to avoid a public discussion of Adams . He had heard that the Adams issue might be brought up at the RNC meeting in Chicago in a few days .
 He asked me to talk bluntly to Adams about the political realities of the situation we faced, he said . He asked him to talk about the situation he faced, Adams said .
 He did not authorize me to say that he wanted Adams to resign, but it was clear he wanted the result of our conversation to be Adams’s resignation .
 Adams: "I gave Adams my straightforward appraisal of the present situation from a political standpoint" Adams: I gave Adams his straightforward assessment of the situation from the political standpoint .
 I told him that most of the candidates and party leaders across the country believed that he should resign. I also told him most of them believe he should quit. He said: "Most of the people in the country believe that he must resign. He should resign"
 I replied that only Eisenhower could answer that question, and I had not discussed it with him . I replied: "Only Eisenhower can answer this question."
 He pressed me further to try to determine whether I was expressing my own views, reporting on the views of others, or reflecting the President’s position, he said .
 "He hasn't told me to tell you this, Sherm, so I am only expressing my personal view. I replied, “He hasn’t told me . He replied, "I replied to him, ‘I am just expressing my own view.”
 "From the way he talked about ‘seeing the boss,” it seemed clear that he was not going to take my hints," he said . "He seemed like he intended to hang on as long as he could," he added .
 Sherman Adams had earned the reputation of keeping icy cold no matter how hot the situation was . Adams has earned a reputation for his icy coldness no matter what happens .
 In this case, however, I could see that the strain was beginning to tell . The strain was starting to tell.
 While I was in his office he took a bottle of pills from his desk, poured a couple of the tablets into his hand, and swallowed them with a glass of water .
 I told him that Adams was clearly not going to budge without first talking directly to him personally . Adams had asked to speak to Adams as he had asked, but that he was not willing to . I told Adams that I had just talked to him as he'd asked .
 I was called over to the Oval Office a while later and found the President hitting 5-irons on the South Lawn . The President was playing golf with a group of golfers on the White House .
 Ann Whitman, Eisenhower’s personal secretary, had warned him that he was in a “sour mood,” and it showed up in his golf game . Ann Whitman had warned me that Eisenhower was in “a ” sour mood.” Ann Whitman
 He looked out the car window for a minute and then said, “He has a heart condition.” He then said he was worried about his son's condition .
 Later that evening I went back to The Greenbrier to rejoin Pat and the girls . "I went back and went to see Pat again," he said .
 Eisenhower went to his summer White House in Newport, Newport, and Adams went to New Brunswick, New Brunswick . Eisenhower and Adams both vacationed in New York .
 Meade Alcorn was able to forestall any public action by the Republican state chairmen and campaign officials . Alcorn: "I'm not going to get involved in this race. I'm going to be a Republican"
 Poll finds overwhelming majority in favor of Eisenhowers firing Adams or Adams resigning .
 Eisenhower was told by the White House that an association between Goldfine and the chief assistant to the President was a reflection upon the White house that Eisenhower should not allow it to continue . They had apparently told him .
 He told Alcorn to work with him to settle the matter as quickly as possible . Alcorn said he wants to settle it quickly as a matter of urgency .
 At eleven that morning Alcorn came to my office at the Capitol so that we could plan our strategy . Alcorn's office was at 11:30 a.m. to plan out the strategy .
 The halls were swarming with reporters who sensed a crisis brewing, so I suggested to Alcorn that he meet with Adams alone . Alcorn: The halls of Congress was swarming, and I suggested that Alcorn should meet alone .
 If the two left my office and went to the White House together, the reporters would follow us . "It might become impossible to accomplish our objective of giving Adams a dignified opportunity to resign," he says .
 Alcorn met with Adams at two o’clock that afternoon in Adams’s White House office . Alcorn: “Alcorn, Adams and Adams met in an office in the White House. Alcorn, Alcorn and Adams were at the time of the meeting.
 Adams hung on, stubborn to the last, to the end . After the meeting, Alcorn called to report that it had been a long and difficult session . Adams had hung on .
 "Alcorn convinced him that we were acting at the direct request of the President," he says . "We were acting in response to the President's request," he adds .
 On September 22, Sherman Adams flew to Newport and met with Eisenhower . Adams met Eisenhower in Newport, New York, on September 22 .
 Eisenhower said he would accept the resignation but only with the deepest regret . Eisenhower told Eisenhower he had decided to resign . Eisenhower accepted the resignation with the "deepest regret"
 Adams flew back to Washington, and that night announced his resignation in a nationally televised speech . Adams then flew to Washington and announced it in a national televised address .
 I am convinced that he was personally an honest man who would not have allowed any decision he made to be influenced by his friends or by any gifts he received . I'm convinced that . would not in any circumstances have allowed . any decision to be . influenced by friends or gifts, he
 Adams had come to Washington as a man of modest means, and as far as I knew he left with less than he had when he arrived . Adams was a modest man, but he left Washington with less when he left .
 He kept the wheels of the executive office turning during more than one major crisis . But I never doubted that he always did what he believed "the boss" wanted and expected him to do .
 General Walter Bedell Smith, Eisenhower’s chief of staff in World War II, was reminiscing about his years with Eisenhower . Smith provided an important insight into Eisenhower's personality and leadership style .
 "He was very tired, and he uncharacteristically began showing his emotions," he said . "He uncharacteristicly began showing emotions. He was tired and very tired."
 Tears began to stream down his cheeks, and he blurted out his pentup feelings . He blurts out that he was in love for the first time .
 He always had to have someone else who could do the firing, or the reprimanding, or give any orders which he knew people would find unpleasant to carry out . He had to be someone else, or someone who could fire him or reprimand him .
 A story spread that Adams and I were deadly enemies, the two major rivals for power in the Eisenhower White House . Over the years a story spread about Adams and Adams being enemies in the White House, he says .
 Adams was jealously protective of his prerogatives during the time of the President's major illnesses . Adams was probably not Adams’s first choice for Vice President, and certainly Adams was .
 Eisenhower once asked Eisenhower if there was a single quality he valued above all in selecting a man for a top position on his staff . Eisenhower said he valued a man's ability to be a top staff member above all .
 He thought for a long time—so long that I wondered if he had forgotten my question . He thought long enough to answer the question: "What do you think?"
 Selflessness is the most important attribute a member of any organization can have . Selflessness is the best attribute a person can have, according to the author of the book .
 He had no political ambitions; he did not seek any other position; unlike many White House aides, he was not trying to advance his own career . Unlike many others, he didn't seek other positions; unlike other White House staffers, he had no ambitions .
 Former White House chief of staff David Goldfine was an outstanding and successful chief of the White House staff . But it was also this quality of selflessness that made him, except for his tragic misjudgments in his relationship with Goldfine, he says .
 Heated intraparty battles were taking place in a number of key states, including California . Heated speeches were being held in California .
 Eisenhower, always reluctant to involve himself in partisan politicking, would be able to do even less than in 1954 because of his health . Eisenhower would be reluctant to get involved in partisan politics because of health .
 Most Cabinet members are planning to sit out the campaign . And once again most of the Cabinet members were planning to stay out .
 In the aftermath of Caracas, my popularity was now at its highest point. In the 1990s, I was popular with Venezuelans . In the past decade, I have been in touch with the Venezuelan president .
 If I wanted to run for the presidency in 1960, it would be risky to put myself again in the position of Eisenhower’s political point-man. ‘I’m not sure whether I would run for president again,’ he says .
 Republican candidates were inundated with requests to appear on behalf of GOP candidates . CNN's John Sutter says he was "deluged by appeals from across the country" to appear .
 "In the end, I took on the task because it had to be done, and because there wasn't anyone else to do it," he said . "I took on it because I took it on myself," he added. "I don’t think it’s
 "In the campaign I traveled all over the country, doing what little I could," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I'm not afraid to be afraid," says Cruz . Cruz says he hopes to be a better candidate for president .
 Some of the candidates were personal friends and good men who deserved to be elected or re-elected to Congress . Some of those candidates are personal friends . They deserve to be friends of Congressmen, some of them good men .
 In the last weeks of the campaign I labored under a feeling of total hopelessness. In the final weeks of my campaign, I felt like I was going to die of a heart attack .
 The defeat was massive, and November 4, 1958, was one of the most depressing election nights I have ever known . November 4 was a depressing election night for President Kennedy, President Kennedy .
 In the Senate, the Democratic majority increased by 13 seats, bringing the proportion up to 62 to 34 . In the U.S. Senate, Democrats have increased the proportion by 13 to 34 seats .
 Republicans won only 8 of 21 gubernatorial contests . Democrats now control 34 of the 48 state houses . Republicans now control only eight of 21 state houses in the state .
 The defeats in crucial states meant that the party would have to face the formidable task of rebuilding its state organizations if it was to have any hopes of carrying them in 1960 .
 The reasons for the defeat were fairly easy to analyze, but the disappointment was still great . The defeat was the first time the World Cup has been held in the Premier League this summer .
 "I knew that this defeat would make the campaign coming up in less than two years the most difficult of my career," says Obama . Obama's election campaign will be "the most difficult" of his career, he says .
 "It seemed that the worst fears of my friends and advisers had been realized," she said . "I'm not surprised. It seemed that my worst fears were realized."
 My campaigning had had little visible effect, had gained me little thanks or credit, and had tarred me with the brush of partisan defeat at a time when my potential rivals for the nomination, Rockefeller and Goldwater, were basking in the glory of victory .
 Eisenhower represented Eisenhower at the dedication of the American Chapel in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1958 .
 My major speech on this trip was to the English-Speaking Union at London’s historic Guildhall on November 27 . His major speech was to English-speaking Union .
 I said that a new kind of battle was being fought, especially in the countries of Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America, where the leaders of those countries were struggling to satisfy their peoples’ desire for physical wellbeing and material comfort .
 They would prefer to attain these objectives and retain their freedom . But if they believed that that was impossible, they would choose progress even without liberty .
 I closed by saying that we should speak less of the threat of communism and more of the promise of freedom . We should adopt as our primary objective not the defeat of communism but the victory of plenty over want, of health over disease .
 The trip gave me an opportunity to meet with and obtain the views of Britain’s major political leaders on foreign policy issues .
 Prime Minister Harold Macmillan displayed high intelligence in dealing with Soviet Union . He was particularly impressed by the high intelligence and common sense shown by the Prime Minister .
 While we were in London I met with Winston Churchill at his house in Hyde Park Gate . Winston Churchill was a member of the Cabinet at the time .
 As we talked about world affairs, however, he became more animated and became animated . By the end of our conversation there were flashes of the old brilliance .
 "After almost an hour, I said that I would not impose upon him any longer. After almost a hour, he said that he would not imposed upon himself any longer."
 "I was sad to see that he could not move without the assistance of his aide, who supported him as he walked," says author . "I'm sad that he couldn't move without his aide," she says .
 "As the door swung open, we could see the lights from the movie cameras and all the reporters and photographers standing on the step" "We could see all the cameras and reporters," she says . "We're not going to be surprised. We're looking forward to a very exciting
 With sudden surprising strength, Churchill pushed his aide aside and almost seemed to puff himself up as he stood beside me . Churchill pushed the aide aside, almost seemed like he puffing himself up .
 The cameras rolled and the flashbulbs popped, and the picture of the scene shows the proud, strong, upright Churchill of people’s memory rather than the sad reality of time and age .
 He had defeated and ousted the repressive Batista regime, and promised justice and freedom for the people of Cuba . He promised justice for the Cuban people .
 Castro received a generally favorable press in the U.S. as the leader of a successful revolution against a right-wing dictator . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 Eisenhower administration had mixed feelings about Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower administration was divided on Eisenhower's achievements .
 State Department experts advocate immediate recognition of Castro’s government . Most of the State Department's Latin American experts have called for immediate recognition .
 Castro accepted invitation to speak in Washington at a meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors on April 17, 1959 . Eisenhower had not yet made a decision on this issue when Castro spoke .
 The President refused to see Castro, but Herter urged that he meet with him informally . Herter said he might be able to gain additional information about Castro's background and insight into his views .
 On Sunday, April 19, we met alone in the Vice President’s formal office in the Capitol . For three hours we discussed his political views, his attitude toward the United States, and other issues .
 After that meeting I dictated a long memorandum for Eisenhower, Herter, Foster and Dulles summarizing our conversation and describing my impressions . Allen Dulles wrote the memo .
 He used the same argument that he was simply reflecting the will of the people in justifying the executions of war criminals and his overruling the acquittal of Batista's aviators .
 It was this almost slavish subservience to prevailing majority opinion, the voice of the mob, rather than his naïve attitude toward communism, that concerned me most in evaluating what kind of a leader he might eventually turn out to be . It was that his lack of understanding of basic
 I spent as much time as I could trying to emphasize that he had the great gift of leadership, but that it was the responsibility of a leader not always to follow public opinion but to help to direct it in the proper channels . That is the reason why I spent . trying to .
 The Cuban president has a greater responsibility on him to see elections held at the earliest date . He must restore the faith of the people in democratic processes, he says .
 The inevitable result would be the same dictatorship against which he and his followers had fought so gallantly . Otherwise, it would have been the dictatorship against whom he had fought .
 I used the same argument with regard to freedom of the press, the right to a fair trial before an impartial court, judge, and jury, and on other issues which came up during the course of the conversation .
 In every instance he justified his departure from democratic principles on the ground that he was following the will of the people . In the past, he justified leaving the country on the grounds that he had been following the people's will .
 Whatever we may think of him, he is going to be a great factor in the development of Cuba and very possibly in Latin American affairs generally . The Cuban president is likely to become a major factor in Latin America's development .
 He is either incredibly naive about communism or under Communist discipline—my guess is the former . His ideas as to how to run a government or an economy are less developed than those of almost any world figure I have met in fifty countries .
 We have no choice but at least to try to orient him in the right direction . But because he has the power to lead to which I have referred, we have to try and orient him right away .
 Castro’s actions when he returned to Cuba convinced me that he was indeed a Communist, he says . “I sided strongly with Allen Dulles in presenting this view in NSC and other meetings.”
 Eisenhower became convinced we were right and that steps should be taken to support the anti-Castro forces inside and outside Cuba . In early 1960 Eisenhower was convinced that the Cuban government should be supported .
 Eisenhower authorized the CIA to organize and train Cuban exiles for the eventual purpose of freeing their homeland from the Communists . I was present at the meeting in which Eisenhower authorized this to be .
 The Cuban people were rid of a right-wing dictator only at the cost of accepting a leftwing dictator who turned out to be far worse . The irony, and the tragedy, of Castro’s coming to power was that the Cuban people had to accept a far worse dictator .
 From the U.S. point of view, Batista at least was friendly; Castro turned out to be an implacable and dangerous enemy . From the United States. view of Batista, Castro was friendly, but dangerous .
 Eisenhower approved a recommendation by the U.S. Information Agency for me to represent the United States at the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow in July 1959 .
 It may be difficult for those who do not remember the late 1950s to understand the nature of the relations between the Communist nations and the free world then .
 Russia was still shrouded in much of the sinister mystery of the Stalin era . Russia still shrouded under the shadow of the Soviet Union .
 The Iron Curtain was pulled tight across Europe, and Soviet missiles were feared in Bonn, Paris, London, London and Washington . In Washington, Washington, the U.S. feared the threat of Soviet missiles .
 Khrushchev’s rough manners, bad grammar, and heavy drinking caused many Western journalists and diplomats to underestimate him . He was known for his rough manners and bad grammar .
 Despite rough edges, he had a keen mind and a ruthless grasp of power politics . But despite his rough edges he was keen to win back power in Washington .
 Khrushchev openly continued to stockpile missiles, build submarines, and test nuclear weapons . Bluntly ignoring Western invitations for disarmament and détente, he continued to build missiles and submarines .
 The bellicose way Khrushchev flaunted his new leadership in rocketry made many believe that he would have no qualms about using it to unleash a nuclear war . The belliose way he flaunted it made many think he would use it as a weapon of war .
 Few foreigners had been invited to meet Khrushchev, and those who did were often deeply disturbed by him . Few foreign visitors were invited to visit the Soviet leader .
 At times he was almost seductively charming; at other times, he was boorish and obtuse . He was almost charming but at times he would be almost obtious .
 Some visitors came away swearing that he was the devil incarnate . Others came away saying he was just a drunk, others swearing he was a drunk .
 For this trip to the Soviet Union, I undertook the most intense preparation I had ever made for a trip or meeting . For this visit to Russia, I went to the country for the first time in 30 years .
 "I received briefings from the State Department and the CIA and familiarized myself with the backgrounds of the Soviet leaders I would be likely to meet," he says . "I was briefed by the State Dept. and CIA," he adds. "I got briefings from State Department, CIA and
 By the time I left for Moscow on July 22, I was prepared to discuss any of the more than a hundred topics or problems of Soviet-American relations that Khrushchev was likely to bring up . The next week, the U.S. went to Moscow to meet with the
 Khrushchev was one of the few Westerners who had met and talked to him . He was the leader of the Soviet Union in the early 1960s and early '60s . He is now the prime minister of Russia .
 Many said that of prime importance was to leave absolutely no doubt in his mind about the sincerity of our dedication to peace . Many said the prime importance of leaving no doubt was that he left no doubt about his sincerity of peace .
 Khrushchev would be scrutinizing my conduct for any hints of belligerence, they warned, so, as Walter Lippmann put it, "I should bend over backward not to rock the boat" Khushchev would have been scrutinizing his conduct, they said .
 Others felt Khrushchev would fasten on any sign of weakness or appeasement on my part and exploit it to his advantage . Others, equally expert, felt that . Others felt that Khrrushchev . would not have been able to deal with any weakness .
 Foster Dulles was in Walter Reed Hospital with terminal cancer at the time of his death . Dulles wrote to Dulles to get the advice of him, who was in a terminal cancer .
 When I arrived he was sitting in a wheelchair, a ted plaid bathrobe covered his shrunken frame . He was sitting sitting in the wheelchair, sitting in his wheelchair, with a plaid robe covering his frame .
 His voice was weak, and between sentences he would suck on an ice cube to dull the burning in his throat . He would suck ice cubes between sentences to dull his voice, but his throat was burning .
 As usual he took time to consider his answer, and he expressed his thoughts with customary firmness and logic . As usual, he took a few minutes to think about his answer .
 In saying that he is for peaceful competition, he really means competition between his system and ours only in our world, not in his . In saying "peaceful competition" he really meant competition between our world and ours, not our world .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of being involved in the Kremlin's activities around the world . Putin should be asked to explain why Russia is involved in Syria, Putin says . Putin: "We have concrete proof of the Kremlin’s activities"
 Although there were considerable differences in our ages and backgrounds, we shared a fascination with the world and the same basic outlook on America’s role in it . Although there was considerable differences .
 Secretary of State Dulles used to keep him abreast of what was going on in Washington, especially in Congress . Dulles was by no means politically inexperienced or naive, but as secretary of state he was frequently traveling .
 Many nights I would have cocktails or dinner with him, then we would sit for hours talking our way around the world . Many nights we would have dinner or dinner and then sit around the globe talking to each other, he says .
 It was an incomparable opportunity for me to learn from one of the great diplomats of our time. It was a great opportunity for us to learn," she said .
 Most people who did not know Dulles thought him severe, dour, almost ascetic . Most people thought Dulles was severe and dour-dour . Dulles had a reputation for being severe and often dour .
 Dulles was a brilliant, disciplined, and deeply religious man who saw many dimensions of principle and logic in every issue he encountered . Dulles saw principle, logic in many of the issues he encountered in the world .
 Each individual on earth was important and precious because it was the gift of God . But he was also a man who thought that the life of each individual on Earth was important .
 Dulles appreciated the considerable leeway Eisenhower gave him in the conduct of foreign affairs . He was constantly aware of the responsibilities and obligations involved .
 "He loses his usefulness when he, rather than his policy, becomes the issue," says President Obama . "A public man must never forget," he says .
 In this respect Foster Dulles was perhaps the most conscientious public man I have ever known . Dulles had a long life of conscientious public service, says historian .
 At a time when the political and intellectual climate in the West appeared to be moving slowly but steadily toward advocacy of shortsighted and Opportunistic arrangements with the Soviets, Dulles was made to seem and sound like a throwback to cold war rigidity .
 He saw his work as a high calling, and a few months before his death he said, “Communism is stubborn for the wrong; let us be steadfast for the right"
 World leaders and heads of government came to Dulles’s funeral, as well as the foreign secretaries and foreign ministers who were his opposite numbers .
 "They all respected him for his integrity and for his profound dedication to the principles of peace, freedom, and justice that motivated every decision he made," he said .
 Congress passed Captive Nations resolution, as it had every year since 1950 . Shortly before I left for Moscow, Congress passed it again . "Captive Nations" resolution has been passed since 1950.
 Eisenhower issued the proclamation just a week before he left for Moscow was coincidental . I knew that Khrushchev might interpret it as an intentionally belligerent action . The fact that Eisenhower issued it was coincidentally coincidental, he says .
 Deputy Premier Frol Kozlov gave a long welcoming speech . American and Soviet flags hung limp in the warm afternoon air . Deputy Premier Kozlov gives a long speech .
 Llewellyn "Tommy" Thompson, whom I had first met in Austria in 1956, was now our ambassador in Moscow . Thompson was now the ambassador in Russia . Thompson, who had been ambassador to Austria, had been working in Austria .
 In every country, the ambassador's embassy has a room that is constantly guarded and swept for listening devices . We talked for a long time in the secure room on the second floor of Spaso House .
 Thompson told me that the Soviet leaders were furious about the Captive Nations resolution . The airport reception was probably only the first sign of their disapproval .
 He said they were particularly sensitive to such criticism because their relations with some of the satellite countries were strained .
 Danilovsky went to the famous Danilovo market, where farmers bring their vegetables and meat . The Secret Service agent, Jack Sherwood, told him he wanted to visit the market .
 "It would be a good way to get a sense of the city and its people before starting my official schedule," he says . "I would like to see some of the sights and sights I've seen," he adds .
 Sherwood and I were joined by a Russian security policeman who served as a driver and interpreter . Sherwood was joined by the Russian security officer who was his interpreter and driver . The pair met at the end of the day in a hotel in Moscow .
 As I walked through the crowded aisles between the stalls, word of my arrival spread quickly . I was greeted by a crowd of people who wanted to know about me .
 For almost an hour I mingled with the crowd, answering questions, caught up in the friendly and spontaneous exchange . For almost a hour, I was able to get in contact with the people in the crowd .
 As I was about to leave, several people asked if I had any tickets to the American Exhibition . The American Exhibition will be held in New York City on November 28 .
 I said I had none but would be delighted to buy some for my new friends there in the market so they could be my guests . I said he had none of them but would buy them for his new friends at the market .
 I had Sherwood hand the spokesman for the group a hundred-ruble note, enough for a hundred tickets . Sherwood handed the spokesman the note enough for 100 tickets .
 The spokesman handed it back, explaining that the problem was not the cost of the tickets but the fact that the government made them available only to selected persons . The spokesman explained that the tickets were only available to selected people .
 The next day the three largest Soviet newspapers, Pravda, Izvestia, and Trud, headlined the incident . They accused me of having tried to “bribe” and “degrade” Soviet citizens by offering them money . The following day, the
 Later that morning, I went to the Kremlin for my first meeting with Khrushchev . "I was in Moscow for the first time in my life," he says . "It was a great day for me, but it was a terrible experience," he adds .
 He was standing at the far corner of his large office, examining a small model of the Soviet rocket that had recently been fired into outer space .
 He was shorter than I expected, but otherwise he looked exactly like his photographs . The girth, the brash smile, the prominent mole on his cheek, he looked like his photos .
 Khruchshev chatted amiably about the fine Moscow weather . While reporters and photographers were present he chatted about the good weather .
 He praised my London Guildhall speech and said that he too welcomed the kind of peaceful competition I had described in it . He also praised my speech in London .
 He waved photographers out and gestured toward a long conference table with chairs on both sides . Then he waved the photographers out of the room, gesturing to a long table . He waved them out, gestured at a long, high-tech conference table .
 Khrushchev launched into a tirade against the Captive Nations resolution . Abruptly the atmosphere changed, and Khrushche launched into an angry tirade .
 He called it a stupid and frightening decision and asked if war would be the next step . He asked whether war was next step and asked whether it would be a stupid decision .
 I tried to explain how the resolution had come about and suggested we go on to other subjects . I tried . I was asked to explain the resolution, but it was not clear how it came to an end .
 The White House has a procedure for breaking off long discussions that seem to get nowhere, White House says . "At the White House we have a procedure," Obama says .
 Khrushchev’s face remained impassive while the translator interpreted his words . The translator interpreted my words: “I’m not sure what I’ve been doing since the end of the Cold War .” ‘Krushchev,’
 Khrushchev had in his youth worked as a herder of pigs, according to some of his briefing materials . He had worked in the fields of pigs and worked with a pig herder, says historian .
 I also remembered from my childhood that horse manure was commonly used as fertilizer . But a neighbor had once used a load of pig manure, and the stench was overpowering, he says .
 Khrushchev said, "I am afraid that the Chairman is mistaken. He is mistaken" The former Soviet Union leader responded with a "convenience" reply .
 Khrushchev’s face hovered on the borderline of rage . For a split second after the translator had finished, his face looked like he was on the verge of rage.
 The American Exhibition opened officially that evening in Moscow . The exhibition is the first of its kind in the Russian capital .
 One of the first displays we came to was a model television studio . A young engineer asked if we would like to try out a new color television taping system by recording greetings that could be played back during the Exhibition .
 Khrushchev seemed suspicious, but when he saw a group of Soviet workmen near the display the actor in him took over . The actor in himself took over, and the Soviet leader seemed suspicious .
 'Before I knew what he was doing he had scrambled onto the platform and was talking for the cameras and playing to the gallery' 'I was shocked to see how quickly he was able to get on the platform,' she said .
 Soviet and American men work together well for peace, even as they have worked together in building this Exhibition . But these men, Soviet and U.S. men, work together, even though they work together for peace .
 "There must be a free exchange of ideas," Obama said . "If this competition in which you plan to outstrip us is to do the best for both of our peoples," he said .
 Walking through the Exhibition, we soon arrived at its most controversial attraction . The exhibition is being held in a bid to raise awareness of the dangers of the exhibition .
 A full-size model of a middle-class American home was priced at $14,000 . The model was full of conveniences that dazzled the Russians . The Russians were dazzled by the model's conveniences .
 Soviet press called it the “Taj Mahal” and insisted that it did not represent the way that an average American family really lived . The Soviet press insisted that the Taj Mahal was not an American family . It was the "TajMahal"
 I told Khrushchev that this was the kind of home that might be owned by an American steelworker, but either he did not believe me or he was unwilling to admit that it was true . I told him that this . either he . did not . believe me . or he
 We stopped in the model kitchen, and our exchange there turned into a debate that reverberated around the world . We stopped there to discuss the role of the kitchen .
 Unlike our encounter in the model television studio, our ‘kitchen debate’ was not televised, but it was widely reported . A dramatic photograph showed me prodding my finger in Khrushchev’s chest for emphasis .
 He was aggressive, arguing that it was better to have just one model of washing machine than many . He was defensive, declaring that Russian houses, too, would have modern equipment displayed .
 When I asked if it wasn’t better to be arguing about the relative merits of washing machines than the relative strengths of rockets, he shouted, “Your generals say we must compete in rockets,” he said .
 We can also show you something so that you will know the Russian spirit, we say . We are also able to show you how to feel Russian spirit .
 "No one should ever use his strength to put another in the position where he in effect has an ultimatum," she said . She said, "I replied, “No one . should ever put another . in a position where . he in . effect has been an ult
 Khrushchev tried to turn the tables, accusing me of issuing an ultimatum . "I'm not going to go to war with the Soviet Union," he says. "It's a war of words"
 Standing next to Khrushchev during this heated exchange was one of his chief aides, Leonid Brezhnev . Standing next was a young party official named LeonidBrezhnevs .
 We toasted each other with champagne and, following our host’s lead, threw glasses into the fireplace .
 The following night we gave a dinner for Khrushchev at the American Embassy . "The following night, we gave the following night at the U.S. Embassy," he said .
 Midway through the evening he began describing the beauties of the Russian countryside . He spoke of the beauty of the countryside .
 Half an hour later we were in a limousine speeding down deserted roads . Half a hour later, we were back in the limo with the driver .
 Soon we were in the forest, where the air was cooler and the darkness seemed deep and still . We were taken to a forest in the dark, but the darkness was still still .
 Khrushchev’s dacha, which had been a Czarist summer home, was almost as large as the White House . Khrushov's dacha had been almost as big as the Kremlin's White House, it is thought .
 It was surrounded by acres of grounds and gardens, and on one side the forest dropped down to the banks of the Moskva River . On one side, the forest drops down to one side of the riverbed .
 With the gusto of a social director, he immediately took everything in hand . With the enthusiasm of the social director he took the job, he took over the job .
 Boats were waiting at the dock, and we followed the winding Moskva upriver for almost an hour . Boats are waiting for passengers at the end of the trip .
 Several times groups of bathers swam out from the shore of the shore and surrounded the boat, cheering Khrushchev and clamoring to shake hands .
 We had lunch on the lawn under a canopy of magnificent birch trees . The scene could have been out of Chekhov .
 Khrushchev accused him of trying to be a Romeo when he was too old for the part . Anastas Mikoyan started to speak in English to Pat when he started speaking in English .
 With his finger he drew an imaginary line down the middle of the starched white tablecloth between Pat and Mikoyan . Pat drew the imaginary line between the two men on the table .
 One of the first courses was a Siberian delicacy, raw whitefish sliced very thin and spiced with salt, pepper, and garlic .
 Khrushchev took a generous portion and smiled approvingly when he saw me do the same . "Krushchev's smile was a big part of the deal," he said .
 When the plates had been cleared, I expected that Khrushchev and I would excuse ourselves and settle down for serious talk . I expected the plates to be cleared, but he said they were going to be serious .
 He began boasting about the power and accuracy of Soviet rockets and missiles . Instead, as we all sat there he began boasting of the power of the Soviet rockets .
 He cast a chill over the table by casually admitting that accidents can happen . "Accidents can happen," he casually admitted .
 A couple of months earlier, he had been worried when a Soviet ICBM malfunctioned and overshot its course by 1,250 miles . He had also been worried about a malfunctioning ICBM, which he said was a mistake .
 At first he had been afraid that it might land in Alaska, but fortunately it fell into the ocean . Fortunately, it fell in the ocean, and it fell out of the water .
 I asked him why the Soviets bothered to continue building bombers if they were so far advanced in missile production . The Soviets were so advanced that they were able to make a bomber bomber, he said .
 Khrushchev answered, “We have almost stopped production of bombers, because missiles are much more accurate and not subject to human failure and human emotions”
 Humans are often incapable of dropping bombs on their assigned targets because of emotional revulsion . Humans are frequently incapable of . dropping bombs because of . emotional . revulsion.
 Pat smiled at Khrushchev and said, “I’m surprised that there is a subject that you’re not prepared to discuss, Mr Chairman.” Pat smiled and said ‘I'm surprised’ that there was not a subject to discuss .
 I said it was largely because of belligerent talk from the Soviet leaders that the world was as fearful of war as it was . I said quietly that it was mainly because of the talk from Soviet leaders . 'The world was afraid of war,' he said .
 Khrushchev blustered and said that it wasn’t interference if the Soviets were supporting a genuine internal uprising . He said that if the Soviet Union supported a genuine uprising, it wasn't interference .
 I asked him about the fact that the Soviet newspapers and radio had openly endorsed the terrorism against Pat and me in Venezuela, he said . "I asked him if he had endorsed terrorism against me and Pat," he replied .
 The Soviet press had expressed complete sympathy with the mob that had tried to kill us there . The mob had also expressed support for the Soviet press that had attacked us .
 Khrushchev paused for a moment and then leaned across the table toward me . "Krushchev: 'I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not going to back down,' he said .
 In a low voice, thick with emotion, he said, “We have a saying that ‘you are my guest, but truth is my mother,’ so I will answer your very serious question.”
 But such meetings would have to take place on a basis of give and take, says the BBC .
 You are one of the most effective spokesmen for your own views that I have ever seen, Mr Chairman. I have never seen,’s Mr Chairman . Mr Chairman said .
 CNN.com: "You say that the United States is always wrong, and the Soviet Union is never wrong" "The Soviet Union was never wrong. You say that you are always wrong. The United States always wrong," he says .
 This fired him anew and he began another long harangue which lasted almost an hour . The president of the United States was fired from his seat in the Senate .
 As he finally wound down, I said, “My question is whether there is any room for negotiation in your position.” I asked whether there was any room to negotiate, he replied .
 President of the United States sitting across the table from you instead of Vice President. Suppose I were the President . I was sitting in the middle of the table with the Vice President sitting next to me .
 He was obviously not interested in pursuing the question further, because he answered me with a vague reference to Berlin . He soon rose to indicate that the luncheon was at an end .
 It had been 3:30 when we sat down; it had been almost nine o’clock when we finally rose from the table . It was almost 9 o'clock when they finally rose .
 Khrushchev’s intention had been to bully us with Soviet military strength and his willingness to use it, he says . “Krushchev had intended to overwhelm us,” he says. “To overwhelm us with military strength,’ he writes .
 "Like most tyrants, he considered the trapped audience and the interminable monologue important weapons in his personal arsenal," he said .
 After that long luncheon at the dacha, I knew that my intuition had been right . After that luncheon, I know that I was right, and I'm not scared .
 Khrushchev would respect only those who stood up to him, who resisted him, writes David Frum . Frum: "Krushchev respected those who believed in their own cause as he believed in his"
 At the end of his trip I made an unprecedented radio and television address to the Soviet people . At the beginning of my trip, I made a radio and TV address to Soviet people. It was an unprecedented television address .
 Tommy Thompson and Professor William Y Elliott of Harvard helped me prepare my remarks . Tommy Thompson, who had come at my request as a member of my party, came at his request .
 He said that the Soviet press had made so much of it that it would be on many of his listeners’ minds . He said he hoped that the story would be a popular topic on the radio show .
 This was the first time anyone could remember that Pravda had been criticized publicly . The incident stirred debate among the Russian people long after I was gone. In my speech I simply described what had happened, but this was the .
 But the very essence of our belief is that we do not and will not try to impose our system on anybody else. We do not try and impose our systems on anyone else. But we will not impose our own system. We are not trying to impose ourselves, we are trying to
 After leaving the Soviet Union, we made a brief visit to one of the captive nations—Poland. After leaving, we visited the country, Poland .
 The Polish government was extremely sensitive to the fact that Khrushchev had received a cool reception when he had recently visited Warsaw . No public announcement had been made of the time of our arrival or the route of our motorcade .
 Radio Free Europe is an underground network that survives even in tightly controlled Communist societies . The people knew, thanks to the underground network, but the people knew it .
 As we left the airport we soon were greeted, first by small clusters, then by huge throngs of people, waving, clapping, shouting, cheering . Many with tears streaming down their faces .
 Hundreds threw bouquets of flowers into my car, into Pat’s car, even into the press buses that followed behind . Hundreds of flowers were thrown into Pat's car, and into his car .
 Despite the presence of Soviet troops, the people of Poland demonstrated their friendship for the U.S. Despite their friendship with the United States, they demonstrated their disdain for the Soviet Union .
 When we landed in Washington on August 5, we were welcomed by a large and enthusiastic crowd . We were greeted by an enthusiastic crowd at the Pentagon .
 The film clip of his first encounter with Khrushchev at the Exhibition had been shown on USS. television . The coverage of our other meetings had presented me as the man who stood up to Khrush .
 Some press observers suggested that if I became President I might not be able to get along with Khrushchev, he said . "Some press observers said that if he became President he might not get along, he did everything he could to lend credence to this theory"
 Jack Kennedy and I were both in the peak years of our political energy, and we were contesting great issues in a watershed period of American life and history . Jack Kennedy was both in a peak year of his political energy and we faced great issues .
 He preached the orthodox Democratic gospel of government activism . He made sweeping promises and issued rhetorical challenges to leap ahead into an era of new leadership .
 "I carried the banner of constructive postwar Republicanism," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "A healthy private sector and individual initiative set the best pace of prosperity and progress," he says .
 The Kennedys played politics and the way the media let them get away with it left me angry and frustrated . But beyond these differences, the way they played politics was left angry, frustrated by the media .
 Kennedy and IJ entered the 1960 race fairly evenly matched in terms of their personal campaigning strengths and weaknesses . Kennedy and J.I.J. were both very well matched in the 1960s .
 Venezuelan leader says he was probably the best known political figure in the country after Eisenhower . His most formidable asset was that, since Caracas and his confrontation with Khrushchev, was that he was best known .
 The polls showed that people thought of me as the more experienced candidate, she said . "I intended to stress my experience in the campaign," she said. "I wanted to stress that I was the more seasoned candidate"
 "I was physically, mentally, and emotionally ready for this campaign," she says . "I'm enthusiastically looking forward to it. Perhaps most important of all, I was physically and mentally ready," she said .
 In 1960 there were 50 million Americans of voting age who considered themselves Democrats . Only 33 million Republicans considered themselves Republicans .
 In the disastrous 1958 elections, Republican candidates had won only 43 percent of the total votes cast . Republicans had won just 43 percent in the 1958 elections .
 I considered Kennedy’s biggest assets to be his wealth and the appeal of his personal style . Kennedy's biggest assets were his wealth, his appeal and personal style, he said .
 Some Republican strategists thought that these would weigh against him, but I felt that in the new decade of the sixties, after eight years of Eisenhower’s rather grandfatherly manner, people might be ready for a new style of leadership .
 Democrats are usually able to swallow their differences and unite behind their party’s nominee . Unlike Republicans, Democrats usually swallow differences and unify behind the nominee .
 In his judgment one was only apparent -- his Catholicism; the other was real -- his lack of experience . "In my judgment one of his flaws was real—his lack of . experience," he said .
 The religion issue would cut several ways and would probably end up as an advantage for Kennedy . Kennedy would likely end up having an advantage because of the issue of religion .
 "The pockets of fundamentalist anti-Catholic prejudice that still existed were concentrated in states that I stood to win anyway," he says . The pockets of anti-Catholics still existed, he says, but they were concentrated on states that he won anyway .
 Many Catholics would vote for Kennedy because he was Catholic . Some non-Catholics would also vote for him just to prove they were not bigoted . Kennedy was a Catholic .
 The experience issue, however, was one on which Kennedy was vulnerable . The experience is one of the issues facing Kennedy .
 He had established a reputation for the caliber of his mind and the quality of his staff . But he had not carved out any particular areas of expertise, he said .
 I was sure that Kennedy would be the Democratic nominee, I was almost as sure that Lyndon Johnson would be his running mate . Just as well as Kennedy, he was almost sure that LBJ would be running mate, he would be JFK's running mate.
 Kennedy—Johnson ticket would be ideally balanced in age, experience, region, and religion . Both men were superb campaigners and politicians, and a Kennedy-Johnson ticket is ideal .
 It might be an uneasy and joyless marriage of convenience, but it was a ticket that would unite the party . It would assure Southern conservative support even though the ticket was headed by a Northern liberal .
 The obvious Republican equivalent of the Kennedy—Johnson ticket would have been a Nixon—Rockefeller ticket . The obvious GOP equivalent would be a Nixon-Roc Rockefeller ticket .
 Rockefeller’s independent temperament would have made him a much more difficult running mate for me than Johnson would be for Kennedy . Rockefeller's independent temperament made him more difficult to deal with than Johnson . Rockefeller was not altogether sorry, but he was not entirely sorry, he said .
 President Barack Obama's refusal to run a balanced candidate left him without the option of a finely balanced ticket . But his refusal left me without the chance of the kind of balanced ticket the Democrats had achieved .
 Kennedy made a strong impression during the Democratic National Convention . Kennedy received a great deal of favorable publicity during the convention in mid-July .
 Pollster: Kennedy-Johnson ticket 55 percent to 45 percent ahead of any ticket the Republicans might field . Kennedy—Johnson ticket is 55 percent ahead, according to pollster .
 The state of Arizona moved to make unanimous my nomination as Republican candidate for President of the United States. Just after 11 PM. on Wednesday, July 27, on Wednesday night, Arizona voted to approve me .
 Ambassador to the U.N. Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts; Senator Thruston Morton of Kentucky; Congressman Walter Judd of Minnesota; Congressman Gerald Ford of Michigan . Secretary of the Interior Fred Seaton of Nebraska; Secretary of Labor Jim Mitchell of New Jersey . Ambassador to United Nations Henry
 Both Judd and Morton urged that I select a man with a national reputation who would appeal to wider political constituencies than I might otherwise attract . I was asked to choose a national politician with a wider political appeal than I would otherwise attract.
 Morton wanted the position badly, but he magnanimously recommended that he chose Lodge . Morton wanted to take the post, but chose Lodge instead . Lodge is a former CIA director of operations in Washington .
 Lodge had the greatest support among the assembled party leaders, he said . Lodge was the right choice overall, and overall, he was the best choice .
 I had no doubt that if the need ever arose he would be able to take over and serve as President with great distinction . While I was concerned that his domestic views were more liberal than mine, I was also concerned that he was more liberal .
 I wanted to use the speech to break the stolid and unimaginative stereotype of Eisenhower and his administration that had been presented by Kennedy and the Democrats at their convention, he says .
 I wanted to challenge people with the rather daring idea that a Republican campaign could be exciting and even inspiring. "I wanted to ... challenge people ... to challenge them," she says .
 He understood that the unity of the party would depend largely on his words, and he came through effectively, as did Goldwater, when he spoke . "He understood that he would come through effectively," he said .
 In an election between evenly matched contenders, every vote would be important . Every vote -- and thus every state -- would be an important part of the election .
 I believed the key issue of the campaign would be experience, and in my acceptance speech I brought home that message . I believed that experience would be the campaign's key issue, and I brought that message home, he said .
 We shall build a better America, in which we shall see the realization of the dreams of millions of people not only in America but throughout the world . We shall see a fuller, freer, richer life than men have ever known in the history of mankind .
 The only answer to a strategy of victory for the Communist world is a strategy for the free world, writes David Frum . Frum says the only answer is to win over the world's Communist world .
 "Let the victory we seek be the victory of freedom over tyranny, of plenty over hunger, of health over disease, in every country of the world"
 "The publicity surrounding the Republican convention and my acceptance speech succeeded as I had hoped they would," he says . "I had hoped that they would. The publicity surrounding my nomination for the Republican nomination and my speech succeeded," he said .
 "I knew that the immediate impact of the convention and the speech would soon wear off," he says . "But I knew that . The projections about the election itself were that we would be neck and neck until the finish," he adds .
 The first televised presidential debates were held in 1960 . They were the first televised debates between the two presidential candidates . The debates were televised for the first time .
 An incumbent seldom agrees willingly to debate his challenger, and I knew that the debates would benefit Kennedy more than me by giving his views national exposure, which he needed more than I did . The debates will benefit Kennedy by giving him national exposure .
 He would have the tactical advantage of being on the offensive . Further, he would have a tactical advantage to be on the defensive .
 As a member of Eisenhower's administration, I would have to defend the administration’s record while trying to move the discussion to my own plans and programs, he says . He says he would defend the record while moving discussion to his own programs .
 Kennedy and the media turned my refusal into a central campaign issue . But there was no way I could refuse to debate without having Kennedy turn it into a major campaign issue.
 The question we faced was not whether to debate, but how to arrange the debates so as to give Kennedy the least possible advantage . The question was not to debate but to arrange debates so that Kennedy was given the most possible advantage.
 One of these two programs would be devoted exclusively to domestic issues, the other exclusively to foreign policy . One program would focus on domestic issues and the other on foreign issues .
 Determining our preferred order of these two broadcasts turned out to be one of my most important decisions of the campaign . It was one of the biggest mistakes of my campaign, and one of our biggest mistakes .
 Since there is no precedent for this kind of televised debate, we could only guess which program would have the larger audience . Since there was no precedent, we couldn't guess which show would have a bigger audience .
 Foreign affairs was my strong suit, and I wanted the larger audience for that debate . I wanted to be able to debate foreign affairs, but I wanted a larger audience .
 I thought more people would watch the first one, and that interest would diminish as the novelty of the confrontation wore off . "I thought more than a million would watch this one," he said .
 Most of my advisers believed interest would build as the campaign progressed, and that the last program, nearest Election Day, would be the most important one . Most of his advisers believed that interest would start to build in the campaign . But that's not always the case, he said .
 I yielded to their judgment and agreed that in the negotiations to set up the debates I would agree to scheduling the domestic policy debate first and the foreign policy debate last . I yield to their judgement and agreed to schedule the debates first .
 "I began my fifty-state campaign with two trips into the South in midAugust. I began this week in the South," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 "I bumped my knee getting into a car in Greensboro. We received a warm welcome, and the successful visit was marred only by a seemingly small incident" "I bumped my knee. It was a good day for me," he says .
 Tests showed the knee was badly infected after it became intensely painful . But twelve days later it was intensely painful, and tests showed it had become infected .
 I required massive doses of penicillin and other antibiotics—and two weeks in bed at Walter Reed Hospital . "I was in bed there for two weeks, and I was in a coma for two months," she says .
 All the plans I had made for seizing the initiative by extensive early campaigning were now useless . I had hoped to seize the initiative, but my plans were useless, he said . He said: 'All the plans for seizing initiative by early campaigning now useless'
 "It was painful when my knee was injected with antibiotics, but it was even more painful to know that each day I was falling behind Kennedy and losing precious time in the campaign," she said . "It's painful when I was injecting my knee with antibiotics. It was painful," she
 After only a weekend at home at home I began an intensive two-week tour covering 15,000 miles and twenty-five states .
 We took an early morning flight from Baltimore to appear at a rally in Indianapolis . From Indianapolis we flew to Dallas for a motorcade and rally, and from Dallas to San Francisco for a rally .
 I can now see that I should have accepted the advice of my campaign manager, Bob Finch, my chief scheduler, Jim Bassett, and other members of my staff who urged that my hospital stay was a compelling and legitimate reason to abandon the pledge I had made to carry my campaign
 "I was stubborn and determined to carry it through. But having made the pledge, I was stubborn," she said . She said: 'I'm not going to let it go'
 While I was in the hospital he had regained the lead in the Gallup poll by a slender 51 percent to 49 percent . He had regained his lead in Gallup poll while he was in hospital .
 Instead of lightening my campaign load, I intensified it to make up for lost time. So instead of lighterening my campaigning load, he intensified it . So instead, he said, 'I'm going to do it again. So I'm doing it'
 "In the first week after leaving the hospital, I covered fourteen states," he says . "I covered 14 states in one week," he adds .
 After less than a day at home in Washington, D.C., I took a night flight to Chicago, where a crowd of 5,000 was waiting at the airport . CNN.com's John Sutter spent the night in Chicago .
 After making a short speech and shaking some hands, we moved on to the street rallies that had been planned in each of the five election wards we were to drive through .
 In the morning I was scheduled to make a speech to the annual convention of the carpenters’ union . In the afternoon I had only the afternoon for an uninterrupted review of my notes for the debate .
 "When I arrived at the studio I was mentally alert but I was physically worn out, and I looked it," she said . "I was physically tired out, but I looked like I was ready for the show," she added .
 My collar was now a full size too large, and it hung loosely around my neck . My collar now hangs loosely around the neck .
 Ted Rogers' TV adviser, Ted Rogers, recommended that he use television makeup, but unwisely I refused . Only a little “beard stick” on his perpetual five o'clock shadow .
 During the debate Kennedy was continually on the offensive, attacking Eisenhower’s policies and calling them ineffective . Kennedy said Eisenhower's policies were ineffective .
 "I did not disagree with many of the goals he outlined, but I sharply attacked the means he advocated to achieve them," he says . "I sharply attacked him for the means of achieving those goals," he writes .
 "No real substance that hurt me. While most of the questions dealt with substantive issues, it was a question of no real substance," she said . "It was the question of 'no real substance,' she said.
 Eisenhower had meant, “Ask me at next week’s conference’—but he immediately knew that it had come out wrong, and he called me that afternoon to express his regret . Eisenhower called the next day to express regret .
 The Democrats leaped on Eisenhower's slip to undercut his emphasis on experience and to imply that Eisenhower was less than enthusiastic about his candidacy . The Democrats jumped on the slip as a way to undercut my emphasis of experience .
 Most of the editorial writers based their opinions on substance rather than image, even in the pro-Kennedy D.C. Post and St. Louis Post editorialists .
 PostDispatch called the debate a draw, but postdebate polls of the television audience gave the edge to Kennedy . Post-debate poll polls of TV audience gave Kennedy the edge .
 Ralph McGill of the Atlanta Constitution, who supported Kennedy, observed that those listening to the debate on radio reported that I had had the better of it . Ralph McGill: Those listening to Kennedy's debate reported that he had won the debate .
 TV audience had been five to six times larger than the radio audience . This was small comfort, since the television audience was five to . six times bigger than radio .
 What hurt me most in the first debate was not the substance of the encounter between Kennedy and me, but the disadvantageous contrast in our physical appearances . It is a devastating commentary on the nature of television as a political medium that what hurt me the most was the physical appearance of Kennedy and
 "After the program ended, callers, including my mother, wanted to know if anything was wrong, because I did not look well," she said . After the show ended, she said, "I looked tired, but I was fine"
 The second debate is scheduled for October 7, eleven days later, in Washington, D.C.
 A four-a-day regimen of rich milkshakes helped me put on weight, and this time I agreed to use makeup .
 I immediately took the offensive, hitting at Kennedy’s vulnerabilities. ‘I immediately took it on the offensive. I immediately hit at Kennedy's vulnerabilities.’ ‘It was a mistake,’ he said .
 In May he had made a rash statement after the Soviets shot down one of our U-2 spy planes . He suggested that Eisenhower should apologize to Khrushchev .
 I argued that an American President should never apologize for action taken to defend America’s security . President Obama should not apologize for actions he took to defend U.S. security, he said .
 I hammered hard on Kennedy’s shortsighted unwillingness to defend the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu, occupied by Chiang Kai-shek's forces . I also hammered hard . Kennedy was shortsighted .
 After the second debate, the consensus was that I had had the better of it. After the first debate, it was clear that I'd had the best of it, says David Cameron .
 20 million fewer people had watched this debate than had watched the first one . The debate was held in New York City, New York, on Sunday .
 Once again I hit hard on the Quemoy—Matsu issue, stating that Kennedy’s willingness to surrender the islands to the Communists under threat of war was no different from submitting to blackmail . Once again, I hit .
 Kennedy's top foreign policy adviser telephoned Secretary of State Herter to say that Kennedy did not want to give the Communists the impression that America would not stand united against aggression . Kennedy was prepared to revise his position in order not to appear to oppose the administration .
 I saw this as Kennedy’s way of trying to slide away from an unpopular position, and my immediate inclination was not to let him get away with it. I saw it as Kennedy's way of . trying to . slide away . away from unpopular position . Kennedy's immediate inclination
 The importance of America’s role in discouraging Communist aggression was so great, that I decided not to press the point if Kennedy modified his stand . But the Quemoy—Matsu situation was so tense, and the importance of the U.S. role in . discouraging Communist
 I pointed out how his changed attitude reflected his lack of experience, and then let the issue drop . "I pointed out that he had changed his attitude, then let it drop," he said .
 This was the foreign policy debate, which we had hoped would have the largest audience . We had hoped that the debate would have had the biggest audience possible .
 The number of viewers stubbornly remained 20 million fewer than for the first time . Instead, the number of people watching the show was 20 million .
 Kennedy had received a CIA briefing on the administration’s Cuban policy and assumed that he knew, as I did, that a plan to aid the Cuban exiles was already under way on a top-secret basis .
 His statement jeopardizes the project, which could succeed only if it were supported and implemented secretly . The project could succeed if it was supported and carried out secretly, he said .
 In order to protect the secrecy of the planning and the safety of the thousands of men and women involved in the operation, I had no choice but to take a completely opposite stand and attack Kennedy's advocacy of open intervention in Cuba .
 This was the most uncomfortable and ironic duty I have had to perform in any political campaign. I was forced to perform this duty for the first time. This was an uncomfortable, ironic duty, I said. It was a very difficult time for me to be in the political arena, I
 I shocked and disappointed many of my own supporters and received support from all the wrong places for what I considered to be the wrong reasons . "I thought I was going to be able to do so much more than what I thought I would do," she says .
 Within a few days Kennedy modified his position; only a fraction of the debate audience ever was aware of that . Kennedy's position was changed within days .
 In that debate, Kennedy conveyed the image —to 60 million people —that he was tougher on Castro and communism than I was. Kennedy conveyed that image, Kennedy said, to 60 million Americans .
 Those who claim that the ‘great debates’ were the decisive turning point in the 1960 campaign overstate the case . Those who say that the debates were the turning point overstated the case.
 To ascribe defeat or victory to a single factor in such a close contest is at best guesswork, oversimplification . The result was a close finish for the U.S. vs. Korea .
 The public opinion polls seem to indicate that the debates had little significant effect on the outcome of the election . Public opinion polls show that the debate did not affect the outcome .
 Gallup had shown Kennedy ahead, 51 percent to 49 percent . Before the first debate, Gallup showed Kennedy ahead .
 Gallup showed Kennedy with 50.5 and me with 49.5 . Gallup showed that after all debates and intensive nationwide campaigning, Kennedy had the lowest percentage of support .
 As for television debates in general, I doubt that they can ever serve a responsible role in defining the issues of a presidential campaign . As for TV debates, they can never be responsible for defining issues of the campaign, he says .
 Because of the nature of the medium, there will inevitably be a greater premium on showmanship than on statesmanship, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 'After the last debate, with just over two weeks left before the election, I intensified my efforts even more. After the last debates, with . just over . two weeks . left before . election, he intensified his efforts. after the debate .
 The polls showed me slightly behind, but I could sense a momentum beginning to develop, and I felt that with a final push we could go over the top . The polls had shown that the polls showed him slightly behind but he could sense the momentum .
 "I continued the killing pace of the rally speeches and in the last week added several fifteen-minute television talks on the major issues," he said . "I continue the killing . pace of speeches"
 I tried to draw even more sharply my major differences with Kennedy over domestic issues, primarily the economy . I was trying to draw more sharply with Kennedy on domestic issues .
 The government spending programs he was proposing would raise the federal budget some $15 billion and set off rounds of higher prices . He was proposing to raise the government budget by $15billion .
 I wanted to reach as many voters as I could in these last days, and television would have been the ideal way to reach them, he says . "I wanted to be able to reach out to voters," he says of his final days on TV .
 "We could afford only one telethon, which we scheduled for the day before the election," she says . "We were able to afford the telethons, which were set up in advance of the election, so we could afford one," she adds .
 From the earliest days of the campaign, I had planned to keep Eisenhower in reserve as a political weapon that would be the more powerful for having been sparingly used . I planned to use it sparingly, he says .
 'We felt that his appearances in the last two weeks of the campaign might tip the balance to me in some close areas in key states,' says Obama .
 Kennedy began to attack the record of his administration, especially on the phony issue of the alleged ‘missile gap’ He bridled under his self-imposed restraint, but began to bridle under his restraint .
 Eisenhower was to have lunch with Eisenhower at the White House on October 31 to discuss expanded campaign schedule . Eisenhower had suggested undertaking a specially expanded schedule, which he had suggested .
 The night before the luncheon Pat received a phone call from Mamie Eisenhower . Mamie called Pat the next day to say she was sorry for her actions . Pat says she received a call from the President of the United States .
 She was distraught and said that Eisenhower was not up to the strain campaigning might put on his heart . She said that she was distraught that he might not be up to campaigning .
 He was so determined to get out and answer the attacks on his record that she could not dissuade him . But he was determined to go on the campaign trail to defend his record .
 She begged Pat to have me make him change his mind without letting him know that she had intervened . She begged him to do it without telling him that she'd changed his mind .
 The next morning I received an urgent call from the White House physician, Major General Howard Snyder . Major General Snyder called the next morning . The next day, Major Snyder called President Obama's White House doctor .
 He told me he could not approve a heavy campaign schedule for the President . President Obama said he would not approve such a schedule for him .
 Eisenhower's dander was up because of Kennedy’s attacks, but the strain of intense campaigning might be too much for his limited cardiac reserves . Eisenhower's heart rate was up due to the stress of campaigning .
 I had rarely seen Eisenhower more animated than he was when I arrived at the White House that afternoon . Eisenhower was rarely animated when he was in the midst of his presidency .
 He was confused—to put it mildly, when I opened the discussion with half a dozen rather lame reasons for his not carrying out the expanded itinerary . "He was confused," he said, "when I opened it up with half-a dozen reasons"
 President Obama said he should limit himself to the original schedule and to the election eve telecast with Lodge and me. But I stood my ground and insisted that he should only limit himself .
 "His pride prevented him from saying anything, but he knew that he was puzzled and frustrated by my conduct," she said . "He was puzzled, frustrated by his conduct. He was puzzled," she added .
 Those who traveled with Eisenhower for his few appearances during that final week said they had never seen him show such partisan fervor, not even in his own campaigns . Eisenhower's final days in the White House were marked by a series of scandals .
 In retrospect, it seems possible that if he had been able to carry out his expanded campaign schedule, he might have had a decisive impact .
 His appearance in southern Illinois, which would have had extensive coverage in eastern Missouri as well, might have tipped the balance in those states that Kennedy won by razor-thin margins .
 "Under the circumstances, however, I could make no other decision than to discourage him and limit his participation," he said .
 Eisenhower told Eisenhower the real reason for his sudden change of mind regarding his campaigning . Eisenhower told him he had changed his mind about his campaign strategy . Eisenhower said Eisenhower had told him the reason for the change .
 Since the convention in August I had traveled over 65,000 miles and visited all fifty states . Since August, he had traveled more than 65,00 miles to visit all 50 states .
 The campaign had an intensity of spirit that was at once exhausting and uplifting . The campaign was a campaign of intensity that was once exhausting .
 We flew to California to vote and wait for the results, which would begin coming in around six o'clock, after the polls closed in the East .
 Pat took Tricia and Julie to Beverly Hills to have their hair done . Tricia's hair was done by a stylist in Beverly Hills, California .
 Don Hughes, Jack Sherwood, and a Los Angeles police driver drive south on the Pacific Coast Highway . Don Hughes drove south with Don Hughes on the P.C. Highway with a police driver .
 Hughes remarked that he had never been to Tijuana, so we continued all the way to Mexico . Hughes said he'd never been there before, so he continued to drive to Mexico to see Tijuana .
 We were back in Los Angeles by the time the first results were coming in . We were able to watch the results from the first round of the race .
 Election night in 1960 was the most tantalizing and frustrating election night I've ever experienced . Any election night is an emotional roller coaster ride, but election night was one of the most frustrating and frustrating .
 The Texas results went back and forth; Ohio leaned my way; but Pennsylvania was going to Kennedy . The Texas result went back to Texas .
 The Daley machine was holding back the Chicago results until the downstate Republican counties had reported and it was known how many votes the Democrats would need to carry the state . The machine held back the results until downstate Republicans had reported .
 At midnight I was fast closing the gap of 1.1 million votes that had opened up between us early in the evening . The overall trend seemed to favor Kennedy, but at midnight, the gap was growing .
 It was problematical whether I could overtake him, but the race was still not over . It was then 'problematical' whether I was able to overtake him in the race .
 Most of the press had already predicted a substantial Kennedy victory, and there was tremendous pressure from reporters and commentators for me to concede . Even so, most of the . press had . already predicted . a substantial . Kennedy victory .
 "I decided to make a brief statement acknowledging the apparent trend of the returns thus far," says President Obama . "I am pleased with the returns," he says .
 Pat, fierce with pride, adamantly opposed making any statement and said that she would not join me . Pat, "fierce with pride," she said . Pat said, "She adamantly refused to join me. Pat is a proud woman."
 It is at such moments, when you see the effect it has on your family, that the ache of losing is the greatest . It's at such a moment, when . you see . the effect of losing, that's the greatest, says the author .
 At 12:15 A.M. we went downstairs to the ballroom of the Ambassador Hotel . We were in the ball room at 12:30 a.m. at the Ambassador hotel .
 Kennedy’s lead had narrowed to 500,000 votes, and there were stories of massive vote frauds in Chicago and Texas . Kennedy's lead had been narrow in the last week .
 Everett Dirksen urged me to request a recount and demanded that I not concede, says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I'm not going to concede," says Cruz . Cruz: "I don't want to concede. I want to win"
 He warned that once I had conceded, voting records would be destroyed or otherwise disappear, and a recount would be impossible, he said . He also said that once a recount was completed, it would be difficult to recount .
 We had made a serious mistake in not having taken precautions against such a situation, and it was too late now. It's too late for us to have taken precautions, we said . We are not going to be able to get back in touch with the world now, it's too
 A presidential recount would require up to half a year, during which time the legitimacy of Kennedy’s election would be in question . A recount would take place in a presidential election .
 Charges of “sore loser” would follow me through history and remove any possibility of a further political career . Charges of "sore losers" would follow him through history, he says .
 "I sent Kennedy a telegram conceding the election. After considering these and many other factors, I made my decision," he said .
 I had planned to sleep on the long flight back to Washington, but I found I could not . I found myself unable to sleep during the long journey .
 I thought about how close we had come and what we should have done differently . Instead of thinking about what had happened, I thought of how close I had come .
 The 1960 election was the closest presidential contest since Harrison Cleveland in 1888 . Cleveland's victory was the first since the 1888 election . Cleveland was the only candidate to win the election in 1888.
 The shift of one-half vote per precinct could have changed the outcome of the election . The shift was one-in-a-half votes per precinct .
 Republican leaders were still urging me to contest the results and demand recounts . Many Republican leaders still wanted me to challenge the results of the election .
 Eisenhower himself urged that course, offering to help raise the money needed for recounts in Illinois and Texas . Eisenhower offered to help with the funds needed to recount votes .
 There was substantial vote fraud in the 1960 election. There was no doubt that there was substantial fraud in that election. The 1960 election was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Texas and Illinois produced the most damaging, as well as the most flagrant, examples . The state of Illinois is one of the worst offenders in the country's history .
 In one county in Texas, where only 4,895 voters were registered, 6,138 votes were counted . In another county, there were 6,137 votes counted in a county with 4,800 voters .
 Kennedy called Mayor Daley on election night to find out how things were shaping up in Chicago, a close friend of Kennedy's says . Kennedy called Daley to tell him about the outcome of the election, according to Benjamin Bradlee .
 As experienced as I was in politics by 1960, I encountered several new and unexpected factors, each of which had a strong influence on the outcome of the election . The result of the 1960 election was the result of a change in the direction of the country .
 First, there was the substantial and influential power that the emergence of television as the primary news medium gave the reporters, commentators, and producers .
 It was largely they who decided what the public would hear and see of the campaign . "They were largely responsible for the outcome of the election," she said .
 Many reporters in 1960s were caught up in the excitement of Kennedy’s campaign and infected with his personal sense of mission . Another new political phenomenon was the way so many reporters became caught up with Kennedy's campaign and his personal mission .
 This bred an unusual mutuality of interests that replaced the more traditional skepticism of the press toward politicians . This breed of interests bred a more than usual skepticism of politicians .
 By the last weeks of the campaign, those forty or fifty national correspondents who had followed Kennedy since the beginning of his electoral exertions had become more than a press corps . They had become his friends and, some of them, his most devoted admirers .
 When the bus or plane rolled or flew through the night, they sang songs of their own composition about Mr Nixon and the Republicans in chorus with the Kennedy staff . They felt like soldiers of the Lord to the New Frontier .
 Willard Edwards, the Chicago Tribune’s veteran political analyst, put it bluntly . Edwards: "I don’t think the president should be allowed to run for office in 2016 . Obama should be able to run again, he says .
 The other unique aspect of this campaign was the Kennedy organization and technique . The Kennedy organization is the Kennedy technique. The campaign was unique to the campaign.
 'Going into the 1960 campaign was like moving from the minor to the major leagues. I had been through some pretty rough campaigns in the past, but compared to the others, going into the .1960 campaign was 'like moving from . minor to major leagues'
 I had an efficient, totally dedicated, wellfinanced, and highly motivated organization . I had a totally dedicated and well-financed organization. I had to work very hard, very hard and very hard .
 President Barack Obama's presidential campaign against Hillary Clinton was a tough act of courage . Hillary Clinton's campaign was led by the most ruthless group of political operators ever mobilized for a presidential campaign. Hillary Clinton: "We were faced by an organization that had equal dedication and unlimited money"
 Kennedy’s organization approached dirty tricks with a roguish relish and carried them off with an insouciance that captivated many politicians and overcame the critical faculties of many reporters . Kennedy's organization approached campaign dirty tricks .
 I should have anticipated what was coming as I observed some of what went on in Kennedy’s brilliant but coldly mechanical destruction of Hubert Humphrey in the primaries . Kennedy's ruthless destruction of Humphrey was the result of the race .
 In his autobiography, The Education of a Public Man, published 16 years later, Humphrey wrote that the Kennedy organization was undeniably impressive and successful .
 The Kennedys repeatedly made religion an issue in the campaign even as they professed that it should not be one . Finally, I was not prepared for the blatant and highly successful way they made religion a major issue in their campaign .
 Robert Kennedy managed to turn the election partially into a referendum on tolerance versus bigotry . Led by Robert Kennedy, the Kennedy family turned the election into a test of tolerance . The Kennedy family is proud of their legacy .
 From this point on I had the wisdom and wariness of someone who had been burned by the power of the Kennedys and their money and by the license they were given by the media . I had to be wary and wary of the media and the power it gave to the Kenn
 I vowed that I would never again enter an election at a disadvantage by being vulnerable to them, or anyone, on the level of political tactics . I vowed to never enter a race at an electoral disadvantage again, he said .
 If we had known then as much about how to campaign, etc. as we know now, we would have probably won in 1960 . If we'd known then we would've probably won, we wouldn't have been able to win in 1960, says Bob Greene .
 Whether that would have been a good thing or a bad thing, I am not sure . Whether that's a good or bad thing is not sure, he says . "It's not good or good," he adds .
 I am speaking now not personally but so far as the country was concerned. I'm not talking about me personally, I'm talking about the country's future . I'm speaking about the future of the country, not me personally .
 It might have been that we would have continued establishment types in office too long and would not have done the job we should have done as far as the country was concerned . The country's future is in the hands of President Barack Obama, Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton .
 Had we won in 1960 we would have handled the Cuban Bay of Pigs crisis much differently, says author . We would probably have faced down the Russians and saved Cuba from Castro, he says .
 I think also that we would have handled Vietnam quite differently, and would have used our power effectively very early in the war if we had found it necessary to use it at all . We would have been able to use power effectively early in Vietnam, he says .
 History was kind of kind to us by arranging for the Cuban missile confrontation to come in 1962, which sealed the fate as far as the gubernatorial election was concerned .
 Had we won the gubernatorial election, as I have often pointed out, I would have inevitably been nominated in 1964 and would have lost . "I would have invariably lost," he says. "If we won we won, we would have been running for governor"
 Had we won Kennedy might not have been going to Texas and Oswald might never have shot him . Under the circumstances we might have had a re-run of the ’60 campaign with a better chance to win than was the case after the Kennedy assassination .
 "Within a few days after the election I was already thinking about what we would do next," he says . "I was already looking forward to what I would like to do," he said .
 "Admiral and Mrs. Pat and I went directly from the inaugural ceremony to the F Street Club," he says . "We were there for the first time," he adds .
 President and Mrs. Lewis Strauss were the hosts at a farewell luncheon for President Obama and Vice President Joe Biden .
 When I said goodbye to Eisenhower, he held my hand for a long time as he shook it. Eisenhower held his hand . When he died, he was the only person in the world to hold a handshake with him .
 "If I had not been cheated in Chicago and a couple of other places, we would be having this dinner at the White House," he says . "Both said that if I hadn't been cheated ... we would have had this dinner"
 Despite the way I felt I told them that this was no time for bitterness and that one benefit of losing the election was that I would be home for dinner more often . Despite the pain I said: "This is no time to be bitter"
 My Secret Service protection had ended at noon, but I had an official car and chauffeur until midnight . "I had my official car," she says .
 John Wardlaw had been my driver for almost eight years, and I asked him if he would mind coming back after dinner for one last ride through the city . He had been his driver for eight years . Wardlaw's last ride was one of many last trips to the city in the
 Hundreds of cars and rented limousines lined up outside hotels waiting to pick up men in tails and women in long gowns .
 No one noticed us as we drove past the White House and headed through the streets toward Capitol Hill . "No one notices us as well as us," says CNN iReporters .
 The Vice President's car was parked in the space reserved for the Vice President’s car . President Barack Obama's office is located in Washington, DC .
 A surprised guard let me in, and I walked past the entrance to the Senate Chamber and down the long corridor to the Rotunda . The dome of the Capitol rises above it, rising above it .
 I opened a door and went onto a balcony that looks out across the west grounds of the Capitol . I went to the Capitol to see how the Capitol is now . I'm not afraid to be afraid, but I'm glad to be a senator .
 It is one of the most magnificent vistas in the world, and it never seemed more beautiful than at this moment . It is a magnificent vista of the world .
 The Washington Monument stood out stark and clear against the luminous gray sky . In the distance, the Lincoln Memorial was also visible .
 Washington had been my home since I arrived as a young congressman in 1947 . Now all that was over, he would be leaving Washington, which had been his home .
 As I turned to go inside, I suddenly stopped short, struck by the thought that this was not the end—that someday I would be back here . "I was struck short," he said, "and I was struck with the thought I would return here"
 The day after Kennedy’s inauguration, Pat and I flew to Eleuthera in the Bahamas to spend a few days with friends . Pat and Pat were trying to relax while we discussed our plans for the immediate future .
 During my 14 years of public service, we had lived a comfortable but simple life. During my . 14 years I had lived in a comfortable and simple life, my wife said .
 After we paid the costs of moving from Washington to Los Angeles, our sole asset other than personal effects was a $48,000 equity in our house in Washington, D.C. After paying the costs, we paid for the move, our only asset was our home in Los Angeles
 I felt that I owed it to Pat to take a job that would pay well enough to support a reasonably comfortable life and send our daughters to good colleges, and also give me time with them to make up for the long hours and days I had had to spend away from home .
 "I also wanted to stay at least a little involved in politics. I also wanted a job that would allow me to stay in touch with politics," she says .
 Law firm Adams, Duque, and Hazeltine is a Los Angeles law firm . Pat and Pat wanted to move back to California, so I decided to accept an offer .
 In 1946, Earl Adams offered Earl Adams a job with the firm in the event I lost the election . Earl Adams had offered him a job when he was running against Voorhis . In 1946 he had been offered a job at the firm by Adams .
 It had taken me only 14 years to get the right qualification, I told him jokingly, but it had taken him only fourteen years .
 We did not want to take Tricia and Julie out of school in the middle of the year, so we decided that Pat would stay with them in Washington and I would live in Los Angeles until June . Pat would live with Tricia, Julie and Pat in Washington, Los Angeles,
 Relatives and friends wanted to stay with them, but I preferred to be alone, so I rented a small bachelor apartment on Wilshire Boulevard not far from the office . Relatives wanted me to stay .
 Fortunately, I have never been fussy about food and I actually learned to enjoy heating a TV dinner and eating it alone while reading a book or magazine . Fortunately, she has never been a fussy eater, she says .
 I had thought that I could move right into the work of the law firm, just as I had done with every other challenging new job, I said . I had been looking forward to the challenge of working at a law firm . I'm not sure how long I'll be able to
 "For several weeks, however, I found it difficult to concentrate and almost impossible to work up much enthusiasm," says the author . "I was almost unable to concentrate," she says .
 In 1961 I found virtually everything I did seemed unexciting, unimportant by comparison with national office . In 1961, I found that virtually everything . seemed unexhiting and unimportant . by comparison .
 When you win, you are driven by the challenges you have to meet . When you lose, you must drive yourself to do whatever it is required, says Mark Hughes .
 Many of those who called or wrote had supported me so loyally over the years that I felt an obligation to see them or to talk to them by phone . But many of the people who supported me had supported him so much, he said . He said he felt a obligation to
 I was simply “talked out” from the campaign, but I believed that the new administration should have the traditional honeymoon of freedom from partisan criticism . But aside from the fact that I was . simply ‘talked . out’ from the . campaign, I
 In the spring Pat and the girls came out, and we spent Easter vacation by the ocean in Santa Monica, California . Pat and his wife spent the holiday with the girls .
 The girls loved the beach and the warm weather, and their enthusiasm about California began to rub off on me . The girls' enthusiasm for the beach, and the warmer weather, also rubbed off with me, I said .
 During his first weeks in office he was confronted with a crisis involving Communist aggression in Laos . The crisis occurred during his first week in office .
 After initial show of strength in one of his first press conferences, he pulled back and ended up accepting a supposedly neutral government . Everyone knew that the government would be heavily influenced by the Communists . After initially showing his strength in a first press conference, he withdrew .
 I decided that it was time for the administration’s honeymoon to end, and I agreed to give a speech before the Executives Club of Chicago on May 5, 1961 . I decided to give the speech to the club, and it was a speech for the club .
 President Nixon asked the White House to allow Allen Dulles to give him a CIA briefing . "Because my speech was to deal with foreign policy, I asked for the CIA briefing," he says .
 CNN.com: "My request was approved, and we arranged to meet at my house in Washington at six o’clock on April 19. My request was confirmed, and I’m not surprised," she says .
 Anti-Castro rebel forces landed in Cuba at a spot known as the Bay of Pigs . Two days earlier, while I was still in California, I heard the news that antiCastro rebels had landed .
 The invaders had met with considerable resistance and had not been able to achieve much initial success . During the next few days the news reports were frustratingly sketchy and incomplete, but it was clear .
 While I was waiting for Dulles on April 19, I picked up the Washington Star, and read more pessimistic—but still inconclusive—reports about the invasion . The D.C. invasion was inconclusive .
 Dulles sent word that he would be late, and when he finally arrived shortly after 7:30, he looked nervous and shaken . Dulles says he was shaken by the incident .
 Dulles: "I certainly would —] really need one. I asked him if he would like a drink, and he said he would . Dulles says he needs a drink .
 Dulles explained that after his election Kennedy had given his go-ahead to the invasion plans . The CIA had continued to train the Cuban exiles, Dulles said .
 Some of Kennedy’s advisers urged him to call off the action on the ground that if our support became known, U.S. prestige in the world would be badly damaged . However, some of Kennedy's advisers said he should call off action .
 They held out the specter of World War III if the Soviet Union decided to intervene . They painted grim pictures of the repercussions if the invasion failed, they said .
 The invasion had been planned for February, but Kennedy postponed it while internal debate raged within the administration . The invasion was originally scheduled for February .
 Kennedy tried to keep both sides happy by making lastminute compromises . But nervous aides made a final attempt to dissuade Kennedy, but he made last minute compromises .
 He canceled two of the three air strikes that were intended to knock out Castro’s air force and to provide air cover for the invasion forces . The strikes were canceled .
 Free Cuban forces landing in the Bay of Pigs found themselves sitting ducks for Castro’s Soviet-made bombers . Castro's Soviet-built bombers were used to carry out the deadly mission .
 At first, the White House and Adlai Stevenson, our ambassador to the United Nations, completely denied any American involvement in the invasion . The White House, the U.S. Ambassador to the UN, initially denied any U.N. involvement in this invasion, he says .
 Our international prestige suffered a double blow—first for having mounted an unsuccessful invasion and then for trying to deny it . The British prime minister says it was a "double blow" for the country .
 I spent the morning of April 20 on Capitol Hill conferring with the Republican leaders . I spent that morning on Washington, D.C. meeting with the GOP leaders .
 Kennedy was standing at his desk in the Oval Office talking to Lyndon Johnson . Kennedy was talking to Johnson at the time of the incident .
 Kennedy motioned me to one of the small sofas near the fireplace; he sat in his rocking chair . After Johnson left the room, Kennedy sat in a rocking chair. Kennedy: "It's been a long time since I got here, but it's a long way to
 With that he jumped up from his chair and began pacing back and forth in front of his desk . He jumped up and paced around his desk in anger .
 Everything had been going so well for him; a few days earlier he stood high in the polls, and his press was overwhelmingly favorable . His press had been overwhelmingly favorable for him .
 He felt he was the innocent victim of bad advice from men whom he had trusted . Now he was in deep trouble, he felt that he had been in trouble, and he felt innocent .
 It suddenly struck me how alone he must feel— how wronged yet how responsible . "I suddenly struck myself how alone I must feel," he said .
 "Without any hesitation I would find a proper legal cover and I would go in," he says .
 There are several justifications that could be used, like protecting American citizens living in Cuba and defending our base at Guantánamo . The U.S. should use the military to protect its citizens in Cuba, the author says .
 There is a good chance that if we move on Cuba, Khrushchev will move on Berlin . This means that there are a good . chance that there is a . good chance . This . means that, if . we move . Cuba, it means that if . us move on
 I explained that I looked at Cuba in the larger context of Communist ambitions around the world . I explained how Cuba was viewed in the context of its Communist ambitions .
 Khrushchev would probe and prod in several places at the same time, he says . As soon as we showed any weakness, he would create a crisis to take advantage of us, he writes .
 I said that we should take some action in both Cuba and Laos, including if necessary, U.S. air power would be needed . I said we should do so, including air power, if necessary .
 This was a complete reversal of what he had said on television in March about the vital importance of defending Laos . Laos is one of the most important countries in the world to defend .
 "I knew that this was no time to try to convince him of that; this was a crisis," she said . "He wanted and needed my support. But I knew that . This was an emergency," she added. "This is a crisis"
 I said, “I will publicly support you to the hilt if you make such a decision in regard to either Laos or Cuba, and I will urge all other Republicans to do likewise.”
 Some political observers say you might risk political defeat in 1964 if either the Cuban or Far East crisis involves an American armed forces commitment . The U.S. would be involved in both the Cuban and Far East crises .
 I felt that I had at least lightened his burden by listening to him and by assuring him that I would not turn this crisis into a partisan exercise . We had been talking for almost an hour, and I felt I had lightened the burden of his burden, he said .
 Bob Greene says Pat Brown was concerned that a poll showed him running behind him in a race for governor of California . He says he's worried that Pat Brown is running against him for governor . Greene: "Pat Brown is concerned because he's running behind me"
 "I didn’t have the slightest intention of doing so, and I was very surprised that Kennedy and Brown were discussing that possibility," she says .
 We shook hands, and he turned and walked back up the path to his office .
 His hands were thrust in his jacket pockets, but his head was bowed and his usually jaunty walk seemed slow . His head was turned around and he was thrusting his hands in jacket pockets .
 At that moment I felt empathy for a man who had to face up to a bitter tragedy that was not entirely his fault but was nonetheless his inescapable responsibility . At that point I felt sympathy for the man who faced up to the tragedy .
 I began by stressing that criticism of the new administration should be responsible and constructive, and focus only on issues of substance . I said criticism should be constructive and focused on substance .
 "I was concerned about the way Kennedy had handled the Bay of Pigs," he says . "I wanted to make my concerns known," he adds .
 Those who talk constantly of our prestige would seem to believe that we are in a popularity contest with other countries to see who is most liked and admired, he said . I said, “Those who talk . constantly of their prestige would . seem to think that . other countries are in
 "My greatest concern was that Kennedy, having been burned in Cuba, would be reluctant to stand up to the Communists in the other places like Laos, Vietnam, or Berlin," he says .
 "Any concerns I might have had that time would hang heavy in private life were soon dispelled," he said . "I had no idea that I would have a private life," he added .
 This was one of the busiest periods of my life, says David Cameron . With the demands of the law firm, my personal and political correspondence, unavoidable travel, and preparation of the columns I was writing for the Times-Mirror syndicate, he says .
 "As usual, the ones who suffered most, and most silently, were my family," she said . "I'm not sure what happened to me. As usual, I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised."
 "I think I saw them even less that year than I had when we were in Washington. One of my reasons for moving to California was to have more time with Pat and the girls," she says .
 By December 1961, I was more tired than I had been at the end of the 1960 campaign. I was tired by December 1961. I had to be tired more than I was in December 1961 . I was very tired, says the author .
 I was almost ten pounds underweight from strain and fatigue, and I became short-tempered at home and at the office . I was nearly ten pounds overweight from strain, fatigue and became short tempersed at home .
 "It was ironic that while I was writing a book about handling crises, I had let myself get so run-down that I was not in good shape for making a decision which created a major new crisis for me and my family," she says .
 "Friends, old supporters, and business and party leaders from all over the state approached me by letter, phone, or in person, urging me to run" "Friends and old supporters" urged him to run, he says .
 I replied that I wasn’t interested in running for anything so soon after the 1960 presidential election, and urged that they look elsewhere for a candidate . I said, “I wasn't interested . I wasn't going to run for anything,’s a candidate. I
 By the beginning of the summer I began for the first time to consider seriously the possibility of running for president . But the pressure continued and by the end of that month I began to consider running again . I hope to win the White House .
 "My intuition was unchanged—I still thought it would be a case of running for the wrong office at the wrong time," she says .
 I had a long talk with Eisenhower at the El Dorado Country Club near Palm Springs, California . Eisenhower was the president of the United States .
 He thought that I should run for governor in 1962 and then run for the presidency again in 1964, he said . "He thought that he would run for president in 1962," he said. "I would run again for governor and again for president," he added .
 He said it has been his experience that when a man is asked by a majority of the leaders of his party to take on an assignment, he must do so or risk losing their support in the future .
 A few weeks later I wrote a long letter to Eisenhower outlining the pros and cons of running . "A few weeks after I wrote to Eisenhower," he wrote to him .
 Another argument is that from the time I started the campaign in January through the period I served in office, I would have to devote my attention almost exclusively to the problems of California, he says . Another argument which is made against my running is that I would spend more time focusing on California
 Rockefeller: "I simply do not believe it would be possible for me to continue to speak at all constructively on national and international issues if I decided to run for governor" Rockefeller: Our problems here are so complex and also we are, frankly, physically so far away from the centers
 The polls were then indicating that I could defeat Brown fairly easily, one had me beating him 5 to 3 . The polls indicated that he could easily defeat Brown . One of the polls had him beating Brown 5-3 .
 Eisenhower’s advice would have been the same had he thought there was a considerable risk of my losing. Iam not sure that Eisenhower would have given it the same advice .
 Whittaker Chambers died on July 11 . She called me at home on the afternoon of July 11 to tell me that she had died .
 Chambers had survived so much in his life that I suppose I had come to think of him as indestructible . Chambers had not been well, but he had survived much of his life . Chambers was not well, and he had not recovered from his injuries .
 Forgive me if I say here a few things which, otherwise, I should not presume to say. So forgive me . forgive me if you say here . I should say here I shouldn't presume to . say, but forgive me for some things .
 Almost from the first day we met I sensed in you some quality, deep-going, difficult to identify in the world’s glib way, but good, and meaningful for you and multitudes of others . "Almost from the start of the day I sensed some quality,"
 "I do not believe for a moment that because you have been cruelly checked in the employment of what is best in you, what is most yourself, that that check is final. I do not think for a minute that because of that, it is final, that you have
 "Some tell me that there are reasons why you should not presently run for governor of California," says Gov. Bob Brown . Brown: "There are reasons ... why you shouldn't currently run"
 I, for what it is worth, strongly urge you to consider this. But if it is at all feasible, I strongly urge them to consider it .
 Friends whose political judgment I respected were sharply divided as to what I should do . Friends' political judgment was sharply divided on what should be the best thing to do .
 Eisenhower, Dewey and Dewey urged me to run for governor so that I could have a new political base . Eisenhower, Tom Dewey, and J. Edgar Hoover, among others, wanted me to be governor . I'm proud to be able to build a strong political base,
 Herbert Hoover and General Douglas MacArthur advised me to run for Congress . "I would have a forum from which I could address national and international issues," he says . Hoover and MacArthur advised him to run .
 "We discussed some of the political forces that would be arrayed against me if I ran," he said . "We also discussed the potential impact of a run for the White House," he added .
 First, there would be the all-out opposition of the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration would be opposed to the idea .
 They would do everything they could to stop me from getting a new political lease on life by winning the governorship . They would try to keep me from losing my seat in the Senate .
 Rockefeller or Goldwater could not count on the support of the many California Republicans who favored Rockefeller or . Goldwater for President in 1964 . Rockefeller and Goldwater were both Republicans in California .
 The two men would be opposing each other as the convention neared, but they would join in opposing me now, he says . "They would join me now," he says of Hillary Clinton .
 Joe Shell, the Republican leader in the state assembly, had already begun to campaign for the gubernatorial nomination . Shell had picked up considerable conservative support and money .
 He was in the enviable political position of being a man whom no one particularly disliked . Although generally considered something of a bumbler, he was in an enviable position .
 The word found its way back to Washington, Washington, and within a couple of days I received a call from Len Hall and Cliff Folger urgently requesting to talk with me before I announced my decision . The word was found in Washington, D.C., and the call was quickly answered
 Eisenhower was counting on me to run and win, says Eisenhower . "They both stressed how much Eisenhower was count on me running and winning," she says .
 President Kennedy would be almost unbeatable in 1964, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "My own political judgment at that point told me that Kennedy would never be beaten"
 If I ran for governor I felt I would have to pledge to spend the full term in Sacramento, says Gov. Rick Perry . Perry: "I'm not going to run for governor. I'm going to be in Sacramento. I want to be governor"
 Kennedy would be the last person to square off in 1964 against Kennedy, his money, and his tactics . That would leave someone else to square up against Kennedy and his money .
 "The real problem was that I had no great desire to be governor of California," he says . The real problem is that he says he didn't want to be a governor .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Thursday .
 She thought that we owed it to ourselves as well as to Tricia and Julie to spend more time with them during their adolescent years . Tricia said that she wanted to spend time with Julie and Tricia during their teenage years .
 Eisenhower’s advice and the pressures brought to bear by Hall and Folger, by Whittaker Chambers, began to tip the balance in favor of a decision to run for president .
 "I dreaded bringing up the subject with Pat and Tricia and Julie, so I left it until the last possible moment" "I left it out until the end of the day"
 I had asked Bob Finch to arrange a press conference on September 27, when I would announce my decision . Bob Finch will announce his decision at the end of September .
 On September 25, as we all sat around the table after dinner, I described some of the factors and the conflicting advice I had been receiving and weighing . "I'm not going to make a decision, but I'm going to do it," she said .
 I said that I was now thinking of running, but I wanted to know their feelings before I made up my mind, I said . I said I was considering running but wanted to hear their feelings first .
 Many women would give everything they have to be a celebrity, but Pat has always been one of those rare individuals whose ego does not depend on public attention . "Pat is one of the rare women who doesn't depend on the public attention," she said .
 "Her deepest feelings have always been private, and she shares them only with her family and loved ones," she said . Her deepest feelings are private, she said.
 She had been by my side through all the invective and controversy of the congressional campaigns . She had endured nobly and silently the agony of the fund crisis; and during the vice presidency she had constantly balanced the requirements of national office with the importance of maintaining a normal and loving home
 After the 1960 defeat she had looked forward to building a new and private life in California for herself and the girls . But there had been so many campaigns and dinners and trips that she had hoped to build a new life in the state .
 Tricia and Julie at 15 and 13 were still too young to exert a major influence on my decision, but I wanted to hear their views . Tricia, Julie at fifteen and 13, were still .
 When Julie saw that Pat and Pat had such a strong difference of opinion, she said that she would approve whatever I decided . "She would approve what I decided," she said, adding that Julie would approve it .
 I sat at my desk and started to make some notes for the press conference, announcing that I had decided not to run for governor . I sat down and decided to announce that I was not running for governor. I sat in my office to make notes for a press conference .
 She sat down on the sofa, outside the pool of light cast by my desk lamp . She sat on the couch, outside of a pool of . light .
 Her face was in the shadows, but I could tell from her voice that she was fighting not to show her tremendous disappointment . "I'm not going to be surprised," she said. "I can't wait to see what's going to happen."
 "If you weigh everything and still decide to run, I will support your decision," she says . "I will support you. But if you weigh it all, I'll support you."
 She came over to me, put her hand on my shoulder, kissed me, and left the room . Then she came over and kissed him, leaving the room, he said .
 After she had gone, I tore off the top sheet of paper and threw it into the wastebasket . I tore it off, then threw it in the waste bin .
 On a fresh page I began making notes for an announcement that I had decided to run for president . "I'm going to make a decision to run," he says .
 On September 27 I held a press conference at the Statler Hilton Hotel in Los Angeles . "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to the world," says President Barack Obama .
 The first was that I would not be a candidate for President of the U.S. in 1964, he said . The first thing he said was that he would not run for President in 1964 .
 The second was that he would be a candidate for governor of California in 1962, he says . The first time he would run for governor was in 1962 .
 I told him, “I think General Sherman’s statement meant that he wasn’t a candidate.” He said he told him that he was not a candidate for president .
 Former President Richard Nixon spent the next three months writing and editing the final draft of his book, Six Crises . He had undertaken to write it a few months after Kennedy’s inauguration, when the prospect of running for anything in 1962 seemed unthinkable .
 'I was up against a publisher’s deadline at the very time that I had to make vital decisions about the campaign,' she says . 'Now I was . up against . a publisher's deadline. Now I was up . against the deadline, I decided to make a decision
 As I traveled through the state before the June primary, I met with a lot of heckling—but it was different from the heckling in 1950 . "I'm not sure if I'm going to run for president, but I'm sure I'm not going to vote for president
 I had been heckled by the far left; now I was being heckled in the far right . Then I'd been heckling by the right, he said . Then he said: 'Then I had to be heckled. Then I was heckled . Now I'm being
 Members of the ultra right-wing John Birch Society had infiltrated a considerable number of Republican organizations . Members of John Birch society infiltrated a number of GOP organizations .
 Congressmen John Rousselot and Edgar Hiestand were two of my closest personal and political friends . I was a friend of Congressmen Edgar Hiestand and Rousselsot . I'm proud of his work in Washington, DC .
 Neither he personally believed any of Welch’s accusations, nor did they repudiate them .
 "I lost not only their support but the support of their friends in two heavily Republican districts. Thus I lost ... their support," he said . "I lose not only my support but their friends"
 Politically it was a no-win proposition, but as a matter of conscience I had no choice. Politically I had to choose, but I was forced to do it, he says .
 I could not accept support from an extremist group whose leader had defamed Eisenhower and Dulles . I was not willing to accept support for the extremist group, he said . He said: "I'm not sure if I would accept support"
 Republican defections could be a portent of the kind of defections I might have to expect in November . I took that as a sign that Republicans might be in trouble in November, he says .
 Some of those who participated gained valuable experience that served us well six years later in my campaign for the presidency . Fortunately my campaign organization was excellent and already functioning smoothly .
 Herb Klein was my major press adviser, and a young man named Ron Ziegler worked on my staff . Herb Klein worked for me in the 1980s and '90s . Ron was a key member of my staff, and I worked with Herb Klein .
 Immediately after the primary, pressure began for a candidates’ debate . Pressure began to be raised for a candidate’s debate .
 Brown was now running ahead in the polls, so I felt that a debate would be in my interest . Brown was running ahead of the polls so I decided to debate him .
 Brown tried to avoid a debate for just that reason, and the closest we got was a joint appearance before a group of newspaper editors and publishers in San Francisco on October 1 .
 After Brown and Brown made brief opening statements, one of the first to ask a question was Tom Braden, publisher of the Oceanside Blade Tribune . Braden: "I want to know if you're going to be able to make a decision to vote for a candidate for the
 Braden was a liberal columnist whom Pat Brown appointed to the State Board of Education . Brown appointed Braden to the board .
 My mother put up as security for that loan practically everything she had—a piece of property, which, to her, was wealthy, and which now is producing an income of $10,000 a year to the creditor . My mother's mother's house is now worth $20,
 President Kennedy refused to make a political issue out of any of the charges made against members of his family . President Kennedy did not, as did his brother and mother, in the presidential election .
 I was never asked to do anything by the Hughes Tool Company and never did anything for them. "I'm not sure what happened to me," he says . "I was never ever asked to work for them," he adds .
 President Kennedy refused to use this as an issue, but Brown's hatchetmen have been constantly saying that I must have gotten some of the money—that I did something wrong .
 "I was in government for 14 years as a congressman, as a senator, as Vice President," says President Obama . "I've been in government  for fourteen years," says Obama .
 If Governor of this state has evidence pointing up that I did anything wrong in this case, that I asked them for this loan, then instead of doing it privately, doing it slyly, the way he has, he cannot deny it, because newsmen in this audience have told me
 Governor Brown "has a chance to stand up as a man and charge me with misconduct," Brown says . "Governor Brown has a chance" to charge him with misconduct, he says .
 Brown was taken off guard by the way I had turned the issue around, he said . Brown was trying to deny that he and his staff had been raising it in the campaign .
 The media loved the story and played it up big, but it was so damaging to me, he says . "It made such tantalizing copy and because it made such tempting copy," he says of the story . "The media loved it. It played it big. It made such
 I felt that I came out considerably ahead of Brown in this meeting; apparently he agreed . Apparently he agreed, because he refused to participate in other joint appearances when I challenged him to do so . Brown refused to appear in other public appearances when he was challenged .
 "My biggest problem in the campaign was the question of my actual interest in being governor of California. Aside from the Hughes loan and my repudiation of the John Birch Society, my biggest problem was the fact that I actually wanted to be governor," he says .
 "I was simply not able to convince many people. Despite my constant disclaimers of any plans to run for president in 1964," he says . "Despite my constant . disclaimers, I was simply . not able . to convince . many people, he writes .
 Looking back, I recognize that there was a measure of truth in what the polls showed the public perceived . Looking back on his time in the White House, he says, "I recognize that . There was truth in the polls," he says .
 I thought that Kennedy would be unbeatable, so my disclaimers of any interest in running for President were absolutely honest,” he says . “I thought that JFK would be unstoppableable,’ he writes .
 "I must have answered the question about the Hughes loan at least a hundred times. Despite my efforts to campaign on the issues, every press conference brought questions about the personal attacks being made against me," he said . "I'm not going to give up on the issue of the Hughes
 Reporters never tired of asking if I had repudiated the John Birch Society, or of having me reiterate my refusal to support Rousselot and Hiestand . Reporters asked if I'd repudiated John Birch society, or if I hadn't. Reporters always tired of
 "There was no morning, afternoon, or evening that I did not deny that I was planning to use the governorship as a stepping-stone to a presidential candidacy in 1964," he says .
 Most reporters showed little interest in the many detailed proposals I made on the cost of state government, crime, education, education and the necessity for creating a better business climate in California .
 President Kennedy reported in a dramatic television address that the Soviets had moved medium-range nuclear missiles into Cuba on October 22 . President Kennedy made the announcement on the evening of October 22, 1962 .
 He announced a U.S. naval blockade of Cuba and demanded that the Soviets dismantle and remove the missiles immediately . He also demanded that they dismantle the missiles and remove them .
 The world waited tensely for Khrushchev’s response to this direct challenge . The world was tensely waiting to hear his response to the challenge .
 For almost two days, America seemed to be tottering on the brink of nuclear war . America seems to be on the verge of a nuclear war, but it wasn't until Monday .
 As always in time of international crisis, the nation rallied behind the President. "As always in a time of crisis, we rallied behind him," says President Obama. "The nation rallied around him, as always in times of crisis."
 I strongly supported Kennedy’s actions in a statement I made in Oakland and a statewide television address in San Diego, California . He said he strongly supported his actions in Oakland, San Diego and San Diego .
 The Cuban missile crisis completely dominated the news for the last days of the 1962 campaign . The missile crisis was the focus of the campaign's final days .
 Now I knew how Stevenson must have felt when Suez and the Hungarian rebellion flared up in the last days before the election in 1956 . Now I know how Stevenson felt . He knew how he felt .
 I knew that any chance I might have had of narrowing Brown’s lead in the polls was now gone . Brown's lead in polls is now gone, and I knew any chance of narrowing it was gone .
 We had to play the dreary drama through to its conclusion on election night . Election night is the end of the long-running saga .
 "I left for the hotel early in the afternoon, telling my family that I would call as soon as I had an idea how it was going," says CNN.com.com's John Daley .
 It was all over before midnight even though the numerical vote was still close . The vote was all done before midnight, even though it was close .
 "I knew the state well enough enough to know that votes in districts not yet reported would not be enough to carry me over," she says . She says she knew enough that votes not enough would carry her over if she wins .
 "I went to bed around three o'clock, and when I got up four hours later, the worst was confirmed," he says . "The worst is confirmed. It was confirmed, he says, that the worst had been confirmed," CNN reported .
 I watched on the television in my room as reporters harassed him, demanding that he come down and make a personal appearance . I watched the reporters harass him, saying that I should come down, but I didn't do it .
 They were so persistent that Klein finally came up to his room and asked if he would consider meeting them . They were persistent and Klein said he would meet them .
 "The anger and frustration, the disappointment and fatigue inside me burst out. The anger, frustration, and frustration inside myself burst out," she said . "The frustration and anger inside me bursts out. This is not the first time I've seen this."
 As Nixon left, reporters still asked, “Where’s Nixon?”—as if I had some obligation to appear before them . Just as I was leaving, I looked at the television for a moment and heard the insulting tone of the reporters still asking, "Where
 "I walked into the press room and went up to the platform where Herb was talking at the microphone," says Bob Greene . "Sheer" was speaking on the platform at the time of the interview .
 This didn’t sound like the abject performance they had been hoping for. This didn't sound like a performance they'd hoped for. But it was a good start to the season.
 "My philosophy with regard to the press has never really gotten through. And my philosophy ... never really got through," he says . "I'm not sure how much of my philosophy is getting through"
 Never in my 16 years of campaigning have I complained to a publisher, to an editor, about the coverage of a reporter. Never in 16 years I have complained about the way the media has been covered in the past, he says .
 I believe if a reporter believes that one man ought to win rather than the other, whether it’s on television or radio or the like, he ought to say so, he should say so . I believe that if you believe one man should win, you should be able to
 I wish you'd give my opponent the same going over that you give me. I will say to the reporters sometimes that I think, well, look, look . Look at my opponent. I wish he'd give me the same . going over . I wish I'd given my opponent
 "Just think how much you're going to be missing. But as I leave you I want you to know," he says . "Think what you're missing," he writes .
 I've never canceled a subscription to a paper, and also I never will. But unlike some people, I’ve never canceled my subscription to the paper . I never cancels a subscription .
 To the great majority of my supporters and virtually all of the press, my socalled last press conference was a personal and political disaster, he says . To the public, he said: "To the great . majority of the ... supporters and . virtually all the . press, virtually all
 Maury Stans told me that he thought it would cost me $100,000 a year in new legal clients . Stans said he thought he would cost him $100K a year to get new clients .
 "My critics and opponents exulted in what they interpreted as the ultimate, selfinflicted blow," he says . "They interpreted it as a self-inflicted wound," he adds. "I'm not there to blame."
 "I received thousands of letters and wires from friends and supporters across the country who said they were glad that someone finally had the guts to tell the press off," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I believe that it gave the media a warning that I would not sit back and take whatever biased coverage was dished out to me. I believe it gave me a warning . I believe I gave it a warning to the media that it was biased .
 I think that the episode was partially responsible for the much fairer treatment I received from the press during the next few years . In that respect, he thinks that the incident was partly responsible for some of the press's fairer treatment .
 Murray Chotiner and Jerry Ford spoke as longtime friends, lamenting that my defeat and my press conference seemed to mark the end of my political career . Murray: "I'm glad that I was able to get elected again, but I'm not sure if I'll be able to
 Smith matter-of-factly asked him how he felt about his conduct during the Hiss-Chambers case . Smith matter of-factively asked him about his role in the case .
 Hiss: "He was less interested in developing the facts objectively than in seeking ways of making a preconceived plan appear plausible" Hiss said in an arrogantly tolerant tone of voice, Hiss .
 The immediate uproar that followed this remark helped to turn me from the sore loser of the “last press conference” into something of an injured party . The uproar helped to change me from being a sore loser to something of a injured party.
 ABC switchboard lit up with hundreds of calls even before the program was finished . ABC switchboards lit up before the show was even finished .
 Eighty thousand letters and telegrams protesting Hiss’s appearance poured in over the next several days . Hiss was assassinated in November 1945 .
 President Eisenhower called Jim Hagerty, then an executive at ABC, to tell him that he was astonished at the 'incredibly bad taste' of putting Hiss on the air to comment on my defeat . Hiss: "President Eisenhower was astonished"
 If ABC was prepared to write my political obituary, those within the Kennedy administration were not inclined to leave anything to chance . The Kennedy administration was not prepared to leave things to chance.
 Three months after I lost the governor’s race, my income tax returns were subjected to an exhaustive audit . “I lost my tax returns in the wake of my defeat,” says Gov. Rick Perry .
 Years later, in 1973, the IRS supervisor in charge wrote to Rose Woods to explain that although he had informed his Washington superiors of ‘no change” in the original audit, they sent the case back to him three separate times . The case was sent back by the IRS three
 It was hard for me to believe that such tactics would persist even after I had been defeated for a second time . "I'm marked by political observers everywhere as a man without a political future," he said .
 The probe, according to a report, cleared members of my family of any wrongdoing . "The probe, which was conducted by the White House," cleared them of wrongdoing, he says .
 The political motivation behind this use of a federal agency was manifest, the author says . The agency's use of the federal agency is a political motivation, he says .
 These instances of abuse of the IRS and Justice Department for political purposes were typical of the partisan vindictiveness that pervaded the Kennedy administration .
 After a few days in Miami, we flew to Nassau, and as soon as school let out Pat and the girls joined us there for the Thanksgiving holidays . The girls were in Nassau for the holidays .
 Elmer Bobst is chairman of the board of the Warner-Lambert Pharmaceutical Company . Bobst talks with his old friend, Elmer, on his trip to New York .
 The more I thought about the move, the more evenly balanced the arguments seemed . The more balanced arguments seemed seemed. The more he thought about it, he said .
 New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo says he would not rule himself out of politics for 'foreseeable future' But leaving his political base and moving to a state in which all political power was firmly held by Nelson Rockefeller, his principal rival .
 She felt strongly that now was the time for me to get out of the political arena once and for all, she said . She said: "She felt strongly she felt strongly . that now is the time . for me . for all. She said .
 Governor says he overruled family when he ran for governor in 1962 . "I thought that now it was their turn. Having in effect overruled the family when I ran for Gov. in 1962, I thought that . now it's their turn"
 A few months later I joined the Wall Street law firm of Mudge, Stern, Baldwin, and Todd, which became Nixon, Mudge and Rose, Guthrie, and Alexander . Nixon's law firm later became Nixon's firm Nixon, which later went into Nixon's office .
 We bought a ten-room cooperative apartment that was, coincidentally, in the same building in which Nelson Rockefeller lived . We bought the apartment in Rockefeller's same building .
 Before beginning my new job, I was determined to keep a longstanding promise to Pat and the girls . Before beginning his new job he was determined, he had promised to keep his promise .
 On June 12 we set out on a six-week vacation in Europe and the Middle East with our friends Jack and Helene Drown .
 From our welcome abroad, no one would have guessed that I had lost two elections in the past three years . My prospects for any political comeback seemed extremely remote, he says . But he says his prospects for a political comeback were extremely remote .
 Generalissimo Francisco Franco received me at his summer residence in Barcelona, Spain . Franco died of a heart attack at the end of the war .
 I had never met him before, and I expected to find him rigid and unpleasant dictator pictured in the press . I expected him to be a rigid, unpleasant dictator, but he was not . I met him at the end of this week and he was a happy and relaxed man .
 Spain’s leader is a subtle, pragmatic leader whose primary interest was maintaining internal stability . Spain's leader was a subtle and pragmatic leader, says Juan Igniza .
 President de Gaulle invited Pat and me to have lunch with him in Paris . Pat and I were invited by President of France to meet with him .
 The luncheon was held outdoors on a patio behind the Elysée Palace in Paris .
 After lunch de Gaulle rose and proposed a warm and typically eloquent toast . The former French president proposed the toast at the end of lunch .
 He said he knew I had suffered some difficult defeats, but he predicted that at some time in the future I would be serving my nation in a very high capacity . He said that he knew that he . knew I . knew some difficult losses, but said he . predicted that . at
 Perhaps the most indelible memory I have of this trip is my first sight of the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall is the most iconic building in the history of Germany .
 We were taken on a tour of the drab city of East Berlin by Communist police . The oppressive number of Communist police who accompanied us meant we had hardly any chance to talk to the people .
 A man dressed in work clothes came up and whispered in his ear, “We are glad you came to East Berlin.” A man from East Berlin came up to say he was glad to be in the East .
 An excellent Hungarian orchestra played gypsy music at a restaurant in Budapest .
 I was recognized, and after dinner I went up to the bandstand and banged out the “Missouri Waltz” on the piano . “I was recognized. I was going to play the "Miss Missouri Waltz," he says .
 President Nasser arranged a special trip for us to the site of the Aswan dam in Egypt . While in Cairo, we were in Egypt, we visited the dam .
 When our Egyptian hosts showed us the plans for the dam, they proudly proclaimed that there were very few Russians working on the project . Egyptian hosts proudly proclaimed there are very few Russian workers on the dam .
 A substantial number of the drivers, however, were Russian, says author . "I could tell from the appearance of the . drivers, though, that a substantial . number of them were Russian"
 Despite the bombast of his public utterances, I was impressed by his dignity and quiet manner in private . Despite his bombast, he had a quiet and dignitous private life, he said .
 He was eager to have my assessment of the current attitudes and intentions of the Soviet leaders . He asked me to share my thoughts of Soviet leaders' intentions and intentions .
 He ventured some criticisms of President Kennedy’s policy toward Israel . "I gave him no encouragement, and he quickly caught the hint and changed the subject," he said .
 I emphasized as politely as I could that I thought his first priority should be the welfare and progress of his own people . I said I thought he should be focused on the welfare of the people in his own country .
 Like Sukarno and Nkrumah, Nasser devoted the best of his energies to revolution . Nasser had devoted the most of his energy to revolution, he said .
 He was more interested in a grandiose crusade for Arab unity than he was in managing Egypt's economic, political, and social structure . Now he is more concerned with managing and improving Egypt's economy, political and social structures .
 If Israel had not existed, Nasser would have had to invent something to take its place . Nasser's attitude toward Israel served his political purpose, beyond his blind intolerance of the Jews .
 Arab unity needed a common cause, and the destruction of Israel filled the bill . Arab unity was needed to be united, and Israel's destruction of the country filled it, says Arab leader .
 We were awed by the Pyramids and by the Valley of the Kings at Luxor . But equally impressive to me was what I learned about modern Egypt and its ruler .
 Despite its terrible poverty, the country was moving ahead and would eventually exert enormous influence throughout the Middle East . I could see that, despite its . poverty, despite the country being moving ahead, I could . see that . Despite its poverty, I was able to see that despite its terrible
 Despite Israel’s superior technology and training, the Egyptians and the Arabs would in the end submerge the Israelis and defeat them by sheer weight of numbers unless some accommodation were reached .
 Closer relations between the U.S. and Israel’s Mideast enemies were going to be of the utmost importance . Israel itself and the prevention of a confrontation between the great powers in the Middle East, he says .
 President Barack Obama called the President in a hotel room in his hotel room . The phone rang in the hotel room and the operator informed me that the President was calling . President Obama was in the room when the phone rang .
 He said he had heard we were in Rome and just wanted to say hello . Sounding happy and relaxed, he said that he had been told he was in Rome . He said: "I'm happy to be in Rome. I'm glad to be here."
 This was to be the last time I talked to him; five months later he was dead . This was the last talk he had with him, five months after he died .
 The trip was one of the happiest times of our lives for Pat and Tricia, Tricia and Julie, Julie, and Pat .
 "What made it so special was that it gave us a chance to be together as a family," says mother-of-one .
 "Vacation time was over, and I immediately devoted my full energies to my new responsibilities as a Wall Street lawyer," she says .
 New business came to Nixon, Mudge, and the firm expanded as we had hoped it would . New business was brought in, but it was not as successful as it was hoped .
 Goldwater would drive off almost everyone except the party’s most conservative fringe; Rockefeller would split the party down the middle . Rockefeller, Goldwater, Rockefeller would divide the party, they said .
 "I could sympathize with their concerns, but my instinct was to stay completely out of it," he says . "I'm not going to get involved in the debate," he adds .
 Despite Kennedy’s recent slippage in the polls, his lackluster domestic record, and his crisis-prone foreign policy, I felt that he was almost certainly going to be reelected .
 With party unity and a favorable press added to the advantages of being an incumbent, Kennedy would be virtually unbeatable . Kennedy's party unity, favorable press and party unity would help him win .
 "I could not idly consider the thought of subjecting Pat, the girls, or myself to the tension and disappointment of another losing campaign against Kennedy," she says . "I was not prepared to think of the possibility of a losing campaign"
 I was well aware that after my defeats in 1960 and 1962, another defeat in 1964 might so brand me with a loser image that I could never recover . I was also well aware of the fact that after losing in 1960, 1962 and 1963, I would never recover from that defeat .
 Many of Goldwater’s supporters were opposed to his candidacy for reasons I did not share . Many of them were against Goldwater for reasons they didn’t share . Goldwater ran for the presidency in 1964 .
 He had a tendency to be impulsive and to shoot from the hip, but knew that he was also well intentioned and open to advice . He said: 'I knew that I knew that . He was also open to . advice. He was a good guy'
 Goldwater was farther to the right of my centrist position than Rockefeller was to the left of it . Rockefeller’s deviation from midstream at least put him deeper into Republican territory . Rockefeller's deviation from the midstream made him practically a liberal Democrat on many issues .
 "I received a call from our upstairs neighbor on the morning of September 3, inviting me for cocktails that afternoon," she says . "I was invited to cocktails by my upstairs neighbor," she writes .
 Rockefeller greeted me warmly when he arrived Rockefeller greeted him warmly . After an exchange of small talk, we quickly settled down to a serious discussion . Rockefeller: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared"
 He doesn’t have a good staff, and he has a very superficial approach to problems. He doesn't have a very good staff. He has a lot of problems to deal with, he says . He says .
 His greatest weakness is that he knows too little of the world and is too sure of what he doesn’t know, he says .
 You could, but it would be a big mistake, and you don’t make that kind of mistake,’s the president . You could. You could . But you could, you could ... make that mistake .
 "You and I are the only ones qualified on both foreign and national issues to serve as President. What we both have to recognize is that you and I . are the best ones qualified," he says .
 I thanked him for his candor but said that I planned not to participate personally in the campaign, except to support whoever was nominated . I said that he planned to not participate personally .
 As Thanksgiving approached, I held firm to my plan that unless something unexpected happened, I would not become a candidate in 1964 . I would try to remain on good terms with all the potential candidates so that I could play the role of party unifier regardless of who won .
 The PepsiCola Company is one of the clients of the firm's law firm in Dallas, Texas . PepsiCola is a client of the law firm .
 Several local reporters asked for an interview, and the next day I met with them briefly at my hotel . The next day, they asked me to meet with them again at the hotel .
 I had read that demonstrations were planned against Kennedy and Johnson, who were to visit Dallas the next day . The next day, the president and vice president were visiting the city .
 President and Vice President deserved to be treated with respect wherever they appeared . I told reporters that, however strongly people felt about particular issues or personalities, the President and vice president deserved respect . However strongly people feel strongly about certain issues, he said .
 Flags displayed along motorcade route for presidential visit to Dallas airport .
 A man rushed over from the curb and started talking to the driver . The incident happened near the 59th Street Bridge in Queens .
 We had no radio, and as we continued into Manhattan, a hundred thoughts rushed through my mind . I had no idea why we were going to Manhattan, but I had a lot of thoughts .
 He could have been mistaken about what he had heard; or perhaps a gunman might have shot at Kennedy but missed or only wounded him . Kennedy could be mistaken for what he'd heard; perhaps he was mistaken for the shot .
 Oswald’s wife had disclosed that Oswald had been planning to kill me when I visited Dallas, Hoover said . Oswald's wife said only with great difficulty had she managed to keep him in the house to prevent him from doing so, he said . Hoover said Oswald had planned to kill
 I never felt the “there but for the grace of God go I’m” reaction to Kennedy’s death that many people seemed to imagine I would. “I never felt that much of the ‘there’ve been a reaction’ to
 After eight years as Vice President I had become fatalistic about the danger of assassination, I had 'become fatalistic' about the threat of assassination .
 "It takes a combination of luck and the law of averages to keep him alive," says President Obama . "I knew that given the number of people who, for whatever reasons, want to kill a President," he says .
 I did not think that if I had won in 1960 it would have been I rather than he riding through Dealey Plaza in Dallas at that time, on that day . "I did think that ... if I'd won ... it would be I," he says .
 Since the 1960 election there had been no love lost between Kennedy and me . I had been critical of his performance as President. I had a critical of him as President, he said .
 I admired his ambition and competitiveness, and I could feel the terrible impact this tragedy would have on his closely knit family . But I admired him and could feel his family would be devastated by the tragedy .
 I remembered how I had felt when first Arthur and then Harold had died, and I wished that there was something that I could do to ease the Kennedys’ grief . I felt like I had done so much to help the family of the late Arthur and Harold .
 Long after the fire had gone out I wrote a letter to Jacqueline Kennedy. Long after that, I wrote her a letter . She said: "I love you very much. I love you"
 The hand of fate made Jack and me political opponents, but I always cherished the fact that we were personal friends from the time we came to the Congress together in 1947 . The hand-of-the-hand made Jack an opponent of the president .
 "That friendship evidenced itself itself in many ways including the invitation we received to attend your wedding," she wrote . "I was very happy to be invited to your wedding"
 Nothing I could say now could add to the splendid tributes which have come from throughout the world to him . Nothing could be added to the tributes he received from all over the world, including the world .
 The nation will also be forever grateful for your service as First Lady, says President Obama .
 You brought to the White House charm, beauty and elegance as the official hostess for America, and the mystique of the young in heart which was uniquely yours made an indelible impression on the American consciousness . The Queen of England will be remembered for her role as a hostess
 If in the days ahead we could be helpful in any way, we shall be honored to be at your command . We are honored to have the opportunity to help in the future .
 Johnson was able to consolidate the nation's grief over Kennedy’s death . By the first weeks of 1964 it was widely believed by objective observers in both parties that no one could beat him in November .
 The March 10 New Hampshire presidential primary surprised most political professionals when a well-organized write-in campaign won the primary . Lodge came in first in New Hampshire as a result of a write-ins campaign .
 In this way I was also able to visit old friends from my vice presidential days and make new ones . "In this way, I also visited old friends and made new ones," he said .
 As a private citizen, I was able to meet with opposition leaders as well as government officials . My business and legal contacts gave me a much more rounded view of local issues and attitudes than I had gained as an official visitor .
 New Hampshire primary was held in New Hampshire . President Barack Obama visited Lebanon, Pakistan, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam, the Philippines and the Philippines .
 Everywhere I went I heard about America’s declining prestige, I heard expressions of dismay that the country was showing so little positive leadership . The world's strongest nation, the U.S. is showing little leadership, the author says .
 "I saw for myself how dangerously different the reality of the situation in Vietnam was from the version of it being presented to the American people at home. Perhaps most disturbing of all, I saw . The reality was dangerously different from the . version of the . American people . at home .
 Kennedy’s naive willingness to accept a “neutralist” coalition regime that was known to be a convenient cover for the Communist Pathet Lao guerrillas . The Asian leaders I talked with looked at Laos, where we had suffered an unqualified disaster because of Kennedy
 They looked at Cuba, where our indecisiveness during the Bay of Pigs had given the Communists their greatest propaganda victory in many years . The Communists looked at the US' indecision in Cuba as a propaganda victory, they looked at our indecision .
 After years of encouraging and building up the anticommunist Saigon government, we seemed reluctant to support the measures needed to defeat the Communists . And now they were looking at Vietnam, where they were . The U.S. was reluctant to back the government in Vietnam .
 To our Asian friends and allies it looked as if a combination of political expediency, public apathy, distorted reporting in the media, and partisan politics was undermining America’s will to fight against communism in Asia. To our allies and allies, it looked like if political . exped
 He spoke sadly about what he believed had been American collusion in the murder of President Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam on November 1, 1963, three weeks before Kennedy’s assassination . He believed the U.S. had been involved in the killing of Diem .
 Thai PM Thanom Kittikachorn warns against relaxation of the war against the Vietcong . Thailand's prime minister has warned against any relaxation of its war against them .
 If Vietnam were to fall, Communist influence would have a green light in Southeast Asia, he said . He said it would have green light for Southeast Asia .
 Johnson's eagerness to begin talks with the Vietcong would only encourage them to hold out for better terms . Pote Sarasin, Thailand’s ambassador in Washington when I was Vice President, said that Johnson’�s eagerness for talks will only encourage a better deal
 Then you should present them with a final offer that they can accept or reject . Then you must give them the choice of what they want or what they will accept .
 Sandbags piled up around the hangars and armed soldiers patrolled the runways . Sandbags were piled up . Armed soldiers were stationed at runways in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The Vietnamese military leaders I met fully understood the nature of their enemy . The Vietnam military leaders were fully understood by the Vietnamese military . They also fully understood their enemy.
 They will stop at nothing, and they will settle for nothing short of winning everything . They will settle at nothing . They won't settle for winning everything, they will win everything .
 Vietnamese military leaders were distressed that Washington was holding them back from launching air raids into North Vietnam as well as ground raids into Laos to cut off the pipeline of Vietcong arms and supplies known as the Ho Chi Minh trail . Both the U.S. and the Vietnamese military were distressed
 Many American officers thought they were being restrained because of the election year at home . Some of them blamed the highly distorted reports in the American media for the incident .
 Cabot Lodge, then U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, described his concerns . Lodge was then United States ambassador to Vietnam . Lodge: "I told him about my concerns. They were very serious"
 But there’s a bigger and broader problem that can’t be settled by fighting over it, he says . It's a bigger, broader problem than just trying to solve, he adds .
 Lodge argued against pursuing the Vietcong forces into Laos or Cambodia . Lodge argued not to pursue them into Laos, Cambodia or Laos .
 He said American troops should avoid fighting the Vietcong except to retaliate when Americans were killed . Even more surprising, he said U.S. troops should not engage in combat except when Americans die .
 I could hardly believe that I was hearing this from one as versed as Cabot Lodge in the tactics and techniques of international communism . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to find a way to get around the world," says Lodge .
 I wondered whether he felt it was his duty to defend the administration’s policy regardless of his own feelings, or whether he had actually been converted by academic theorists around Johnson who thought that the problem of communism in Southeast Asia could be solved by economic development .
 What I saw and heard on this trip convinced me that Johnson’s Vietnam policy would not succeed, he says . Johnson's Vietnam policy will not succeed.
 Lodge was eager to have my reading of the political situation at home in Vietnam, he says . Lodge: "In our discussions in Saigon, we were eager to see how the situation in Vietnam was changing"
 Reversing Goldwater’s ‘Southern strategy,” he argued that a moderate Republican concentrating on the Northern cities could do very well .
 If he had won the Oregon primary in May he had planned to resign and return home to campaign for the nomination . Several years later, he told me that if he'd won, he'd resign and go back to campaign .
 In Taiwan I was the houseguest of Chiang Kai-shek, who was predictably critical of our Vietnam policy . In Taiwan, he was also a guest of the late leader of the country .
 He said that we could never win without invading North Vietnam, and he laughed at the Strategic Hamlet Program then being pursued . The President said that he would never be able to defeat North Vietnam .
 I met with Japanese Prime Minister Ikeda in Tokyo . He was concerned by America’s apparent crisis of confidence over its policy in Vietnam .
 Sato and Kishi felt that the key to victory in Vietnam lay with China and Russia . They suggested that U.S. policy on Vietnam be formulated in terms of great-power interests involved .
 Vietnam was not nearly of as much interest in Washington as the race developing among Lodge, Goldwater, and Rockefeller . The battle of wills shaping up over whether LBJ would allow Bobby Kennedy a place on the ticket as his running mate .
 Many expected Lodge to repeat his New Hampshire victory . Asia seemed far away, and attention was focused on the Oregon primary .
 In April and May the polls continued to show Rockefeller doing well with voters . But in the area that counted, getting convention delegates, Goldwater was on the way to winning the nomination by a landslide .
 "Some of my supporters still refused to give up, and they mounted a write-in effort for me in the Nebraska primary on May 12," he says . "Some people still refused, and some of them are still fighting for me"
 The 42,800 votes I received there represented an astonishingly strong showing, but I had no illusions that this would slow the Goldwater bandwagon, let alone stop it .
 Rockefeller won a surprise victory in the Oregon primary, thus eliminating Lodge . Rockefeller won the primary in Oregon, ending Lodge's hopes of winning the presidency .
 Goldwater’s victory in the all-important California primary on June 2 eliminated Rockefeller . Rockefeller was defeated by Goldwater in the California primary .
 Last-ditch efforts to launch campaigns for Governor William Scranton of Pennsylvania and Governor George Romney of Michigan proved too little and too late . Scrantan and Romney are governors of Pennsylvania, Michigan and Michigan .
 Goldwater had the nomination locked up long before the convention began in San Francisco . Goldwater's nomination was secured long before convention began .
 I looked upon this as the first and best chance to begin the ministry of party unity that I expected to preach right through Election Day in November . I had asked that as the former standard-bearer I be given the honor of presenting the nominee to the convention before his acceptance speech .
 "Before this convention we were Goldwater Republicans, Rockefeller Republicans, Scranton Republicans, Lodge Republicans," he said . "Now that this convention has met and made its decision, we are Republicans, period, working for Barry Goldwater"
 I tried to stress Goldwater’s Republicanism and to place him in the historical tradition of other Republican nominees. Goldwater's Republicanism, he said .
 Forget the harsh criticisms of his critics and forget even perhaps the too complimentary compliments of his friends . Forget the too harsh criticisms and forget the too . complimentary compliments from his friends. Forget the . too harsh . criticisms of him critics or his friends, forget the .
 He is the man who, by the action of this convention, is now Mr Republican . Mr Obama is now the Republican Party's Mr President .
 The speech seemed to have the desired effect of pleasing the different party factions .
 Here was the best opportunity he would have to heal the party’s wounds and unite it behind him for the campaign ahead . Here is the best chance to heal party's wounds .
 "To my dismay, Goldwater proceeded to deliver a strident, divisive speech," he said . Goldwater's speech was a 'divisive speech' that divided the country .
 This was the statement that, more than any other, enabled Johnson and the Democrats to put the skids under his campaign . The statement was the one that enabled Johnson's campaign to fall apart .
 Goldwater had won the nomination, but if he had ever had any chance to win the presidency, he lost it that night with that speech . Goldwater lost his chance of winning the presidency that night .
 Goldwater failed to close the rifts in the party and heal its wounds, he opened new wounds and then rubbed salt in them . Not only did Goldwater fail to close rifts, he failed to heal the wounds, but he opened them again .
 It was terribly sad to see a man throw away his chance for something he wanted and had worked very hard to get. It's terribly sad, he said, 'It's a man throwing away something he had worked hard for'
 Republican candidates would now be doomed to spend their campaigns trying to explain away the man at the top of the ticket . But his major concern was for Republican candidates across the country .
 It should have been his aim to unify the party while moving it to the right . It should be his aim of unifying the party and moving it further .
 Losing to Johnson, who was running as Kennedy’s successor, need not have been ruinous . Losing Kennedy to Johnson was not ruinous, but it could have been a good thing for Kennedy .
 If Goldwater could have minimized congressional and state losses in 1964 and then picked up a few seats by campaigning in 1966, he would have been in a very strong position to reclaim the nomination in 1968 .
 Unless someone got to Goldwater and toned him down, the Republican nomination in 1968 might not be worth anything to anyone . Goldwater's nomination would be worth nothing to anyone in 1968 .
 I waited until he had been back in Gettysburg for a few days before I called him to suggest two ideas . He suggested two ideas for Gettysburg, including adding a new name to Gettysburg .
 He also agreed to a Republican “summit conference” of party leaders be held a few days after Goldwater . Goldwater agreed to his second suggestion .
 With Goldwater’s cooperation, we could turn this summit meeting into a highly publicized display of party unity . With the help of Goldwater's cooperation, the party could turn it into a high-profile display of unity .
 It would give Goldwater a chance to start his campaign anew, on a basis of moderation and unity, he says . Goldwater's campaign would give him a chance, he writes .
 I suggested to Goldwater that we take steps to quiet the controversy still raging over his acceptance speech . To set the stage, Goldwater suggested to set up, he suggested to take steps .
 "I offered to write a letter asking for clarification, and then to make public both my letter and his reply," he said . "I offer to write the letter and make it public, and I offer to make the public," he added .
 He agreed, and in his letter he substantially modified his controversial “extremism” statement . He agreed to a modified version of his controversial statement .
 Rockefeller hung the extremist tag around Goldwater’s neck in the primaries, and Goldwater's acceptance speech had turned it into a noose . Rockefeller had hung the extremism tag around . Goldwater had hung it around his neck .
 "I hoped this letter would loosen it a bit, but my hopes were soon dashed," she says .
 The master political operator of our time, Lyndon B Johnson, knew that he had a devastatingly good issue . With invaluable assistance from Goldwater’s numerous gaffes in the campaign, he tied the extremist tag so tight on Goldwater that it choked the political life out of
 Eisenhower did not want us at his farm so we crowded into his small office in town . Eisenhower wanted us to visit his farm . Eisenhower's office was located in a small town town .
 Eisenhower lay it on the line for the first time in his career . Eisenhower's words were not the first thing he'd done so often in his life .
 He suggested that Goldwater give a speech discussing charges of extremism that had been made against him and admit that he may have encouraged them by the language of his acceptance speech .
 He could understand that Eisenhower was particularly sensitive about those of his comments that were taken to be critical of the Eisenhower administration, but he had not meant anything personal by them .
 This, and the impending publication of our exchange of letters, seemed to bode well for the success of the upcoming summit meeting . The summit meeting is scheduled to take place at the end of the month .
 Summit meeting of party leaders, candidates, governors, and aides met at the rambling old Hotel Hershey in Hershey, Pennsylvania, on August 12 .
 Goldwater made a speech in which he considerably modified some of his most extreme positions . Goldwater's most extreme position was that he had to modify some of the most extreme views .
 Goldwater, Rockefeller, Romney, Scranton, Eisenhower, and Eisenhower discussed how the campaign should be run . Then Goldwater and Rockefeller discussed how to run the campaign, he says .
 The real purpose of the exercise was to make effective use of the press conference to be held at the end . Of course, the real purpose was to use the press conferences to be used .
 This was to be Goldwater’s chance to emerge as the leader and spokesman of a united party . Goldwater was to become the leader of a unified party .
 "After all our planning Goldwater did not grasp the opportunity the meeting had given him. To my amazement and disappointment, after all our . planning, he said . Goldwater didn't grasp the chance he had been given him, he added .
 He said he did not consider his speech earlier in the day to have been conciliatory . Instead he said he would not agree that he had made any concessions on issues of substance .
 He himself brought up his controversial statement that he would consider giving military commanders in the field control over the use of tactical nuclear weapons . He refused to back away from it .
 "You know, before we had this meeting I thought that Goldwater was just stubborn," he said . "I learned later that on the drive back to Gettysburg he said, “You know . I learned later . He said, "I thought that before we . had this
 The “Spirit of Hershey’s” may have fooled some of the press and the public, but the politicians weren’t taken in for a minute . While the “spirit of Hersheysys’” was a hit, the politicians were
 A sense of doom enveloped the Goldwater campaign, and very few national leaders wanted any part of it . Goldwater's campaign in 1964 was one of the most successful presidential campaigns ever .
 George Romney concentrated on his own gubernatorial campaign in Michigan . George Romney ran for governor of Michigan in 2012 .
 Scranton was a good soldier and tried to help, but his efforts had little effect even with his own supporters . Eisenhower played hardly any role in the effort to get the troops on the ground .
 Many were old friends and supporters; others were promising new candidates . They had the ill fortune to be running their first races in a year of dismal presidential prospects .
 'It was frustrating for me to see as inept a candidate as Goldwater running for President. It was frustrating to see him run for President,' says Sen. Richard Nixon .
 Republican voters seemed to be interested in the campaign that year; everywhere I went I found the audiences big and enthusiastic . It was especially heartbreaking because Republican voters were interested in this year's election .
 Sen. Barry Barry Goldwater ran for the presidency in 1964 . Barry's candidacy was linked to Goldwater, but candidates begged him to avoid associating him with Goldwater . Barry says he's proud to be able to speak on behalf of a senator or congressional candidate .
 "It was a difficult tightrope to walk, but I usually found some way to praise the local candidates independently of expressing, as I did in every speech I gave, my personal support for Goldwater."
 "From the time the campaign began I knew that we were going to lose heavily," says Hillary Clinton . "I knew that I knew I would lose heavily. From the start of the campaign I knew," she says .
 The next morning I got up early to check the final reports on the campaigns for House and Senate . "The next morning, I went home to check on the latest reports," she says .
 Most of the new young candidates Eisenhower and I had tried to encourage failed in their first bids for public office . Most of these young candidates failed to be elected to public office, he says . Eisenhower: "Most of the young people I tried to help failed in public office."
 The week before the end of the campaign, Ronald Reagan made a nationwide television broadcast on Goldwater’s behalf . Ronald Reagan also made a national television broadcast to Goldwater's behalf .
 The broadcast started a ground swell of support that swept Reagan into the California governor's office in 1966 and into the race for the presidential nomination in 1968 . Reagan was elected governor of California in 1966 .
 Johnson resisted what must have been a great temptation to crow over his landslide . Goldwater took his defeat with grace, and Johnson resisted the temptation .
 It was Nelson Rockefeller who tried to turn the disaster into his own advantage . Rockefeller tried to use the disaster to turn it into an advantage, Rockefeller said .
 The day after the election, he issued a statement aimed at reading Goldwater and his followers out of the party . Those like me who had supported Goldwater—and those like myself who supported him— were left out . The statement was intended to read Goldwater supporters out of party .
 I had intended to make no comment on the results until after a ‘cooling-off’ period, but Rockefeller’s attack changed my mind, I said . I had planned to make a statement but Rockefeller's attack changed that mind . Rockefeller's attacks on the president
 I complimented Goldwater, saying that he had fought courageously against great odds . "I complimented him for his courage," he said of Goldwater . Goldwater was a hero of his own, he said .
 I said that those who had divided the party in the past could not now expect to unite it in the future . I said: Those who had . divided the . party could not . now expect it to unite in the . future .
 "I had said what needed to be said in order to avert an irreconcilable split between conservatives and liberals within the party," he says . But he says he had said 'what was needed' to avert a split .
 Other party leaders joined me in calling for a cooling-off period and for renouncing recriminations over 1964 . The party could be united for a comeback in 1966, he says .
 Johnson would have to deal with the fact that the left wing of his own party was as extreme and self-righteous as the Republican right wing . Johnson would soon have to face the challenge of dealing with the extreme left .
 Johnson’s magic seemed to be wearing thin even at the height of his power . Johnson's magic was worn thin even even at his height .
 The Eastern media had been contemptuous of his Texas ways when he was Vice President . Now that he was no longer Kennedy’s legatee but had been elected on his own, a newly critical tone began to appear in some of his coverage .
 "I knew from experience that this would be hard, boring, and sometimes thankless work," she says . "It's hard and boring work. It's a thankless job," she writes .
 It was pragmatism more than altruism that led me to take it on, he says . "I believed that whoever did would gain a significant advantage in the race for the 1968 presidential nomination," he writes .
 This enabled me to reconcile the paradox of having to help my Republican competitors—Rockefeller, Romney, and Reagan . I was able to help Rockefeller, Romney and Reagan, but not Reagan, Rockefeller .
 I felt that if the base of the party were not expanded, the 1968 nomination would be worthless, he said . "I felt that . if the . base . of the . 1968 nomination was not expanded," he said. "It was a very important moment for the party to expand
 If the party were expanded by the victories of others, I thought I had a good chance of benefiting from its greater strength . The party should be expanded by others, he said .
 I did not reveal to my family or anyone else that this was what I had planned to do, he says . "I didn't tell anyone else I wanted to do this," he says. "I did not tell anyone that this is what I wanted"
 "I had finally come to the realization that there was no other life for me but politics and public service," she says . "There is no other way for me to be a politician," she adds .
 "Even when my legal work was at its most interesting I never found it truly fulfilling. Even when I was at my most interesting legal work, I found it interesting," she said .
 I told some friends that if all I had was my legal work, I would be mentally dead in two years and physically dead in four, he said . I told friends at this time that if I had nothing to do with legal work I would die in four years, he added .
 "I knew that they thought I was exaggerating; but I was telling the truth about the way I thought and felt," she says . "I was telling them the truth," she adds .
 On January 9, 1965, after a small family party to celebrate my fifty-second birthday, I sat in my study to look back on the past year and look ahead into the future .
 Winston Churchill had been in his mid-fifties when he lost his position of leadership in the House of Commons in 1929 . Most of his contemporaries had then written him off as a political leader .
 "I took heart from the example of his refusal to give up just because people thought he was finished. I took heart" from his example, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I put down my yellow pad, turned out the light, and stared into the fire. I put down the yellow pad and turned out my yellow . pad," she said .
 "For the first time in seven years, I started not only to think seriously about running for the presidency again but to think about where I should begin," he says . "I started thinking about where to begin. I started thinking again about running again," he adds .
 It's still much too early to make any final decision, much less any announcement, about running for President again . "It's still too early for anyone to decide whether to run for president again," says Hillary Clinton .
 Any attempt at presidential politics before the party had had a chance to rebuild itself for 1966 would be self-defeating . Besides, I was convinced that any attempt at . presidential politics . before the . party had . had had enough of a chance at . having had a . chance to
 'If I was interested in running, it would be equally foolish not to begin laying plans and harnessing some of the good will I had built up in the 1964 campaign. But if I was . interested in . running, I would begin laying . plans, harnessing . some of
 "I began making lists of the odds for and against my nomination in 1968," says Oscar Wilde . Wilde says he was nominated for best actor in 1968 for best directorial nomination .
 "After 1960 and 1962, I had what every politician dreads most, a loser image," says Bob Greene . He says he had a 'losing image' after 1960s and '62s .
 'For the first time in my life I was making a solid six-figure income from the law firm and from my book royalties and writing fees,' says author . 'I'm not going to let it slide down,' she says .
 "We had an expensive apartment, and one daughter in private school and the other in college," she says . "But we had a very expensive apartment. But we had to go back and forth," she writes . "We were very fortunate to be able to get our daughters to college
 After all the frugal years in Washington, I felt that Pat and the girls deserved the best, and I would not have them stint in order to bankroll another candidacy . I would rather have them bankrolled another candidacy. I felt they deserved the the best.
 By leaving California I had become in political terms a man without a country, he said . He said: "By leaving California, I became a man with a country. I had left California for a better life"
 It was almost unprecedented for a major candidate to build a serious presidential campaign without having the party machinery in his home state working for him . It's almost unprecedented that a major presidential candidate built a serious campaign without a party machine in his state .
 Although the odds against me were heavy, there were also some points in my favor . I was able to overcome the odds with the help of a good friend and family .
 One of the reasons for the Republican presidential nomination is that he's seen as front-runner in polls of GOP voters . Another was his position as front runner for the presidential nomination, he says .
 In the summer of 1966, the Gallup poll gave me a lead of almost 2 to 1 over my nearest competitor, Henry Cabot Lodge . In 1966, he was given a 2-1 lead over his nearest competitor .
 "Many years of labor in the Republican vineyards were being rewarded by the support of the party organization in most of the country," he says .
 "I was the most consistently newsworthy of the potential presidential candidates," he says . "Another advantage was that, like me or not, the press seemed to consider me the most consistent newsworthy," he adds .
 Even though I did not hold an office, I could count on overflow attendance any time I called a press conference, and wherever I traveled local television usually covered my speeches and appearances . Even though he didn't hold a office, he was expected to have overflow attendance .
 In my judgment, however, the most important thing in my favor was less tangible and more substantive than polls or press coverage . In his judgment, he said, "I think I'm going to be able to win the election"
 "I was confident that because of my background and experience, particularly in the field of foreign policy, I had the best grasp of the issues and trends that would determine the campaign and the election," says Hillary Clinton .
 Whether this was in fact true, I believed it was true, and the confidence that belief gave me was itself a tremendous advantage . I believed that belief was itself itself, and I was able to believe it .
 Since the best way to prepare for 1968 was to do well in 1966, I decided to begin some rudimentary planning for the coming year’s election campaign .
 In the middle of 1965, Maurice Stans, Al Cole, and Peter Flanigan began raising money for my travels on behalf of the party and its candidates in the 1966 elections . In the mid-1960s he began to raise money for his travels . Al Cole: "Maur
 The issues that were to dominate the political dialogue of the latter part of the 1960s were already taking shape by the middle of the decade . The issues of the future were already shaping up by the end of the century .
 The fatal flaw of his Great Society was precisely its inclination to establish massive federal programs . Johnson observed quite correctly that “the solution to these problems does not rest on a massive program in Washington,” he said .
 In five years, Johnson’s spending for the poor doubled, from $12. billion to $24. billion . Johnson spent $12 billion in five years to help the poor .
 The Great Society promised so much to so many that, instead of inspiring people to work hard to attain its goals, it made people impatient and angry when the goals were not immediately achieved without effort on their part . Even allowing for a healthy dose of oratorical overstatement, the Great
 I knew that Johnson would soon be bitterly disappointed by the ingratitude of those he tried to help . Johnson was disappointed by those who he tried, but was soon disappointed .
 His Great Society programs spawned a new constituency of government dependents who would always demand more than he could give . President Obama's Great Society program spawned a class of people who would demand more .
 Johnson was a man who needed praise, but he would get precious little of it from them . Johnson was known for his work in Washington, D.C., for his efforts .
 "I also anticipated the breakdown of performance of the Great Society programs themselves," says President Obama . "I'm not surprised at the performance of these programs," he says .
 The Great Society was created by liberal academics and bureaucrats steeped in the myths of the New Deal . It was created in the 1930s by liberals steeped with myths of New Deal, but was never fully formed .
 When its theoretical highmindedness ran up against the self-interested tough-mindedness of the people it was intended to serve, there was certain to be conflict . There was certain conflict between the two sides of the book's authors .
 The philosophical distinction between the Republican and Democratic parties was never clearer than in the middle 1960s . In the 1960s, both parties were divided by their respective ideologies .
 It is therefore the perfect time for Republicans to lead an active opposition . Republicans should lead the opposition to the White House .
 I fully recognized, however, that one of our biggest problems lay in our public image as a ‘negative” party . I fully realized, however . that one . problem lay in public image of the party as a "negative" party .
 Republicans had always been tagged as reactionary, but after his campaign we were portrayed as reckless and racist . Republicans had been portrayed as reactionary and racist, he said . Republicans were portrayed in the media as 'reckless and racist'
 Republicans needed to leapfrog the Democrats on the Great Society issues and get ahead of them, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the GOP needed to jumpfrog the Dems on the issues of Great Society .
 The Democrats were the majority party, but it seemed to me that the great strength of the Republicans lay in our ability to lead effectively on the local level, much as the Democrats rested on their ability to mobilize the resources of Washington . The Democrats are the Democrats, but the Republicans are the
 I deliberately used the terms /iberal and conservative, which in 1964 had been the sorrow of the party, to show how they had been abused and distorted almost beyond recognition . The terms were used to show that the party had been 'sorrowed' and 'sour'
 "If being a liberal means federalizing everything, then Pm no liberal. I said, “If . being a . Liberal means federalized everything, it's no liberal,” she said .
 "I was equally critical of the black activists and the extremists in the civil rights movement," says the author . He says he was also critical of "extremists" and "black activists"
 Watts district of Los Angeles was swept by black rioters, arsonists, and looters in the summer of 1965 . I refused to accept that such outbursts were the inevitable result of any systematic racism of American society .
 The real culprits in the race riots of the 1960s were neither society nor the police, but the extremists of both races who encouraged the idea that people need obey only the laws with which they agree . In his judgment, the real culprit was the extremists who encouraged people to obey only
 Another widespread concern during this period was the general tone of American society and the growth of permissiveness . Another concern was that the tone of U.S. society was becoming more permissive .
 Psychologists, preachers, and parents worried as traditional standards of social and sexual behavior were flouted or abandoned . Psychologists and preachers worried that traditional standards would be flouted .
 "I felt that to a large degree these excesses reflected the malaise of affluence," says the author . He said he felt that the excesses 'reflected a malaising' affluence .
 Republicans should try to understand them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Republicans should not bemoaning them, he says . Sutter: "In some cases, they represented a real change in American culture"
 I had become deeply concerned about the contrast between the actual situation I found when I visited Vietnam in 1964 and what the Johnson administration was telling the U.S. people about the situation, he says . "I was deeply concerned," he says. "I had become very concerned"
 Johnson had not leveled with the American people and told them why we were fighting in Vietnam or how deeply American troops were actually involved in the war . Johnson had failed to tell them why they were involved in Vietnam .
 He was expanding the war, and it would be difficult to explain why he considered it necessary without arousing the ire of antiwar forces and the skepticism of the average citizen .
 The government lost the confidence of the people, which I believe it could have kept . Johnson took the risk and fully explained the war and patiently educated people about it .
 By limiting the military effort to retaliation and small-scale operations, he forfeited the military initiative to the Communists . By limiting his efforts to retaliation, he also forfeited his military initiative .
 Johnson seemed to believe restraint on his part would be interpreted by the Communists as proof of his sincerity in seeking a negotiated settlement . Johnson's restraint was part of an effort to placate the left wing of his party .
 He did not see how they could refuse to come to the conference table when faced with anyone as reasonable as he was determined to be, he said .
 Successful negotiation requires the creation of conditions that make it advantageous for the other party to do what you want . Negotiating is a form of negotiation that allows you to create an advantageous situation .
 For a favorable outcome in Vietnam, it would have been necessary for the U.S. to employ its great economic and military power to demonstrate convincingly to the Communists that aggression would not pay . The United States would have had to demonstrate convincing to the Communist that aggression .
 The Johnson administration pursued a policy of only the most gradual escalation of the air and ground war . The war was only a gradual escalation .
 The policy actually accomplished was to convince the Communists that the U.S. lacked the will to win in Vietnam and could be worn down with propaganda directed against both domestic front and our allies around the world .
 As I saw it, Johnson should have told the American people about our role in Vietnam frankly and without any rosy predictions, I said . Johnson should've told the U.S. people about the Vietnam role in the war .
 The country should have been informed how difficult and costly the struggle would be. The struggle will be difficult, costly, the country should be informed of the difficulties .
 What had been true of Czechoslovakia to Hitler in 1938 was no less true of the betrayal of South Vietnam to the Communists advocated by many in 1965 . The betrayal of Vietnam in 1965 was no more true than the betrayal by the Communists in 1938 .
 The fall of free Vietnam to outside aggression would have sent shock waves throughout Asia . Free Vietnam would have shocked the world .
 To me, the choice lay not, as many doves thought, between this war and no war, but this war . This war would be a bigger war later when the Communists would be stronger and more confident, he says . The choice was not between the war and a war later
 In his speeches in 1965 I sought to justify and explain the American commitment in Southeast Asia . In 1965 he sought to explain and justify the U.S. commitment to Southeast Asia, he said .
 I pointed out that we were not like the French colonialists, who had been fighting to stay in Vietnam . "We were not fighting for Vietnam," he said. "I pointed out [French] colonialists," he added .
 I urged that we take the war to North Vietnam by naval and air bombing of the Communists’ supply routes in South Vietnam and by destroying the Vietcong staging areas in North Vietnam and Laos and Laos .
 I warned that we must not delude ourselves with schemes for coalition governments or neutralization . I warned . We must not fool ourselves that coalition governments will be able to be neutralized .
 Any negotiated settlement would inevitably lead only to further Communist demands . Any negotiated deal would inevitably end up leading to further communist demands . This is not the first time a deal has been reached .
 Unlike some of the extremist “hawks,” I did not think that we should use nuclear weapons in Vietnam . I didn't think that I did . Unlike some other ‘hawks’, I did think that .
 "I didn't think that we should rely on a strategy of committing increasing numbers of American troops to land battles," he says . Nor did he think that .
 I said that we should instead “quarantine” the war in Vietnam by using our air and sea power to close off the outside interference from Laos and North Vietnam that made it possible for the Vietcong to practice their guerrilla terrorism .
 I felt that what I had proposed was the right way, in fact the only way, to deal with the problem of Vietnam . But I felt it was the wrong way, and that it was only way of dealing with it, he said .
 I found the situation a bit improved from eighteen months before, particularly in terms of the morale among the South Vietnamese . I found a bit of the situation improved from 18 months before . The situation is a bit better now, according to the author .
 U.S. and Vietnamese military officials still seemed frustrated with each other's actions . But American and Vietnamese officials seemed to be frustrated .
 They felt they felt they were being held back because Washington thought this would encourage negotiations, while the enemy was making advances . Washington thought it would encourage talks, but the enemy made advances, they said .
 During 1965 the volume of political mail, phone calls, and speaking requests coming into my office took a quantum leap . During 1965, political mail and phone calls from the public took a 'quantity leap'
 By the end of the year it was clear that I would have to begin building a personal staff—not just for the 1966 campaign but with an eye to being ready for 1968 . "I would have had to start building a staff," he says .
 The St. Louis Globe-Democrat joined my staff as a researcher and speech-writer . I'm proud to be a proud member of our staff .
 If the party went down to defeat or even failed to make a reasonable comeback, Nixon would say that Nixon, the perennial loser, had once again dragged the party down, and that we needed new faces to win in 1968 .
 If I had a hand in a Sweeping party victory, it would not go unnoticed in the party ranks . However, Republicans had good reason to be optimistic about the 1966 elections, and it would go unnoticed .
 "Early in 1966 I began to concentrate specifically on the fall campaign. Early in 1966, 1966, I started to concentrate on the autumn campaign," he says .
 Tom Evans and Len Garment, both lawyers with our firm, were often in our office talking more politics than law . Tom Evans was often in his office talking about politics more than law, but not law .
 John P Sears, a twenty-five-year-old associate in the firm, volunteered afterhours work . He volunteered after hours work at the request of the firm .
 The fund-raising efforts of Cole, Stans, and Flanigan were stepped up and formalized in three committees, Congress ’66 . The major one was called Congress '66 .
 RNC Chairman Ray Bliss refused our request for committee funds to rent a plane on the ground that this would be showing favoritism for me over other potential presidential candidates, he says .
 "It was a political miracle that we were able to do it all by ourselves," says President Obama . "We are going to have a very successful year," says Obama .
 Johnson had sent his regrets, and Hubert Humphrey was sitting in for him . Johnson sent regrets to Humphrey .
 Later in the evening, Johnson burst into the room, followed by the presidential entourage . Johnson burst in after many speeches and skits had been completed .
 As he was being escorted from the dais after the toasts he greeted me and said that he would like me to stop by to have coffee with him the next morning .
 As I got off the elevator on the second floor of the White House, a butler greeted me and escorted me to Johnson's room .
 His voice was extremely hoarse, and he looked tired, almost to the point of exhaustion . He looked tired and his voice was very hoarse .
 I told him my views regarding the need to take stronger actions to bring the North Vietnamese to the conference table . I said he told him his views on the need for stronger actions .
 I said that I had defended the administration’s policy in all the foreign countries I visited, he said . I said he had defended his administration's policy in every foreign country I visited . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 He then turned to my recommendations regarding a harder line in Vietnam, he said . He then said he was concerned about a hard line in the country .
 She greeted me warmly, got into bed beside her husband, and joined us for the remainder of our conversation . She greeted him warmly and got to bed beside him .
 He shifted gears and in muted tones began talking like a man arriving at the end of his term, rather than a President in full control of events . The President shifted gears, talking like he was arriving at end of term .
 I said that since it was an election year, I would be out campaigning and making speeches for Republican candidates just as he had done for Democrats in 1954 and 1958 when the Republicans were in office . He said he would be campaigning for Republicans in the election year .
 With few exceptions I was able to give my enthusiastic endorsement to the Republican candidates . With very few exceptions, I gave my enthusiastic endorsements to the GOP candidates .
 "I was pretty much on my own because the other big guns on the national scene were tied up with their own campaigns," she says . "I personally picked districts and states in which I felt I could be effective," she said .
 The polls indicated that the Democrats were going to take a fairly substantial beating, CNN's John Sutter says . "I could feel a tremendous confidence and enthusiasm in the crowds I met and spoke to," he says .
 Rumors began to circulate that Johnson was planning a last-minute grandstand play that would restore public confidence right before the election . Rumors circulated that he was planning to make a grand stand play . But rumors began that he would do it right before election .
 I knew him well enough to know that such a move would be entirely in character for him, so I assumed a position of watchful waiting . "Such a move was entirely incharacter for him," he said .
 At the end of September Johnson made a surprise announcement that he was going to meet with President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam and other Vietnamese and allied leaders in late October .
 In a newspaper column I was writing this week I bluntly noted the widespread skepticism that greeted this announcement . In the newspaper column he was writing at this time I noted that this announcement was greeted with skepticism .
 It offered an American and allied troop withdrawal from South Vietnam within six months, contingent upon a North Vietnamese withdrawal of forces, cessation of their support of Vietcong infiltration, and a general lessening of the levels of violence .
 I was on a campaign trip when we received a copy of the Manila Communiqué, and I stayed up a good part of the night analyzing it . I was a candidate for the White House when we got the Manila communique .
 "I called in Rose Woods and Pat Buchanan and dictated several pages of notes," says Pat Buchanan . "We're not going to be able to talk to each other," says President Obama .
 I asked them to travel ahead ahead to the next stop so that Buchanan could begin incorporating my thoughts into a working draft . I asked the team to begin incorporating their thoughts .
 U.S. and North Vietnamese troop withdrawals are far more illusory than real, says U.N. Korea . North Vietnam's offer of mutual withdrawal was far more likely than real .
 The South Vietnamese Army could not prevail for any length of time over the Communist guerrillas without American advisers, air support, and logistical backing . The U.S. helped the South Vietnam Army prevail over the Communists in Vietnam .
 The situation in 1966, when the South Vietnamese were totally untrained and unprepared to defend themselves, was very different from that in 1969 . In 1969, in my presidency we were able to propose a mutual withdrawal with the assurance that our Vietnamization policies would prepare the . South Vietnamese to defend
 I said if I understood the Manila Communiqué correctly, it offered to tie American withdrawals to the level of fighting indulged in by the Vietcong . I said that if . I understood it correctly, the . Manila communiqué offered to . tie American withdrawal to the . level
 It was treated as major news, particularly because I had consistently supported our goals in Vietnam, even while I raised questions about the tactics being used to achieve them . I had raised questions over the tactics of the war in Vietnam .
 If the Manila meeting had been intended to help the Democrats in the election, it backfired completely . The Manila meeting was meant to help Democrats win the election .
 The doves attacked the Manila Communiqué as bellicose, and the hawks attacked it as amounting to surrender on the installment plan . The hawks said it amounted to surrender .
 My criticism of the Manila Communiqué apparently hit a particularly raw nerve in the White House . The White House reportedly responded to the criticism with a harsh response .
 Johnson’s press conference on November 4 opened with some questions that revealed the cynical attitude of the press toward him . Johnson's press conference was the first of its kind .
 Johnson was tired and testy, and when a reporter asked him for a comment on my statement, something inside him seemed to break . "Something inside him seems to break," Johnson said of Johnson's interview .
 'He never did really recognize and realize what was going on when he had an official position in the government. He never really recognized and didn't realize what he was doing,' he said .
 President Eisenhower said, "If you would give him a week or so he would figure out what he was doing" President Obama said he would give the president a week to figure out .
 He went back to San Francisco, hoping that he would be in the wings, available if Goldwater stumbled . Then he went home and went to California, hoping he could be available if he stumbled .
 Reporters stole glances at one another to make sure that they were hearing correctly . Reporters steal glances at each other to ensure that they are hearing correctly. Reporters were shocked to hear the news .
 Johnson began defending the terms of the Manila Communiqué against the charges in my statement . Johnson defended the terms in his statement in which he said they were necessary .
 He said that the Communists should have no doubts about our determination to leave Vietnam as soon as the conditions of mutual withdrawal, suspension of infiltration, and a decrease in fighting were met . The Communist Party leader said that he would leave Vietnam if conditions of withdrawal and suspension of infiltrations were met
 Attempts to do that will cause people to lose votes instead of gaining them, he says . "It will be very difficult to get elected again," he adds .
 When the aggression, infiltration, and violence cease, not a nation there wants to keep occupying troops in South Vietnam . Not a nation in Vietnam would want to keep occupied troops in the country .
 Buchanan told me what had happened I realized for the first time how worried Johnson was beneath his booming exterior . Buchanan told him what he thought Johnson was worried about .
 "I knew that if I handled myself well, this could turn into both a Republican and a personal windfall," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I know that if he handled himself well, he could turn himself into a Republican"
 President Obama spoke at Waterville, Maine, on Saturday . Obama has been accused of being a victim of the President of the United States .
 I said, “Now President Johnson and I can disagree about that, but let’s disagree as gentlemen.” President Johnson said. “Let’t disagree,” he said . President Johnson later said.
 Let me say that the best way is not a one-man way, not just LBJ’s way but the twoparty way . The best way to get around the world is not one man's way, it's the other way .
 With just a few days left before the election, I suddenly found myself the center of national attention . With just days left, he suddenly found himself the . center of . national attention.
 Editorialists and columnists who had had little use for me in the past defended my integrity against Johnson’s intemperate attack . ‘I’m not afraid to defend my integrity,’ he said .
 Eisenhower called me from Gettysburg and said, “Dick, I could kick myself every time some jackass brings up that goddamn ‘give me a week’ business.”
 Johnson has gone too far on this, and there will be a very strong backlash in your favor . Johnson will have to face a backlash from the public .
 "I shall answer it not for myself but because of a great principle that is at stake," says Obama . Obama: "I will answer that question not for me but for the sake of my country"
 President of the United States. That means the right to disagree with any government official, even the President . That includes disagreeing with the president of the U.S.
 I used most of the speech to make the case for a Republican Congress, but at the end I returned to Johnson’s attack .
 I understand that the President of the United States may be listening to this program tonight. I understand it may be important that the president of the U.S. may listen to it tonight.
 For 14 years I had the privilege of serving with you in Washington. For fourteen years I was in Washington, Washington, D.C., for 14 years . I was proud to serve with you. I hope you will continue to serve your country .
 I respect you for the great office you hold, President Obama says . I respect your office that we both sought and that you won. President Obama's office is a very special place to be in .
 I respect you for the great energies you devote to that office, and my respect has not changed because of the personal attack you made on me, he says . "I respect you," he writes .
 You see, I think I understand how a man can be very, very tired and how his temper then can be short. You see ... I think it's a very difficult thing to do for a man who is very tired .
 I offered Johnson my continued support in his search for peace and freedom abroad and progress at home . I closed the broadcast by offering Johnson his continued support .
 The speech was a success, it renewed my credentials as a national spokesman and a fighting campaigner. The speech, which was a 'success' for me, I said, was a great success .
 It also served to identify me with the Republican victory that now seemed almost certain in the election two days hence . The election now seems almost certain .
 The election was personally satisfying to me in that the Republicans made gains in the South, defeating Democratic backlash candidates in Arkansas, and in Maryland, where Spiro Agnew defeated a Democrat running on a subtly racist line .
 After the last returns were in and our victory was confirmed, I rounded up a small party to go to El Morocco for a victory supper of spaghetti and red wine .
 Republican Sen. Ted Cruz: "It was gratifying to know that I had played a major part in this Republican victory" "I was gratified to know I had helped contribute to my own comeback," he says .
 I had indisputably played a central part, and for the first time in ten years I was identified with a smashing victory. But no matter what the reasons, I had . I'm not sure why I did so, but it's a good thing for me to play a central
 Johnson’s attack made me the wounded party. For one of the few times in my political career, I was wounded party, he says .
 'I was something of a chronic campaigner, always out on the stump raising partisan hell,' he says . He says he was always a 'chronic campaigner' who raised partisan hell . 'I'm not a politician, but I'm a fighter,' he adds .
 Nixon's hard edges may have rounded off some of the hard edges of the younger Nixon . But his years in the “wilderness” and the simple process of growing older had probably rounded off his hard edges, he says .
 I emerged from the campaign of 1966 as a seasoned senior Republican statesman who could still deliver some effective political licks . I emerged as a senior Republican stateman who still delivered some effective licks. I emerged .
 On the day after the election I issued a statement of my belief that the results represented a repudiation of Johnson’s policies, he said . He said the results were a repudiated of Johnson's policies .
 Many of my friends, advisers, and supporters had urged me to gear up my own organization to be ready to go public with my presidential candidacy as soon as the election was over . The great Republican victory had taken place.
 "I wanted to run for President in 1968, but I wanted to leave open, until the last possible moment, the option of deciding zor to run," he says . He says he wanted to "leave open" the possibility of running .
 We went sailing with Bebe Rebozo on his boat, the Coco Lobo . We spent hours on the beach reading, swimming, and talking about everything except politics . Bebe's boat was the Coco .
 "I knew that Pat and the girls were secretly hoping that the moratorium on politics would go on and on," says Pat . "I know that Pat's hoping that this moratorium will continue," she says. "I'm glad that we're not going to have a long-term political
 'They said that the time had come to make a move if I had any intention of being a candidate in 1968,' he says . 'They told me that I had no intention of running for president in 1968'
 Reagan’s supporters were talking about renewing the Goldwater conservative movement . Romney was off and running, and Reagan supporters were discussing renewing Goldwater movement . Reagan's supporters were off-and-running .
 Nelson Rockefeller was in the wings, ready to pick up the ball if others stumbled . Nelson Rockefeller: "Nelson Rockefeller was ready to step in when others stumbled" Nelson Rockefeller is in the right place to take up the mantle .
 Each hopeful was trying to get party leaders and workers committed to him . Unless I could give my personal supporters some reason to hold out, I might one day find that they had been snatched up by my rivals .
 Flanigan and Stans wanted to organize a Nixon for President Club . They wanted to begin some preliminary low-key organizing and fundraising . Flanigan, Stans planned to organize Nixon for president .
 I told them that I considered the ability to remain officially undecided for as long as possible to be one of my greatest advantages . I considered it one of the greatest advantages of being undecided, he said .
 "Speculation about my intentions guaranteed far more media attention than I would have if I announced. Not only would this allow me more independence, but it also would allow me to have more media coverage," she said .
 I would publicly neither approve nor disapprove their activity. Therefore, I would not publicly approve or disapprove of their activity . I would rather rather approve than disapprove their activities than disapprove .
 "I assured them that I agreed completely with their analysis of the need to begin organizing," he said . But he also said he agreed with them that they need to start organizing .
 A few months later, Nixon for President Committee was announced in Washington . The first Nixon campaign committee was formed in Washington, D.C.
 On January 7 and 8, 1967, I held planning meetings at the Waldorf Towers . "I was there for planning meetings on January 7, 1967," he says .
 "I made it clear that my six-month moratorium, while admittedly a risk, was carefully calculated," he said . "I'm not sure how long it will be," he added .
 George Romney could be out front taking the heat from the press and the pundits while I continued my quiet planning and foreign travel . I continued to be quiet planning, foreign travel and planning, says Romney .
 "I decided to begin building a personal political staff so that I could be ready to plunge into the battle as soon as my moratorium ended. I decided to build a personal staff," he said .
 In addition to Price, Dwight Chapin, a young advertising executive, joined the staff to serve as a personal aide .
 On January 1, 1967, my law firm had merged with the firm of Caldwell, Trimble, and Mitchell, which specialized in municipal bonds . My law firm merged with Caldwell and Trimble and Mitchell in 1967 .
 "I struck up an immediate friendship with the husky, outwardly gruff senior partner, John Mitchell," she says . She says she struck up a friendship with Mitchell after meeting him at the start of the series .
 He had never been involved in a campaign, but he had an instinctive talent for politics, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'I felt from our conversations that he had a instinct for politics'
 As a result of his extensive work with state and local governments in providing legal advice on bond issues, he had an exceptionally wide network of political contacts . He had worked with local governments to provide legal advice .
 Within a few months I was beginning to turn increasingly to him for advice and counsel on political matters . Within a year, he was turning increasingly to his political adviser for advice .
 I decided to use the time during my moratorium on active politics to make a series of foreign study trips to study abroad . I decide to use this time to take a break from active politics .
 "I wanted to bring my impressions up to date and to renew my contacts and refine my ideas about current conditions in the world," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 By undertaking these trips I was building on my political strong suit, my knowledge of foreign affairs, says Mr Obama . By taking these trips, Mr Obama said he was building his political strength in foreign affairs .
 I also believed this was the best possible way to ensure that I would be able to frame foreign policy issues in a way that would be both effective and responsible, and, if I becamé President, I could get a head start on what to me were the most important decisions a
 By this time Robert Ellsworth, an exceptionally able former congressman from Kansas then practicing law in Washington, had arranged to spend half his time helping with my campaign-that-was-not-yet-acampaignaign .
 Ellsworth had a special interest in foreign and defense matters . He helped make arrangements for the trips through State Department and embassies .
 He accompanied me on the first trip and on part of another; Ray Price was on the second; Bebe was on third to Latin America; and Pat Buchanan on the fourth . Pat Buchanan was also a part of the trip, Ray Price and Bebe were also there .
 "I met the leaders, met the people, and saw at first hand the problems, opportunities, and dangers confronting the U.S. In these 1967 worldwide trips I met the world's leaders and met the . people," he says .
 The result was to reinforce some views I already strongly held and modify others . The result of the book is to be published in New York City .
 As usual I requested a CIA briefing before departure; and for the first time since I had left office it was refused . The first time I had requested a briefing since I left office was refused, he says .
 Such briefings are a privilege, not a right, for a private citizen, no official explanation was given .
 Unofficially I was told that Johnson was still furious over the Manila Communiqué incident and that he had expressly forbidden the CIA to give me any help or guidance . The CIA was forbidden by Johnson to give him any guidance .
 I had not made a systematic tour of NATO nations since 1963 . I was shocked by the extent to which our relations with them had deteriorated, he said . He said he was shocked to discover that relations with NATO nations had deteriorated .
 The Europeans were deeply offended by our failures to consult with them, or even to inform them of decisions we made that touched on their defenses and their destinies . The Europeans, the Europeans, were very upset by our failure to consult them .
 Standing back, his hands still on his shoulders, he said, “Thank God you are here.” Standing back he said: ‘Thank God, thank God you're here. Thank God,’
 This great architect of postwar Europe was depressed about Europe’s future . He said he was worried about the future of Europe .
 He completely discounted the Soviet Union’s alleged interest in hastening peace in Vietnam . He also discounted popular speculation that the Soviets would turn toward the West out of fear of China .
 Most of all they want Europe, and to get Europe they know they must destroy Germany . Most of Europe, they want to destroy Germany, and they know it must destroy it .
 Adenauer urged—as had de Gaulle four years before, that we tilt our policy toward Communist China to counterbalance the growing Soviet threat . Adenauer: "China is a major source of instability in the world"
 I was surprised to find a similar concern about Soviet strategy expressed by almost everyone I talked with on this trip . The Soviet Union was a major source of concern in the Soviet Union's strategy .
 In Rome President Saragat and Foreign Minister Fanfani agreed that the Soviets were determined to keep the war going in Vietnam . In Rome they agreed that in Rome they would continue the war .
 Like Adenauer, they felt that the primary threat from communism was in Europe rather than in Asia . Adenauer and Adenauer felt the threat was mainly in Europe .
 Fanfani: "NATO is what really counts, but too many people in your country take it for granted and think that Vietnam is the most important thing" He says NATO is what matters most .
 Manlio Brosio, the Italian diplomat who was then Secretary General of NATO after having served in Washington for six years and in Moscow for five, expressed doubts about Soviet intentions .
 I had been refused a visa to visit Poland on this trip and was therefore surprised to receive a visa from Romania . I had refused to travel to Poland but was surprised to get one from Romania.
 I assumed I would get one of the cold-shoulder receptions that Communist governments are particularly good at. Even so, I assumed that I would be greeted with a cold shoulder reception. Even though I was going to get one, I thought it would be a cold hand of ice .
 "From the moment Ellsworth and I stepped off the plane in Bucharest, it was clear that this was going to be a remarkable visit," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Everywhere we were greeted with outbursts of friendship from the people, the people. Everywhere we are greeted with . Outbursts from people everywhere we were . Everywhere we . met each other .
 I doubted that any true détente with the Soviets could be achieved until some kind of rapprochement could be reached with Communist China . I doubt that any real denteente with Soviets could ever be achieved . I doubted it could be possible until some form of a rappro
 I said that the U.S. could do little to establish effective communications with China until the Vietnam war was ended . I said I thought that the United States could . do little, I thought, until the war was over . ended .
 President Obama said he could take steps to normalize relations with Peking . China's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years .
 CeauSescu was guarded in his reaction, but I could tell that he was interested to hear me talking in this way, and that he agreed with what I said . "I could tell him he was ... interested in hearing me talking about this way," he said .
 On his trip to Asia in April he wanted to evaluate the situation in Vietnam and the importance of the conflict to Vietnam’s neighbors . He wanted to talk about the impact of Vietnam's conflict on Vietnam's neighbors .
 I also particularly wanted to learn how Asian leaders were viewing China and its future relationship with the rest of Asia and the world . I also wanted to talk about how China is viewed by other Asian leaders .
 Many Americans were primarily Europeanists in their approach to foreign affairs, dismissing Asia as relatively unimportant . Many Americans thought Asia was a relatively small part of the world .
 The U.S. is a Pacific power, but rapid changes were taking place in Asia . Asia might well determine the world’s future, and that might well decide the future .
 Japan would soon be the world’s third-ranking industrial power, behind the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Japan would become the world's third-ranked industrial power .
 Some of the most rapid rates of economic progress anywhere were being achieved by the nations of non-Communist Asia . Asia's rapid economic progress was achieved by non-communist Asia in the 1970s .
 Mainland China posed the greatest threat to peace during the final third of the twentieth century . mainland China potentially posed the most threat of peace during that period .
 I met with Prime Minister Sato, former Prime Minister Kishi, and a number of other Japanese political officials. I also met with PM Sato and former PM Kishi .
 The Japanese leaders felt strongly that the U.S. must remain in Asia, and that it was vital that we continue to help defend South Vietnam . The U.N. should stay in Asia .
 They were keenly aware that, because of memories of World War I, there were limits to the leadership Japan could exercise . They were aware of the limits they could exercise because of the memory of WWI .
 They acknowledged the need for regional cooperation to contain the Communist challenge . Nonetheless, they acknowledged that regional cooperation is needed .
 Chiang still dreamed of returning to the mainland, and once again urged that America support such an effort . Once again he urged that U.S. support such a effort .
 He argued that Chinese on the mainland were disenchenchanted with their leaders . He said they were ready to rally to another force .
 A Nationalist invasion of the mainland would end the threat of a Red Chinese atomic bomb and end the chance of a Sino-Soviet rapprochement, he said . The invasion would also end Chinese support of the Vietnam war and end China's support of Vietnam .
 Chiang was unquestionably one of the giants of the twentieth century . He was a friend and unquestionably a friend of Chiang's .
 I wondered whether he might be right, but my pragmatic analysis told me that he was wrong . I wondered . Whether he might have been right, or not, he was right .
 His burning desire to return to the mainland was understandable and admirable . His desire for return to mainland was admirable and admirable, he said .
 But it was totally unrealistic in view of the massive power the Communists had developed, it was said . It was 'totally unrealistic' to expect the Communist Party to have any power .
 In Vietnam, despite the military’s optimistic prediction, I became further convinced that continuation of the administration's policy of fighting a defensive war of attrition would inevitably lead to defeat . I became convinced that . continuation of . the administration’�s policy of . fighting a . defensive
 It was small comfort to learn the enemy was losing more men than we were . It was a small comfort that it was not the enemy losing more than us .
 It had become America’s war, and the South Vietnamese were not being adequately trained and equipped to defend themselves . The South Vietnamese had not been adequately trained or equipped to protect themselves, the author says .
 Every leader in Asia expressed support for a strong U.S. position in Vietnam, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Some who had opposed any change of U.S. policy toward China had come around to the view that some new and direct relationship between the two nations was essential if there were to be any chance after the Vietnam war was over .
 Kennedy’s Alliance for Progress had raised expectations too high in Latin America in May . In Latin America, he found that Kennedy's alliance for Progress was too high for expectations .
 Leaders in Latin America express disappointment at lack of investment from U.S. and Europe . Latin American leaders urge the U.N. to develop a new approach to attract private investment from both the .
 In June the leaders emphasized their desire to have more aid from the United States rather than depend on their former colonial masters . In Africa in June they said they wanted more aid .
 With a few exceptions, new black African nations simply did not have trained leadership to achieve their goals in any forseeable future . But I was discouraged by the fact .
 In a long conversation with General Yitzhak Rabin I pointed out that Israel had a stake in the outcome of the war in Vietnam . Israel had been involved in the Vietnam War, writes David Cameron .
 If the U.S. were defeated or humiliated in Vietnam, the American people could well turn isolationist and be unwilling to come to the aid of other small nations, like Israel, who depended on us for survival .
 I was impressed by the courage and toughness of the Israeli leaders and people, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . He says he was impressed with the courage of Israeli leaders .
 Israel's swift and overwhelming victory over the Arabs had created a feeling of overconfidence about their ability to win any war in the future . But I was disturbed by the fact that their swift victory had created an attitude of total intransigence on negotiating any peace agreement that would involve return
 It left a residue of hatred among their neighbors that I felt could only result in another war, particularly if the Russians were to step up military aid to their defeated Arab clients . I felt it could only lead to another war .
 I summarized my conclusions from these trips first in a speech at the Bohemian Grove and then in an article for the quarterly Foreign Affairs. I summarized these trips in both speeches and articles .
 If I were to choose the speech that gave me the most pleasure and satisfaction in my political career, it would be my Lakeside Speech at the Bohemian Grove in July 1967 . The speech was the most memorable moment of his political career .
 Because this speech traditionally was off the record it received no publicity at the time . Because of this speech, it was off-the-record .
 President Barack Obama's presidency marked the first milestone on his road to the presidency, Obama says . Obama: "In many important ways it marked the beginning milestone"
 The setting is possibly the most dramatic and beautiful I have ever seen. The setting was possibly the best I've ever seen . It was a 'beautiful and dramatic' experience .
 A natural amphitheatre has been built up around a platform on the shore of a small lake . The amphitheater was built up on a platform around a lake .
 Redwoods tower above the scene, and the weather in July is usually warm and clear . Redwoods are usually warm, clear and dry .
 Herbert Hoover had always delivered the Lakeside Speech, but he had died in 1964 . Hoover had been asked if he would deliver the 1967 speech in his honor . Hoover was asked to deliver the lakeside speech in 1967 .
 "It was an emotional assignment for me and also an unparalleled opportunity to reach some of the most important and influential men," she says . "It's an opportunity for me to reach out to the most influential men, not just from California"
 "Never in human history have more changes taken place in the world in one generation’," Obama says . "This is a world of new leaders, of new people of new ideas," he says .
 I led the audience on a tour of the world, tracing the changes and examining the conflicts, finding both danger and opportunity as the U.S. entered the final third of the twentieth century .
 I urged the need for strong alliances and continued aid to the developing nations . I also urged that we should provide our aid more selectively, rewarding our friends and discouraging our enemies .
 Even as the Soviet leaders talked peace they continued to stir up trouble, to encourage aggression, and to build missiles, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In negotiations we must always remember ‘that our goal is different from theirs’ And in negotiations, we must also remember that our goal, the government, must be different from their .
 As we enter this last third of the twentieth century, the hopes of the world rest with America . The hopes of America rest with the United States .
 Whether peace and freedom survive in the world depends on U.S. leadership, says President Obama . "Peace and freedom" depends on American leadership, Obama says .
 Our economic superiority is enormous, our military superiority can be whatever we choose to make it, says President Obama . "Our economic superiority ... is enormous," he says .
 "Most important, it happens that we are on the right side," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "We're on the side of freedom and peace and progress against totalitarianism"
 There is only one area where there is any question—that is whether America has the national character and moral stamina to see us through this long and difficult struggle. America's national character, moral stamina, will be tested in the long struggle.
 Some counsel conceding to China a ‘sphere of influence’ embracing much of the Asian mainland and extending even to the island nations beyond . Others urge that we eliminate the threat by preemptive war .
 Clearly, neither of these courses would be acceptable to the United States or to its Asian allies . The U.S. and its allies are not likely to accept the course of action .
 Others argue that we should seek an anti-Chinese alliance with European powers, even including the Soviet Union . Others say it should be a European alliance against China .
 Such a course would inevitably carry connotations of Europe vs. Russia . Quite apart from the obvious problems involved in Soviet participation, such a course carries connotations .
 Only as nations of non-Communist Asia become so strong that they no longer furnish tempting targets for Chinese aggression, they will be persuaded to turn their energies inward rather than outward .
 China will be the time when the dialogue with mainland China can begin, he says . And that's the time for the dialogue to begin with China, he adds .
 For the short run, this means a policy of firm restraint, of no reward . Counterpressure designed to persuade Peking that its interests can be served only by accepting the basic rules of international civility .
 For the long run, it means pulling China back into the world community, not as the epicenter of world revolution . China must be pulled back as a great and progressing nation, not a revolutionary nation, says President Xi Jinping .
 Things were moving so fast that even the few months I was away had produced an almost completely different political landscape . Things are moving so quickly that even a few months ago had produced a completely different landscape, says David Frum .
 "I found that sentiment was beginning to turn very decisively in my favor," says President Obama . "I'm beginning to find that sentiment in my favour," says Obama .
 "It appeared more than more that the presidential primaries offered the only way to show that I could win. It appeared more . more than that it appeared more and more that . that was the only . way of showing that I . could win," she said .
 Ronald Reagan was one of the potential presidential candidates who denied any interest in the nomination . Reagan was a potential presidential candidate in the 1980s and '90s . Ronald Reagan denied interest in running for president in 1980s .
 Sen. Murphy had a candid discussion of the political situation at the Bohemian Grove in July . Senator Murphy, he, and Sen. George Murphy sat outdoors on a bench under the giant redwoods .
 I assured him that it was my intention to do everything possible to unite the party and to campaign only against Johnson and his administration, and not against any fellow Republicans .
 Reagan said he was surprised, flattered, and somewhat concerned about all the presidential speculation surrounding him . Reagan said that he had been surprised and flattered by all the speculation about him .
 He did not want to be a favorite son, he said, but he would probably have to allow it in order to assure party unity in California . He said he didn't want to become favorite son but would probably allow it .
 I looked forward to discussing politics and world affairs with him, but now we had another subject of mutual interest . 'I looked forward, as usual, to discuss politics with him,' he said .
 Julie and her grandson David had been seeing a great deal of each other while at college . Julie and David were dating at college and had been together for a year .
 Actually, though it was not known to the respective families, they had already decided to marry . The pair's families were not aware of the fact that they were engaged .
 We had chicken with noodles with noodles and salad garnished with pickled watermelon rind .
 Eisenhower had been quite animated at lunch, but afterward he looked tired and had to grope for words . Eisenhower looked tired at the end of the meal . Eisenhower was tired at lunch but later said he was tired .
 He was particularly fatigued after we took a short walk to the barn, but he was firm in the advice he gave me . He said: 'He was tired and tired. He was tired. We need to take him out of the barn. He needs to get back to the
 He advised me against making Vietnam a political issue because many Republicans supported Johnson's goals, although questioning the means he was using to achieve them .
 He agreed with my long-held view that Johnson’s greatest error in prosecuting the war was not having used more power at the outset .
 He said he knew from his own military experience that gradual escalation did not work . He said gradual escalation didn't work, and he knew that .
 He said, “If an enemy battalion is defending a hill, you give me two battalions and Ill take the hill—but at a terrible cost in casualties,” he said . He said: “I will take a hill but it will cost a terrible amount in
 He felt Scranton was the best qualified of any of the men who had not held national office . He felt he was best qualified to be president .
 President Richard Nixon visited most of the Republican governors and party leaders in their home states in the fall of 1967 .
 They all wanted to know my plans, but I said only that I was considering entering the primaries and would be grateful for any advice they had. They asked me to tell them what I would like to do .
 "It reinforced their determination to see how I would do in the primaries before deciding whom to support," he said . "While this position did not commit me or call for any commitments from them, it reinforced their determined to see ... how they would do," he added .
 Many Republicans were using my possible candidacy as an excuse for remaining uncommitted to anyone else, he says . "In fact, it looked as if many Republicans were ... using it as a . excuse," he says. "to stay uncommitted"
 Many Southern leaders, particularly, were holding back on these grounds . But many Southern leaders have been holding back .
 In their hearts they would have preferred Reagan, but they had learned a lesson of political pragmatism . Goldwater burned by Goldwater and Goldwater, but the GOP learned from a lesson from Goldwater .
 I was in a conference, so I asked Rose to tell him I would return the call . Rose was in the middle of a conference when she called .
 My mother had suffered a stroke two years before, and we had reluctantly put her in a nursing home in Whittier, California . My mother was put in the nursing home after suffering a stroke .
 She never gave any signs of awareness and could speak only in monosyllables, but I felt sure that in the deep recesses of her mind she recognized me . She never spoke of any emotion, but she was sure she knew me .
 "There were times when I regretted that we did not do whatever was necessary to keep her in one of our homes," says mother-of-one .
 There was no doubt, however, that it was better for her to be where she could receive proper care . There is no doubt that she will be able to be cared for at least .
 "I also knew that she would have wanted it that way, because she never wanted to be a burden to her family," she said . "She would have also wanted it to be that way," she added .
 Perhaps because I was prepared intellectually for the idea of her death, it took some time before the emotional impact of it hit me . Perhaps because of the way she died, I was not emotionally prepared for her death .
 They were in tears; they loved their grandmother very much . It would not have been possible for them to love her as much as she loved them, she said . She was in tears when she passed away .
 Her love was all-encompassing and totally unselfish—never expecting or wanting anything from anything in return . She never expected or wanted anything from anyone else in her life .
 I did not cry when I heard the news, nor when I talked with Pat and the girls in the apartment, nor on the plane to California for the funeral. "I didn't cry," she says . "I did not break down when I called Pat," she writes .
 My principal thought was a feeling of deep regret that I had not done as much for her as I might have if I hadn't been so busy with my own career and concerns, she said .
 My mother had been a great admirer of Billy Graham, even before he became famous . Billy Graham is a hero of the day, and Billy Graham was a great friend of his .
 She had attended one of his first crusades in Southern California and spoken to him afterward . He never forgot her in the years that followed . She attended a crusade in California .
 As soon as he heard of her death, he called me from his home in North Carolina and said that he wanted to come to the funeral . "He called me to say that he was going to come," she says .
 The service was held in the same Friends Church in East Whittier where as a child I had played the piano and sung in the choir .
 It was in this church that my father’s funeral service had been held eleven years earlier . My father's funeral service was held in the church where he was buried .
 Many of my mother’s Whittier friends and acquaintances had to stand outside because of the great number of reporters, whose presence I deeply resented, who filled the back and side aisles . The church was full, and many of my . mother's . friends and
 At the end of the service the family were the first to leave the church and walk by the open casket . The service was held in honour of the late father .
 My mother was not pretty, but she was beautiful, and she looked as beautiful in death as she had in life . "She was beautiful in life. She was as beautiful as she was in life," she said .
 I shook hands with the minister and then, as . shook . hands with Billy, our eyes met. Billy's eyes met with Billy's as we shook hands . Billy was the first minister to shake hands with David Cameron .
 We walked out into the sunlight and rode from the church to Rose Hills Memorial Park . We rode to the memorial park .
 My mother was buried in the family plot, alongside my father, my brothers Arthur and Harold, her mother and father, and her sister Elizabeth, who died of cancer . Her sister Elizabeth was buried alongside her father, Arthur, Harold and Harold .
 "Only one reporter had the bad manners to stick a microphone in my face and ask how I felt," she said .
 While Pat slept, I closed my eyes and thought back on my mother’s life . "While Pat slept I closed his eyes," she said, "I thought back"
 She had just had an operation, and although she was in terrible pain she never once complained about it . Although she had been in pain, she did not once complain .
 She pulled herself up in the bed, and with sudden strength in her voice she said, “Richard, don’t you give up.” Richard, Richard, says . Richard's wife says, "Richard, please don't give up"
 Just before her operation she had read a column in the Los Angeles Times speculating that she was through as far as any chances of regaining national office were concerned . Only later did I find out that just before . I found out that . She had read that she had been through as
 A typical sentiment, I thought as the plane flew eastward into nightfall . What a typical sentiment? I thought . What was typical sentiment .
 The Republican front-runner during the pre-primary period was George Romney . George Romney was the GOP's favorite candidate for the Republican presidential nomination .
 I knew Romney had a head start, but I also suspected that his lack of experience might make him politically accident-prone . I knew that Romney had an early head start but also suspected he might be accident prone .
 His statement that he had been successfully “brainwashed” by his official hosts during his study tour of Vietnam was his worst, but by no means his only, gaffe during this period . The statement was his best, but not his worst gaffe .
 The most interesting question about Romney was whether Rockefeller was using him as a stalking horse for his own candidacy . Romney: "From my point of view, the most interesting part of the question is whether Nelson Rockefeller was trying to use him as his stalking horse"
 By now, the political situation was beginning to develop very quickly, and he was outspoken in analyzing the various political personalities who might play a role in 1968 .
 In December 1968, after I had selected Laird as Secretary of Defense, Eisenhower expressed the same doubts . Eisenhower expressed a similar doubts about Laird's appointment in December 1968 .
 Eisenhower told me he thought I had made a good choice, Eisenhower said in January . After a meeting in January, Eisenhower told him he thought he had made it good choice .
 I said that I thought we should quarantine North Vietnam by mining its harbors . I said we should quarantined the country by mining North Vietnam's harbors. I also said that we should also quarantine North Vietnam .
 Eisenhower said that he thought we would need a declaration of war in order to justify such action under international law . Eisenhower said he thought such a declaration would be necessary to justify the action .
 He took a hard line, however, regarding the proposals to stop the bombing of North Vietnam .
 Johnson thought Johnson’s hesitations at crucial occasions had been damaging . He thought that Johnson's hesitations in crucial moments were damaging .
 I asked him what he thought of the idea of switching to a volunteer army when the war ended . He said it was a good idea to switch to volunteer army .
 He strongly opposed it and said that he had written a thesis on the topic at the War College . He said he wrote a thesis about the topic in his thesis .
 He had investigated all the options and concluded that universal military training was a good idea . "Universal military training" was the best idea, he said .
 Eisenhower’s brow furrowed as he tried to pick up his train of thought, and it was painful for me to watch him struggling to remember . Eisenhower‘s brow brow furrows as he struggled to remember. Eisenhower was the president of the United States .
 By the end of 1967 I knew that I had to make a final decision about running for president . "I had to decide whether to run for president in 1968," he says. "I was in the process of making a decision"
 The Nixon for President organization was ready to shift into high gear as soon as I gave the signal . The Nixon campaign organization is now in high gear, Nixon said . Nixon's campaign group is ready to take on the job of president .
 Johnson’s personal and political insecurity had become obvious . His party was ready to split apart under pressure from Eugene McCarthy and Bobby Kennedy on the left .
 The chances for a Republican to be elected President in 1968 looked better all the time . In 1968, the chances for Republicans to win the White House looked better than ever .
 I was the first choice of Republicans for the nomination in almost every Gallup poll taken in 1967 . Most of the party’s organizational leaders either wanted to support me or, at least, felt that I had earned a shot at the nomination by the hard labor I had done for the
 Many of my strongest supporters were still not sure that I could throw off my ‘loser image’ and lead the party to victory . However, many of my strong supporters were not sure about me being a candidate for president .
 In October 1967 the Gallup poll’s presidential trial heat had shown me running ahead of Johnson for the first time, 49 percent to 45 percent . The poll had shown that Johnson was ahead of him by 49 percent .
 Even though he regained the lead in November, this showing did much to improve my chances. Even though . Even though. he regained . the lead, this . showed much of his chances, he was back in November .
 In all the conversations that I had in the latter part of 1967, seeking advice about what to do, I did not reveal to anyone my inner doubts about becoming a candidate, he says .
 Late on the night of December 22, 1967, I committed some of these photos to paper . The photos were taken in the early days of the day .
 It had been a long day—lunch with my law partners, an afternoon meeting with key campaign advisers, and in the evening our annual Christmas party at our apartment . Tom Dewey led the singing in his rich baritone, at which he played .
 After the party, Pat and I went to the kitchen to thank Manolo and Fina Sanchez for the splendid job they had done in serving over a hundred guests .
 We realized again, as we had so many times before, how fortunate we were to have had the loyal and efficient services of this remarkable Spanish couple . They had come to us as refugees from Cuba in 1961 .
 Manolo had laid a fire, and the room had a comforting, familiar warmth . The room had been filled with comforting warmth .
 The memories of 1960 and 1962 were still painful. —Perhaps I had lost the spirit and zeal essential to survive the ordeal of a long presidential campaign. — perhaps I had . Perhaps I had. lost the . spirit .
 There would be no draft at the convention. Yet I really did not relish the combat and had to force myself to develop the fighting spirit necessary to inspire others. —I was tired of having to ask for support from political and business leaders and even from old friends. —There would
 "I was bored by the charade of trying to romance the media. People were still hesitating about their support," she said .
 “Personally, I have had it. They were being relatively courteous at this period, but I knew the majority opposed my views and would strongly oppose my candidacy. —“I knew the most opposed my . views," he said .
 Even as I wrote the words I was surprised by my ambivalence regarding the presidency, I was ambivalent about the presidency . Even though I wrote this, I felt ambivalent towards the president .
 Many of my friends did not want my place in history to be determined by the defeats of 1960 and 1962 . But I was not sure whether I still had the heart—whether I had not reached the time when I lacked the zeal to continue a political career .
 "I had a fatalistic, almost deterministic, view of history," he says . "History makes the man more than the man makes history. That argument never had much appeal to me"
 "I had somehow always always known that if everything worked out right, I could have another presidential candidacy," he says . "I'm not going to give up on the idea of running again, but I'm going to do it," he adds .
 "I was surprised to find myself procrastinating. But now, on the brink of that decision, I was surprised by the decision," she says .
 Tricia and Julie were now grown up, and I gave great weight to their opinions . Tricia, Julie and Julie are now grown-up, and Tricia was now grown .
 With the New Hampshire primary less than three months away, I could not prolong the final decision much longer . With the primary in New Hampshire less than a month away, it's time to decide whether to run .
 It was clear that in the busy holiday atmosphere at home, I would not be able to do any concentrated thinking . I would be unable to concentrate on a game of football in the UK .
 I decided to go to Florida for a few days to relax and think in solitude . I decided therefore to go there for the first time to relax, think alone .
 Bebe Rebozo met me at the airport, and we went directly to a villa at the Key Biscayne Hotel . Bebe met her at the hotel, and they went straight to the villa .
 I had telephoned Billy Graham and asked if he could come down and join us, he said . Billy Graham had been invited to join us in the U.S.
 For the next three days I walked on the beach and thought about the most important decision of my life . For the first three days, I thought about my decision to move to the beach .
 "On the first night we sat up late talking about theology and politics and sports," she says . "We're going to spend a lot of time talking about politics, sports and sports"
 The next afternoon I invited him to join us for a walk along the beach . The next day he was invited to join him for a beach walk . It was the first time he had been invited to visit the beach in South Wales .
 He had been very sick with pneumonia and was still recuperating, so we decided not to tax his strength by walking too far . He had to be very careful not to walk too far, as he was still recovering .
 I told him that I was genuinely torn on the question of whether to run for president . He said he was "genuinely torn" on whether he would run for office .
 Part of me wanted to more than anything else, but another part of me rebelled at the thought of all it would entail . One part of myself wanted to, but the other part wanted to be involved in it .
 It was far from certain that I could win the nomination; even if I did, that would be only the prelude to an even more arduous campaign . Even if I won the nomination, I would have to go on a long and arduous road to victory .
 Ten months of campaigning would mean great stress and strain on my family, especially Pat. Ten months campaigning would be a strain on me and on my wife .
 We had become so involved in our conversation that we walked more than a mile to the old Spanish lighthouse at the tip of Key Biscayne, Florida .
 That night, New Year's Eve, we had dinner at the Jamaica Inn, where I had reserved my favorite table beside a small waterfall . The Jamaica Inn is located in Jamaica .
 As Billy was getting ready to leave the next day, I went to his room and sat looking out at the ocean while he finished packing . Billy was packing for a trip to the U.S.
 He talked about the problems facing America and how much greater and more serious they were now than in 1960 . He also talked about how serious they are now in the U.S.
 He said that I had been denied the chance to provide leadership in 1960, but now, providentially, I had another chance . He said: "Now providentally, providence . I had a second chance. He said."
 David Eisenhower sent Eisenhower a letter from his hotel room to his villa . Eisenhower was the first president to visit the U.S. President in the 1950s .
 President Richard Nixon is facing a difficult decision to decide whether to run for president . Nixon's wife, Julie, told him of the 'difficult decisions' he was facing .
 The most discouraging aspect of politics, when I rationally consider my ambitions in life, is its thanklessness . I think politics is a thanklessness. I'm not a politician. I want to be a politician, not a person, a politician . I'm proud to be able to
 My Grandad is now regarded as a simple country bumpkin and a sweet old General . He was a General in the Army and a general in the RAF .
 The liberal element, since it does control educational and journalistic media to a vast degree, has distorted his personal and public image possibly forever . "Liberal element" has distorted him forever, he says .
 "I feel his efforts were, for himself and many others, the source of genuine satisfaction since he served his country to the best of his ability and touched the lives of millions"
 Everything I say must be a tremendous understatement since I have never endured a political campaign or political life in its most taxing form . Everything must be an understatement, he says, but he says .
 Politics is a sacrifice, in terms of one's family, privacy, and countless other aspects of a man's life . Politics is also a sacrifice for a man’s family and privacy .
 It is rare when someone possesses such wisdom and insight that he should be called upon to sacrifice himself and to serve . It's rare to see someone who possesses such insight that should sacrifice himself .
 "America needs the guidance you could render. But I sincerely feel that you have it," he said .
 Only you can determine whether to run is worth the effort and the hardships or not . Run for the first time in your own life . Only you will decide whether or not to run .
 Julie came home from school for a weekend so that I could tell the whole family at the same time . My mind was made up, but I decided to wait until Julie could come home for the weekend .
 Rose Woods was a "virtually a part of the family" when she died . Woods has been through so much with us that she was virtually a family member, she says . Woods is now a "celebrity"
 "I waited until dinner was over, then I asked Manolo and Fina to join us," she said . The pair were joined by Manolo for dinner .
 "I knew that Pat was not in favor of my running, and that was the one factor that finally weighed most heavily in my mind against it," he says . "That's the thing I knew was that Pat would not be in favor," he adds .
 Politics was not just an alternative occupation for me. But I had increasingly come to understand that politics was not an alternative to an alternative .
 "I felt that this time I could win. Although it would be a long, hard road, I felt that I would win," she said .
 "I know what you are asking us to do, and what you're asking of yourself. Then Pat said, “I know . What you are . asking us, Pat said . Pat then said, "You are asking them to do what you . are asking of themselves.
 I said at the outset that I had considered the ‘he can’t win’ problem and had decided to enter all the primaries to prove that I could win, he said . Anticipating the central question, I said that I . had considered . the “
 I had some reasons for confidence about the chances for success of my primary strategy . I had reasons for . confidence about . the chances of success of his primary strategy, he said .
 Gallup poll of Republicans gave me a commanding 40 percent lead over Romney . I led Rockefeller by a comfortable 14 percent, according to the poll .
 Given these generally reassuring figures, I had three major concerns about the New Hampshire primary . The primary is held in New Hampshire, the first presidential election since 2008 .
 32 percent of the voters are undecided, and 32 percent are undecided . No candidate can be confident of an election when 32 percent say they're undecided . Hillary Clinton's campaign has a history of upsets in the polls .
 "I had to show that I could be a winner, but I could not let the proud and independent voters of New Hampshire think me arrogant or start regarding Romney as an underdog," Romney says .
 I knew that the media would analyze and examine everything I did and said, and I would have to be extraordinarily careful of the image and tone my campaign projected . "I knew that I had to have an extraordinarily careful campaign," she says .
 Third, there was the danger of allowing the primary campaign to split the Republican ranks so deeply, that whoever won would inherit a dispirited and disunited party .
 Johnson's popularity ratings were low because of North Korea’s seizure of the intelligence ship Pueblo in January, the Tet offensive in Vietnam in Vietnam and the bitter disunity being stirred up among the Democrats by Senator Eugene McCarthy's antiwar candidacy . Johnson was the president of the
 Even considering these factors, it would still be very difficult for any Republican to challenge Lyndon Johnson, a resourceful politician .
 The Vietnam war was the dominant issue in New Hampshire, as it was throughout the campaign . The Vietnam War was the main issue in the New Hampshire campaign .
 I wanted the war to end, but in a manner that would save the South Vietnamese people from military defeat and subjection to the domination of the North Vietnamese Communist regime . I wanted to end the war, but not end it in a way to save the people from being subject to the
 I felt that there were a number of unexplored avenues to probe in finding a way to end the war . I felt there were many unexplored ways to find a way of ending the war. I felt it was a good idea to explore .
 "I believed that we could use our armed strength more effectively to convince the North Vietnamese that a military victory was not possible," he said . "We believed that . we could ... convince [North Vietnamese] that a . military victory is not possible"
 South Vietnamese needed to develop capability of defending themselves, he said . The country also needed to step up its programs for training and equipping the South Vietnamese, he added .
 Most important, I believed that we were not making adequate use of our vast diplomatic resources and powers . Most important was that we did not make use of vast diplomatic powers .
 As a candidate it would have been foolhardy, and as a prospective President, improper, for me to outline specific plans in detail, he said . As a prospective president, it would've been improper, he added .
 I did not have the full range of information or the intelligence resources available to Johnson, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 Even if I had been able to formulate specific ‘plans,’ it would have been absurd to make them public . And even if I'd had specific “plans” to make it public, it would be absurd to say, he says .
 In the field of diplomacy, premature disclosure can often doom even the best-laid plans . The U.S. should not reveal its intentions in advance of a meeting with Russia .
 "To some extent, then, I was asking voters to take on faith my ability to end the war," he says . "I was asking them to trust me," he adds .
 I never said that I had a ‘plan, much less a “secret plan,” to end the war . I was deliberately straightforward about the difficulty of finding a solution, he says . He says he never said he had a "plan" or a "secret plan
 As I told the AP on March 14, 1968, there was “no magic formula, no gimmick,” there was no gimmick . As I said in 1968, “There was no magic formula or gimmick.”
 Romney campaigned vigorously and spent large sums of money —much of which was rumored to have come from Rockefeller . The polls continued to move against him .
 Pat Buchanan came up after a speech and said that he had to talk to me alone . "I was in the middle of a campaign swing through a number of small towns," he says . Buchanan: "Pat Buchanan was very impressed with his ability to stand up for me"
 CNN's John Sutter says he heard from a reporter that Romney was going to hold a press conference and pull out of the race . He guided me to a nearby men's room and said that he had just heard of Romney's plans to pull out .
 I was utterly astonished, and I asked my staff to watch Romney’s press conference and fill me in. ‘I was utterly surprised,’ he said. “I asked his staff . to watch his staff and fill him in.”
 Their report was in the broad grins they wore when they walked into my room after the broadcast . The report was from the broadcasters' report . The pair were in the middle of their report .
 Even though I had knocked him out of the ring, now I would win without having actually defeated an opponent in the election . The test of the election was, after all, the reason I had decided to enter the primaries in the first place .
 Despite Romney’s withdrawal, we continued to forecast my vote at only 45 percent to 50 percent of the total . Despite Romney's withdrawal, my vote was forecast to be only 45-to-50 percent of total .
 While I hoped and expected to win more, I believed it was better to understate the prospects than to overstate them . "I believed it would be better to underestimate the prospect than overstaggerate them," he said .
 Even without Romney in the race, my win was hailed as significant, and it dwarfed the handful of write-in votes that had been solicited by some of Rockefeller’s unofficial supporters . Rockefeller's win dwarfed those of Rockefeller's unofficial supporters who had solicited some of
 The New Hampshire results changed the political picture for both parties in New Hampshire . The state is a battleground for the 2016 presidential election .
 On the Democratic side, Johnson won with 49. percent of the vote, but McCarthy's antiwar candidacy received a phenomenal 42. percent .
 The media attention and analysis concentrated so heavily on McCarthy that many people got the impression he had actually won —and, for all practical purposes, he had . McCarthy won the White House race for the first time in a decade . McCarthy's victory in the House of Representatives will be remembered as
 Many of the conscientious antiwar liberals felt that Kennedy was cynically moving in to usurp the fruits of McCarthy’s labors . Many of those who opposed Kennedy felt that he was moving in . Kennedy was the president of the United States in 1968 .
 On March 21, Rockefeller called a press conference after Romney’s withdrawal and my victory put pressure on Rockefeller . Rockefeller: Romney withdrew and I won’t be allowed to run for president again .
 He said he would “do nothing in the future by word or deed to encourage” a presidential draft . He also said he had signed an affidavit taking his name out of the Oregon primary .
 Governor Spiro T Agnew of Maryland was watching the broadcast in his office in Annapolis with a group of friends and reporters . Governor Agnew was in the Annapolis office at the time .
 Agnew was a sponsor of the National Draft Rockefeller Committee, which had been formed in Annapolis just three days before . Agnew fully expected Rockefeller to announce his candidacy . Rockefeller was a candidate for the presidency in 1964 .
 Agnew said he was “tremendously surprised and greatly disappointed” by Rockefeller’s decision . Agnew told reporters that he was disappointed by Rockefeller's decision to step down from the post .
 The next week I met with Agnew for two hours, and I was impressed with his intelligence and poise . Agnew was impressed by his intelligence, poise, and his intelligence .
 After that meeting he told reporters that he still liked Rockefeller and was not yet ready to announce his support for me . He told reporters he still likes Rockefeller and not ready to support me .
 I had scheduled a nationwide radio speech for Sunday evening, March 31, to outline my views on the Vietnam war . I had planned to outline his views on Vietnam war, but it was canceled .
 I intended to propose that America vigorously try to convince the Soviet Union to reduce its military support for North Vietnam, I wrote . I wanted to ask the Soviets to reduce their support for the North Vietnam regime .
 I also planned to deliver a sharp critique of the Johnson policy of gradualism on the military front, I said . I also had planned to discuss the Johnson administration's gradualism in the military .
 Johnson has asked the television networks for time to tape his speech . Johnson's speech will be taped on Saturday night .
 I asked Pat Buchanan to listen to the speech and to meet me at La Guardia Airport with a report when I landed . Because I would be airborne during Johnson’s speech, I asked him to listen .
 Johnson had described his latest attempts at de-escalating the war . Johnson had stressed his personal dedication to obtaining peace . Johnson has described his efforts to end the war in Afghanistan .
 President Barack Obama made a surprise move to the White House in 2016 . The White House has never been seen as a major party in American history .
 He said that he did not believe that he should devote even an hour of his day to any personal partisan causes .
 I was justifiably criticized for thus characterizing Johnson’s action . While the dropout label might have been apt for the first two, it might not have been appropriate for Johnson .
 The next primary, held in Wisconsin on April 2, was rendered almost meaningless . The upshot of these events was that the next primary in Wisconsin was rendered meaningless .
 I won 79. percent of the Republican vote, and McCarthy swamped noncandidate Johnson, 56 percent to 34 percent . Johnson won the GOP vote, but McCarthy won the Democratic vote by 56 percent .
 Martin Luther King, Jr. was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, two days after the Wisconsin primary .
 The uproar set off by Johnson’s announcement had not yet subsided, and now the nation was about to go through brief but intense agony . Shock turned to disillusion, disillusion to despair, and despair to hatred and violence .
 Within an hour after King’s death, looting and vandalism broke out in Washington, D.C., within six blocks of the White House .
 The National Guard was called out there, as well as in Detroit, Boston, and elsewhere . National Guard is called out in Boston, Detroit and Boston .
 On Sunday, April 7, I flew to Atlanta to pay my respects to the King family . CNN.com airs at 9 p.m. ET on Sunday .
 I went to their home and met his four children, still dazed over their father’s murder . "I went to his home and . met his . four children," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I was moved by her poise and serenity," says King . King in her room, where she was resting, she says . "I'm moved by [her poise], she says."
 She thanked me for coming, and we talked about my first meeting with her husband, on the occasion of the independence of Ghana in 1957 . We talked about the first meeting of Ghana's independence of 1957 .
 I told her how impressed I had been by his insistence that the realization of his dream of equal opportunity for all should be accomplished by peaceful rather than violent means . I said I was impressed with his insistence on peaceful means of achieving equality .
 The idealism of Martin Luther King, Jr. expressed in his words and actions, was his unique contribution to the civil rights cause . King's idealism was expressed in the words of his words, actions and words .
 He worked to resist the extremists in the movement, those who wished to resort to violence to reach their goals, he says .
 Perhaps their pressure sometimes caused him to be more extreme in his public views than he otherwise would have been, he said .
 He did not enjoy hearing that patience would be required to achieve his goals . But as a practical man, he realized that this was the case. Like his colleagues, he didn't enjoy hearing .
 His death left black America without a nationally recognized leader who combined responsibility with charisma . His death leaves black America with no nationally recognized leaders .
 Others were reasonably effective, but none could match his mystique and his ability to inspire people . Others could match him, but he could inspire people, white as well as black .
 David Gergen appeared before the American Society of Newspaper Editors . Gergen is a Pulitzer Prize-winning editor .
 Eisenhower sent a letter to Eisenhower after his speech . Eisenhower was impressed with his speech and a lively question and answer session .
 My morning's paper carried excerpts from your speech before the Nation’s Editors . Your speech was a speech to the Nation's Editors .
 I applaud your Q and A format—it gives you opportunity for spontaneity, humor, and hard-hitting observations . Moreover, I applaud the format of a Q & A format .
 President Obama says his campaign will be 'far brighter' than a few weeks ago . He says it's a good sign that word-of-mouth reports are positive .
 The cheer I received from Eisenhower’s letter was particularly welcome—and timely . Within a week Nelson Rockefeller was back in the race against me .
 On April 30 Rockefeller convened a press conference in Albany and announced a complete turnaround . Rockefeller announced a full turnaround on April 30 . Rockefeller: "I'm going to make a full recovery"
 He explained that the “dramatic and unprecedented events of the past weeks have revealed the gravity of the crisis that we face as a people,” and declared his candidacy .
 Rockefeller made his announcement on the day of the Massachusetts primary . Rockefeller announced his candidacy on the same day as the state's primary election .
 Governor John Volpe, one of my early supporters, had insisted on running as a favorite son candidate . Governor Volpe was one of his early supporters . Gov. Rick Perry said he was disappointed by the outcome of the election .
 Rockefeller managed to squeeze out a half percentage-point victory over Volpe thanks to write-in votes . Rockefeller won the election by a narrow margin .
 The victory was embarrassing to Volpe, irritating to me, and a great boost to Rockefeller . Rockefeller's victory over Volpe was embarrassing and irritating to him, he says . Rockefeller: "It was a victory"
 All thirty-four Massachusetts delegates went to him, and his campaign got a good send-off . All of the Massachusetts delegates were delegates .
 Rockefeller entered the race too late to have his name on the ballot in any of the remaining primaries . Rockefeller entered into the race late enough to be on the race . Rockefeller's name will not be listed in the final two primaries, which are still open .
 I'm certain that his late entry was calculated to spare himself the risk of losing. I was certain that . I was . certain that he was .certain that he . was prepared to . spare himself a risk of . losing .
 With Rockefeller back in the race, I began listening for the faint hoof-beats of another aspiring candidate . Rockefeller is a former senator from New Hampshire .
 Ronald Reagan could not win a two-man contest with me at the convention, but with Rockefeller to chip away at me from the left, Reagan would very likely begin seeing visions of a greater role than favorite son of the California delegation . Ronald Reagan would likely see visions of greater role as
 Reagan assented to his name’s being placed on the ballot by Nebraska state officials for its May 14 primary . Therefore, I was not surprised that Reagan had assented .
 He disavowed any personal encouragement of the effort, but his supporters mounted a substantial effort on his behalf . The effort included several primetime showings of a very effective half-hour television documentary .
 I topped Reagan 70 percent to 22 percent, while Rockefeller limped in at only 5 percent . Despite their efforts, Reagan topped Rockefeller 70 percent, according to Gallup .
 This was the most competitive Republican primary so far, and I was gratified by the results, says Sen. Rand Paul . Paul: "I'm gratified that the primary was competitive and I'm not surprised at the results"
 The key primary was now Oregon, the last one I would enter; the June 4 contest in California was Reagan’s . I had decided not to risk dividing the party by challenging his favorite son status .
 I was worried about Oregon because Reagan’s people were spending heavily in an attempt to make a last-minute sweep. I was concerned about Oregon . Reagan's people spent heavily in a bid to win the White House election .
 Rockefeller’s forces, seeking write-in votes, did the same . They eventually spent several hundred thousand dollars in the state . Rockefeller's forces also spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in New Hampshire .
 "I doubled my efforts in Oregon, and, unlike Reagan and Rockefeller, I went to the state to campaign," says Sen. Ted Kennedy . Kennedy doubled his efforts in the state .
 Reagan could not go because he was professing not to be a candidate . Rockefeller apparently felt he could not afford to because a defeat would look worse if he had campaigned there . Rockefeller felt he couldn't afford to .
 Reagan showed his documentary and Rockefeller ran hundreds of ads, but his strategy paid off . Rockefeller ran the ads against Reagan, but Reagan showed the documentary . Rockefeller's strategy was successful, Rockefeller says . Rockefeller: "I'm not going to give up on this, but I'm going to
 I received more than 73 percent of the vote in this final primary test, with Reagan trailing at 23 percent and Rockefeller at 4 percent . Reagan trailed by 23 percent . Rockefeller was 4 percent. Rockefeller was just 4 percent in the final test .
 "That night in my suite in the Benson Hotel in Portland I had some of the same sense of satisfaction that I had had on election night 1966," he says . "That . night in his suite in my . suite in Portland, Portland, he says. That night in . his
 In June 1967 Bob Haldeman gave me a memorandum on the use of media in a modern presidential campaign . Bob's memo was given to me in June 1967 . I was impressed by the memo .
 He stressed that creative thought had to be given to developing ways to use television . He stressed creative thought must be given .
 Haldeman correctly argued that a candidate could make hundreds of speeches during a campaign and still only meet directly with a few hundred thousand potential new supporters . He said a candidate can make speeches and meet hundreds of thousands of potential supporters .
 A candidate "becomes punchy, mauled by his admirers, jeered and deflated by his opponent’s supporters," says Hillary Clinton . Such a frenetic pace, in the meantime, causes a candidate to “become punchy” and �
 He has no time to think, to study his opponent’s strategy and statements, to develop his own strategy . ‘I have no time’ to develop my own strategy,’ he says .
 Haldeman memo was to develop new ways to use television . Most important recommendation in memo was developing new ways of using television .
 The goal was to match the candidate with the medium, to determine exactly what manner of presentation would be the most effective . The goal is to match candidate with medium to determine how effective it would be .
 They analyzed each performance and decided that the more spontaneous the situation, the better I came across . The team decided to use spontaneous spontaneity to get the best results .
 This insight led to the decision that I would use the question-and-answer technique extensively, not only in press conferences and public question sessions with student audiences but also in my paid political programming .
 In the campaign this evolved into the “man in the arena” concept, in which I stood alone, with no podium, in the center of a stage surrounded by an audience in bleacherlike tiers . The concept evolved into a ‘man in an arena’ concept
 In this setting I was asked questions by a panel of private citizens, sometimes joined by local reporters . The panel is often joined by private citizens and local reporters.
 In 1968 the South was to be one of the most important regions in terms of winning both the nomination and the election . The South was one of America's most important areas in the presidential election .
 In 1968 Wallace decided to expand his appeal along more generally conservative lines and make his bid via a third party . Wallace ran for the presidency in 1968 . Wallace was elected to the Senate in 1968, but decided to run for the White House .
 He was working to get his name on the general election ballot in as many states as possible . His name was on the ballot in many states, including California .
 On the Republican side, it was Ronald Reagan who set the hearts of many Southern Republicans aflutter . Reagan was a Republican presidential candidate in 1980s .
 There was always a possibility that Southern delegates could be lured at the last minute by his ideological siren song . He spoke their conservative language articulately .
 Until I had the nomination, therefore, I had to pay careful attention to the dangers of a sudden resurgence on the right, he said . 'I'm not going to be surprised,' he added .
 A serious intraparty split would deliver the Reaganites into Wallace’s camp . Equally dangerous would be a serious intraarty split that would deliver Reaganites to Wallace's camp .
 On May 31, I flew to Atlanta for one of the most important conferences of the pre-convention period . I was in Atlanta for an important conference of the day .
 The Southern Republican state chairmen were meeting, and I spent several hours over two days with these officials individually and in various groups . The Southern Republicans were meeting .
 I had invited Senator Strom Thurmond to Atlanta, and he sat in on one of the meetings . Senator Thurmond was invited to Atlanta to meet with Strom .
 Thurmond was a former governor of South Carolina and Dixiecrat candidate for President in 1948 on the States’ Rights ticket . Thurmond ran for President on the states’s Rights ticket in 1948 .
 Sen. Ted Cruz: "Now he was among the strongest Republican leaders in the South, and his support was essential to me. Now he was ... essential to him"
 I had been consulting privately with Thurmond for several months, he said . Thurmond said he would join his campaign if he were satisfied on the two issues of paramount concern to him .
 As a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee he believed that America should be unquestionably first in the world in military power . "I agreed with him completely," he said .
 Thurmond wanted tariffs against textile imports to protect South Carolina’s position in the industry . Thurmond: “I want South Carolina to have a strong presence in the textile industry.”
 U.S. should try to get Japan and other countries to reduce exports to the United States before taking a tariff route, he says . "I reluctantly went along with him on this issue because of political realities," he adds .
 On civil rights, Thurmond knew his position was very different from his . Thurmond: Thurmond's position on civil rights was different from that of his .
 "He knew that I would enforce the law, but that he would not make the South the whipping boy," he says . He knew he would enforce law but not make it the South 'the whipping boy'
 I emerged from this meeting with Thurmond’s pledge of support, which would become a valuable element in my ability to thwart any moves by Reagan on my right . Thurmond: “Thurmond would be a useful element in thwarting any moves’
 Because of the time difference, I stayed up only long enough to get a sense of the trend . CNN.com will be reporting from New York to Washington, D.C. on Sunday morning .
 Bobby Kennedy was gaining back the initiative he had lost to McCarthy in Oregon . Bobby Kennedy's victory in the state of Oregon was a victory for Bobby Kennedy .
 I believed Hubert Humphrey had waited too long before declaring his candidacy . I saw no way a Kennedy juggernaut could be stopped once it had acquired momentum of a California victory . I believed that Hubert . Humphrey .
 David and Julie said they would stay up watching and give a report in the morning . David said they will stay up to give me a report on the morning of the day .
 It was not long before I dimly heard David’s voice calling my name over and over. "It was not soon long before ... David, David, called my name," she said . "I dimly . heard David's voice calling me . over again."
 The next day I was working in my study when Pat came in, tears in her eyes. "The next day she came in and said 'I love you, Pat,' she said .
 "Bobby Kennedy and I were political antagonists, representing wholly different constituencies," he says . Bobby Kennedy and Bobby Kennedy were political adversaries, representing different constituencies, he adds .
 We shared, as all politicians do, membership in an unchartartered club of those who devote their energies and themselves to public life and public service . But we shared membership in membership in the uncharted club .
 All the candidates observed a moratorium on campaigning in the weeks following the funeral . The candidates observed the moratorium in the aftermath of the death .
 President Johnson ordered round-the-clock Secret Service protection for all presidential candidates and their families . Johnson ordered the protection for presidential candidates .
 "I renewed my campaigning at the end of June, and except for occasional periods of rest there was no stopping until Election Day, November 5," she says .
 As the convention neared, I kept my lead despite formidable efforts by the Rockefeller and Reagan forces to dislodge and attract delegates . Rockefeller tried to keep his lead despite efforts by Reagan and Rockefeller forces, he says .
 He would try to demonstrate that he had a better chance of winning in November than I did, he said . He would say that he would demonstrate that . I did not, but I did. He would be trying to prove that he could win in November, he did .
 Rockefeller proposed, first, that I meet him in a debate, and then that I join him in commissioning a poll to test our relative strengths in areas of large electoral votes . Rockefeller proposed to meet him and commission a poll of their relative strengths, he says .
 The results of these polls would be given to delegates at the convention, who could use them to decide upon their nominee . The results would be the results of the polls .
 I had never heard of such a ridiculous way to determine a party’s nominee. I was shocked by the way the system is set up, he said .
 I rejected the offer of a joint poll, Rockefeller went ahead on his own . Rockefeller went to his own. Although I rejected it, Rockefeller decided to go ahead with his own poll . Rockefeller's poll was the first of its kind.
 He hired a polling firm and then spent millions of dollars on a massive national advertising campaign . The campaign was an obvious attempt to affect public opinion at the time of polls being made .
 Just before the convention, Rockefeller began releasing the results of the polls, which showed him ahead of me in the key electoral states, he said . Rockefeller began to release the results before the party convention, showing that he was ahead of Obama in key states .
 My own polls showed me doing as well as, or even better than, Rockefeller in the same key states. My own poll shows me doing well, or better, in those states .
 "I felt certain of defeating Rockefeller, and I didn’t want to let him draw me into internecine warfare that could only hurt my chances in the fall," she says .
 "While Rockefeller continued his charade of the polls, I maintained a heavy schedule aimed at solidifying the delegate support I already had and at collecting additional delegates to ensure a first-ballot victory"
 Eisenhower's endorsement was essential to obtain Eisenhower’s endorsement. To this end, I felt . I felt it was essential . To this . end, he felt it . felt it would be essential .
 "I knew that he would prefer to bestow his endorsement after the convention, when it would have a symbolic unifying effect on the party," he said . The endorsement would be a symbol of unifying, unifying .
 I asked Bryce Harlow, one of his former top aides now supporting me, to write to Eisenhower urging him to endorse me before the convention . But I knew that he wanted me to get the nomination, and I knew he wanted it, he says .
 His smile had not dimmed, but the deep wrinkles in his face showed that age and illness had taken their toll . His smile still dimmed but his deep wrinkles showed that he had never dimmed .
 "Dick, I don’t want there to be any more question about this. Our importunings had apparently been effective," he said . "Without hesitation or qualifications, he said, "Dick"
 I support Richard M Nixon as my party’s nominee for the presidency of the United States. I support Nixon as president of the U.S.
 "I feel that the security, prosperity, and solvency of the United States and the cause of world peace will best be served by placing Dick Nixon in the White House in January 1969," says Nixon .
 President Johnson offered to all presidential candidates an intelligence briefing on July 26, 1964 . President Johnson had offered the briefing to all candidates for president .
 President Johnson briefed George Wallace earlier that day, and when I got to the White House, Johnson, Rusk, and Rostow, the President’s National Security Adviser, were waiting for me . He had briefed Wallace .
 On the question of whether we should unilaterally stop the bombing in North Vietnam, Johnson spoke feelingly of the men who were serving in South Vietnam and the letters he had to write to the next of kin of those who had died, he said .
 Rusk, one of the ablest and most honorable men ever to serve as Secretary of State, made the point that the rest of Asia would be in a “panic” if the U.S. were to withdraw from Vietnam without an honorable peace settlement . Rusk:
 He said that he held this view completely apart from the domino theory, which he considered simplistic .
 He believed that withdrawal from Vietnam would leave the Chinese Communists as the only major power on the Asian mainland, thus creating the panic . He believed American withdrawal would leave China as the sole major power .
 Both the Soviets and the North Vietnamese were seriously considering a halt, he said . He said he had, in fact, made an offer involving a halt .
 He said previous halts had produced nothing . Previous halts have produced nothing, he said . He said: 'Previous halts produced nothing'
 He was prepared to wait as long as the North Vietnamese and their Soviet sponsors took to come to reasonable terms . He was willing to wait until the North Vietnam and Soviet sponsors agreed a deal .
 "I said that I would continue to support our goals in Vietnam even though I would be critical of some of the tactics that had been used. I said that . I said . I would ... continue to . support our . goals in . Vietnam," he said .
 I pledged not to undercut our negotiating position just in case the Communists came around and agreed to the conditions Johnson would insist upon in return for a bombing halt . I also pledged to not undercut our . negotiating position .
 Johnson seemed almost to deflate before my eyes. When the briefing was over and the others had left, Johnson seemed deflated before his eyes .
 His voice sounded hollow as he detailed at considerable length his decision not to run again . He detailed his decision to not run again in the 2016 presidential election .
 He gave many reasons and explained the many clues that he said he had been dropping since August 1967 . He said he has been dropping clues since then .
 At no point, however, did he mention Eugene McCarthy or Bobby Kennedy, or the pressures their candidacies were causing . The candidate did not mention McCarthy or Kennedy .
 By the time he walked me to the door, he was his old self again, fully in command . By the end of the day, he'd been back in command again, and he was back in control .
 He praised J Edgar Hoover; he told me of his gratitude for Eisenhower’s support; he complimented me on my family . He said that he had just received a letter from David Eisenhower supporting his position on Vietnam . He praised Hoover, praised Hoover and complimented him on his
 As we shook hands he said, “You know, Dick, all the talk about me being obsessed with power is just hogwash.” He said, "You know ... I'm not obsessed enough with power," he said .
 "The only thing that appeals to me about being President is the opportunity it provides to do some good for the country," says President Obama .
 Johnson: "I was thinking of ways to keep power out of the hands of Nelson Rockefeller" Rockefeller . Rockefeller's use of power could be a problem, he says . Rockefeller: "It's not a problem. It's a problem"
 He continued his frantic polling up to the eve of the convention . He arrived in Miami Beach with armloads of statistics to distribute .
 While Rockefeller was working openly, Reagan continued to be coy about his candidacy . Rockefeller continued to work openly on behalf of Reagan .
 Before the convention Reagan had been flying Southern delegates to California to meet with him, making ideological appeals that were difficult for them to resist . Reagan's Southern delegates had been meeting with him .
 Three weeks before the convention he had set off on a tour of the South with Clifton White, his chief delegate-hunter, in tow .
 When Reagan arrived at the convention, he immediately began ‘dropping in’ at delegation meetings, charming the delegates . Reagan began “dropping’in’s meetings with delegates, charming them with his personality .
 Both Rockefeller and Reagan had an interest in convincing delegates that I had not yet sewn up the nomination . They joined forces to show that my strength was eroding and that I was losing delegates, he says .
 Lieutenants of both candidates buttonholed delegates arriving in Miami, begging them to believe that I had not yet locked up the nomination . Lieutants of each candidate's staff told delegates arriving at Miami that he was not yet in lock-in .
 While this was going on in Miami, I spent the last few days before the convention at Montauk Point on the eastern tip of Long Island working on my acceptance speech .
 On the day Reagan’s candidacy was announced, Pat and Pat flew to Miami Beach . Reagan's candidacy for president was announced on the same day .
 As soon as we reached the penthouse suite of the Hilton Plaza Hotel, I called John Mitchell . John Mitchell is a former President of the United States . Mitchell has been accused of corruption in the past of being corrupt .
 He chuckled and answered with characteristic coolness and confidence, “I told you that you didn’t need to worry, Dick, Dick.” He chuckled .
 Dick Kleindienst, who with Mitchell had responsibility for delegate operation, was equally confident . When I put the same question to Dick, who had responsibility with Mitchell, he said he was equally sure .
 The marriage of convenience between Rockefeller and Reagan was now operating at full force . Still, the marriage was not complete, but it was still working .
 Rockefeller worked on the Northern and Midwestern states while Reagan tried to breach my Southern flank, Rockefeller says . Rockefeller: "I'm not going to let Reagan try to breach me. I'm going to work on my southern flank"
 Strom Thurmond and John Tower of Texas visited or telephoned each delegation personally . Thurmond, Tower, Tower were both senators .
 Southern dike shored against Reagan’s rising waters . Tirelessly they shored the Southern . dike against Reagan's rising waters.
 Holding the South was not our only problem; there were other trouble spots . Holding the Southerland was not the only problem, it was holding the South itself .
 Governor James Rhodes of Ohio, for example, insisted on remaining a favorite son, thus tying up all the Ohio votes, most of which would have gone to me, on the crucial first ballot . Gov. James Rhodes . Rhodes' Ohio votes tied up most of those votes on first ballot
 George Romney also refused to cede his favorite son status, although the majority of his delegates supported me . George Romney's campaign was held by the Republican Party in 2012 .
 "I was satisfied that I had the votes to win. But by Wednesday night, August 7, I was satisfied," he said . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to win," he added .
 After checking and double-checking, I saw no way that Reagan or Rockefeller could pull it off . After checking, double-checked, I found out that Rockefeller and Reagan had no way of pulling it off.
 Nothing short of a miracle could bring either of them a victory even on a later ballot . Their talk of ‘erosion’ was pure political gamesmanship, says CNN.com .
 Some observers claimed that I was smug and complacent about winning the nomination for president . Some observers said he was smug or complacent, but he says he is not .
 "Any idea that the convention was a boring coronation ceremony ignored the months of backbreaking work that had laid the foundation for my success. Any idea that . the convention . was boring was ignored by the months that had built the . foundation for success .
 Critics and commentators who did not favor my candidacy could not honestly maintain that the party bosses had arranged my victory . "What truly galled the critics and commentators" who didn't favor me candidacy, he said .
 "As the only candidate who ran the primary gauntlet from beginning to end, it could hardly be argued that I was not the choice of the people of my party," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 As the nominations began, I invited a small group of friends and staff to join my family in our suite . I invited them to join me and my family for the first time .
 Pat, Tricia and Tricia, Ed Cox, and Julie and David were there . Rose Woods, Bob Haldeman, Pat Buchanan, Dwight Chapin, Ray Price, and Len Garment also there .
 John Mitchell was in constant touch from his communications trailer command post outside the convention hall . John Mitchell is in constant contact with Mitchell from a command post in his trailer .
 Rogers Morton was my floor manager, helping put out fires and giving last-minute pep talks to wavering delegates . Rogers Morton also helped put on fires and gave last-ditch pep-talk talks . He was the floor manager at the U.S. House of
 Dick Kleindienst roamed the convention floor, keeping a close watch on his charges until the last vote was counted . The last vote of the convention was the last to be counted .
 Mitchell had asked him if he would like to have the assignment and suggested that, if he did a good job, he would be among those considered for the second spot on the ticket . Mitchell had suggested that if he was a good performer, he'd be considered for a second spot .
 "We had been able to hold the line against the Reagan inroads, and I won 14 votes to his 12," she says . "I won 14 of those votes to him," she adds .
 Barry Goldwater kept all Arizona’s votes in the Nixon column . Wally Hickel delivered all but 1 of Alaska's 12 votes, and Barry kept Goldwater's votes in Nixon's column .
 When I got 32 out of the state’s 34 votes, the initial danger point had passed, he said . When he got 32, he was able to get enough votes for the governor to pass the Senate .
 In Hlinois, despite Chuck Percy’s last-minute switch to Rockefeller, Rockefeller won 50 of the 58 delegates . Chuck Percy switched from Rockefeller to Rockefeller in the last minute to Rockefeller .
 There were no surprises in any of the states from Massachusetts through Nevada .
 Just before the balloting reached that state, John Mitchell called me from his command post trailer . John Mitchell was in charge of the U.S. National Guard when it was in danger .
 Mitchell had enlisted the help of Frank “Hap” Farley, a Republican stalwart from Atlantic City, and broken open the New Jersey delegation . To counter liberal Senator Clifford Case’s recalcitrance, Mitchell enlisted help from Farley .
 Case’s ego was involved, since he had decided at the last minute to run as a favorite son . Case's ego is involved, as he decided to run last minute .
 Nixon supporters in the delegation had to assert their independence . Rockefeller's candidacy was patently a front for Rockefeller . Nixon supporters had to try to persuade Nixon supporters to assert independence .
 The internal fight was bitter, and he finally demanded that the delegation be polled . "The internal fight is bitter," he said .
 The strategy failed, as each name was read, and as each delegate called out, “Nixon,” the television screen showed Case sulking in his chair, humiliated and hurt . Case was humiliated, hurt.
 I thought of the work we had done together in the House and how my campaigning for him in 1954 had helped to win him his Senate seat by a bare 3,000 votes . As I watched him on the screen, I thought .
 Those bonds were loosened that night, and our relationship would never again be the same . Those bonds would be loosened, and those bonds were never again been the same.
 I was a little surprised when Jim Rhodes refused to yield his favorite son status and held the Ohio delegation . Jim Rhodes was a favorite son of WWE legend Jim Rhodes . Rhodes has been in the ring for three years .
 Pennsylvania Governor Ray Shafer, like Chuck Percy, had gone over to Rockefeller at the last minute . Rockefeller was the governor of Pennsylvania . Percy had gone to Rockefeller .
 Ronald Reagan moved that the nomination be made unanimous by acclamation . Ronald Reagan, in a unifying gesture in keeping with his posture of being a strong party man, moved . Reagan: "I'm a strong man. I'm going to be a strong leader"
 I knew from the experiences of 1960 and 1962 that the next half would be by far the more difficult to climb. The next half of the world's first half is by far harder to climb than 1960s and 1962 .
 He complimented me on my successful strategy and pledged his total support for the final drive in November . He said he was proud of his successful strategy . The final drive is scheduled for November .
 Two weeks earlier John Mitchell and John Mitchell had tentatively—and very privately—concluded that the nod should go to Agnew . Agnew was the president of the United States' longest-serving president .
 The decision would not be final until it was announced, but like most important decisions, it was not final until the announcement was made .
 In talking with Agnew Agnew I had been impressed by him as a man who seemed to have a great deal of inner strength . Agnew was impressed by Agnew as he seemed to be a man with inner strength.
 President Obama's instincts in foreign policy appeared to parallel mine . He had no foreign policy experience, but his instincts in this area appeared to be similar .
 He took a forwardlooking stance on civil rights, but he had firmly opposed those who resorted to violence in promoting their cause . He took the forward-looking stance, but opposed violence .
 As a former county executive of Baltimore County, he had a keen interest in local and state government .
 He expressed deep concern about the plight of the nation’s urban areas . He expressed a deep concern for the state's urban areas.
 He appeared to have presence, poise, and dignity, which would contribute greatly to his effectiveness both as a candidate and, if we should win, as Vice President .
 From a strictly political standpoint, Agnew fit perfectly with the strategy we had devised for the November election . Agnew was a perfect fit for the president, says CNN's John Daley .
 It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to win the entire rimland of the South, the border states, as well as the major states of the Midwest and West . It was necessary to win South, border states and Midwest, West .
 Agnew fit the bill geographically, and as a political moderate he fit it philosophically . Agnew was a geographic and political moderate . He was a political centrist . He would have been a moderate .
 In his two meetings with him before the convention I never raised the possibility that he might be considered for the vice presidential spot. "In my two meetings ... I didn't raise the possibility," he says .
 He said he would not be interested in Cabinet position but would like to be considered for a federal court appointment if an opening occurred .
 I purposely gave no clue to my tentative choice, or even that I had one . In the meetings I held that night after the nomination, lasting into the early morning hours, I purposely didn't reveal my choice .
 Agnew, along with governors John Love of Colorado and Daniel Evans of Washington . Romney, Reagan, John Lindsay, Percy, John Tower, George Bush, John Volpe, Rockefeller .
 The meetings produced no strong consensus for any candidate, but they did gradually tend to eliminate all except Agnew . Agnew was the only candidate to be eliminated from the presidential race .
 Bob was probably his closest friend in politics . Bob was the lieutenant governorship of California in 1966 . He had become a rising star in the party .
 "I was sure of his answer, but I told him, “You have many of Lindsay’s best attributes," she said . "I told him he has many of his best attributes. I was sure he would answer that question."
 He was deeply moved by my suggestion, but he strongly rejected it, arguing that the leap from lieutenant governor to Vice President would be perceived as too great . He said the leap was perceived as a 'too great'
 "There would be charges of cronyism. Besides, he was my former aide and a long-time personal friend," he says .
 He and Reagan had already developed a rivalry in California, and Reagan’s supporters would be extremely irritated if he were chosen . Also, he and Reagan's supporters would have been extremely irritated .
 "I had immense respect for Morton, and we saw eye-eye-eye" on nearly all issues. Morton, who died in 2003, says he had 'enormous respect' for Morton .
 Morton stretched his giant frame and paused for a moment to collect his thoughts . Morton says he is proud of his achievements in the field of sports . Morton is proud to be able to play a major sports event .
 He hastened to add that he did not mean this in a derogatory way, but only as a warning that if Agnew were placed on the ticket, he would have to be given a heavy schedule .
 He said that as a member of the House he lacked the credentials for the job . He said he lacked credibility as a candidate .
 Had Morton said he wanted it, even if Morton said that he wanted, even he might well have picked him .
 I knew him far better than I knew Agnew, and I considered him one of the best campaigners . He considered him an 'ablest individual' and 'one of the most astute politicians in the party'
 Agnew acquitted himself well under a barrage of subtly hostile rapid-fire questions from the press . Agnew is a well-known figure in Washington .
 Admitting that his name is not exactly a household word, he assured everybody that he would work to change that situation . Admits that he will work to improve his name .
 "I turned immediately to putting the final touches of my acceptance speech," says President Obama . "I was in the process of putting the last touches of his acceptance speech"
 No other campaign speech would be as important, because none would have a larger or more attentive audience . No other speech would have been as important because of its larger audience .
 As I was getting ready to leave for the convention hall, a minor revolt developed over my selection of Agnew . Agnew is a Republican presidential candidate .
 The dissidents got George Romney to lead the challenge . When Lindsay declined, Brownell acted as intermediary, Lindsay agreed to place Agnew’s name in nomination .
 Politicking was a harmless way to let the delegates blow off steam, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the politicking was harmless .
 Mitchell was a superb manager, but he lacked the political experience to foresee the effect of an apparently unimportant episode like this . Mitchell was superb manager but lacked political experience . The former Manchester United boss was sacked in the summer of 2013 .
 "We've got to look past the exigencies of the moment. I told him, “John, we’ve got to . look past that moment," she says . "I told him “We’re got to focus on the moment,”
 If the sore losers get away with something like this now, they’ll do the same damn thing during my presidency, he says . The sore losers will get away again, he warns .
 I told him that I expected him to impose whatever discipline he could on delegates . "I wanted to lose as few votes as possible on this challenge," he said . He said: "I told him he wanted to impose discipline on delegates"
 Agnew received 1,128 votes to Romney’s 186 . The revolt was cut short by Agnew receiving 1128 votes . Agnew won the majority of the vote .
 As Pat and Pat approached the podium in the convention hall, the roar was deafening . The roar of the crowd at the end of the speech, the crowd roared loudly . "As Pat and I approach the podium, we were greeted by a deafening roar," the author says .
 Hillary Clinton accepted the nomination for President Obama on Tuesday night . Hillary Clinton has been nominated for the 2016 presidential nomination . Clinton's nomination is the first presidential candidate to accept a nomination .
 America is in trouble today not because her people have failed but because her leaders have failed . America's leaders are in trouble not because they have failed, but because they've failed, says Obama .
 My fellow Americans, tonight, tonight I accept the challenge and the commitment to provide that new leadership for America . Mr. Obama: "I accept the . challenge and . the commitment . to provide the . commitment to providing that . new leadership . for America."
 I had written the conclusion of the speech as a personal testimony to the political and social opportunity we have in the United States. "I had written it as a . personal testimony," he said. "It was a personal . testimony"
 "That child in that great city is more important than any politician’s promise," she says . She says. "I’m not going to give up on my promise. That child in the great city will be important."
 "He is everything we ever hoped to be and everything we dare to dream to be," says mother-of-one . He is "everything we've ever hoped for," says father-in-law .
 "When he awakens, he wakes up to a living nightmare of poverty, neglect, and despair," says CNN.com .
 For him the American system is one that feeds his stomach and starves his soul, he says . For him, he's fed up with the system that feeds him stomach and feeds his soul .
 To millions of children in this rich land, this is their prospect of the future . To many children, the future is the future of the world's richest country .
 He hears a train go by at night and dreams of far away places where he’d like to go . He hears trains go by and he dreams of places he'd like to visit .
 A father who had to go to work before he finished the sixth grade, sacrificed everything he had to work so that his sons could go to college . The father sacrificed everything to get his sons to attend college in order to get a good education .
 A gentle, Quaker mother, with a passionate concern for peace, quietly wept when he went to war . She understood why he had to go but she understood why .
 A great teacher, a remarkable football coach, an inspirational minister encouraged him on his way . A great football coach and a remarkable minister, he is remembered as a great teacher and football coach .
 A courageous wife and loyal children stood by him in victory and also defeat . "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my husband," he said .
 In his chosen profession of politics, first there were scores, then hundreds, then thousands, and finally millions who worked for his success . And in his career, he had millions of people working for him, including scores of people .
 He stands before you --nominated for President of the United States of America . And tonight he stands before us .
 The first post-convention Gallup poll showed me leading Humphrey 45 percent to 29 percent . It looked good on television, but it was a 16 percent margin .
 On the way, Agnew and I stopped in Texas to meet with President Johnson, Secretary of State Rusk, Deputy Defense Secretary Vance, and CIA Director Richard Helms .
 They gave us a full-scale intelligence briefing, ordered by Johnson for each of the nominees . Johnson ordered the briefing, which was ordered by each of them .
 Johnson and Rusk came out to meet the presidential helicopter that flew us to the LBJ Ranch . The presidential helicopter was flown to the ranch to meet Johnson .
 Johnson was expansive and cordial, and I could see that he was already enjoying his role as a noncandidate in this election year . Johnson is a non-candidate, and he was expansive .
 On the way he went by the little house where he was born and showed me the plot of land where his parents were buried . His parents are buried in the family plot .
 After seeing Johnson at his ranch, I understood what Billy Graham had meant when he said that Johnson “loved the land” and always wanted to go back to it .
 As I started to board the helicopter, Johnson’s dog darted past my legs into the cabin . As I was boarding the helicopter I was greeted by Johnson's dog .
 "There was a great deal of laughter, and I practically had to pick the animal up and carry him down the steps," she says . "There were a great deals of laughter," she adds .
 This time I had to win at least three in order to have a chance of winning the election. This time it was more important than winning at least one of the three .
 "I could not match him there without compromising on the civil rights issue, which I would not do," he says . "I would not have been able to do that without compromising"
 Carolinas, Florida, Virginia, Virginia and other states on the rim of the South . But I would not concede the Carolinas or Florida .
 These states became the foundation of my strategy . Added to the Midwest, the Great Plains, the Rocky Mountains, and the Far West, they would put me over the top .
 Wallace’s vote was overwhelmingly Democratic, but when his name was not included in the poll sampling, his votes came to me on more than a two-to-one basis, especially in the South . Wallace's vote was also overwhelmingly Democratic when he was in the polls, especially
 Wallace vote was essential that I keep the Wallace vote as low as possible, he said . Therefore it was essential to keep the vote as little as possible . Wallace was the only candidate to win a seat in the Senate .
 A major theme that we used very effectively in key states such as Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia was that Wallace couldn’t win. Wallace couldn't win, he says. Wallace's message was that he couldn't beat.
 While the Democrats gathered in Chicago for their convention, I went to Key Biscayne to rest and think . I went there to rest, think. While the Democratic convention was in Chicago, I was there to think.
 With Bobby Kennedy gone, I knew that Humphrey would get the nomination . I knew it would be Humphrey, but I'm not sure if he would win .
 Most of the media sympathized with McCarthy and coverage given his challenge would have national impact, regardless of its actual influence on the convention’s choice . Although the outcome of such a contest was a foregone conclusion, most of the coverage of McCarthy's challenge was sympathetic .
 Thousands of young people converged on Chicago for the Democratic convention . Thousands had converged for the convention .
 Many were sincere protesters against the Vietnam war, but some were little more than semiprofessional agitators and educated hoodlums . The Vietnam War was the Vietnam War, and some of the protesters were college students .
 A series of clashes with the Chicago police erupted into a pitched battle on the night of Humphrey’s nomination .
 "I did not want to believe my eyes. Like millions of other Americans watching television that night, I did not . Like millions, I wanted to believe it, but I didn't believe it .
 It seemed as if the Democrats’ convention was confirming every indictment of their leadership that I had made in my campaign speeches, he says . The convention was confirmed every indictment he made in his speeches .
 "I knew, of course, that the impact of Humphrey’s nomination would now be seriously undermined," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: “I knew that Humphrey's nomination would ... seriously undermined”
 He would have to spend his entire campaign trying to patch up the divisions in his party . He would be forced to spend an entire campaign .
 McCarthy and his zealous followers had been embittered by the convention because their efforts to pass a peace plank in the platform were defeated . Even before the confrontation with the police, McCarthy's supporters had been defeated . McCarthy's followers were defeated by the platform defeat .
 A former governor who had shown great political skill in getting re-elected in a traditionally Republican state, Muskie was a strong addition to the ticket . Muskie is a former governor .
 My first scheduled stop in the 1968 presidential campaign was a motorcade through downtown Chicago on September 4 . President Richard Nixon was a candidate for the White House .
 In some respects this was a risk because the city was still tense and reeling from the Democratic convention and from criticism of Mayor Richard Daley and the Chicago police force .
 As our motorcade passed through Chicago’s Loop at noontime, an estimated half million people turned out in genuine good cheer .
 The contrast with the bitter confrontation that Humphrey was now tied to could not have been greater . The contrast between Humphrey and Hillary Clinton was greater .
 Nixon 43% Humphrey 31% Wallace 21% Wallace 19% Undecided 7% . Nixon is the front-runner in the polls .
 In addition to his designated partisans, he had in his corner was the giant combine of American organized labor . The president of the U.S. Senate in New York City, New Jersey, was assassinated in 1968 .
 Although intellectuals, upper-middle-class liberals, and young people had temporarily deserted Humphrey, the union bosses never wavered . The union bosses remained loyal to the union boss .
 Under Meany’s orders, labor unions across the country provided Humphrey with millions of dollars, tens of thousands of marching feet, sophisticated direct mail and data processing .
 Hundreds of thousands of blue-collar Democrats voted for George Wallace in the primaries . Humphrey would not necessarily inherit their support from those voters .
 The anti-Nixon and anti-Wallace union propaganda eventually began paying off for Humphrey, but he needed more . Humphrey needed more of the anti-union propaganda .
 Lyndon Johnson stayed home in the White House . Humphrey became a handy target for everyone on the left who hated the Johnson administration and the Vietnam war .
 During Humphrey’s first weeks of campaign appearances, he was subjected to persistent heckling . The chant “Dump the Hump” dogged his steps . Humphrey's first weeks were dogged by persistent hecklers .
 At one point he was driven almost to tears in front of the television cameras when he could not finish a speech before a derisive audience .
 In an attempt to separate himself from Johnson on the war issue, Humphrey delivered a nationally televised speech from Salt Lake City on September 30 . Humphrey's speech was nationally televised .
 He said his first priority as President would be to end the war and obtain an honorable peace . He said that he would be first priority would be ending the war . He added that the war would be an honorable war .
 Johnson's position scarcely differed from Johnson’s position, but he made it sound like a major new departure . While it scarcely differed, Johnson said it was not a major departure .
 By this point the doves were clutching at straws . They were beginning to realize that, however disappointed they were with Humphrey, and however disillusioned by Chicago, unless something were done to knock down my commanding lead in the polls, I was going to be elected President on November
 Liberal support and money started pouring back into Humphrey’s campaign . Liberal support started pouring into his election campaign .
 Humphrey’s problems with hecklers considerably abated; they began instead to focus their efforts on disrupting his campaign . Humphrey: “They began instead of focusing on disrupting my campaign. They began to focus on disrupting me.”
 These were not the hecklers of the American and British campaign tradition who press candidates with barbed questions and comments . The hecklers are not the same type of hecklers in the U.S.
 As soon as speeches began they would start shouting, chanting simplistic and often obscene slogans . Less to be heard themselves than to prevent the speaker from being heard, they would say .
 Waving fists, carrying signs, shouting filth and obscenities, demonstrators made life miserable for me as well as for Pat, Tricia, and Julie when they made campaign appearances for me .
 "They were symbolic of the things that were wrong with America that year," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "They're symbolic of what was wrong with the country," he says .
 "To this day I cannot understand the twisted logic that escalates the right of free speech into a license for hysteria and mob violence," says the author of the book "Free Speech"
 "Humphrey began issuing challenges to me to debate him," Humphrey says . Humphrey challenged me to challenge him in a debate .
 I was determined not to be lured into a confrontation, since Humphrey was still far behind me in the polls, and would therefore be the beneficiary of any debate . Humphrey would therefore benefit from any debate, he said .
 "There was no way that he and I could have a debate without including George Wallace. Besides, as Humphrey knew," he said . Besides, he knew, "he and I would have to include George Wallace," he added .
 Wallace’s candidacy was depriving me of a substantial number of votes, and anything I did to elevate Wallace would be self-destructive, he says . “I did not want Wallace to be elevated,” he says. “Anything I did was self-
 "It was not fear but self-interest that determined my decision on the debates," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "Self-interest" was the reason for the debates, Cruz says .
 "My unwillingness to debate gave Humphrey a major campaign issue," he said . "It was a major issue for Humphrey," he added . "I'm not sure what I'm doing, but I'm sure I'm not afraid to debate"
 Polls taken after the election indicated that if George Wallace had not run for President in 1968, George Wallace might have received the same overwhelming mandate then that Eisenhower had received in 1952 . Wallace won the White House in 1968 .
 He would siphon off the protest votes of people who were fed up with the policies of the Great Society, he says .
 "I had to try my best to hold down the Wallace vote, but I had to do it in a responsible manner," Wallace says . Wallace: "I'm not afraid to say I'm not scared. I'm scared to say 'I'm scared," he says of Wallace .
 Humphrey and his advisers saw that Wallace could be used as a blockade against me. Wallace was the target of a blockade, he says. Humphrey's advisers saw it as a way to get around Wallace .
 If Humphrey could not get enough electoral votes to become President, he could still end up in the White House by making sure that he didn’t get enough either .
 Under the Constitution, if no candidate received a majority of electoral votes, the election would be decided in the House of Representatives . If no candidate won a majority, the House would decide the election .
 Humphrey would make a deal with Wallace and thus emerge as the thirty-seventh President . Since the Democrats controlled the House, it was almost certain that Humphrey made a deal .
 Humphrey refused to agree that the winner of the popular vote should get the support of the loser, he says . He says he challenged him to agree on the issue .
 Humphrey—and the media—began concentrating on Agnew, Agnew . Having failed to make measurable inroads on my lead, Humphrey and the media began to focus on him . Agnew died of a heart attack in 1972 .
 Because of his total lack of previous experience in national campaigning, it did not take long to catch him in a slip and magnify it into a cause célébre . Because of the lack of experience, he did not have any previous national experience .
 No one felt worse than Agnew about such embarrassing misjudgments, and I admired him for the way he stood up to the attacks . Agnew: "No one feels worse than himself"
 I tried to reassure him, telling him that these efforts were mainly a way of using him to get at me . He said: "I tried to . reassure him that . I told him that I was not being used by him, and that he was not .
 Muskie emerged from the campaign the favorite of the media—clearly presidential timber for 1972 . Muskie won the White House in 1972 .
 This infatuation with Muskie could not have pleased Humphrey, but he had to acknowledge and use it . Muskie had a long-standing infatitude with President Nixon, but had to use it, he says .
 "I was campaigning eighteen and twenty hours a day. During the two weeks before Election Day I was campaigning 18 and 20 hours a a day," says Hillary Clinton . "I'm not going to be able to get my hands on the ballot box," she says .
 'At each appearance I tried to have some new ammunition to fire at Humphrey. At each appearance there were new ammunition for Humphrey to fire on Humphrey,' he said .
 At Springfield, Ohio, I hit another key issue, loss of respect for America . I hit a key issue: "Losing respect for the U.S. is a problem"
 'I felt it was essential to take the battle to Humphrey after his weeks of much harsher rhetorical assaults. But I felt it would be essential, he said, to take it to him,' he said .
 I was especially intent on getting across my stark differences with Humphrey on the issues of crime and justice . I was . intent on . getting across the differences between Humphrey and me, I said. 'I was especially . intent to get across the stark differences'
 His statement about leading a “revolt’s” was the kind of rationalization many liberals produced to justify the riotous disorders of the 1960s . It was the same rationalization liberals used to justify rioting disorders of that era .
 The war on poverty was not a war on crime, and it was no substitute for a war against crime, he says . He says poverty is not a cause of crime, but it is a source of crime .
 Johnson’s guns-and-butter policy was not apparent until after he entered the White House . Inflation was on the rise in 1968 and the economic storm signals were clear, but the actual detrimental effects of the policy were not apparent .
 Humphrey was able to campaign on a platform of prosperity while making the classic Democratic charge that every Republican since Herbert Hoover had a compulsion to make people unemployed . Humphrey won the presidency in 1968 .
 In fact, despite what Humphrey and other Democratic spokesmen were saying, both my rhetoric and actions were restrained in the 1968 campaign . "I was restrained in 1968 campaign. I was not going to run for president in 1968," he says .
 President Obama didn't want to enter the White House after a bitterly divisive campaign, he says . He says national unity was so fragile that year, he didn’t want it to be seen as a problem .
 After the Democratic convention, I led Humphrey 43 percent to 31 percent, and a few weeks later 46 percent . After the convention, Humphrey led me to a 46 percent victory over Hubert Humphrey .
 During the last few weeks of the campaign, the gap narrowed dramatically . The election turned out to be a cliff-hanger .
 The trend was reversed as traditional Democrats returned to the party of their fathers . George Wallace’s spoiler candidacy was felt as the effects of George Wallace's spoiler candidacy were felt .
 At the end of the campaign, antiwar liberals decided to bury the hatchet and vote for Humphrey . Antiwar liberals also decided to vote for the president .
 Eugene McCarthy finally endorsed Humphrey . Less than two weeks before Election Day, Eugene McCarthy endorsed him . McCarthy's endorsement came just weeks before the election .
 Lyndon Johnson's masterstroke almost won him the election in 1968 . More than anything else else else, Humphrey had Lyndon Johnson to thank for the masterstroke .
 I was sitting in my study at home at home making notes for a speech later that evening when the phone rang . I set aside a couple of quiet hours in the afternoon to make notes for the speech . I was in the middle of the afternoon when the telephone rang.
 There had been a breakthrough in Paris, he said, and after wide consultations among his advisers, he had decided to call a total bombing halt over North Vietnam .
 "Whatever this meant to North Vietnam, he had just dropped a pretty good bomb in the middle of my campaign. As Johnson went on, I thought to myself that whatever this . meant to . North Vietnam," he said .
 Johnson explained that he had not been able to persuade Saigon to agree to the provisions of the halt, so that South Vietnam would not be joining in the announcement .
 I thanked Johnson for making the call and seconded Humphrey’s pledge of support . “I thanked Johnson and Humphrey for their support. I thanked them for their service. I also seconded Johnson for his support,” he said .
 The telephone call over, I could feel my anger and frustration welling up . The phone call was over, but I could still feel angry and frustrated .
 Johnson was making the one move that I thought could determine the outcome of the election . Johnson's move was the one I thought was the best move, and it could be the one he made .
 I remembered how categorical Johnson had been at our briefing earlier that summer . Johnson was categorical at the time . He had been categorical earlier this summer .
 He was contemptuous of those who wanted a bombing halt, and his arms had sliced the air as he insisted that he was not going to let one ammunition truck pass freely into South Vietnam carrying the weapons to kill American boys . Then he had been contemptuous .
 The announcement was the other shoe that I had been waiting for Johnson to drop . I had known for several weeks that plans were being made for such an action . The announcement comes as Johnson announces his resignation .
 Announcing halt so close to the election was utterly callous if politically calculated, and utterly naive if sincere . Announcing the halt was a callous move, but it was not political or political .
 Henry Kissinger was available to assist Rockefeller's foreign policy adviser, Henry Kissinger, on September 12 . Kissinger's visit to Washington began September 12, 1973 . Kissinger was the president of the United States' longest-ever presidential administration .
 In 1967 Kissinger had served Johnson as a secret emissary, passing Johnson’s offers for a bombing halt to the North Vietnamese via French intermediaries . In 1967, Kissinger had passed Johnson's offers for bombing halt .
 The “Kissinger channel” came to an end in October 1967 . At one point Johnson even recommended a direct meeting, but the North Vietnamese were recalcitrant .
 Kissinger, however, retained the respect of Johnson and his national security advisers . Kissinger continued to have entrée into the administration’s foreign policy inner circles .
 Rockefeller had been offering Kissinger’s assistance and urging that I make use of it ever since the convention, he says . Rockefeller offered Kissinger's assistance, urging that he make use it . Rockefeller: "I knew that Rockefeller ... had been ... offering Kissinger's help"
 Mitchell should continue as liaison with Kissinger, says Haldeman . Mitchell's desire to keep his role confidential, says Kissinger . Kissinger wants to keep Mitchell's role completely confidential .
 Kissinger called Mitchell again two weeks after his first meeting with Mitchell, Kissinger called again . Two weeks after Mitchell's first meeting, Kissinger met with Mitchell again . Kissinger was in touch with Mitchell for two weeks .
 He said that he had just returned from Paris, where he had picked up word that something big was going on regarding Vietnam . He said he'd picked up news of something big is going on in Paris .
 He advised that if I had to say anything about Vietnam during the following week, I should avoid any new ideas or proposals . He advised me to avoid any proposals or proposals during the next week .
 Kissinger was completely circumspect in the advice he gave us during the campaign . Kissinger was "completely circumspect" in his advice to us, he says .
 "If he was privy to the details of negotiations, he did not reveal them to us," he said . "He was not privy of the details," he added .
 "He considered it proper and responsible, however, to warn me against making any statements that might be undercut by negotiations I was not aware of," he said .
 Bryce Harlow calls the Republican Senate Minority Leader, Everett Dirksen . Haldeman: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this"
 Agnew asked Agnew to ask Dean Rusk whether there was anything to “rumors” we had heard, Haldeman said . Agnew also asked Rusk to ask Rusk if there were anything to "rumors" we'd heard, he said .
 That same day I sent a memo to my key staff thinkers and writers ordering them to put the Vietnam monkey on Humphrey's back, not Johnson’s . The Vietnam monkey was put on the back of President Johnson's, not his, not vice president .
 I thought it was Humphrey rather than the President who was playing politics with the war . I wanted to make it clear that I thought Humphrey was not trying to play politics .
 A few days later Haldeman sent me a memorandum with more information from Kissinger via Mitchell, Mitchell . Mitchell: "Haldeman was a good friend of Kissinger, a good man who helped him get the information." Mitchell: Kissinger was "a good man"
 There is a better than even chance that Johnson will order a bombing halt at approximately mid-October, our source says . Our source feels that there is a good chance that there will be a halt in the bombing at some point .
 This will be tied in with a big flurry of diplomatic activity in Paris which will have no meaning but will be made to look important . The French capital will host a series of diplomatic events in the coming weeks .
 Our source is extremely concerned about the moves Johnson may take . He expects that he will take some action before the election .
 On October 9, the North Vietnamese in Paris publicly called on Johnson to stop the bombing while he still had the power to do so . The North Vietnamese are calling for Johnson to end the bombing .
 Kissinger said that there was a strong possibility that the administration would move before October 23 . Kissinger also said that the move could be made before the end of the month . Kissinger's report was a secret report from Kissinger .
 Kissinger strongly recommended that I avoid making any statements about Humphrey’s hurting the prospects of peace, he says . Kissinger: “Kississian advised me not to make any statements that might hurt peace. Kissinger strongly advised me to avoid making such statements .
 Kissinger’s credibility was the length to which he went to protect his secrecy, he says . One factor that had most convinced me of Kissinger's credibility is the length of his secrecy . He says Kissinger's secrecy was the extent of his efforts to protect himself .
 "In such a tense political and diplomatic atmosphere, I was no longer sure of anything," says Putin . "I'm not going to be able to predict anything," he says of Putin .
 Rumors became rampant that something big was about to happen in Paris . Over the next few days rumors became rampant about the upcoming events .
 White House says there are no breakthroughs in Paris and no change in the situation . Reporters demanded to know what was happening, and in response to their questions, the White House released a statement .
 Johnson wanted to clarify matters with a conference call to all three candidates . Johnson was campaigning in Missouri on October 16 when word arrived from the White House .
 When the call came, I was in Kansas City’s Union Station, about to address a large rally in the main waiting room . The call came when he was in the middle of the rally, he says .
 Throughout our conversation people wandered by, staring quizzed by me jammed into this closet . People wandered by to ask if they could see me in this closet, I said .
 We had a bad connection, so that I had to strain to make out Johnson’s words .
 He said that there had been some movement by Hanoi, but that anything might jeopardize it . He added that anything could jeopardize the peace deal .
 North Vietnamese would not carry out large-scale rocket or artillery attacks against South Vietnam’s major cities . Prompt and serious talks must follow any halt; Hanoi must not violate the Demilitarized Zone; and the Vietcong or the North Vietnamese .
 If these conditions are fulfilled, of course, I would support whatever arrangements I could work out with Johnson .
 After dinner, Johnson asked Haldeman to pass the word that he would not be making major speeches criticizing the conduct of the war .
 Vietnam was becoming the hottest national issue no matter how much the candidates soft-pedaled it . Vietnam became the hottest issue in the U.S. in the 1960s .
 If there was nothing I could do about Johnson’s motivations in this matter, I was determined to make absolutely sure that, if he did stop the bombing, it would at least be done according to the minimum safeguards that I insisted be met . I wanted to make sure that if
 I was asked the next day about the rumors during a regionally broadcast question-and-answer session televised live from Boston . The next day, the president of the United States' House of Representatives was in Boston for a regional broadcast .
 For the first time, while reiterating his position, I suggested that something might be taking place . For the second time, he suggested that . Something might be happening, he said .
 On October 22, Bryce Harlow received information from a source whose credibility was beyond question . The source's credibility is beyond question, Harlow says .
 It was from someone in Johnson’s innermost circle, and, as events turned out, it was entirely accurate . It was an accurate report from a source close to the president .
 The President is driving exceedingly hard for a deal with North Vietnam . President Obama is working exceedingly hard to get a deal in Vietnam .
 Clark Clifford, Califano, and Llewellyn Thompson are the main participants in this effort . Clark Clifford is the main participant in the effort .
 White Housers still think they can pull the election out for HHH with this ploy; that’s what is being attempted . The White House is trying to win the election with the ploy .
 I even considered having Harlow fly to Vietnam to talk to General Andrew Goodpaster to get a firsthand military view of the situation there .
 Johnson continued to hold the whip hand. But I was simply venting my frustration . No matter what I did, no matter what happened, Johnson held the whip .
 The initial results of my orders raised some doubts about Harlow’s secret source . ‘Initial results of this order raise some doubts,’ says the author .
 Kissinger had not heard anything about Johnson’s plan, and when Ev Dirksen confronted Johnson with the rumor, he denied it with a vehemence that convinced even his skeptical friend .
 He said that there was nothing new to report from Paris . He chided Dirksen for being taken in by such obvious rumors at this stage of his life .
 The next day, October 24, Harlow reported from his source that an agreement had been reached with the North Vietnamese the day before, and that it would be announced shortly . Harlow said the agreement was reached with North Vietnam the next day . The agreement was announced shortly thereafter .
 Harlow: Considering his source, there could be no doubt about the accuracy of the report . Harlow says he found this hard to believe, but Harlow emphasized that considering his source .
 If it were true, it meant that the settlement had already been reached when Johnson had told Dirksen that no settlement was even being contemplated . If it was true, Johnson had said no settlement had been contemplated .
 In retrospect I cannot fault Johnson for his secrecy, but I was angry at his lack of candor with me . In retrospect, Johnson's secrecy was not the only reason for his failure to speak to me .
 "I felt that he should at least have dropped the pretense that he would keep me fully informed," she said . She said he should have dropped pretense he would be fully informed .
 I would not have used this information if our sources had been opposed to Johnson’s policies and were trying to undermine them by talking to us, he says . I wouldn’t have used it if sources were opposed to the policies, he adds .
 Johnson was using the war to help Humphrey, and that was politics, not policy, says historian . But they felt that Johnson used the war in aid of Humphrey . That was politics not policy but politics .
 "I immediately decided that the only way to prevent Johnson from totally undercutting my candidacy at the eleventh hour was for me to make public the fact that a bombing halt was imminent," she says .
 President Obama wanted to show that his motives and timing were not dictated by diplomacy alone . "I wanted to plant the impression—which I believed to be true"
 "I knew that Johnson wanted nothing more than to be able to set peace in motion before he left the presidency," he says . "He knew that he wanted to set ... peace, he said. I knew that . Johnson wanted to . set peace, I said."
 If he waited until after the election, the Communists might decide to hold out in order to deal with the new administration . If he didn't wait, the Communist Party could hold out for months .
 The next ten days might be Johnson’s last chance to redeem his record, and I could not begrudge him the effort . The next 10 days are Johnson's last chance of redeeming his record .
 Vietnam had consumed him politically and personally, and negotiating a peace would help him regain much of what he had lost to that conflict . Vietnam was consumed by Vietnam and personally .
 "Everything he did was weighed a second time on a strictly political scale," he said . "I knew him well enough enough to know that everything he did ... was weighed in a second place"
 The political liaison between Humphrey and the White House was very active, Harlow's source says . Harlow’s source had made it clear that, contrary to popular impression, the political liaison .
 Adept partisans such as Clark Clifford and George Ball would see to it that any political benefits to be gained for Humphrey would not be overlooked . Adept and dedicated partisans such to be seen to be . .
 I knew that I would be walking a fine line between political necessity and personal responsibility, but I believed that the actions of Johnson and many of those around him were sufficiently political to permit my taking action . I knew it would be a difficult decision to take action .
 In the last thirty-six hours I have been advised of a flurry of meetings in the White House and elsewhere on Vietnam on Vietnam . In the past 36 hours, I've been told of the meetings in Washington and beyond .
 Top officials in the administration have been driving very hard for an agreement on a bombing halt, accompanied possibly by a cease-fire, in the immediate future . I am told that top officials are working very hard to get an agreement .
 Iam ... told that this spurt of activity is a cynical, last-minute attempt by President Johnson to salvage Mr Humphrey's candidacy . Iam... told that Mr Johnson is trying to salvage the candidacy of Mr . Humphrey. Iam… told that .
 "In every conversation I have had with him he has made it clear that he will not play politics with this war," says David Cameron . Mr Cameron: "He has made a clear he won't play politics"
 Johnson would not go out of his way to help Humphrey unless he were forced to meet a clear-cut partisan challenge . The last thing I wanted to do was to give the President an excuse to get angry with me, he says .
 I hoped to avoid Johnson’s going all out for Humphrey with every resource at the command of the White House. ‘I hoped to . avoid Johnson's going all . out for . Humphrey, I hope to avoid . Johnson's efforts to win the election, he
 The timing and impact were completely in Johnson’s hands . Even though I knew what was coming —had known about it for weeks— the timing was completely in his hands .
 The bombing halt unquestionably resulted in a last-minute surge of support for Humphrey . It was the first stop in the campaign of the Vietnam War .
 Even those who had pledged never to support Humphrey now had an excuse to vote for him . Even those McCarthy zealots who had vowed never to back Humphrey had a reason to vote .
 The bombing halt also undercut one of his most effective campaign issues, the Democratic leadership, he says . "The bombing halt" also undercut an effective campaign issue .
 Studies made after the election showed that public opinion had been particularly volatile during this period . The hope that the halt might lead to a peace settlement resulted in massive voter shifts to Humphrey .
 The Democrats’ euphoria was dampened on November 2, when President Thieu announced that his government would not participate in the negotiations .
 He watched American politics no less carefully than did the leaders in Hanoi, Vietnam's leaders . He watched U.S. politics no longer carefully, as did leaders in Vietnam .
 Given his disapproval of any bombing halt, and the fact that Humphrey was now talking like a dove, it was scarcely in Thieu’s interest to acquiesce in a bad bargain, he says .
 Thieu fostered the impression that Johnson’s plan had been too quickly conceived and too shakily executed . By holding back his support, Thieu created the impression of Johnson's plan being too hastily conceived .
 Bob Finch put the word out to newsmen that the prospects for peace were not as advanced as Johnson’s announcement might have made them seem .
 Bryce Harlow urged me to call Johnson to calm him down, and I did so Sunday morning, November 3 . Johnson was in tears Sunday morning .
 I pointed out that my public statements on the issue were responsible, but that I had to respond to developments as I saw them, he said . He said he pointed out his public statements were responsible for his actions .
 "He calmed down, and the rest of the conversation was relatively cordial," he said . He calmed down and said, "I don't know what I think of you."
 I decided to treat Johnson’s announcement as a potentially beneficial diplomatic move botched by lack of planning rather than as a straight political ploy . I decided .
 I told my staff to get our spokesmen asking why we didn’t have the agreement worked out with allies, he said . I told his staff to ask why we had to work out with our allies, the president said .
 With the help of last-minute campaign contributions and loans, Humphrey appeared to be outspending us in television commercials in the week before the election . Humphrey appears to have outspent us in TV commercials in a week before election .
 I scheduled a four-hour telethon—two hours for the eastern U.S. and two for the West—the day before the election . I set up the telethons in the eastern United States and the West .
 Bud Wilkinson acted as moderator, reading out the questions to me as they were phoned in from across the country . Bud Wilkinson read out the answers to each of the questions .
 Some of my advisers had thought such a costly and tiring effort was not needed, but I overruled them, he said . Some of his advisers thought it was not necessary, but he overruled .
 I remembered 1960 and felt I should do everything possible that might make the difference in a close election. I felt it might make a difference, and I wanted to make it possible, to help . I felt I would do everything I could to help make it happen .
 Had we not had that last telethon, I believe Humphrey would have squeaked through with a close win on Election Day . I believe that Humphrey .
 "I felt we could not afford to do anything that would augment the advantage that Humphrey was getting from sympathetic treatment in the national media," she says .
 Humphrey benefited from favorable press coverage . Whatever the reason, Humphrey received favorable coverage from the press . He says he was a popular underdog, but his likability was a factor .
 Edith Efron’s carefully researched book, The News Twisters, was released in 1971 . Though I had sensed this instinctively during the campaign, I had no idea that the favoritism toward Humphrey was so strong until Edith's book was published in 1971.
 In it she documented the number of words spoken “for” and “against” me by reporters on the three networks .
 Only one of the three networks showed a larger ratio of “against” than “for,” and that was by a much smaller margin of 6 to 1 . She did the same thing for Humphrey and found that only one network showed larger ratios of ‘against
 Every editorial technique was employed on three networks to render the pro-Nixon side less “forceful” than the anti-nixon side . And every editorial . technique was used on three . networks to make the pro and anti-N. Nixon side .
 Pat and I voted by absentee ballot in 1968; for once we did not have to get up early to be photographed voting . Pat and Pat voted absentee ballot by absentee in 1968 .
 "We got to the airport in Los Angeles before ten o'clock that morning to board our campaign plane, the Tricia. The Tricia" campaign plane .
 As the plane taxied toward the runway, I sank into the chair in my private compartment . "I sank into a chair in a private compartment. I sank in the chair," she said .
 I knew that the wide gap of the early campaign had closed, and that all the polls showed the race was too close to call . I knew I had a chance to win, but the race is still too much to call, he says .
 I felt instinctively confident this time, I took the precaution of preparing my family for the worst . Although I felt instinctually confident, this time I felt more confident, I prepared my family . This time I had to prepare my family and prepare them for worst .
 Pat, Tricia, Julie, Julie and David were invited to visit Pat's private office compartment . David and Tricia were invited by Tricia and Julie to visit David and Julie's private compartment .
 "I said that it would be almost impossible for me to lose this election by popular vote," says Obama . Obama said it was 'almost impossible' for him to lose the popular vote . Obama won't be the first president to lose a presidential election .
 I was sure that each of them wondered whether I knew something or had seen some poll that had led me to prepare them for losing . I'm sure each of the players wondered whether they knew something, or if they had seen poll that led them to lose .
 In fact, that afternoon a reporter had asked me for a comment on a Harris poll showing Humphrey winning by three points, approximately two million votes . The poll showed that Humphrey had won by 3 points, about two million more votes .
 I felt that Harris might have weighted his sample in the metropolitan areas . Gallup, whose last poll showed me still leading by two points, was more accurate, he said .
 "If we don’t win, we'll simply go on to other projects which, from a personal viewpoint, may give us more satisfaction. If we don't win, it will simply go elsewhere," he said .
 "I said jokingly that at least this time we would not have to endure a twenty-four-hour ordeal as we had in 1960," she says . "Before I left Pat and the girls in their room, I said . Before I left I joked that this time, I
 "I felt that by midnight or one o'clock Eastern time, when there were sufficient California returns to indicate a trend, we would know for sure," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We would know by midnight"
 While the polls were closing in the East and Midwest, I treated myself to a long hot soak in the huge bathtub .
 "I took my time shaving and dressing, and then I called Haldeman to find out what was happening," he says .
 The president's percentage remained the same, but Humphrey’s moved up to 38 percent . For the next half hour, his percentage remained unchanged .
 At 9:15 I had a 5 percent lead in New Jersey and a slight lead in Pennsylvania, but I was behind by 2 percent in Texas . At 9.15, President Obama was behind in Texas, but he was behind 2 percent .
 Humphrey was walking away with Massachusetts, which was no surprise . But he had fallen hopelessly behind in Connecticut, a state he had hopes of winning .
 "It's still too early to see any shape in the numbers or percentages," says coach . "I kept reminding everyone that it was still too soon to see [the numbers] or percentages"
 When I checked the national returns again at 9:30, Humphrey had moved up another point while I remained at 41 percent . Humphrey moved up a point in the polls .
 I was shaken by the early returns from Illinois, which gave me 35 percent to Humphrey’s 56 percent . Humphrey's 56 percent and Wallace's 8 percent . Illinois gave him 35 percent of the vote, but Wallace's eight percent .
 Mayor Daley would, usual, hold back dozens of Cook County precincts, these figures were doubly disturbing . Since I knew that Mayor . would, as usual, he would, hold . back dozens . of Cook . precincts, he says .
 The network commentators had begun playing with the numbers and speculating about a possible Humphrey upset .
 At 10:15, however, my lead was holding in New Jersey and Pennsylvania . I was reported ahead by 6 points in South Carolina, but I was 6 points ahead .
 The momentum there was in my direction, and since the late votes would be from the rural areas and small towns, I was fairly confident of Ohio . The momentum would be in the direction of my opponent, he says .
 Losing Missouri and Maryland, however, would leave me 4 votes shy of winning. Losing those two states would leave him 4 votes short of winning .
 These figures did not include the crucial toss-ups in Texas, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New Mexico, South Carolina, Hawaii, or Washington .
 My estimate was conservative; but no matter how the numbers were arranged, it was close . "No matter how much of the money was spent, it would be close," he said .
 "I thought back to what I had told Pat, the girls, and David earlier in the evening," says David . "It was a great night for David and Pat," he says .
 "I had decided to put them in a separate suite and not to meet with them until after I was relatively sure of the outcome," says President Obama . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do," says Obama's White House spokesman .
 I knew how worried they would be until the winner had been decided, and I did not want to make them feel that they had to keep up a cheerful front for my sake . I knew they would have been worried until the result was decided, but I didn't want them to make
 At 10:30 the national results were still the same—-Humphrey and I were running neck and neck, while Wallace had 18 percent . Wallace had just 18 percent of the vote, but Humphrey was running neck-and-neck .
 I was behind in Missouri, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Ohio and Ohio, and ahead in New Jersey and Maryland, all with 41 percent or less of their votes in .
 At 11 PM. word arrived that something had gone wrong with the voting tabulation in Dallas . The votes could not be counted until the next day . At 11 p.m. ET, the votes were counted .
 I feared that Texas Democrats were fully as capable of stealing votes in 1968 as they had been in 1960 . I told Haldeman to find out what the hell was happening and what we could do about it, he says .
 He had been following the results as closely as I had, and we had arrived at the same figures . He had followed the results closely and had followed them closely . He said: 'I had been watching the results, and I had followed it closely'
 There were disturbing intimations that the momentum was with Humphrey . But there were disturbing hints that Humphrey was winning the election .
 I had high hopes for Texas, but I knew that Johnson and Connally had fired up the recalcitrant state Democratic organization to get behind Humphrey .
 Mitchell was confident that Missouri would come through and I had learned to trust his confidence . Mitchell was always confident Missouri would be able to come through .
 As Ohio and California move more solidly into my column, the balance seemed to hang on Illinois, where I now had a substantial lead of almost 100,000 votes . Illinois is the most populous state in the country .
 In the early hours of November 6, confident that I had won Illinois, I became irritated with Daley’s stubbornness in not releasing the count in Cook County, Illinois .
 I called Bryce Harlow and told him to get Larry O'Brien, Humphrey’s campaign manager, on the phone . Larry O’Brien is the candidate's campaign manager . Larry is a longtime supporter of the Democratic presidential candidate .
 Harlow reached O’Brien’s suite, but either he was not there or would not take the call . Harlow tried to reach O'Brien's suite but he refused to take it . The call was answered by O”Brien, who was not in the
 Just before 3 A.M., for the first time in that long night, I allowed myself the luxury of self-assurance . "Just before 3 a.M.M." Just before that time, for first time, we allowed ourselves to relax," she says .
 Bob Finch, Murray Chotiner, John Mitchell, and Bob Haldeman were interviewed by Bob Finch . The interview was conducted by John Mitchell and Bob Finch in New York .
 I told them that I was sure of all the big ones, including California, Illinois, Ohio, and Missouri, including the states of California, Ohio and Missouri . "I told them I was certain of all of them," he said .
 We sat and talked for almost two hours while we waited for the reported results to confirm our predictions . We sat in silence for two hours as the results were confirmed .
 Mitchell or Haldeman had to call our people in the key states to break loose better information than the TV commentators seemed able to supply . Several times I asked Mitchell or . Haldemans to call their people in key states for better information .
 Mitchell and Haldeman persuaded me to try to nap. Finally, around five o’clock, Mitchell and . Haldemans persuaded him to try a nap.
 It was clear that the outcome would not be definite until the morning, and at this point I had been up for almost twenty-two hours . The outcome was not certain until the night, and the outcome was still not certain .
 Both NBC and ABC declared me the winner in California and Ohio . Haldeman brought in word that both networks had declared me a winner in both states .
 "There was still no movement in Illinois, and that was what I needed to confirm victory," said Obama . "But there were still no movements in Illinois," he said . "That was what was needed, and it was a confirmation victory"
 We hurried into the sitting room where the television set was on, and watched as ABC continued to survey the electoral vote count .
 It was the first time that anyone addressed me by the title I had just won. It was first time I had been addressed by anyone who had won the title. I was shocked to be addressed by my title, he said .
 Mitchell said his wife's problems had been an immense emotional strain on him . It was also the first time that Mitchell had directly referred to his wife’s problems, which he knew had been immense .
 Martha had been in a rest home during the last weeks of the campaign, and I fully understood his desire to be with her now . Martha was in a state of health during the final weeks of her campaign, but she was not in a permanent residence .
 "I went down the hall to the suite where Pat and the girls were waiting," she says . "Pat and Pat were waiting. Pat was waiting for Pat," she adds .
 They were so physically and emotionally exhausted that there wasn’t the elation one would normally expect . ‘They were so emotionally and physically exhausted they were so exhausted,’ the team said .
 She opened her briefcase and pulled out a piece of crewelwork she had done during campaign flights around the country . She opened up and said she had been crewel work for the campaign .
 It was the Great Seal of the United States, with the inscription “To RN—JN” stitched at the bottom . The Great Seal was the seal of the U.S.
 "It had been a terribly difficult night for Pat," Pat says . "I sat alone with Pat, and she told me that it was a terrible night for her," she says .
 The speculation by the commentators about Illinois had driven her to tears, she said . She said she had been driven to tears .
 Waves of nausea had swept over her as she feared that we would have to experience a repeat of the outrageous frauds of 1960 . She feared that she would have had a repeat .
 There was still no word from Humphrey, and I could not do anything until he conceded . "There were still no words from him," she said of Humphrey .
 At 10:35 Haldeman came in with the news that NBC had finally projected my victory . NBC had been working on the election for weeks .
 His voice, usually so cheerful and confident, was full of fatigue and disappointment . His voice was often so cheerful, confident, he was often tired and disappointed . He said: "I'm sorry for what I've done, I'm not going to be able to do this again."
 When I saw his wife Muriel and the other members of his family standing with him when he appeared on television, I felt sorrier for them than for him . I felt sorry for them, but for him. I felt for him more than for his family .
 "I knew from experience how bitter and crushing defeat is for the people one loves," she says . But she also knew how painful it was to lose one of her loved ones . "It's not easy to say goodbye to your loved ones," she writes .
 As soon as Humphrey had finished his concession, Pat, Tricia, Julie, Julie and David, and I went down to the Waldorf-Astoria, where hundreds of supporters remained . Hundreds of supporters had remained, keeping an all-night vigil with us .
 Although I had often thought about what I would say if this occasion came, what I finally said was spontaneous . Although I'd often thought of what I'd say, I said it was spontaneous. "I'm not afraid to say anything," he said .
 I told about receiving Humphrey’s phone call, and of how I had told him I knew what it was like to lose a close one . I told him about receiving . receiving . Humphrey's phone call and how I . told him, "I know what it is
 A whistle-stop in Deshler, Ohio, was the one that touched me the most . It was a long day of whistle-stopping in the state of Ohio .
 The White House is trying to bring the American people together, Obama says . Obama says he wants to bring together .
 When we arrived back at our Fifth Avenue apartment, early in the afternoon, Manolo and Fina were not there, so I suggested to Pat that we all go out for lunch . Manolo, Fina and Manolo were not at the apartment when they returned .
 She and the girls went into the kitchen and fixed bacon and eggs, and we all sat in my library for this postelection feast . She and her girls went to the kitchen .
 When Manolo and Fina came back later, they reminded me of the reason for their absence, I said .
 Never imagined that the election would spill over into the following day, they had arranged to take their oaths of citizenship that afternoon . Never imagining that they had planned to take the oaths that afternoon, the election spills over .
 Richard Rodgers' musical score from Victory at Sea by Richard Rodgers is one of his favorites . The musical score is from the musical score of Victory At Sea, a musical from Richard Rodgers .
 "The music captured the moment for me better than anything I could say or think or write," he says . The music captures the moment, he says, "better than anything you could say"
 On November 6 we flew aboard an Air Force jet to Key Biscayne for a postelection rest . President-elect Barack Obama was the first to fly aboard a post-election jet to Florida .
 Eisenhower visited Eisenhower at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington, D.C. On the way we stopped in Washington so that I could visit Eisenhower .
 "Few moments in my life have been more satisfying than entering his room as the President-elect. Few moments in his life have come with him," he says .
 He urged me to describe for him every detail of the long election night and morning, and he beamed with pleasure all the while . Mr Obama beamed as he described his victory in the election night .
 Election night had been too draining for celebration, and this was the first time we were really able to relax and savor the joy of having finally reached the top of the mountain after a long and arduous journey . Election night was too draining to celebrate .
 Humphrey and Muskie and their families were on their way to a vacation in the Virgin Islands . "I drove from Key Biscayne to Opa-Locka Airport to meet with Humphrey," Muskie says .
 I asked Humphrey if he would consider becoming ambassador to the United Nations . Humphrey: "I'm sure he would like to be a U.N. ambassador" Humphrey says he would be happy to be ambassador .
 At the end of the meeting, Humphrey told reporters that the election was over and the national interest must prevail over partisan interest . Humphrey: "The national interest is over and must prevail"
 President and Mrs. Obama visited Washington for a luncheon at the White House . President Obama and his wife attended the lunch .
 Lady Bird and Pat began a room-by-room inspection of the entire mansion . Johnson had scheduled a series of briefings for me .
 There were a large closet and dressing room, including a white-tiled bathroom . There were also a large closets and a white tiled bathroom.
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Earle Wheeler, Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms, and National Security Adviser Walt Rostow attend the ceremony .
 They wanted desperately to end the war before leaving office, but they had not succeeded . They had wanted to end it but they failed to .
 I sensed that, despite the disappointment of defeat, they were relieved to be able to turn this morass over to someone else . Despite the defeat, the players were relieved that they were able to end the morass .
 U.S. must see the war through to a successful conclusion, with negotiations if possible, but with continued fighting if necessary . They all emphasized that the United States must see a successful end to the war .
 An American bug-out, or a negotiated settlement that could be interpreted as a defeat, would have a devastatingly detrimental effect on our allies and friends in Asia and around the world . The U.S. agreed that an American bug out would be detrimental to allies and allies in Asia
 Clark Clifford, who during my administration became one of the most outspoken critics of the war, was an ardent supporter of Johnson’s policies that afternoon . Clifford was a staunch critic of Johnson's policies . Clifford became a staunch supporter of the president's war policies .
 When Johnson and I returned to the Oval Office after the briefing, he talked with a sense of urgency . Johnson and Johnson were at the White House for a briefing on immigration .
 Johnson and I had been adversaries for many years, but on that day our political and personal differences melted away . Johnson and Johnson were adversaries for decades, but their political differences melted .
 My first staff appointment was Rose Mary Woods as my personal secretary . I was in charge of a Cabinet minister in 1973 . I have been in charge for more than 30 years . I am proud to be able to keep in touch with the world .
 Her faith about her future had never wavered, even when her own sometimes did . Her faith was never wavering, even though her faith about the future was never doubted .
 His role, as we envisaged it, would be administrative rather than substantive . His role as a minister would be 'administrative' not substantive, it is said .
 He would examine the paperwork to ensure that opposing views were included and then bring the material to me for my decision . He would be a funnel rather than a filter, he would be the filter rather than filter .
 "His intelligence and his capacity for detaching his personal prejudices from the examination of issues made him the ideal man for the job. His intelligence and ability to detachele his prejudices," he said .
 This would place him in the unenviable position of having to say no to a lot of people who felt they needed to see me personally and often, but he knew that his strong ego would be able to handle the jealousy and unpopularity such a role inevitably engenders .
 I had strong opinions, many of them derived from my experiences and observations during the Eisenhower years, about the way a President should work . President Eisenhower was a President of the Eisenhower era .
 Key to a successful presidency is in the decision-making process, says President Obama . "In my view, then and now, the key to a . successful presidency," he says . Obama says, "then and now"
 I felt that the matters brought before a President for decisions should be only those that cannot or should not be made at a lower level on the White House staff, or by the Cabinet member responsible for them . I felt it should only be those that can't be made by a White House
 Eisenhower's staff had too often cluttered his schedule with unimportant events and bothered him with minor problems that drained his time and energy . This was a lesson I had learned directly from Eisenhower, whose staff had over-stuffed his schedule . Eisenhower said he had learned from Eisenhower: "
 I knew that I could absorb far more material by reading it than by talking about it . Staff members will present problems more concisely and incisively in writing than they will in meetings . I have always found that staff members present problems better concisely .
 I had attended hundreds of Cabinet meetings as Vice President . I felt that most of them were unnecessary and boring . Most of the Cabinet meetings were unnecessary, boring, he said .
 On the few issues that cut across all departments, such as the economy, group discussions would sometimes be informative . Group discussions would often be informative, says the author .
 The day had long since passed when it was useful to take an hour and a half to discuss the Secretary of Transportation’s new highway proposal . The Secretary of Defense and the . Secretary of . State and the Secretary . of Transportation's new highway . proposal .
 I wanted to keep Cabinet meetings in my administration to a minimum, says Obama . Therefore I wanted the Cabinet meetings to be kept a low profile, he says .
 "I felt that the better each Cabinet member performed his job, the less time I should have to spend discussing it with him except for major questions of politics or policy," he said .
 Government would have to have good managers who could immerse themselves in detail and learn the job, says David Cameron . Government must run with a tough approach to wastefulness, he says .
 I had also seen the hazards of appointing Cabinet members who were too strong-willed to act as part of a team . I've seen the dangers of appointing ministers who are too strong and not team-mates .
 I wanted people who would fight to the finish in private for what they thought was right, but would support my decision once it was made . I wanted to be seen as someone who would support me in private but not in public, he said .
 "I was fully conscious that I had won the presidency with a narrow plurality of the popular vote," says Obama . "I'm fully conscious of the fact that I won the election," he says .
 I wanted to have some Democrats in the Cabinet or in Cabinet-level posts, but Humphrey turned down UN ambassadorship . Senator Henry Jackson of Washington turned down offer to be Secretary of Defense .
 President Kennedy’s brother-in-law Sargent Shriver was appointed ambassador to France . President Kennedy had appointed Shriver to be ambassador to the U.S.
 Shriver expressed great interest and sent me a message stating the conditions for his acceptance . Shriver said she was interested in the role of the president of the United States .
 President Obama required a pledge that the federal poverty programs would not be cut . Among other things he required that the poverty programs wouldn't be cut, he also required that they were not cut .
 It was intolerable to have a prospective ambassadorial appointee making demands relating to domestic policy, so I told Bill Rogers to inform Shriver that I had decided against him and let him know why .
 Rogers reported that Shriver realized that he had overstepped himself and had tried to backpedal . He said he had not meant his message to set forth conditions but to make suggestions . Shriver said he didn't want to set out conditions but made suggestions .
 "I had hoped to bring some black leaders into my Cabinet. In addition to some Democrats, some Democrats," President Obama says .
 I offered the UN post to Ed Brooke, but he felt he could make a greater contribution by staying in the Senate . Ed Brooke was offered a UN post but turned down it because he wanted to stay in the US Senate .
 Whitney Young, the Executive Director of the Urban League, declined to be Secretary of Housing and Urban Development . Whitney Young said he felt he could do more for his cause working outside the government .
 Republican Cabinet would be the political kiss of death for anyone who wanted a role of real leadership in the black community, he says . What he meant, of course, was that serving in a Republican Cabinet .
 In 1960 I had received 32 percent of the black vote; in 1964 Goldwater received only 6 percent . In 1960 Goldwater got 32 percent, in 1964 he received 6 percent. In 1964 he had received only six percent .
 The false impression that Goldwater was a racist was still too prevalent for an easy relationship to exist between the black community and a Republican administration . I was able to increase the Republican share of the black vote to 12 percent in 1968 in 1968 .
 "I regretted this fact, but I knew that there was nothing I could say that would change it," she said . "There was nothing that could change it. I regret this fact," she added .
 "I would have to show by my actions in office that I was indeed President of all the American people," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he would show by his actions that he is indeed President .
 As a group, its members were less conservative than Eisenhower’s Cabinet, he says . He says they were to the left of his own centrist positions .
 Each man knew his subject and each brought both competence and imagination to his job . But each man knew their subject better than anyone else .
 Bill Rogers, a strong administrator, would have the formidable job of managing the recalcitrant bureaucracy of the State Department . Rogers would have to deal with the State Dept. Bill Rogers .
 He was a resourceful negotiator, and as a personal friend I knew that I could trust him to work with me on the most sensitive assignments in domestic and foreign policy .
 Mr. Eisenhower demonstrated that he could get along with Congress . During his service as Attorney General in the Eisenhower years he had demonstrated that . He was Attorney General .
 I felt that the almost institutionalized enmity between Fulbright’s Foreign Relations Committee and the White House had become damaging to the national interest, and I thought Rogers could thaw that freeze . I felt it was damaging to national interest .
 Melvin Laird of Wisconsin is a veteran of seventeen years in the House of Representatives . Laird is an expert on defense appropriations . He is a Republican who served in Congress for 17 years .
 Mel Laird was respected by his congressional colleagues as a strong man and a shrewd politician . Laird died at age 92 .
 Even as John Mitchell was helping me develop a list of candidates for Attorney General, I decided that I would try to persuade him to accept the position himself . I decided to persuade John Mitchell to accept himself .
 "I wanted someone who shared my concern about permissiveness in the courts and even law enforcement agencies," she says . She says she wants someone who shares her concern about law enforcement .
 "I counted him my most trusted friend and adviser and I wanted to have his advice available, not just on legal matters," she says .
 David Kennedy was head of the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company in Chicago . He brought to the Treasury Department his experience and expertise in international finance .
 Winton “Red” Blount for Postmaster General, Walter Hickel for Interior, Clifford Hardin for Agriculture, Maurice Stans for Commerce . George Shultz for Labor, Bob Finch for Health, Education, and Welfare, George Romney for Housing and Urban Development,
 I had invited Ted Agnew and his wife, Judy, to Key Biscayne right after the election to begin making plans for his role in the administration . I invited Ted and Judy Agnew to Key Island right after election to start making plans .
 I told Agnew that I wanted him to assume policy-making responsibilities, and I suggested that he have an office in the West Wing of the White House, the first time in history that a Vice President would do so .
 Gov. Chris Christie takes on the major responsibility for federal-state relations . Christie: "I asked him to draw on his experience as a state official by taking the responsibility for state relations"
 I urged him to use his role as President of the Senate to get to know Congress and its members, to work with them, and to serve as their primary liaison with the White House .
 Eisenhower selected Foster Dulles as his Secretary of State, he wanted him to be his chief foreign policy adviser . Dulles was uniquely qualified to fill the role of a foreign policy advisor .
 "From the outset of my administration, however, I planned to direct foreign policy from the White House," Obama says . "I planned to do so," he says .
 I regarded my choice of a National Security Adviser as crucial. Therefore I regarded his choice as crucial . I regarded him as a national security adviser .
 Considering the importance I placed on the post, I made my choice in an uncharacteristically impulsive way . The decision was made in a decision to write a blog post .
 Henry Kissinger served for many years as a foreign policy adviser to Nelson Rockefeller . Kissinger had served as an adviser to Rockefeller for decades . Kissinger was assassinated in 1968 .
 Kissinger had privately made disparaging comments about my competence in the field, Rockefeller says . Rockefeller and Kissinger were rivals for the nomination of the Republican Party in 1968 . Rockefeller says Kissinger had disparaging remarks about his competence in politics .
 Rockefeller associate: "I expected this from a Rockefeller associate, and I chalk it up to politics" Rockefeller associate says . But he says he expects this from Rockefeller associate .
 Kissinger was providing us with information about the bombing halt, he says . "I became more aware of both his knowledge and his influence," he says of Kissinger's knowledge .
 I outlined for him some of the plans I had for my administration’s foreign policy. Since neither of us was interested in small talk, I proceeded to outline for him . I then told him what I had planned for his foreign policy .
 I had read his book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy when it first appeared in 1957 . I knew that we were very much alike in our general outlook in that we shared a belief in the importance of isolating and influencing factors affecting worldwide balances of power .
 "We also agreed that whatever else a foreign policy might be, it must be strong to be credible," he said . "It must be credible to be successful," he added .
 I was not hopeful about the prospects of settling the Vietnam war through the Paris talks . I felt that we needed to rethink our whole diplomatic and military policy on Vietnam . I was disappointed with the prospect of a resolution of the war in Paris .
 Kissinger agreed, "although he was less pessimistic about the negotiations than I was," Kissinger said . Kissinger said he was optimistic about the outcome of negotiations .
 I said I was determined to avoid the trap Johnson had fallen into, of devoting virtually all my foreign policy time and energy to Vietnam, which was really a short-term problem . I said that I was . determined to not be drawn to Vietnam .
 I felt that failing to deal with the longer-term problems could be devastating to America’s security and survival . I talked about restoring the vitality of the NATO alliance, and about the Middle East, the Soviet Union, and Japan . I also talked about the Mideast,
 I urged him to read Foreign Affairs article in which I had first raised this idea as a possibility and a necessity . Finally I mentioned my concern about the need to re-evaluate our policy toward Communist China, he said .
 He said that if I intended to operate on such a wide-ranging basis, I was going to need the best possible system for getting advice, he said . He said: "If I intended . to operate ... I'm going to have to get advice. He said."
 Kennedy had replaced NSC strategic planning with tactical crisis management . Johnson had reduced NSC decision-making to informal weekly luncheon sessions with only a few advisers .
 Kissinger recommended that I structure a national security apparatus within the White House . Kissinger said it could also develop policy options for me to consider before making decisions . Kissinger: I structure national security .
 I had a strong intuition about Henry Kissinger, and I decided on the spot that he should be my National Security Adviser . Kissinger was Kissinger's first choice to be the U.S. Secretary of State .
 I did not make a specific offer to him then, but I made it clear that I was interested in having him serve in my administration . I made the clear that he was interested, but ... I made a clear ... that I would like to have him there .
 President Obama would want to think about our conversation, and also that he would feel an obligation to discuss it with Rockefeller . "I guessed that he'd want to talk about my conversation," he said .
 He immediately began assembling a staff and analyzing the policy choices that I would have to address as soon as I took office . President Barack Obama's first day on the job: "I'm not going to be surprised," he says .
 "From the beginning he worked with the intensity and stamina that were to characterize his performance over the years. From the beginning, he worked ... from the beginning," he said . "He worked very hard, very hard and very hard," he added .
 The grocer's son from Whittier and the refugee from Hitler’s Germany, the politician and the academic . The combination was unlikely, but it was unlikely to be a success . It was unlikely—the grocer”s son and refugee from Germany .
 Daniel Patrick Moynihan had one of the most innovative minds for domestic policy in the country . He was an innovator for the U.S. government .
 Like Kissinger a Harvard professor, he had served as Assistant Secretary of Labor in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . Like Kissinger, he was a Harvard Professor .
 I had read several of his articles before the 1968 campaign, and I found his thinking refreshing and stimulating . I found him thinking refreshingly and stimulating, he said .
 Unlike so many liberal academics, Moynihan was free of professional jargon and ideological cant . Unlike many liberals, he was not afraid to use jargon or ideological cant, he says . He says he was free to use his views of the liberal movement .
 He had helped design the Great Society poverty programs, but he was not afraid to acknowledge that many of them had failed . He was ready to apply the lessons learned from that failure to devise new programs that might work .
 I met with Moynihan to explore his views and to sound him out about coming to the White House . Moynihans is a former congressman from New York City .
 He quickly made known his opposition to the Vietnam war, but he was clearly interested by the opportunity . He quickly became known for his anti-war views .
 Our shared conviction that the current welfare system had to be totally reformed helped to cement the rapport I immediately felt with him . Our shared belief that the welfare system must be completely reformed helped cement a rapport, she says . She adds: "Our shared conviction" that the system needs to be
 I told Moynihan about my intention to establish an Urban Affairs Council, describing it as the domestic policy equivalent of the National Security Council in foreign affairs . He said it would be the "domestic policy equivalent" of the N. Security Council .
 Even when I thought Pat Moynihan was wrong about a particular issue or problem, I found his intellect scintillating and challenging . Even when he thought he was wrong, he was right, he had to be challenged .
 I created a new Cabinet-level position, Counsellor to the President, for my old friend and adviser Arthur Burns . Arthur Burns is a former adviser to the British Prime Minister . The new role was created for his old friend, Mr Burns, in a Cabinet post .
 I thought that his conservatism would be a useful and creative counterweight to Moynihan’s liberalism. He thought that he would be useful, creative counterweights to his liberalism.
 Eisenhower signed his resignation letter of resignation from the Army at the Blackstone Hotel in 1952 . I could remember as if it were only yesterday sitting in Eisenhower’s suite .
 He had not been in politics very long and was bound to be surprised by many of the things he did . He had been in the political arena for a very long time .
 President Barack Obama was elected to the White House in 2008 . He had been involved in presidential politics for almost two decades . But he was determined to be as prepared as anyone ever had been for the presidency .
 Despite the demands of daily events during this transition period, I set aside time to think about the condition of the nation and the world I would be inheriting from Johnson . I wanted my presidency to change and improve things, he says .
 As I looked at America’s foreign policy during the 1960s, I felt that it had been held hostage, first under Kennedy to the cold war and then under Johnson to the Vietnam war . As I . felt that . Kennedy to Vietnam war and Kennedy to cold war, I
 Our tendency to become preoccupied with only one or two problems at a time has led to a deterioration of policy on all fronts, says the PM .
 I did not feel that there should be any single foreign policy priority. "I did not want to focus on foreign policy," he said. "It is not a single policy priority," he added .
 There were many priorities, moving in tandem, each affecting the others . There are many priorities moving forward and backward, moving forward .
 I felt that I had to put Europe at the top of the list. To the extent that I would have to start somewhere, I felt . I felt  I had had to . start somewhere . To the . extent, I would . have to . started somewhere, he said .
 Only when we had secured our Western alliance would we be able to begin talks with the Communists . Only when . secured our . Western alliance, we would then begin . talks with . the Communists. Only .
 NATO was in disarray, largely because of the failure of the U.S. to consult adequately with our European allies, says President Obama . "NATO's failure to consult with its European allies was largely to blame," he says .
 In the Far East, Japan, now the second most productive nation in the free world, was beginning to have doubts about the credibility of America’s defense commitments . The U.S. is now the world's most productive country .
 Our control of the island of Okinawa was a constant irritant in our relations with Japan, says President Obama . The island was a 'constant irritant' in Japan's relations with the U.S.
 In the Middle East the truce that followed the June war of 1967 was continually interrupted by intermittent fighting . In the June 1967, the Arab-Israeli conflict was the first to cease cease-fire .
 The U.S. seemed to be unable to do anything more than arm Israel against the next Arab onslaught . The United States seems to have been unable to arm Israel .
 Egypt and Syria, Israel’s two major potential enemies, were receiving Soviet arms . This turned the already explosive area into an international powder keg . It might lead not only to another war between Israel and its neighbors, but also to a direct confrontation between the U.S.
 A gulf of 20 years of noncommunication separated the world's most populous nation from the world’s most powerful nation . Except for sterile and sporadic talks between the American and Chinese ambassadors in Warsaw .
 America now, as then, was the main defender of the free world against the encroachment and aggression of the Communist world . America now as well as then-as-then-was the main . defender of free world .
 I had seen prewar communism, luring workers and intellectuals with its siren call of equality and justice, reveal itself as an aggressive imperialistic ideology during the postwar period of the Marshall Plan . The Marshall Plan was the result of a successful Marshall Plan program .
 I had watched the Soviets’ phenomenal recovery from the devastation of war and their costly but successful struggle to achieve for communism the selling point of potential prosperity . The Soviets' phenomenal recovery was watched by the Soviets' .
 At home I had seen the face of underground subversive communism when it surfaced in the Hiss case, reminding people not only that it existed, but that its purpose was deadly serious . At home he had seen . The case was a reminder of the reality of underground communism, he said .
 In the late 1940s and during the 1950s I had seen communism spread to China and other parts of Asia, and to Africa and South America, under the camouflage of parties of socialist revolution or wars of national liberation .
 During the 1960s I had watched as Peking and Moscow became rivals for the role of leadership in the Communist world . And, finally, during the . 1960s, I had . watched as . Peking . became rivals . for the . role of . leadership in . the .
 "Never once in my career have doubted that the Communists mean it when they say that their goal is to bring the world under Communist control. Never once in his career have I doubted that . Never once doubted that they meant it."
 Whittaker Chambers’s chilling comment that when he left communism, he had the feeling he was leaving the winning side. Nor have I ever forgotten Whittakers’ chilling comment .
 Some anticommunists think we should refuse to recognize or deal with the Communists lest in doing so we imply or extend ideological respectability to their philosophy and their system . I have always believed that we can and must communicate and, when possible, negotiate with Communist nations .
 We must always remember that they will never act out of altruism, but only out of self-interest . We must also remember that we must remember they will not act out altruism .
 Once this is understood, it is more sensible to communicate with the Communists than it is to live in icy cold-war isolation or confrontation . It's more sensible—and also safer—to communicate with Communists .
 In January 1969 I felt that the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union would probably be the single most important factor in determining whether the world would live at peace during and after my administration . In fact, in January 1969, in fact, he felt that in . January
 I felt that we had allowed ourselves to get in a disadvantageous position visa-vis the Soviets. I felt it was a disadvantage to the Soviets, I said . I felt we were in a disadvantaged position, he said .
 Since the mid-1960s they had supplanted the Chinese as the principal military suppliers of North Vietnam . Except for Tito’s Yugoslavia, they still totally controlled Eastern Europe and threatened the stability and security of Western Europe . They had a major presence in the Arab states of the
 There was also some evidence of growing, albeit limited, independence in some of the satellite nations .
 There were indications that the Soviet leaders were becoming interested in reaching an agreement on strategic arms limitation . The Soviet leaders became interested in a deal with the U.S.
 Berlin was still a divided city and a constant source of tension, not just between the Soviets and the U.S. but also between Western Europe and the Soviets . The two sides appeared to be ready to hold serious talks on the anomalous situation in Berlin .
 "We sensed that they were looking for a facesaving formula that would lessen the risk of confrontation in the Mideast," says CNN's John Defterios .
 The UK is anxious for an expansion of trade with the U.S. President Barack Obama has pledged to open the door to the world's largest economies .
 It was often said that the key to a Vietnam settlement lay in Moscow and Peking rather than in Hanoi .
 Without continuous and massive aid from either or both of the Communist giants, the leaders of North Vietnam would not have been able to carry on the war for more than a few months . North Vietnam's leaders would have had to rely on the help of the Communists .
 North Vietnam had been extremely successful in playing off the Soviets and the Chinese against each other by turning support for their war effort into a touchstone of Communist orthodoxy . Thanks to the SinoSoviet split, however, the North Vietnamese had been very successful in .
 Moscow had little stake in the outcome of the North Vietnamese cause, especially as it worked against Moscow’s own major interests vis-a-vis the U.S. Aside from wanting to keep Hanoi from going over to Peking, Moscow had no stake in outcome of
 I understood that the Soviets were not entirely free agents where their support for North Vietnam was concerned, I nonetheless planned to bring maximum pressure to bear on them in this area . While I understood . that I . understood that . Soviets were . not entirely . free agents .
 I was sure that Brezhnev and Kosygin had been no more anxious for me to win in 1968 than Khrushchev had been in 1960, he says . "I was sure they were no more worried for me than for them in 1960," he says of the Soviet
 The prospect of having to deal with a Republican administration—and a Nixon administration — undoubtedly caused anxiety in Moscow . The prospect .
 In fact, I suspected that the Soviets might have counseled the North Vietnamese to offer to begin the Paris talks in the hope that the bombing halt would tip the balance to Humphrey in the election . If that was their strategy, it had almost worked .
 After the election Johnson proposed to meet with the Soviets in the period before my inauguration . Johnson proposed that as President and Presidentelect he and I attend a summit meeting with the Soviet Union . Johnson and I attended the summit meeting before I became President .
 I understood his desire to make one last dramatic demonstration of his dedication to peace, but I saw no solid basis for concluding that the Soviet leaders were prepared to negotiate seriously on any critical issue . I understood that he wanted to make a dramatic gesture, but he didn't see a solid basis
 The most that might come from such a last-minute summit would be a “spirit,” like the “Spirit of Glassboro” that followed Johnson’s meeting with Kosygin in New Jersey in 1967 or Camp David in 1959 . The "Spirit of
 It was my feeling that such “spirits’ were almost entirely spurious and that they actually worked heavily to the Soviets’ advantage. It was felt that such "spirits" were almost completely spurious . It was also felt that they worked heavily for the Soviets' advantage.
 The optimistic attitudes that characterized American public opinion after a summit made it harder for us to assume a tough line in our dealings with the Soviets . Since public opinion played no role whatever in the Communist system, such summit “spirit” was a one-way street in their direction .
 Kissinger and Kissinger developed a new policy for dealing with the Soviets during the transition period . Kissinger and I developed new policy to deal with the Soviet Union, he says .
 Since U.S. and Soviet interests as the world’s two competing nuclear superpowers were so widespread and overlapping, it was unrealistic to separate or compartmentalize areas of concern .
 Soviet policy linked arms limitation and increased trade with progress in areas that were important to us —Vietnam, the Mideast, and Berlin . Therefore we decided to link progress in such areas of Soviet concern with increased trade .
 I purposely announced it at my first press conference when asked a question about starting SALT talks . Lest there be any doubt of my seriousness in pursuing this policy, he said . "I purposely announced this at my own press conference," he added .
 Linkage was something uncomfortably new and different for the Soviets . It was not surprised when they bridled at the restraints it imposed on our relationship .
 "It would take almost two years of patient and hard-nosed determination on our part before they would accept that linkage with what we wanted from them was the price they would have to pay"
 We made our first contacts with the Soviets during the transition period. We made contact with them during that period . We made contacts with them as well as the Soviets .
 In mid-December Kissinger met with a Soviet UN diplomat who was, as we knew, actually an intelligence officer . Kissinger met the diplomat, who was actually a UN diplomat . Kissinger: "We knew, as well as the Soviet diplomat, was an intelligence agent"
 I wanted it made clear that I was not taken in by any of the optimistic rhetoric that had characterized so much of recent Soviet-American relations. I wanted to make it clear that . "I wanted to show that I did not believe in optimistic rhetoric," he said .
 Nixon administration felt that there were real and substantial differences between us and that an effort to lessen the tension created by these differences should be the central focus of our relationship . Kissinger therefore stated that while the tendency during the last few years had been to emphasize how much our two nations supposedly had in
 Kissinger also said that I did not want a pre-inauguration summit meeting with Johnson . Kissinger said that if they held one with Johnson I would have to state publicly that I would not be bound by it . Kissinger: "I would have been bound by that"
 UN contact reported that the Soviet leadership was “not pessimistic” because of the election of a Republican President . The Soviet leadership is ‘not pessimistic' about the election .
 "After a period of confrontation, we are entering an era of negotiation," President Obama said . Obama said in his inaugural address, “We are entering a era of negotiations. It was with this in mind that I said in my inaugural address .
 The most pressing foreign problem I would have to deal with as soon as I became President was the war in Vietnam, says President Nixon . Nixon: "I would have dealt with the war as a President of Vietnam"
 Kissinger began a review of all possible policies toward Vietnam, distilling them into specific options . The review ran the gamut from massive military escalation to immediate unilateral withdrawal . Kissinger's options ran from massive escalation to withdrawal .
 President Johnson had placed restrictions on commanders in the field on how they could use their massive power to defeat the enemy . For example, it could be argued that military victory was still possible if Johnson had removed the restrictions .
 The most serious of these constraints was the bombing halt; because of it, the Communists had been able to regroup their forces and amass supplies for a new offensive . Because of this, the Communist Party was able to get back into the fight for victory .
 Those who favored the escalation option argued that just the threat of an invasion of North Vietnam would tie down North Vietnamese troops along the DMZ . Others argued that mining Haiphong Harbor would cripple the enemy’s supply lines .
 Opinion polls showed a significant percentage of the public favored a military victory in Vietnam . The opinion polls showed the public was supportive of the war effort .
 Most people thought of a “military victory” in terms of gearing up to administer a knockout blow that would both end the war and win it . But most people thought it was a "military victory" Most thought of it as a ‘military victory,’ in terms
 The problem was that there were only two such knockout blows available to me. The problem is that there was only two of them available to him .
 One would have been to bomb the elaborate systems of irrigation dikes in North Vietnam . One of the main reasons for the bombing was to target dikes .
 The resulting floods would have killed hundreds of thousands of civilians . Floods would have led to the deaths of tens of millions of people .
 The other possible knockout blow would have involved the use of tactical nuclear weapons, the other possible use of nuclear weapons . The U.S. President Barack Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 Short of one of these methods, escalation would probably have required up to six months of highly intensified fighting and significantly increased casualties before the Communists would finally give up and accept a peace settlement .
 "The domestic and international uproar that would have accompanied the use of either of these knockout blows would have got my administration off the worst possible start," says President Barack Obama . The White House has been criticized for not using such a knockout blow .
 "No way that I could hold the country together for that period of time in view of the numbers of casualties we would be sustaining. And as far as escalating the conventional fighting was concerned, there was no way," he said .
 Resorting to the escalation option would also delay or even destroy any chance we might have to develop a new relationship with the Soviet Union and Communist China . The U.S. should not have to resort to escalation tactics, the author says .
 At the other end of the spectrum from escalation was the case for ending the war simply by announcing a quick and orderly withdrawal of all American forces . The withdrawal of American forces would be a good way to avoid escalation .
 If that were done, the Communists would probably respond by returning our POWs after the last American had departed, the argument went . The argument went, but the argument was that it was not necessary to do so .
 There are some undeniably compelling political arguments to recommend this particular course . There are also some compelling reasons to take the course .
 As one of my friends in Congress put it, “You didn’t get us into this war, so even if you end it with a bad peace, by doing it quickly you can put the blame on Kennedy and Johnson and the Democrats,’s friend says .
 "Just go on TV and remind people that it was Kennedy who sent the 16,000 Americans in there," he said . Johnson escalated it to 540,000, he added .
 A precipitate withdrawal would abandon 17 million South Vietnamese, many of whom had worked for us, supported us, to Communist atrocities and domination . The U.S. withdrew from Vietnam in 1991, Vietnam's first war with the South Vietnamese .
 When the Communists had taken over North Vietnam in 1954, 50,000 people had been murdered . Hundreds of thousands more died in labor camps .
 In 1968, during their brief control of Hué, they had shot or clubbed to death or buried alive more than 3,000 civilians . Their only crime was to have supported the Saigon government . In 1968 they shot or killed more than 300 civilians .
 If we suddenly reneged on our earlier pledges of support, because they had become difficult or costly to carry out, we would not be worthy of the trust of other nations and we certainly would not receive it . We would not have been worthy of trust from other nations .
 "I would not agree to anything that did not include the return of all our POWs and an accounting for our missing in action," he says . "I wouldn't agree to any terms that required or amounted to our overthrow of President Thieu"
 Many Americans considered Thieu a petty and corrupt dictator unworthy of our support . I was aware that many Americans considered him a petty, corrupt dictator . He said he was aware of that .
 "I was not personally attached to Thieu, but I looked at the situation in practical terms," says former president of Vietnam . "I looked at it as a practical matter," he says .
 As I saw it, the alternative to Thieu was not someone more enlightened or tolerant or democratic but someone weaker who would not be able to hold together the contentious factions in South Vietnam . The alternative would be someone weaker than Thieu, he says .
 The South Vietnamese needed a strong and stable government to carry on the fight against the efforts of the Vietcong terrorists, who were supported by the North Vietnamese Army in their efforts to impose a Communist dictatorship on the 17 million people .
 The Communists were so insistent upon securing his downfall as part of a settlement, he says . He says they were determined to honor their commitment to Thieu was a commitment to stability .
 For three and a half years, until the fall of 1972, the North Vietnamese insisted upon our willingness to overthrow or sacrifice Thieu as a sine qua non for a settlement . The North Vietnamese government insisted upon overthrowing or sacrificing Thieu .
 I began my presidency with three fundamental premises regarding Vietnam, Vietnam . I began this year with three basic premises regarding the country's relationship with Vietnam, he said . Vietnam is now one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 I would have to prepare public opinion for the fact that total military victory was no longer possible, he says . "Total military victory is not longer possible," he adds .
 "I would have to act on what my conscience, my experience, and my analysis told me," she says . Second, she says, she would act on the need to keep her commitment .
 "To abandon South Vietnam to the Communists now would cost us inestimably in our search for a stable, structured, and lasting peace," says President Nixon . To abandon Vietnam now would be costly, says Nixon .
 Third, I would have to end the war as quickly as was honorably possible .
 I had ruled out a quick military victory, the only possible course was to try for a fair negotiated settlement that would preserve the independence of South Vietnam . Since I ruled out military victory I tried to negotiate a fair settlement, I was determined to preserve South Vietnam's independence, he says .
 Ideally the war could be over in a matter of months if the North Vietnamese truly wanted peace . The North Vietnamese could end the war within months .
 Realistically, however, I was prepared to take most of my first year in office to arrive at a negotiated agreement with the EU, he says . "Realistically, it would be difficult to negotiate a deal," he adds .
 In mid-December I told Kissinger that I wanted to send a message to North Vietnam . Kissinger: "I want to make it clear that North Vietnam is not going to war with us"
 Sainteny was a French businessman who had spent many years in Indochina . He still knew personally many of the leaders in both North and South Vietnam, including Ho Chi Minh .
 I had first met Sainteny in the South of France in 1965, and Kissinger knew him as well as Kissinger . Kissinger knew Kissinger as well, and I met him in 1965 in France .
 My first message, which Sainteny gave to the North Vietnamese in Paris, set forth in conciliatory terms our proposals for a negotiated settlement . The first message was set forth by the French president in Paris .
 Eleven days later we received a reply charging that Saigon was holding up the opening of the Paris peace talks and that we supported the “absurd demands” of the South Vietnamese leaders . It was claimed Saigon had held up the Paris talks and supported ‘absurd�
 The North Vietnamese reply to this message still took a hard line, but I was neither surprised nor discouraged . I had never expected to end the long war quickly or easily . The North Vietnam reply was neither surprising nor discouraged, but was neither .
 In my inaugural address I reiterated my desire to reach a peaceful settlement if possible, but I left no doubts about my determination to see through to an honorable conclusion the commitment we had undertaken . In his inaugural address he reiterated his desire to . reach a peace settlement .
 The Vietnam war was complicated by factors that had never occurred before in America’s conduct of a war . The Vietnam War was complicated because of factors that hadn't occurred before .
 Many of the most prominent liberals of both parties in Congress in Congress were now trying to back off from their commitment to Vietnam . Many of them supported our involvement in Vietnam under Kennedy and Johnson, but now backing out .
 Senators and congressmen, Cabinet members and columnists who had supported the war were now swelling the ranks of the antiwar forces . Senators and Congressmen, . Cabinet members, columnists . had formerly supported war .
 In 1969 I still had a congressional majority on war-related votes and questions, but it was a bare one at best . "I could not be sure how long it would hold. In 1969, I could not know how long I would hold," he says .
 U.S. news media dominated domestic opinion about its purpose and conduct in Vietnam War . News media dominated public opinion about the nature of the enemy, and its purpose .
 The North Vietnamese were a particularly ruthless and cruel enemy, but the American media concentrated on the failings and frailties of the South Vietnamese or of our own forces . The U.S. media concentrated primarily on the shortcomings of the North Vietnamese .
 In each night's TV news and in each morning’s paper the war was reported battle by battle, but little or no sense of the underlying purpose of the fighting was conveyed .
 This contributed to the impression that we were fighting in military and moral quicksand, rather than toward an important and worthwhile objective . Eventually this contributed to an impression that . we were . fighting in moral and military quicksands, rather . than toward a worthwhile objective, it said .
 More than ever before before, television showed the terrible human suffering and sacrifice of war . "More than ever ever before," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The result was a serious demoralization of the home front, raising the question whether America would ever again be able to fight an enemy abroad with unity and strength of purpose .
 This was the first war in our history when the media was more friendly to our enemies than to our allies . As Newsweek columnist Kenneth Crawford wrote, this was the war's first war .
 I felt that by the time I had become President the way the Vietnam war had worn down America’s spirit and sense of confidence, he said . ‘I felt that the way . the Vietnam War had worn . down America's spirit and confidence,’ he said.
 As I prepared to enter the presidency, I regarded the antiwar protesters and demonstrators with alternating feelings of appreciation for their concerns, anger at their excesses, and frustration at their apparent unwillingness to credit me even with a genuine desire for peace .
 "I considered that the practical effect of their activity was to give encouragement to the enemy and thus prolong the war," he said . "Whatever my estimation of the demonstrators’ motives"
 "They wanted to end it immediately, and in order to do so they were prepared to abandon South Vietnam" "So did I. So did I," says President Richard Nixon .
 The final returns of the 1968 presidential election showed that I had defeated Humphrey by only 500,000 votes—43. percent to 42. percent . The final results showed that Humphrey had defeated me by only . percent .
 If I were to get legislation passed, I would need a coalition of bipartisan support, he says . "I would need to get bipartisan support," he says. "I'm not going to be able to get anything passed"
 "Throughout my presidency my strongest and most dependable support in foreign affairs came from conservatives in both parties," he says . "Throughout his presidency, my strongest support was from conservatives," he said .
 I came to depend particularly on a group of Southern Democrats including Sonny Montgomery of Mississippi, George Mahon of Texas, William Colmer of Mississippi and Joe Waggonner, Eddie Hébert, and Otto Passman of Louisiana . Dick Russell of Georgia, John Stennis of Mississippi
 "There was no similar coalition I could tap for support on domestic policy," he says . " Unfortunately, there was no . similar coalition of support," he said .
 In that area I knew that the different interests of different groups would coincide on some issues and diverge on others . "I knew that in that area, different interests would coincide," he says .
 Liberals would seldom think that I had gone far enough, and conservatives would often think I went too far . Liberals would rarely think that they had gone too far, but conservatives would think it was too much .
 On every issue I would have to gather enough borderline members of each persuasion to pass my legislation . On all issues, I would need to gather more members of both parties to pass legislation .
 "To get my programs through Congress I would have to devise complex political strategies," he says . He says he would need to devise a complex political strategy to get through Congress .
 "To prevent things I opposed from being enacted I would have to be prepared to bear the political and public relations consequences of vetoing large amounts of legislation," he says .
 I won the 1968 election as a Washington insider, but with an outsider’s prejudices, says Sen. Ted Kennedy . Kennedy won the White House in 1968 as an outsider, not an insider .
 People tend to work with each other year after year regardless of changes in administrations . They form personal and professional associations and generally act in concert .
 "I felt that one of the reasons I had been elected was my promise to break the hammerlock Washington holds over the money and decisions that affect American lives," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 "I wanted to break open the iron triangle and start turning money and power back to the states and cities," he says . "I want to throw the red tape out the window. I wanted to throw red tape," he adds .
 Washington is a city run primarily by Democrats and liberals, dominated by like-minded newspapers and other media . From the beginning I knew my chances of succeeding with the kinds of domestic reforms I had in mind were slim .
 I urged the new Cabinet members to replace holdover bureaucrats with people who believed in what we were trying to do. I urged them to move quickly to replace them with new Cabinet ministers .
 I warned that if they did not act quickly, they would become captives of the bureaucracy they were trying to change, I warned . I also warned that they would be captives if they failed to act quickly .
 “We may only have four years in which to do it, so we can’t waste a minute,” he said . “I said. ‘We may not be wasting a minute’,’ he added . ‘I said: �
 Washington should branch out and get new blood from the South, the West, and the Midwest, says John Avlon .
 As I saw it, America in the 1960s had undergone a misguided crash program aimed at using the power of the presidency and the federal government to right past wrongs by trying to legislate social progress . America's 1960s crash program was a misguided attempt to right the wrongs,
 This was the idea behind Kennedy’s New Frontier and the Great Society . Kennedy's New Frontier was the inspiration behind his Great Society, Johnson's Great Society.
 The problems were real and the intention worthy, but the method was foredoomed . The problems are real and . intention worthy . But the method is foreroomed, and the problems are not solved .
 By the end of the decade its costs had become almost prohibitively high in terms of the way it undermined fundamental relationships within our federal system, created confusion about our national values, and corroded American belief in ourselves .
 New sensitivities have developed regarding the black, the poor, and the young in our society . Kennedy’s liberal rhetoric pushed new sensitivities, some sincere, some fashionable, developed .
 This was the period of what social critic Henry Fairlie has called ‘the politics of expectation,” when the President held out the promise of solutions by means of federal programs to the problems of poverty and racial discrimination . The President has raised the expectations of millions of people .
 From 1960 to 1969 the cost of welfare benefits for families with dependent children nearly tripled . The cost of the welfare system nearly tripled between 1960 and 1969 . The welfare system is now in decline .
 More than a quarter of a trillion federal dollars was spent between 1964 and 1969 in an attempt to eradicate poverty and inequality . More than $25 trillion was spent on poverty eradicating the problem .
 Instead of solving problems, these programs themselves became part of the problem, by raising hopes they proved unable to fulfill . But instead of solving the problems, they raised hopes of solving them, they failed to .
 Billions of dollars poured into new federally sponsored programs and agencies to help the poor . But the poor often did not see much of this money because it went to pay the salaries of social workers and the overhead of the vast new poverty bureaucracy, much of it composed of middleclass whites .
 Housing and education services were tied up in red tape and foundered on the fundamentally mistaken notion that the poor can't be talked or taught out of their poverty . Housing, education services in the U.S. are tied up by red tape, say experts .
 By the end of the decade, many people were asking why the federal government had not done all the things it had promised and undertaken to do for them . Many people asked why the government hadn't done all of the things they promised .
 The working poor watched while the nonworking poor made as much money as they did by collecting welfare payments and other unemployment benefits . Perhaps most demoralizing of all, all, was the working poor who watched while they were poor .
 "I wanted to be an activist President in domestic policy," says Obama . "But I wanted the things we did had a chance of working," he says . "I was certain that the things [Obama] did have a chance"
 I had watched the sixties from outside the arena of leadership, but I had strong feelings about what I had seen happen . I had a strong feeling about what had been happening in the 1960s, he says .
 Mass demonstrations grow remote from the wellsprings of sensitivity and feeling that had originally prompted them, and become a cultural fad . I saw the mass demonstrations grow distant from the wellprings and feeling of the original impetus .
 By the middle of the sixties, intolerance for the rights and opinions of those who disagreed with the vocal minority had been established .
 I had no patience with the mindless rioters and professional malcontents . I was appalled by the response of most of the nation’s political and academic leaders to them, he says .
 The political leadership seemed unable to make the distinction between a wrong that needed to be set right and the use of such a wrong as a justification for violating the privileges of democracy .
 The young demonstrators held firmly to their beliefs, while the adults seemed stricken with ambivalence about their own guilt and doubts about their values . The adults were stricken with doubts about the own values .
 By proving themselves vulnerable to mob rule, political and academic leaders encouraged its spread, political leaders encouraged it to spread . The political, academic leaders in Britain have shown themselves vulnerable .
 The students' demonstrations continued and grew, and so did the often rationalized or romanticized violence connected with them . The protesters were encouraged by others on the faculty and in the political arena, says John Sutter .
 I was ready to take a stand on social and cultural issues; I was anxious to defend the ‘square” virtues . I was about to defend "square" virtues, he says .
 In some cases, such as opposing the legalization of marijuana and the provision of federal funds for abortions, I knew I would be standing against the prevailing social winds, and that would cause tension, he says .
 "I thought that at least someone in high office would be standing up for what he believed. But I thought that someone would stand up for his beliefs," she says . "I'm not sure what I believe. I'm sure it's a good thing to say," she adds .
 Since the advent of television as our primary means of communication and source of information modern Presidents must have specialized talents at once more superficial and more complicated .
 They must try to master the art of manipulating the media not only to win in politics but also to further the programs and causes they believe in . At the same time they must avoid at all costs the charge of trying to manipulate the media .
 In the modern presidency, concern for image must rank with concern for substance . There is no guarantee that good programs will automatically ‘ triumph’
 I do not like this situation; I can remember a time in U.S. politics when it was not the case. I'm not happy with this situation, but I do like it. I can't remember a . time in American politics .
 Anyone seeking a position of influence in politics must cope with it . Anyone seeking leadership must master it, says David Cameron . But today it is a fact of life, he says .
 I knew that as President my relations with the media would be at best an uneasy truce . I knew as President I would have to deal with media, he said .
 The media see themselves as adversaries of government, and consider it their obligation to be skeptical . The media are skeptical of government .
 The government knows that there is no such thing as a perfect program, and searches for ways to mitigate criticism sufficiently well and long enough to get something accomplished .
 I am not, and for many years we had looked at each other across an ideological chasm that only deepened further . Vietnam only deepens further, and I'm not the same person as I am now, but I am .
 "I considered the influential majority of the news media to be part of my political opposition. After the Hiss case and the fund episode, I considered it to be a major factor in my opposition to Kennedy," he says .
 "My relationship with them was somehow different even from that of other political figures whom they disliked or with whom they disagreed," he says . Whatever the reasons, he says, they were different from others who he disliked .
 "I knew that my conduct and that of my family would be held up to the most severe scrutiny," she says . "I felt that if anything ever went seriously wrong, the media would jump in and give me a fight for my political life," she adds .
 "I was prepared to do combat with the media in order to get my views and my programs to the people," he says . "I did not believe that this combat would be between equals," he adds .
 The media are far more powerful than the President in creating public awareness and shaping public opinion, for the simple reason that the media always have the last word . The media is more influential than the president in shaping public opinions than the White House .
 I did not want all the views and opinions reaching me filtered through the Times, the Post, and the three television networks . I wanted all of the views of the Times and the Post to be filtered through, and not filtered, through the media .
 I asked for a daily summary of the main ideas and opinions expressed across the country in news reports, editorials, columns, and articles from fifty newspapers, thirty magazines and the two major wire services .
 Within the White House I created the post of Director of Communications for the executive branch . The post was created by President Obama .
 Herb Klein, who had served as my press spokesman in 1960 and 1962, headed this new office . Herb Klein headed the new office. Herb Klein was the president of the White House .
 One of his tasks was to stay in touch with the media in the rest of the country, bring their reports to me, and get my ideas out to them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "One of the things he was doing was to keep in
 I named Ron Ziegler, my twenty-year-old campaign press assistant, as Press Secretary. I named him Ron Ziezler, a twenty-nine-year old campaign press aide, as press secretary. Ron is the son of former President George W. Bush.
 As I assembled my Cabinet and senior staff during this transition period, I thought that one of our most important tasks would be to place our stamp on the federal bureaucracy as quickly and as firmly as we possibly could .
 Democrats have excelled at acting on the premise of “To the victor belong the spoils,” the Democrats had understood . Andrew Jackson and the era of ‘To the winner’s . belong to the victors,’ the Democrats said .
 Eisenhower failed to press Cabinet members and other appointees to Republicanize their agencies and departments . Eisenhower did not press his Cabinet members to GOPize their departments, he says .
 President Obama urged Cabinet members to replace holdover Democrats with Republicans who would be loyal to the administration . After the eight Kennedy—Johnson years the need was hardly less great, he said .
 Even Cabinet members who had been in politics long enough to know better justified retaining Democrats in important positions in their departments for reasons of “morale” or in order to avoid controversy or publicity .
 Eisenhower understood that the combination of human nature and the inertia of institutions will override even the most determined attempts to change them . Looking back, I think that Eisenhower, because of his many years of experience with the Army, understood that he would not be able to change .
 Once the opportunity had passed, it was too late to correct this failure during my first term, says President Obama . "It's too late for us to fix this failure," says Obama .
 I could only console myself with the determination that, if I were re-elected in 1972, I would not make the same mistake of leaving the initiative to individual Cabinet members . I would never make the decision to leave the government in charge .
 "I knew that I was assuming the role of Commander in Chief at what was perhaps the most troubled time in the history of our armed forces," says President Barack Obama .
 Never before had our fighting men been subjected to such criticism—and never to such obloquy—during wartime . Never . before had such criticism . Never before . had been such criticism — and never . to such . oloqued .
 Antiwar movement had serious effect on morale and discipline of our armed forces . Problem became worse as the expanded monthly draft calls began bringing in more young men infected by antiwar attitudes .
 As I looked ahead to the end of the Vietnam war, I saw that we could end the recruitment of our armed forces through universal conscription and create an all-volunteer force . We could end conscription in favour of a volunteer force, he says .
 In 1969 I introduced this plan, and by 1973 the civilian draft had been completely eliminated . In 1969, President Richard Nixon introduced the plan to eliminate the draft .
 I addressed the problems of the military in a speech I gave a few months later at the Air Force Academy commencement exercises in June 1969 . I addressed those problems in the air force in the speech, he said .
 The military profession is derided in some of the so-called best circles of America . Military profession derided by some of America's best circles .
 "I considered it important to let our armed forces know that their Commander in Chief stood behind them. While it was undeniably important to keep the power of the military firmly under civilian control, I also considered it .
 The party had not emerged much strengthened from the 1968 election despite our victory at the top of the ticket . Unfortunately the party had emerged much stronger from the . 1968 election .
 The Democrats had controlled both houses of Congress for all but two of the past thirty years . The fact was that the Democrats had control both House and House of Representatives .
 "I took it as a serious responsibility as leader of the party to inject some much-needed old-time partisan fire and spirit into Republican veins," says GOP leader John Boehner . Boehner: "I'm looking forward to a long-term Republican resurgence"
 Although off-year elections almost always go against the party in the White House, I hoped that we could at least hold our own in 1970 . I hope that we can hold ourselves in 1970.
 By 1972 I hoped to have restored vitality to the Republican organization, he said . By 1972 he had identified and encouraged a new generation of winning Republican candidates .
 In the meantime, I would also have to keep an eye on my own political position . I would have to also keep a close eye on myself myself, says the BBC presenter .
 If it had not been for the debacle of the Chicago convention and the burden of Johnson’s unpopularity, Humphrey might have won, he says .
 There was no reason to expect that the Democrats would be so obliging as to provide me with similar advantages in 1972, he says .
 If they were able to unite around Teddy Kennedy or Muskie or even Humphrey again, they would be very hard to beat . They would be hard to defeat if they united around Teddy .
 We must begin immediately keeping track of everything the leading Democrats did. Therefore I decided that we must start immediately keeping tracking of everything Democrats did .
 I sat on one of the sofas in front of the fireplace in the Oval Office while he sat in the king-size rocking chair that he had brought in to replace Kennedy's smaller one .
 He stressed the need to maintain secrecy on all matters involving national security . He also stressed the importance of maintaining secrecy .
 This comment was prompted by my recent announcement that I planned to revive the moribund National Security Council . President Obama recently announced he planned to revamp the body of national security .
 Johnson was dubious about this decision, and as he warmed to his subject he sat on the edge of his rocker and leaned forward until his face was just inches from mine . He leaned forward and leaned his face inches from his face .
 He said he would have been a damn fool to have discussed major decisions with the full Cabinet present, because I knew that if I said something in the morning, you could sure as hell bet it would appear in the afternoon papers . “Let me tell you, Dick, I would
 "Everybody there’s got their damned deputies and note-takers with them sitting along the wall," he said . "They’ve got their deputies, note takers and note taker with them," he added .
 I don't even let Hubert sit in on some of those meetings for fear his staff might let something out . I don’t even let . Hubert’s staff members know something is wrong, he says .
 Johnson shifted his massive frame to one side of the chair and rocked toward me again . Johnson shifted to another side of his chair as he rocked toward him again . "I don't know what happened to me," Johnson said .
 I told Johnson that I knew one of his greatest disappointments was that he had not been able to end the war before leaving office . I told him that one of Johnson's greatest disappointings was that .
 I assured him that we would do everything possible to bring the war to an early and honorable conclusion, and that when the goal was accomplished I would see to it that he received the credit due to him .
 I told him he could be proud of having stood up to his critics, particularly those in his own party . He said he was proud of standing up to critics, including those in the party .
 Johnson mentioned, as he had at our meeting during the summer, the letter of support that David Eisenhower had written to him . Johnson mentioned that Eisenhower wrote to him to thank him for his support .
 David Eisenhower met his grandfather at his grandfather’s second inauguration in 1957, when they were both eight years old . His daughter Julie first met David Eisenhower at the inauguration of his grandfather's second inauguration .
 They did not see each other during the early 1960s; it was a geographical coincidence that brought them together again . They were reunited in the early 60s; they had been separated for decades .
 David began his freshman year at Amherst College in 1966 . Julie began her freshman year in Smith College, only a few miles away . David and Julie began their freshman years at Smith College .
 One day he called her on an impulse and asked if he could come over to see her . He asked her on the impulse and she said yes, and he said yes .
 Just before the start of their sophomore year, they told Pat and me that they planned to marry . They met, they fell in love, and just before the . start of the sophomore year they told . Pat and I. Pat said, "They met, fell in . love,
 On the night their engagement was announced I wrote a note for Julie and left it on her bed table . "I wrote it on the night they announced I left it there," she said .
 I told Julie that she should give serious consideration to waiting until after the inauguration and being married in the White House . I told her she should consider marrying at the inauguration .
 "That was a unique privilege, and I wanted to be sure that she did not renounce it lightly," she says . "I wanted to make sure that that was not a privilege," she adds .
 Both she and David felt that they wanted their wedding ceremony to be as personal and non-political as it possibly could . The ceremony was a non-partisan affair .
 Just as the preparations had reached their height on the evening of the rehearsal and the wedding party dinner, I came down with the flu and had to be given medication to lower my fever .
 "I was determined, however, not to miss any of the events and not to let Julie or David know that I was not feeling well. I was determined to not be feeling well," she said .
 The church was beautifully decorated for Christmas with fresh pine boughs and red bows draped over the balconies and a large wreath behind the altar . The church is decorated for the holidays with fresh pines, red bows and pine trees .
 Red and white poinsettias banked the entire front of the church and surrounded the small white prie-dieu on which David and Julie knelt during the ceremony . The ceremony was held in front of Julie and David's parents .
 The most memorable moment was when I gave Julie away at the altar at the age of 16 .
 This impulsive, spontaneous gesture brought tears to the eyes of many in the church—including mine . "This impulsive gesture brought many to tears," said the priest .
 "It was not until I had joined Pat in our pew that the reality of what was happening hit me," says author . "It's not the first time I've joined Pat that I've seen him," she says .
 I could not help thinking back to one of my first conversations with Paul Douglas, the senator from Illinois, shortly after I had entered the Senate in 1950 . Douglas: "I was very impressed with his work in the Senate. He was a very good friend. He said he was impressed
 "I told him about Tricia and Julie, suddenly he became very pensive," he said . "Suddenly he became pensive. He became very concerned. He was very concerned about the deaths of Julie and Tricia."
 He said, “I’ve got a little girl that all of a sudden became a teenager without my realizing it.” He said he’s not surprised by the change .
 "Now she’s a young lady, and I was so caught up in my work that I missed the years in between," she says . "I was so proud of my daughter that I was able to give her a smile," she adds .
 "Pat and I had always been careful to set aside time each day to spend with the girls," she says . "We were always careful to spend time together," she adds .
 There were times when we were away campaigning or on official trips or when we would suddenly be called on to fill in for the Eisenhowers and would not be able to have dinner at home . But there were all the times that we would be away campaigning and on official visits .
 California Gov. Chris Brown is running for governor of the state . Brown says he's running for the first time since he's been in office .
 Almost six years later, President-elect Barack Obama was the President-Elect .
 I felt tremendous joy and pride watching my daughter get married but I couldn’t help wondering if it would not have been possible to have spent even a little more time with her, and regretting that I had not tried harder to do so . I felt .
 Mamie Eisenhower had been hospitalized a week earlier with a respiratory infection, so she as well as General Eisenhower saw the wedding from Walter Reed Hospital on a closed-circuit television hookup . The wedding was broadcast from the hospital .
 Eisenhower had been unhappy about the length of David’s hair, and he told me that he had offered him a hundred dollars if he would have it cut short .
 David usually respected his grandfather’s wishes, but he got only a light trim . David usually respects his grandfather's wishes . David's grandfather got only light trim.
 David's hair was considerably shorter than any of his college friends’ in the wedding party, but he never did . Eisenhower never paid for his hair .
 David and Julie chose ‘Edelweiss’ from The Sound of Music as their first dance . The Sound is from The sound of The Sound Of Music .
 "I do not think I have ever felt lighter on my feet than when I tapped David’s shoulder and cut in for my dance with the bride," she said .
 Julie threw her bridal bouquet—into Tricia’s waiting hands . Julie and Tricia are on their honeymoon in Florida . Tricia was the bride to Julie .
 During the wedding Julie had worn the same thin blue garter that Mamie Doud had worn on July 1, 1916, when she married Lieutenant Dwight Eisenhower . Julie wore the same garter as Mamie's in 1916 .
 Julie had given David a different garter to throw to the waiting groomsmen . Julie had therefore given David an alternative garter . Julie gave David a new garter for the grooms .
 That night Pat and I sat in front of the fire in our apartment and talked about the day and how beautiful Julie had looked and about how perfect the ceremony had been . Pat and Julie sat together in their apartment to talk about the ceremony .
 As I anticipated becoming President, I found that I was awed by the prospect but not fearful of it . As I . anticipated becoming . President, he said, "I found that . I found myself awed" by the possibility of becoming President .
 "I had the advantage of experience and of the detachment that comes from being out of office. I had the advantages of experience," he says .
 "I had no illusions about either the difficulty of the challenge or about my ability to meet it," he says . He says he had 'no illusions' about how he would meet the challenge .
 At Key Biscayne a wreath hung on the front door and a beautifully trimmed Christmas tree stood in the living room . The wreath hangs on the door and the tree stands in the house . A wreath and a Christmas tree are hung in the home .
 David and Julie came over from their honeymoon retreat in Palm Beach to join Pat and Tricia for Christmas dinner . Pat, Tricia, and Julie were joined by Tricia and Pat for the dinner .
 On Sunday morning, January 19, 1969, Pat and Pat attended Norman Vincent Peale’s morning service at Marble Collegiate Church . In the afternoon, they boarded the plane Johnson had sent to bring us to Washington .
 I spent my last evening as a private citizen putting the final touches on my inaugural address . I spent the last night putting the last touches on his inaugural address. I spent his last evening . He spent his final evening as an inaugural citizen .
 On inauguration day, January 20, 1969, I woke at 7:45 AM. and had breakfast with Pat in our suite . President Richard Nixon was inaugurated in 1964 . President Nixon was president of the United States from 1964-1974 .
 President Obama attended a prayer service in the State Department Auditorium before driving to the White House . The White House hosted a White House prayer service on Thursday .
 As our car slowly turned into the driveway, we could see the Johnsons waiting for us on the porch under the North Portico . The Johnsons were there to greet us as we drove through the driveway .
 I remembered from 1961 how painful this ceremony could be for a man who had lost a close election . I was touched by Humphrey’s graceful show of good humor . I remembered how painful it was for him to lose a close victory .
 Johnson waved to the crowds lining the route and carried on a lively conversation all the way . During the short ride to the Capitol, Johnson waved .
 Johnson spoke with very strong feeling with regard to Muskie and Agnew . Johnson: "I'm very proud of what I've done. I'm proud of it"
 He said a group of people were talking about how much Muskie had contributed to the campaign . Muskie said at a dinner the night before, a group was talking about his contributions .
 Agnew could take credit or at least a great deal of the credit on South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee, and Kentucky . Johnson had replied that all the press had slobbered over Muskie .
 For the swearing in, Pat held the same two Milhous family Bibles that she had held in 1953 and 1957 . Pat held two Bibles for the swearing-in .
 After Chief Justice Earl Warren administered the oath, I delivered my inaugural address . President Obama delivered his inaugural address at the White House on January 20 .
 If we succeed, generations will say of us now living that we mastered our moment, that we helped make the world safe for mankind . If we fail, generations to come will say that we master masterminded our moment. If we do, we'll be able to help make world safe
 The Secret Service put the top on the presidential limousine during the inaugural parade . President Barack Obama was inaugurated in January 2013 .
 The agent in charge explained that there were several hundred demonstrators along the route . There had already been some skirmishes with the police and the other spectators .
 Around 12th Street I could see protest signs waving above a double line of police struggling to keep the crowd back . Police struggled to keep protesters back from the crowd .
 A barrage of sticks, stones, beer cans, and what looked like firecrackers began sailing through the air toward us . Suddenly a barrage of rocks, stones and beer cans began sailing toward us.
 A Vietcong flag was lifted, and there was a brief scuffle as some in the crowd tried to tear it down . There was a slight scuffle when some tried to pull it down, but it was lifted .
 Seconds later we rounded the corner onto 15th Street, and the atmosphere changed completely. Seconds later, we rounded into 15th St. The atmosphere changed .
 A loud cheer rose from the crowds on the sidewalks in front of the Washington Hotel and the Treasury Building . The crowd cheered as the President's address was delivered .
 I was angered that a group of protesters carrying a Vietcong flag had made us captives inside the car . "I was angry that they had made me captives inside a car," she says .
 "I told the driver to open the sun roof and to let the other agents know that Pat and Pat and I were going to stand up so the people could see us," she says . "Pat and Pat went on to stand in front of the crowd," she adds .
 Tricia and Julie Johnson found the refrigerator stocked with butter brickle ice cream and Dr Pepper . The Johnson girls left the ice cream, Dr Pepper, left by the girls .
 I sat down at the grand piano in the center hall of the Family Quarters and played “Rustle of Spring” and a song I had composed for Pat before we were married . I sat there and played a song written for Pat, a song he had composed before we
 The great historical rooms are primarily on the ground and first floors . The East Room, the Green, Blue, and Red Rooms, and the State Dining Room are the most important rooms .
 The private rooms on the second and third floors are known as the Residence or the Family Quarters . Private rooms are also known as The Residence, or The Family Residence .
 In decorating our Family Quarters Pat chose yellows, blues, and golds . Pat chose sunny, California colors .
 Tricia, who lived with us until her marriage in 1971, took Lynda Bird Johnson’s room, which looked out over Pennsylvania Avenue and Lafayette Park . Tricia was Tricia's roommate, who shared the room with Lynda .
 The bright and airy third-floor Solarium, which had been a schoolroom for the Kennedy children and then a no-adults-admitted teenage party room for Luci and Lynda Johnson, became our family room .
 Truman's bed was brought out of storage for Eisenhower's and Truman's . The bed was first Truman's and then Eisenhower’s . When I asked for a regular bed rather than a large canopied four-poster used by Johnson, the bed turned out to have been
 Politics had literally bred strange bedfellows, says CNN's John Sutter . "I could not help help thinking that here was a case in which politics had bred strange bedsfellows"
 From John Adams to Theodore Roosevelt, the President and his staff worked in the White House itself . From Adams to Roosevelt the President's staff and staff often worked in White House .
 TR’s family of six children and their menagerie of cats, dogs, raccoons, snakes, a pony, and a bear proved too much and he requested the addition of a West Wing .
 On the ground floor are the Oval Office, the Cabinet Room, and another meeting room, which we called the Roosevelt Room . The Oval Office and Cabinet Room are located on the floor of the building .
 During World War II an East Wing was added to provide additional offices for the President’s staff and the staff of the First Lady . The East Wing is located in the White House .
 Even after Pat had warmed the Oval Office with a rich blue and gold rug and vibrant gold sofas and curtains, it was still undeniably formal .
 The White House is next to the White House, separated from it by a narrow closed-off street . I decided, therefore, to have a second and more comfortable office in the old Executive Office Building .
 Reporters usually referred to the EOB office as a “small hideaway office,” but it was almost as large as the Oval Office . Reporters often referred to it as a "small hideout office" Reporters used to refer to the office as "a small
 Pat filled the shelves with my favorite books and decorated it with some of the mementos I had collected over the years . Pat filled it with his favorite books .
 There were many family photographs, but the one that meant the most to me was a picture of Pat, Tricia, Julie, and me, taken on the day we moved back to California after I lost the 1960 presidential election .
 "I preferred working and thinking surrounded by these personal things rather than by the formal atmosphere of the Oval Office," says President Obama . "I prefer working ... surrounded by ... personal things"
 From the first days, I also used the Lincoln Sitting Room on the second floor of the White House for the work I did at night after dinner . The Lincoln sitting room was also used to help with the work he did at the night .
 Lincoln’s secretaries, John Hay and John Nicolay, used the small room as an office . The room was used as a small office by Lincoln's secretaries . It is a small room that was used in the Lincoln's office .
 For the Oval Office I requested the antique desk that I had used in my ceremonial office in the Capitol when I was Vice President . The antique desk is the desk I used to use as Vice President. The desk was the desk my Vice President used in his ceremonial office .
 For the EOB office we brought in the desk and chair Eisenhower had used in the Oval Office . For the office, the desk was used to be the desk used by the president .
 It had been in storage since Kennedy decided to replace it with a desk Franklin D Roosevelt had used during his presidency . Kennedy replaced it with the desk used by Roosevelt during his first term .
 Johnson had a portrait of FDR holding the Atlantic Charter on the mantel in the Oval Office .
 Following White House tradition, I personally selected portraits of three predecessors for Cabinet Room . Following tradition, President Barack Obama personally selected three predecessors .
 Lyndon Johnson captivated by gadgets and electronic equipment . He felt a constant need to know what was being said about him in the press and on television .
 Standing against the wall of the Oval Office to the left of his desk was a large specially constructed cabinet with insulated sides and a thick glass top, housing two constantly clattering wire service news tickers . The cabinet was a specialised cabinet that housed the news service .
 Next to it, a long low cabinet concealed three large-screen color TV sets . The sets were arranged side by side . Next to the cabinet was a long cabinet of three large screen color TVs .
 Using a special remote control device, Johnson could watch the three networks simultaneously while switching back and forth among them for the sound . Johnson could also switch between the two networks for sound .
 There was a similar three-set console in the small office adjacent to the Oval Office . Still another in the President’s bedroom .
 I told Haldeman that I would like a single set put in the small office, and that all the others were to be removed, along with the wire service machines . All the other machines were also removed .
 I was told that some were for his telephones, some were remote control wires for the TV sets . Some were for tape recording equipment connected to the phones, and others for tape recordings .
 One other piece of Johnsonian paraphernalia was the shower in the President’s private bathroom in the Residence .
 It consisted of half a dozen different jets and showerheads, controlled by a complicated panel of knobs . The shower head was controlled by the same panel as a shower head .
 My first few attempts at using it nearly flung me out of the stall, so I asked that it be replaced with a regular overhead fixture . I asked for it to replace it with an overhead fixture instead .
 Johnson showed me a hidden safe during his visit to the U.S. in November . The safe was found in a safe that Johnson had shown him during a visit .
 Johnson's last day in office contained the daily Vietnam Situation Report from the intelligence services for the previous day, Johnson’s last day . The report was published by the White House .
 From January 1, 1968 to January 18, 1969, 14,958 men had been killed and 95,798 had been wounded . The U.S. military had been involved in more than 100,000 deaths .
 I closed the folder and put it back in the safe and left it there until the war was over, a constant reminder of its tragic cost . "I closed it up, put it in a safe place in my safe, and I put it there as a reminder of the tragic cost
 On February 17 Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin came to the White House to pay his first official call . The ambassador was greeted by President Barack Obama in Washington .
 "I told him that I wanted to have completely open communications with him and with the leaders of his government," she said . She added that she wanted "completely open communications"
 Kissinger suggested that we develop a private channel between Dobrynin and him . Kissinger had suggested that Kissinger had to develop a . private channel . He said: "Dobrynin is a very good friend of the Russian president"
 I agreed that Dobrynin might be more forthcoming in strictly private meetings . We arranged for him to arrive unseen through a seldom-used East Wing door so no one need know they had met .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wants talks to begin in arms limitation talks . Putin: Progress in one area must logically be linked to progress in other areas .
 Before Dobrynin left, he handed me an official seven-page note from Moscow . The note indicated that the Soviets were prepared to move forward on a range of topics, including the Middle East, Central Europe, Vietnam, and arms control .
 The major question, of course, was whether the Soviets would follow up on their words with action . The Soviets would have to follow up with action, the author says .
 On February 23 I left Washington for an eight-day working visit to Europe . President Obama visited Europe for the first time since leaving office in January .
 I wanted this trip, my first abroad as President, to establish the principle that we would consult with our allies before negotiating with potential adversaries . President Obama said he wanted to establish a principle that the U.S. would consult its allies .
 I wanted to show the world that the new American President was not completely obsessed with Vietnam, and to dramatize for Americans at home that, despite opposition to the war, their President could still be received abroad with respect and even enthusiasm .
 President de Gaulle’s cooperation would be vital to ending the Vietnam war and to my plans for beginning a new relationship with Communist China . Most important, I felt that . President of France would help end the Vietnam War and to end the . Vietnam war, he says .
 France had diplomatic relations with Hanoi and Peking, and Paris would be the best place to open secret channels of communication between us and them . Paris is best place for diplomatic relations between France and China, says French diplomat .
 de Gaulle had become seriously alienated from America during the last several years . He had become alienated from the U.S. during that time .
 Whether we would be able to use Paris as a site for our diplomatic overtures would depend on our ability to overcome the estrangement that had grown up between us and to establish a relationship of trust and confidence .
 In London I had a luncheon with Queen Elizabeth, and a long informal conversation with 19 prominent British citizens . In London, I had lunch with the Queen Elizabeth and had long informal conversations .
 I had a private talk with Prime Minister Wilson in a comfortable room at 10 Downing Street . I was invited to meet with him in Downing Street to discuss his views on the economy .
 A warm fire cast a glow over the room and after a few minutes Wilson leaned back in his chair and put his feet up on the table . Wilson was speaking to the media for the first time in his new book .
 Our conversation ranged from America's position in Vietnam to Britain’s role in Europe . We discussed the role of Britain in Vietnam and the role it played in Vietnam .
 Wilson had met the Soviet leaders when he visited Moscow, and he offered his impressions of their personalities . Wilson had visited Moscow and met with Soviet leaders during his visit .
 If Brezhnev had been born in Britain he probably would have ended up Secretary General of the Trades Union Council . If Kosygin had been an Englishman he would likely have become Chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries, he said .
 A potentially awkward situation arose when Wilson gave a small dinner party for me at 10 Downing Street . Wilson gave me a dinner party at Downing Street, Downing Street.
 John Freeman, who had then been the magazine’s editor, had recently been appointed British ambassador in Washington . John Freeman was recently appointed British Ambassador in Washington.
 Downing Street would be the first time that he and I would be in the same room in an intimate social setting . That evening at Downing Street was the first meeting of the PM and PM .
 In his toast after dinner he said that American journalists had written far worse things about me than had appeared in Freeman’s magazine . In my toast I said that U.S. journalists had been writing far worse about me .
 We had feared antiwar demonstrations, and a few took place during this trip . But none could mar the overwhelmingly friendly reaction of the large crowds that greeted us everywhere we went .
 Whenever possible, I took impromptu walks or plunged into the crowds to shake hands and meet people . I was always happy to meet people in the crowd, but I was not afraid to get away .
 The high point of this trip personally and substantively was meeting with de Gaulle, he says . The high-point of the trip was his series of meetings with the French leader .
 When Azr Force One taxied to the terminal at Orly Airport, I could see him standing coatless at the foot of the ramp . Azr force One was seen at the end of the runway at the airport .
 I had been told that the temperature was just above freezing, but I immediately took off my overcoat . I had to take off my coat, but it was just below freezing .
 As we shook hands, de Gaulle greeted me in English . It was a virtually unprecedented personal gesture for him . De Gaulle: "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," he said .
 The first topic of discussion was the Soviet Union . When we met privately that afternoon at the Elysée Palace, the first topic was the subject of discussion .
 He said that the central fact of life for postwar Europe was the Soviet threat . But he believed that the Soviets themselves had become preoccupied with China . He said the Soviets were preoccupied by China .
 China is thinking in terms of a possible clash with the West, he said . He said, “They know they can’t fight the West at the same time .
 He thought that the Russians’ traditional fear of German armies would give added impetus to their inclination toward détente . He said he thought that Russia’s fear of the Germans would give impetus to the idea .
 Unless you are prepared to go to war or to break down the Berlin Wall, then there is no alternative policy that is acceptable, says David Cameron . "There are no alternative policies that are acceptable," he says .
 If the Russians marched, you would not use nuclear weapons right away, since it would imply a total effort to kill everyone on the other side . But we also believe that if the Russians march, you wouldn't use nukes right away .
 If both Russia and the U.S. were to use tactical nuclear weapons, Europe would be destroyed . Europe would also be destroyed if both the Russians and the United States used tactical weapons .
 Western Europe and the United Kingdom would be destroyed by Soviet tactical weapons, and East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary . The United States would also be destroyed in the same way .
 "I talked with Madame de Gaulle, a woman of great strength and character," she said . "She was a great woman," she added .
 The next day de Gaulle and Gaulle met in the Grand Trianon Palace at Versailles . "De Gaulle's next day was in Versaille," he said .
 We talked about the tragic effect World War II had had on the great nations of Europe . We also discussed the tragic impact of the war in Europe .
 He compressed volumes of history into a single sentence when he said, “In the Second World War, all the nations of Europe lost.” “All the nations lost. All of Europe," he said in a single statement .
 In ten years, when China has made significant nuclear progress, we will have no choice . We will have 'no choice' in dealing with China's nuclear ambitions, experts say .
 French President Charles de Gaulle died in 1953 at age of 65 . He was killed in the fall of World War II . The French president died at age 65 .
 He confirmed his acceptance of an invitation to visit the United States, and we agreed that a working visit similar to this one would be the most useful .
 French President Nicolas Sarkozy said the new entente cordiale between the Presidents of France and the United States would alone have made his European trip worthwhile .
 He said he believed the only way to end the war was by conducting negotiations on political and military issues simultaneously and by establishing a calendar for departure of our troops .
 He leaned forward and placed his large hands flat on the table and said, “I recognize that France had some part in this as she did not give the Vietnamese freedom early enough . The Communists posed as the champions of national independence, first against us and then against you .
 When he suggested that direct conversations with the North Vietnamese would be the best way to make progress, I indicated great interest in attempting this . When asked if he would talk to North Vietnamese, he said 'great interest'
 De Gaulle said nothing more and our meetings drew to a close, but I felt confident that the message would be passed to the North Vietnamese Embassy . The French Prime Minister said he was confident that he would pass the message to the embassy .
 President Obama spoke to the world leader about his plans for Vietnam . He said he was particularly interested to learn about plans for the country .
 He talked about the importance of resisting the spread of communism in Southeast Asia . He also spoke about the need to resist communism in the region .
 He recalled how the Communists had murdered Christians and suppressed religion after they took over . He said they murdered Christians, suppressed religion .
 In 1954 he agreed that the U.S. should continue to hold the line against the Communists in South Vietnam . North Vietnam in 1954 was captured by American forces .
 "I felt that the European trip had accomplished all the goals we set for it. I felt that . I felt . that was all the things we set . up for it," says Stuart Townsend . Townsend: "It was a great experience for us to experience"
 NATO leaders showed that a new and interested administration had come to power in Washington . It showed the new administration respected their views, NATO leaders said .
 It served warning on the Soviets that they could no longer take for granted—nor take advantage of— Western disunity . The Soviet Union was warned that it would not be taken for granted by the West .
 The TV and press coverage had a positive impact at home, instilling some much needed pride into our sagging national morale . And the TV and . press coverage . instilled, however briefly, some much . needed pride .
 President Eisenhower’s rapidly failing health cast a sad shadow over the early days of his presidency . Eisenhower's health was a major concern for the Eisenhower administration . Eisenhower died in 1953 at age 83 .
 He had been in Walter Reed Hospital since April 1968, and there was little hope that he would ever leave it .
 Former French President Charles de Gaulle visited him before his trip to France . He had asked him to extend his regards to some of his old friends, particularly de Gaulles .
 Even though it was visibly painful for him to talk, he insisted on having a conversation . He insisted on talking even though he couldn't speak .
 I told him that the Pope had said he was praying for him and hoping that a miracle might occur and bring about his complete recovery . The Pope has said he is praying for the Pope to make a miracle, he said .
 Richard Nixon was in the Oval Office with Kissinger, Haldeman, Kissinger, and Laird on March 28 . Nixon: "I had walked back from an NSC meeting to the Oval office"
 "I knew that he had been sinking fast, but the news hit me so hard that I could not speak," she said . "The news was the news that he was sinking fast," she later said .
 Mamie met us at the door of the presidential suite when we arrived at Walter Reed . Mamie was the first lady to visit the hospital .
 When I got back to the White House, I decided to go to Camp David to write the eulogy I would deliver in the Capitol Rotunda on Sunday . "I decided to write it out," President Obama says .
 Mamie says Ike told her last thing he said to her before he died: "Maybe you would like to know the last thing Ike said to me before his death"
 He knew I was sitting there, and he said, ‘I have always loved my wife.’ He said: ‘He knew he was sitting . There were tears in his eyes as he said goodbye to his wife . He said he loved her very much .
 Dwight Eisenhower had a warm smile and icy blue eyes . Eisenhower had an icy smile and a warm blue smile . Eisenhower died in 1953 at age 82 .
 Underneath his captivating personal appearance was a lot of finely tempered hard steel .
 He had exceptional warmth; but there was always a reserve, even an aloofness, that balanced it . He was always always warm, but reserved, even aloof .
 Masses of people all over the world thought they knew him, but the people closest to him, his friends and colleagues who loved or admired him, understood that even they did not really know him well . Even they knew he well, he said .
 Most people probably remember him for his engaging, outgoing personality, but he also remembers his decisive leadership . I remember him as a decisive leader, not an outgoing personality .
 He was at his best in times of crisis and when he had to deal with great issues, says former president . He says he was at best in crisis and was 'at his best' when dealing with issues such as the health crisis .
 It has become popular to think of the 1950s in nostalgic terms as a time of domestic apathy and international stability . The 1950s was a period of national apathy, international stability and apathy . It was also a time when the country was in a stable state .
 Eisenhower became President just as America and the world had reached a turning point in history . The proliferation of nuclear weapons and the rise of Soviet militancy had forever changed the nature of international relations .
 Eisenhower had to address whether we would utilize our nuclear advantage and fight a total war or confine ourselves to applying only limited military strength . One of the questions Eisenhower asked was whether he would utilize his nuclear advantage to fight a full war .
 At the NSC meeting this morning there was a discussion of what the strategy of the United States should be in the event of a major war with the Soviet Union .
 The President took over in as emphatic a manner as I have ever seen him use. The President's words were emphatic, I said . The President was emphatic in an emphatic manner as he used to use the term .
 He stated that he felt this was a problem for the Commander in Chief primarily . He said he felt that this was the problem for him and others .
 He said that the only policy we could follow once war was started against us was to win victory . He added that only policy that could be followed was to 'win the war'
 That under no circumstances could we hold back punches because of some feeling that total victory might bring greater problems than if victory was obtained through limited war. That under . No circumstances could be held back punches, says President George W. Bush .
 He said, in effect, there was no possibility of a limitedwar concept in view of the type of enemy we had and the weapons with which we have to reckon . He said: "There was no . possibility of . a limited war concept"
 He said the casualties would reach 7 million one day, 8 million another possibly . He said we are talking about sizes of bombs and potential destructive power in fantastic amounts .
 He softened it to an extent by suggesting that the Joint Chiefs talk to him privately at any time to attempt to convince him, if they wanted, that his view was wrong .
 At the present time, he was convinced that this is the only sound position to take. At the moment, he said: 'At the present . At the . present time,. he was . convinced that . this is . the only . sound position .
 The only qualification he made was that we might consider not using our strongest weapon if we felt from a military standpoint the reaction would be so great as to make that use unadvisable, he said .
 The Germans had not used it because they realized they were more vulnerable to gas in their constricted positions than were the Allies . The Germans realized they would be more vulnerable than the Allies to gas than they were .
 He objected to a paragraph which said that we should insist on countries being free and democratic after the war . He also objected to the suggestion that countries should be free, democratic after war .
 In the next war every country would come out a dictatorship inevitably and would have to remain a dictatorship for some time, he said . He pointed out that in the next conflict all countries would come from a dictatorship .
 He said they would try in the U.S. to return to a free economy as soon as possible . But he said it would be more difficult in the future than it had been in the past wars .
 He had an engaging, outgoing personality, but also had a very definite sense of dignity . He was a very outgoing personality and had a sense of modesty, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I remember the chilling looks he gave to those who tugged at his sleeve or slapped him on the back . I remember him giving chilling looks at those who tried to hug him . He gave chilling looks as he walked away from the crowd .
 In this respect he could not have been more different from Lyndon Johnson, who seemed unable to carry on a conversation without nudging or poking or even shaking .
 General Jerry Persons, who had been with Eisenhower during the war years and then served as his Director of Congressional Relations before succeeding Adams as chief of the White House staff in 1958, told me of an occasion in 1959 when Eisenhower called him in shortly before Johnson arrived for a meeting .
 Eisenhower was most characteristic of Eisenhower was his determined optimism . Eisenhower's determination to be optimistic was his determination to succeed .
 He enjoyed a good joke, but saw little humor in the weighty problems of his office . He did not particularly like it when others introduced humor into serious discussions .
 A legislative leadership meeting debated whether to prepare the public for the horrors of nuclear war . The meeting was held early in the administration's administration .
 Eisenhower strongly felt that something had to be done to develop civil defense and national preparedness . Eisenhower felt it was necessary to develop a civil defense system .
 At the legislative leaders meeting on Monday morning, Jerry Persons brought up an article that had been written by Drew Pearson to the effect that the President was not going to support Bridges and several other senators . Pearson said that the article was written by Pearson that said the President would not support Bridges .
 The President blew his top and said that he wished that everybody in his whole organization would quit reading the columnists and quit reporting such incidents to him . The President said he wished everyone in his organization would stop reading the columns .
 Eisenhower was not used to being criticized, and he found criticism hard to take . Eisenhower found it difficult to take, but he was not afraid to take criticism .
 He never forgave Truman for his widely quoted quips about his lack of political experience during the 1952 campaign . Truman was president in 1952, but never forgiven for his quips .
 At one point during the administration we were planning a big bipartisan rally to build support for the mutual security program . At one time, the White House was planning a bipartisan rally .
 I suggested that Truman, who supported the program, be invited to appear on the platform . Truman supported the platform, and I suggested he should be invited .
 Eisenhower said he would not appear on the same platform with Truman no matter what was at stake . A cold, hard look came over Eisenhower's face, and he said he wouldn't appear on same platform .
 Eisenhower knew that he was much stronger than his party, Eisenhower said . Eisenhower knew he was strong enough to win over his party . Eisenhower was a strong leader, he said .
 He felt that by doing a good job he could pull his party up; and he did not want his party to drag him down . He felt he could do enough to pull the party up, he said .
 The serious erosion of Republican strength during the years of his presidency was in some measure the result of this hands-off, arm’s-length attitude .
 He knew better than most politicians how to move people, how to rally the nation to his support, and how to inspire their faith and win their trust . These are the essence of politics, and these are the most powerful politicians .
 Eisenhower welcomed and encouraged new and even unorthodox ideas . Eisenhower was a staid standpatter, he actually welcomed new and unorthodox ideas, he says .
 The difficulty with some of the people around the President is that every word that the President spoke they took as gospel, he said . He said that the difficulty is that some people around him took every word of the President as gospel .
 Jerry said those who worked with him before knew that they should not do this . Jerry said he would take a very forward position and finally settle upon one which was not so far out front . He said that many times would take the President's position very forward .
 To many, Dwight Eisenhower seemed a rather kindly and benign grandfather, but his own view of himself and his conception of the presidency were quite different . Eisenhower's view of his presidency was quite different.
 He saw himself in very active terms as the man responsible for doing the right thing for America . He said: 'He saw himself as the person responsible for ... doing the wrong thing'
 "I talked with Eisenhower for about fifteen minutes before the doctor came in to indicate that I should leave. I talked with him for about 15 minutes," he said .
 I could see that he was tiring fast, so I shook hands with him and walked quickly to the door . But I could . see that . He was tired fast . So I walked quickly out of the room and left .
 "It struck me that this was probably the last time I would see him alive," he said . "I'm not sure if this is the last thing I'll see him," he added .
 His eyes were closed as I spoke, but after a brief moment he opened them and lifted his head from the pillow . His eyes remained closed as he listened to the words, but he lifted them up .
 We had wondered whether a new President and a serious new peace overture would produce a breakthrough that would end the Vietnam war . We also wondered whether the new President would produce an end to the war .
 North Vietnamese launched a small-scale but savage offensive into South Vietnam in February . The North Vietnamese gave us the answer in February when they launched a brutal offensive into the country .
 It was a deliberate test, clearly designed to take the measure of me and my administration at the outset, says President Obama . "It was a deliberately designed test," says Obama .
 Kissinger and Kissinger agreed that if we let the Communists manipulate us at this early stage, we might never be able to negotiate with them from a position of equality, much less one of strength, he says . Kissinger and I agreed that . if . we let them manipulate us, it might
 Johnson had made this mistake and never recovered the initiative . Johnson had never been able to recover the initiative from the mistake .
 This view was shared by General Creighton Abrams, the U.S. Commander in Vietnam, and by Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker in Saigon . This view is shared by general Abrams and ambassador Bunker .
 When the Communists stepped up their offensive, both Abrams and Bunker recommended B-52 bombing runs against their supply lines .
 "They feared the fury of Congress and the media if I expanded the war into Cambodia," says President Nixon . "I'm not going to go to Cambodia. I'm going to Cambodia," he says .
 A leak of plans to bomb Cambodia might have triggered serious antiwar demonstrations abroad . I agreed with him, but I decided to postpone a final decision about the bombing until I returned from the European trip .
 I directed that a cable be sent to Bunker through regular channels saying that all discussions of bombing should be suspended . I directed it to send a cable to Bunker telling them to suspend bombing discussions .
 I sent a top secret “back-channel” message to General Abrams telling him to ignore the message to Bunker and to continue planning the B-52 strikes . I would have to withhold approval until after my trip .
 At a press conference two days after my return I was asked what our reaction would be. At the end of the press conference we were asked what we would do if I was back in the U.S. I said yes .
 President Obama said in March that he had issued a warning in response to a question about whether his patience was thin with this kind of provocation . Obama: "You may recall that on March 4, when I received a similar question, at a similar stage in the attacks, I issued what
 "It will be my policy as President to issue a warning only once, and I will not repeat it now," President Obama says .
 On Sunday, March 16, I met with Rogers, Laird, Kissinger, and General Earle Wheeler, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, to review the military and diplomatic situation in Vietnam .
 Intelligence reports indicated that over 40,000 Communist troops had secretly amassed in a zone ten to fifteen miles wide just inside the Cambodian border . The area was ten to 15 miles wide .
 We respected that neutrality, but the Communists were blatantly violating it by launching raids across the Cambodian border into South Vietnam and then retreating to the safety of their jungle sanctuaries .
 I assured everyone that I understood the problems and recognized the risks involved in bombing the sanctuaries, no matter how justified such action might be . I also said I understood that I understand the problems of bombing sanctaries, but also understood the risks .
 I'm convinced that the only way to move the negotiations off dead center is to do something on the military front . I am convinced that . The only way of moving the negotiations is to move them off dead .
 I said that short of resuming the bombing of North Vietnam, this was the only military action we could take that might succeed in saving American lives and getting the peace negotiations moving . I said, short of . resuming bombing of . North . Vietnam, he said, "this was
 I concluded, “I have decided to order the bombing to begin as soon as possible.” I concluded .
 B-52 bombers struck the Communist sanctuaries inside the Cambodian border . The weather was good, and on March 17, the bombers struck inside the border .
 The Pentagon gave the secret bombing the codename Menu, and the various target areas were designated by different mealtimes . The Pentagon said the bombing was a secret operation .
 It was the first turning point in my administration’s conduct of the Vietnam war, says President Obama . "The Vietnam war was a turning point," he says .
 Maximum precautions were taken to keep the bombing secret, for several reasons . The bombing was kept secret for years .
 Prince Sihanouk, the head of the Cambodian government, strongly objected to the presence of the North Vietnamese army in his country . He said: "Cambians are very upset that the North Vietnam army is in Cambodia"
 As early as 1968, he had asked the U.S. to retaliate against the North Vietnamese, either with “hot pursuit” on the ground or by bombing the sanctuaries .
 Cambodia’s neutral status, Sihanouk could not afford to endorse his actions officially . Cambodia's neutral status means it is not allowed to endorse its actions officially. Cambodia's government is neutral . Cambodia has a reputation for its neutrality in the world .
 As long as we bombed secretly, we knew that Sihanouk would be silent . If the bombing became known publicly, however, he would be forced to protest it publicly . Therefore, as long . as long as . we bombed secret, we . knew that we knew . that
 The North Vietnamese would find it difficult to protest since they were officially denying that they had any troops in Cambodia . We also anticipated that as long as the bombing remained secret, the bombing would be kept secret, we said .
 Another reason for secrecy was the problem of domestic antiwar protest . Another reason was the threat of domestic protests .
 "I wanted to provoke as little public outcry as possible at the outset," Obama says . "My administration was only two months old, and I wanted to province as little outcry"
 Only Richard Russell and John Stennis, the Chairman and the ranking member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, were informed of the bombing . The bombing took place in the early hours of the morning .
 Russell was beginning to have doubts about the war in general, but both men thought that the bombing was the right decision . Both said that they would back me up in the event that it became public .
 Operation Breakfast began in South Vietnam . It was a steady decline in U.S. casualties in Vietnam . Operation Breakfast was a success story .
 Less than a month after the secret bombing of the Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia began, we were suddenly confronted with a major crisis from a completely unexpected quarter of the communist world .
 "Just before seven in the morning on April 15, my bedside phone began ringing. Just before 7 a.m. ET, I was in bed with a family member in New York City, New Jersey .
 North Korea reportedly shot down one of our Navy reconnaissance planes with thirty-one men aboard . North Korean jets had shot down the plane, which was shot down by the U.S. Navy .
 "As soon as I got to the Oval Office, I read the fragmentary intelligence reports," says President Obama . "I read the fragments of the intelligence reports. As soon as you got to ... the president," he says .
 The North Koreans shot down a four-engine propeller-driven EC121 Navy aircraft . The aircraft was on a regular reconnaissance mission off the North Korean coast .
 North Korea has been banned from flights to the international limit for almost twenty years . The aircraft were not allowed to fly within forty nautical miles of North Korea's territory .
 It was remotely possible that the men aboard the EC-121 had been taken captive in North Korea as the Pueblo crew had been fifteen months earlier . It was possible that they had been held captive in the same way as the crew of the U.S. Navy's Puebl
 All during the day we assumed the worst—that the men were dead—but hoped for the best . The men were found in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 At ten the next morning, Washington time, President Obama met with the NSC in the Cabinet Room to consider how we would respond to our first international Crisis .
 They reasoned that this might be a completely isolated incident, and thought we should stay our hand until we were completely sure what had happened and why . They said they thought it might be an isolated incident and wanted to stay their hand .
 Option One involved sending a military strike against a North Korean airfield . Option One was to send a strike on North Korea's airfield in retaliation for the strike .
 Option Two involved continuing the EC-121 reconnaissance flights but sending combat escorts with them to ward off any future incidents . Option Two was to continue the reconnaissance flights with escorts . Option Three involved continuing reconnaissance flights, but sending escorts to protect the aircraft .
 The North Koreans were well armed, and if we chose Option One we would have to be prepared to suffer further losses . We would also have to confront the possibility of reopening the fighting in Korea, he says .
 Option Two was admittedly a very weak protest against what appeared to be the murder of thirty-one men and a deliberate affront to American honor . Option Two would clearly establish the principle of our right to fly reconnaissance missions .
 Americans would wonder about the value of our costly overseas commitments if we could not adequately protect our men and our honor in a situation that was as clear-cut as this one . Americans would rightly wonder if they could not .
 Two bodies have been recovered from the water, along with some of the debris of the plane, ninety miles from the coast . Two bodies were found in the water along with the debris .
 There could be no more hope that there had been any survivors from the incident, says CNN.com . The incident was a calculated and cold-blooded challenge, says the BBC.com.com correspondent .
 Intelligence reports indicated that shooting down the EC-121 was an isolated provocation like the seizure of the Pueblo . Intelligence reports indicate that the shooting down of the aircraft was not a provocation .
 April 14 was the birthday of North Korea’s leader, Kim II-sung . It is possible that this was his macabre birthday present to himself .
 The case against retaliation was strongly supported in an urgent cable from Ambassador William Porter in Seoul, warning that any major military action we took would end up playing into the hands of North Korea’s extremist leadership . The cable was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Seoul .
 Kissinger and Kissinger and I continued to feel that retaliation was important. On the other hand, Kissinger said, "retaliation was important" Kissinger: "I continued to think that retaliation is important"
 A strong reaction from the United States would be a signal that for the first time in years the U.S. was sure of itself . As he put it, a strong reaction would signal that the U .S. is confident .
 "It would shore up the morale of our allies and give pause to our enemies," says President Obama . "I'm sure it would be great for the U.S. to have a strong presence in the world," he says .
 We discussed the possibility that the North Koreans would respond with an attack on South Korea . We discussed a possible response to the North Korean attack .
 Kissinger said that he did not believe that would happen, but, if it did, we had to take whatever steps were necessary to bring the North Koreans to their knees, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "We had to be prepared to bring [North Korea] to its knees" Kissinger said
 The resumption of intelligence flights with fighter escorts did not preclude the subsequent use of Option One, he says . The decision was made at a press conference the next morning .
 Option Two backed up with a second round of bombing of the North Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia . Option Two followed up with another round of bombings of North Vietnamese sanctuaryaries in the country .
 This would avoid the risks of a direct retaliation against North Korea . It would be an effective way to impress the Communist leaders of both North Korea and North Vietnam with our resolve to support our allies .
 I decided to call it off and adopt this combination of Option Two and a renewal of the secret Menu bombing in Cambodia . It is a combination of the combination of . Option One bombing plan and the renewal of a secret menu bombing in .
 This second round, aimed at the next target area, would be called Operation Lunch . Operation Lunch would be the second attempt to target the area . Operation lunch would be Operation Operation Lunch.
 Kissinger still felt that our credibility vis-a-vis the Communist world was at stake in our response to this deliberate challenge . Kissinger felt that . our credibility . vis-A-World was at risk in response to our response, Kissinger said .
 The Soviets, North Vietnamese, and the Chinese would all be watching . The Soviets and the North Vietnamese were all being watching .
 It was a calculated risk that the North Koreans would not escalate the situation any further if we retaliated with a single strike against one of their airfields, the South Korean leader said .
 "As long as we were involved in Vietnam, we simply did not have the resources or public support for another war in another place," says President Obama . "We simply simply didn't have the . resources ... to continue to engage in Vietnam," he says .
 Most of my top national security advisers, including Rogers and Laird, were strongly opposed to Option One . I also had to consider the fact that except for Agnew and Mitchell, most of his top advisers, were against Option One, he says .
 Kissinger agreed that we could ill afford a Cabinet insurrection at such an early date in the administration . Kissinger agreed with Kissinger that the president's Cabinet was ill-equipped to deal with a Cabinet revolt .
 Congress and public opinion are not ready for a strong retaliation against North Korea, he says . He also agreed that public opinion was not prepared for the shock of the shock .
 Making my decision in favor of Option Two turned out to be easier than getting it carried out . "I'm not going to let it happen again," she says of her decision .
 Despite my April 18 directive, the Pentagon faced a series of postponements, excuses, and delays from the Pentagon . It was nearly three weeks before my order was implemented .
 Without informing the White House, the Pentagon had also canceled reconnaissance flights in the Mediterranean . Even worse, we discovered that . The Pentagon also cancelled reconnaissance flights without informing the .
 From April 14 to May 8, the United States had not conducted its scheduled aerial reconnaissance in the Mediterranean and the North Pacific . The U.S. has not conducted any scheduled reconnaissance in those areas .
 The North Koreans would think that they had succeeded in making us back off the reconnaissance flights . The North Korea would undoubtedly think they'd succeeded in . But the North Koreans wouldn't have succeeded in persuading us back .
 President Obama learned early in his administration that a President must keep a constant check not just on the way his orders are being followed, but on whether they're being followed at all . Obama learned from this incident that a . President must check his orders, not just the way they are being
 "The EC-121 incident was largely forgotten. Before long, other issues absorbed us and the incident was forgotten," says the author .
 I remained troubled by the response we had made, or, as I saw it, that we had failed to make, I said . Yet, he said, "I remained troubled" by the way we responded .
 He had staked his political future on the outcome of a plebiscite involving Senate and regional reforms . His political future is uncertain after the result of the vote on the issue .
 In addition to the public statement wishing de Gaulle well, I wrote him a personal letter, he also wished him well . "I wrote him well," he said .
 Dear Mr President: Your gracious official message and your very warm personal letter touched me deeply . I am deeply grateful for your gracious official messages and personal letter . I was deeply touched by your kindness .
 Richard Nixon is President of the U.S. and Richard Nixon of the United States . Richard Nixon was President Nixon's first president . President Nixon was assassinated in 1968 . President Richard Nixon died in office in 1973 .
 "I send you from the bottom of my heart all my best wishes for the successful accomplishment of your immense national and international task. Perhaps one day I will have the occasion and the honor to see you again," he writes .
 President Nixon's wife adds her warm wishes . Nixon sends her most respectful regards, which she adds warm wishes to her .
 For you, my dear Mr President, the assurance of my feeling of faithful and devoted friendship, is that I will remain loyal to you . For me, I would like to say goodbye to you, Mr President .
 Georges Pompidou was once de Gaulle’s deputy, and now his successor . I went to Paris for the funeral service in Notre Dame Cathedral, and afterward paid respects to Georges .
 Pompidou was rightly known as a rather unemotional man, and he had had differences with de Gaulle over the years . He had had his differences with the former French president .
 "I looked over and saw that he was choked up and could not speak," he said . "I waited a moment for him to begin the conversation, but after waiting a moment, he looked over to see that he couldn't speak"
 "I waited silently until he had composed himself. Remembering how I felt after Eisenhower's death, I waited silently," he said .
 The two of us had lived and worked for so many of our public years in the shadows of two giants, Eisenhower and de Gaulle . The two worked together in the shadow of the two giants .
 He too must have been thinking about this bond we had shared; now we were alone . He also must have thought about the bond he had shared with him . Now we are alone .
 Leaks about the Vietnam war had plagued Lyndon Johnson during the last years of his presidency .
 At first he was frustrated, then angered, and, finally, nearly obsessed by the need to stop them . He was frustrated and angered, but finally, he was nearly obsessed with stopping them .
 He tried to circumvent leaks by working with fewer and fewer people, until he was making national security policy in private luncheon meetings with a tight circle of trusted advisers .
 I have already described how, when he heard that I had decided to reactivate the NSC system, he told me about his experiences with leaks . He predicted that it would be a decision I would regret, he said . I have described how he described how .
 The leaks began almost with the start of my administration, and before long I experienced firsthand the anger, worry, and frustration that Johnson had described . Before long, Johnson said he was angry and frustrated by leaks .
 CIA report listed forty-five newspaper articles in 1969 that contained serious breaches of secrecy . CIA report: Forty-five newspapers in 1969 contained serious breach of secrecy. A CIA report said the articles were in violation of the law .
 The NSC held its first meeting on the Middle East on February 1 . Details of the discussion were leaked to the press within a matter of days .
 Eisenhower considered any leak of classified foreign policy information treasonable . Eisenhower, whom I had personally briefed on this meeting, considered such a breach of law .
 When he saw the news story he telephoned Kissinger and warned him in no uncertain terms . Kissinger warned him of the dangers of the situation in the world .
 On April 1 an NSC directive was issued that called for a comprehensive new study of alternative policies for Vietnam . The radical option of unilateral withdrawal was also considered .
 "This came as a shock to our allies and undoubtedly gave encouragement to our enemies," says President Barack Obama .
 On April 22 the Times ran a story based on our planning sessions for the coming disarmament talks with the Soviets . The story was based on the planning sessions .
 Two days later the Times had a detailed report of our deliberations on whether to post an intelligence ship off North Korea . Two days after the report, the Times reported that the U.S. was weighing up a decision to post the ship .
 The next day the Tzmes reported a leak from “reliable sources” on our negotiations for arms sales to King Hussein . The Tzme reported the next day that the leak was from ‘reliable source’
 Hoover's three suggestions were to conduct background checks on those suspected as possible sources of leaked information . Hoover's suggestions included to have them tailed, or to place wiretaps on their telephones .
 Tapping is the only really effective means of uncovering leakers, he says . Tapping, he said, is the most effective way to uncover leakers . He said tapping was the only way to find out who leaked .
 It was decided that when leaks occurred Kissinger would supply Hoover with the names of individuals who had had access to the leaked materials and whom he had any cause to suspect . Hoover would then have a list of individuals he had suspected .
 I authorized Hoover to take the necessary steps, including wiretapping, to investigate the leaks and find the leakers, says President Obama . Hoover was authorized to take necessary steps to find out who leaked classified documents .
 On May 6 the same reporter had an inside story of our deliberations during the EC121 crisis . This reporter had a story of the crisis on May 6 .
 The story was filed from Washington, and the reporter attributed his information to Nixon administration sources . The reporter said his information was based on sources from Nixon administration .
 It had saved American lives, the enemy was suffering, and the pressure to negotiate was building . The pressure was building on the U.S. to take action .
 He immediately speculated that the leak must have come from State or Defense . He said the leak was likely from the Department of Defense .
 Rogers was the only person at State who had been told about the bombing . "I was certain that he would never leak secret information," she says .
 We were naive about the Pentagon’s proclivity for leaking whatever would make the Pentagon look good or advance its positions . Nor were we naive about our naiveness, we said .
 This leak would embarrass Mel Laird and likely cause him uncomfortable moments at coming Capitol Hill hearings . But this leak was likely to embarrass him .
 Kissinger expressed a shared feeling that leaks were more than just damaging; they were potentially dangerous to national security . Hoover’s memo: Kissinger expressed our shared feeling . Kissinger expressed feeling that the leaks were damaging . Hoover's memo of the conversations was published by Kissinger in 1973 .
 Kissinger sent Hoover the names of four individuals who had access to the leaked materials . Kissinger sent the names to Hoover . Hoover sent Hoover a list of four people with information on the leaked material .
 I wanted maximum secrecy on this wiretap project and I also instructed that the taps be taken off as soon as possible, he says . "I want maximum secrecy," he says. "I also wanted that the tap taps be removed as soon possible"
 A leak about the wiretaps would be a blow to the morale of the White House staff, and provide a potent issue for the domestic antiwar groups and a propaganda weapon for the North Vietnamese . I knew that a leak . would be the . issue for domestic anti-war groups .
 The average number of warrantless wiretaps per year during my presidency during my administration was less than in any administration since Franklin D Roosevelt’s . In fact, there were fewer wiretaps a year than any other administration since FDR's .
 Nixon felt that what previous Presidents had done in this regard would matter little if the press and the antiwar activists found out about what Nixon was doing . But he felt that previous President had done little, he said . Nixon felt it would not matter little to the press or anti-war
 On May 20 the Washington Post carried a leak of my plans to meet with President Thieu . The Washington Post published a picture of a meeting with Thieu on May 20 .
 On June 3 the Tzmes published an article based on an NSC memo, issued only a week earlier, outlining our fallback position for the negotiations with the Japanese on Okinawa .
 The Japanese side knew how far we were willing to compromise before negotiations began . Its premature revelation seriously undermined our bargaining position, he says .
 That same day the Washington Star published a story about the administration’s decision to begin troop withdrawals from Vietnam . The story was published the same day as the announcement .
 This leak undercut Thieu, whom we had assured that we would make the announcement jointly, lest the Communists interpret it as a sign that we had begun to abandon South Vietnam .
 From 1969 to early 1971, 17 individuals were wiretapped by the FBI in an effort to find the source of national security leaks . The FBI wiretapped them in an attempt to find out what was behind the leaks .
 The group included four newsmen and thirteen White House, State, and Defense Dept. aides .
 I was only asked to approve the program itself and not each individual tap . "I only asked for approval of the program and not individual tap," she says .
 Nine years later, I cannot reconstruct the events that precipitated each other . Today, nine years after the events, I can't reconstruct the circumstances surrounding each of them .
 There was an eighteenth national security tap, one on syndicated columnist Joseph Kraft . Kraft was tapped on by the CIA, the CIA and the White House .
 Kraft had very good sources in the White House, NSC staffs, State and Defense Departments . Kraft was in direct contact with the North Vietnamese, he says .
 I know that I told Ehrlichman on at least one occasion that Kraft’s contacts with the North Vietnamese were all that we were interested in. I know I told him that Kraft had contacts with North Vietnamese, but that wasn't all that was wanted .
 I authorized a tap on Kraft’s home phone in Washington, D.C., but the FBI was reluctant to place a tap at that location . Kraft was the subject of an FBI tap on his home phone .
 The FBI arranged for a tap on Kraft during one of his trips to Paris to see the North Vietnamese . Kraft had a plan to install a tap without using the FBI, but we abandoned this effort when the FBI arranged .
 None of these wiretaps turned up any proof linking anyone in the government to a specific national security leak .
 For at least twenty-five years, every President and Attorney General authorized wiretaps to obtain intelligence in both foreign and domestic security matters . In the past, wiretaps have been used to obtain information from the White House .
 In the early years of my administration I saw the government’s ability to function effectively in international affairs being undermined by leaks . I felt leaks were a violation of law as well as of the code of honorable behavior, he said .
 Even though I disliked wiretapping and felt that it was at best a technique of only limited usefulness, it seemed to be our only chance to find out who was behind the leaks, and to stop them . So even though I dislike wiretapping, I thought it was the only chance of
 When our efforts to discover the source of the leaks failed, we began conducting foreign policy planning in smaller groups . We began conducting our foreign policy .
 Instead of producing more open government, leaks force government to operate in more confined and secret ways . Leaks are an ironic consequence of leaking that instead of producing open government . Leakings are an unfortunate consequence of government leaks, says David Cameron .
 Nixon administration 'paranoia' about secrecy led to impression of Nixon administration "paranoia" about secrecy . So it was that the impression of a Nixon administration ‘paranoia’ about secrecy developed .
 Secrecy unquestionably exacts a high price in the form of a less free and creative interchange of ideas within the government . Secrecy exacts the price of a lack of transparency in the government, says Simon Tisdall .
 Without secrecy there would have been no opening to China, no SALT agreement with the Soviet Union, and no peace agreement ending the Vietnam war . But I can say unequivocally that without secrecy, there would be no opening .
 Despite the Communist offensive in February and despite the stalemate at the Paris talks, I remained convinced that the combined effect of the military pressure from the secret bombing and the public pressure from my repeated invitations to negotiate would force the Communists to respond .
 In March I confidently told the Cabinet that I expected the war to be over in a year . In March, I told the cabinet that I expect the war in Afghanistan to end in one year . I also said I expected it would be over within a year, but not over a year
 We had taken the initiative in Paris and proposed the restoration of the DMZ as a boundary between North and South Vietnam . We also advanced the possibility of a simultaneous withdrawal of American and North Vietnamese troops from the South .
 President Thieu offered to begin talks with the North Vietnamese on the question of a political settlement, and to permit free elections . For his part, he offered to allow free elections and political settlement talks . The talks are scheduled for later this month .
 They insisted that political and military issues were inseparable, that U.S. troops must be withdrawn unilaterally . Thieu must be deposed as a precondition to serious talks, they said .
 "In diplomatic usage, this was a sign that I considered them to be extremely important," says President Obama . "I considered them extremely important. In diplomatic usage this is a sign of respect," he says .
 The President wishes to reiterate his conviction that a just peace is achievable . The President wished to reiterate .
 The President is willing to explore avenues other than the existing negotiating framework . The President has said he wants to explore other options .
 U.S. and DRV negotiators can achieve an agreement in principle, but final technical negotiations can shift back to Paris . For example, it might be desirable for American and North Vietnamese negotiators to meet separately from the Paris framework to discuss general principles .
 Kissinger told Dobrynin that U.S.—Soviet relations were involved because of a settlement in Vietnam was the key to everything . The USG is convinced that all parties are at a crossroads and that extraordinary measures are called called .
 Dobrynin said we had to understand the limitations of Soviet influence on Hanoi . He added that the Soviet Union would never threaten to cut off supplies to their allies in North Vietnam .
 He promised, however, that our proposals would be forwarded to Hanoi within twenty-four hours .
 "After weeks passed with no response, we decided to take the initiative once again. After weeks of waiting, we contacted the authorities again to find out what happened."
 In a televised speech on May 14 I offered our first comprehensive peace plan for Vietnam . In a TV interview, President Obama offered his peace plan to Vietnam . Vietnam is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 I proposed that the major part of all foreign troops—both U.S. and North Vietnamese—withdraw from South Vietnam within one year after an agreement had been signed, he says . The proposal was rejected .
 An international body would monitor withdrawals and supervise free elections in South Vietnam . International body would also supervise the withdrawals .
 Reports from Hanoi indicate that the enemy has given up hope for a military victory in South Vietnam, but is counting on a collapse of will in the U.S. in the United States. I said, “Reports from . Hanois indicate that . reports from H
 There was no serious response from the North Vietnamese, either in Hanoi or Paris, to my May 14 proposals . There were no serious responses from North Vietnamese to the proposals .
 I had never thought that peace in Vietnam would come easily; for the first time I had to consider the possibility that it might not come at all . "Peace in Vietnam might never come easily," he says .
 I decided to continue on the course we had planned, in the hope that the enemy would decide to take up our proposals and join us in the search for a settlement . Nonetheless, I . decided to . continue to continue .
 U.S. withdrawing combat troops from Vietnam would demonstrate to Hanoi that we were serious in seeking a diplomatic settlement . It might also calm domestic public opinion by graphically demonstrating that . we were beginning to wind down the war .
 Mel Laird had long felt that the United States could ‘Vietnamize’ the war . He says the U.S. could train, equip, and inspire the South Vietnamese to fill the gaps left by departing American forces .
 Laird returned from a visit to South Vietnam in March with an optimistic report about the potential of the South Vietnamese to be trained to defend themselves . Laird: "The South Vietnamese are capable of self-defence. They should be able to take advantage of this opportunity"
 Laird: Laird’s enthusiastic advocacy that we undertook the policy of Vietnamization . It was largely on the basis of Laird's enthusiastic advocacy, he says . Laird says the Vietnamization policy was largely based on his enthusiasm .
 This decision was another turning point in my administration’s Vietnam strategy, says President Barack Obama . This is a "turn point" in the administration's Vietnam policy, he says .
 President Thieu was among those who objected to the plan for American withdrawals from South Vietnam . Thieu objected to U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam .
 "I privately assured him through Ambassador Bunker that our support for him was steadfast," says President Obama . "Our support is steadfast. I privately assured Mr. Obama," he said .
 "I proposed that we meet on Midway Island in the Pacific. In order to dramatize this pledge, I proposed that . I proposed . We meet in the middle of the Pacific, Midway .
 I announced that, as a consequence of Thieu’s recommendation and the assessment of our own commander in the field, I had decided to order the . immediate redeployment from Vietnam of approximately 25,000 men .
 This involved some diplomatic exaggeration, because both Thieu and Abrams had privately raised objections to the withdrawals . The withdrawals were withdrawn from the Vietnam War .
 Thieu was mollified by the Midway meeting, but he was still deeply troubled . Thieu is deeply troubled by the situation in Vietnam . He says he is "deeply troubled"
 He knew that the first American withdrawals would begin an irreversible process . The conclusion of this would be the departure of all Americans from Vietnam, he said .
 "To make sure the message of Midway was not lost on Hanoi, I spelled it out when we arrived back at the White House," he says . "I spelled out the message to make sure it wasn't lost on them," he adds .
 I told the people gathered on the South Lawn to welcome us that the combination of my May 14 peace plan and the Midway troop withdrawal left the door to peace wide open . President Obama said the plan and withdrawal of troops from the U.S. left the "door to peace"
 At the end of June it looked as if we might be getting a response of sorts from Hanoi . At the start of June, it seemed as though we might get a response from the authorities .
 Intelligence indicated that some North Vietnamese units were being withdrawn from South Vietnam . There seemed to be a lull in the fighting, according to intelligence sources .
 Le Duc Tho, the Special Adviser to the North Vietnamese delegation at the Paris talks, suddenly returned to Hanoi . There was speculation that he had been called back to receive new negotiating instructions .
 Although the evidence was still entirely circumstantial, the dangers of appearing overeager were as great as ever . I decided to try once again to cut through whatever genuine doubts or misunderstandings might still be holding Hanoi back .
 "I decided to “go for broke” in the sense that I would attempt to end the war one way or the other, either by negotiated agreement or by increased use of force. I decided to go for broke," he says .
 President Obama says peace efforts might be doomed to failure by the end of the year . Obama: "Unless I could build some momentum behind our peace efforts over the next several weeks"
 A massive new antiwar tide would sweep the country during the fall and winter . Once the summer was over and Congress and the colleges returned from vacation in September, a massive new . antiwar . tide .
 There was almost sure to be a renewed Communist offensive during the Tet holiday period in February . Then, with the approaching dry season in Vietnam, there was also a renewed communist offensive in Vietnam .
 By early spring the pressures of the November 1970 elections would make congressional demands for more troop withdrawals impossible to stop and difficult to ignore . The pressure would be so strong that it would be impossible to ignore for the U.S.
 After half a year of sending peaceful signals to the Communists, I was ready to use whatever military pressure was necessary to prevent them from taking over South Vietnam by force . I was prepared to use military pressure to prevent the Communists from taking control of South Vietnam .
 Kissinger and Kissinger developed an elaborate orchestration of diplomatic, military, and publicity pressures we would bring to bear on Hanoi . Kissinger and I developed a plan to use diplomatic and military pressure to bring on the Vietnamese government .
 November 1, 1969 was the first anniversary of Johnson’s bombing halt . November 1 was the deadline for what would in effect be an ultimatum to North Vietnam .
 Since November 1 was only three and a half months away, there was no time to waste . November 1 is November 1, 2014 .
 "I met with him at the White House so that he would be able to talk at firsthand about my strong desire for peace," Obama says .
 My letter to Ho Chi Minh was sent to Sainteny by secret courier . It was delivered to Xuan Thuy, head of the regular North Vietnamese delegation in Paris, for transmittal .
 "I realize that it's difficult to communicate meaningfully across the gulf of four years of war," says President Obama . "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not surprised," he says .
 You will find us forthcoming and open-minded in a common effort to bring the blessings of peace to the brave people of Vietnam, Vietnam, says CNN.com.com .
 Both sides turned their face toward peace rather than toward conflict and war . Let history record that at this critical juncture, both sides turned peace .
 With this letter I felt that I had gone as far as I could until the North Vietnamese indicated that they too were interested in an agreement . I felt it was a good sign that North Vietnam had expressed an interest in a possible agreement .
 As far as I was concerned, my letter put the choice between war and peace in his hands. As far . I'm concerned, I put the . choice between peace and war in the . hands of the British president, writes .
 In a few days word was flashed to us that the North Vietnamese were proposing a secret meeting between Kissinger and Xuan Thuy . The North Vietnamese proposed a meeting with Kissinger and Thuy in a secret .
 This was to be the first leg of an around-the-world trip that included stops in Guam, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, South Vietnam, India, Pakistan, Romania and Britain .
 In honor of Apollo’s accomplishment, we gave the trip the codename Moonglow . The trip was named after Apollo's mission .
 The trip provided the perfect camouflage for Kissinger’s first secret meeting with the North Vietnamese . Kissinger was traveling to Vietnam for the first time to meet with North Vietnam .
 Kissinger was supposed to go to Paris to brief French officials on the results of his meetings . Kissinger would then go to France, ostensibly to inform them of the results, he says . Kissinger's visit to Paris was arranged to inform French officials of the meetings .
 Shortly after we arrived I conducted an informal press conference with the reporters covering the trip . I conducted a press conference .
 Nixon said he enunciated what at first was called the Guam Doctrine . The Nixon Doctrine has since become known as the Nixon Doctrine . Nixon said it was the first time he made mention of the Guam doctrine .
 I stated that the U.S. is a Pacific power and should remain so. I said that the United States should remain a power in the Pacific .
 We would need a new Asian policy to ensure that there were no more Vietnams in the future . But I felt that once the Vietnam war was settled, we would need to change Asian policy . We need to make sure that there are no more Vietnamnams .
 I began with the proposition that we would keep all our existing treaty commitments, but we would not make any more commitments unless they were required by our own vital interests . The UK will not commit any further commitments unless required by its own interests .
 "In the past our policy had been to furnish arms, men, and matériel to help other nations defend themselves against aggression," says the British Prime Minister .
 That was what we had done in Korea, and that was how we had started out in Vietnam . That's what we did in Korea and that's how we got started out of Vietnam .
 From now on, I said, we would furnish only the matériel and the military and economic assistance to those nations willing to accept the responsibility of supplying the manpower to defend themselves . But from now on we would only provide only the material and military .
 The Nixon Doctrine was misinterpreted by some as signaling a new policy that would lead to total American withdrawal from Asia and from other parts of the world as well . Nixon Doctrine announced on Guam was interpreted as signaling an American withdrawal .
 Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield articulated this misunderstanding after I returned from the trip . "In one of our regular breakfast meetings after I . returned from . returning from a trip," he said .
 Nixon Doctrine was not a formula for getting America out of Asia, but one that provided the only sound basis for America’s staying zm and continuing to play a responsible role in helping the nonCommunist nations and neutrals .
 President George W. Bush made state visit to Communist satellite country of Romania . He became the first American President to visit Bucharest, Romania, on August 2 .
 President Nicolae CeauSescu is a strong, independent leader who had cultivated good relations with the Chinese . He had to walk a very fine line lest the Soviets decide to intervene in Romania .
 I had been briefed to expect a courteous reception, but the size and spontaneous enthusiasm of the crowds exceeded all our expectations . I had hoped I would be able to see the Queen perform at the end of the day .
 "At one point CeauSescu and I were literally swept up by the dancing in the streets," says Romanian politician . "I was swept up with the dancing," he adds .
 Romania had good diplomatic relations with the North Vietnamese, and I knew that anything I said would be repeated to them, so I used one of my meetings with CeauSescu to reinforce my message .
 President Barack Obama said: “We cannot indefinitely continue to have two hundred deaths a week in Vietnam and no progress in Paris.”
 I told him that in order to get peace we might have to open another channel of communications between the two sides, he said . "I told him we might need to open a new channel of communication," he added .
 Ceau$escu said he would do everything he could to be helpful in furthering negotiations . Ceau $escu: "I would be very happy to be involved in further negotiations"
 Kissinger’s secret meetings with the North Vietnamese began on August 4, 1969, and extended over the next three years . Kissinger riding slouched down in the back seats of speeding Citroéns, eluding inquisitive reporters, and putting curious embassy officials off the scent .
 The first conversation took place in Jean Sainteny’s Paris apartment in the fashionable Rue de Rivoli, where Kissinger met with Xuan Thuy and Mai Van Bo .
 Kissinger opened by saying that he wanted to convey a message from me personally . Kissinger: "I want to tell you that I'm not going to let you know that you're going to have a lot of things to do with your life" Kissinger: 'I'm going to be a
 He reminded them that November 1 would be the first anniversary of the bombing halt . November 1 is the anniversary of a halt in the bombing .
 "Now, in order to expedite negotiations, I was ready to open another channel of contact with them," he said . "I'm ready to ... open a channel of communication with them"
 He insisted that there were no North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam . He insisted on maintaining the patent fiction that there was no North Vietnam troops in Vietnam .
 He also continued to demand that we overthrow President Thieu before any agreement could be reached . He continued to insist on overthrowing Thieu's government .
 Kissinger decided he had said all he could to representatives who were not actually empowered to negotiate . Kissinger decided that he had spoken all he possible to representatives . Kissinger said that he would not negotiate with the representatives .
 He brought the conversation around to a mellower tone, saying, “We would prefer to have the Vietnamese as friends rather than as enemies.”
 The three men shook hands and departed separately to avoid attracting any attention .
 Nixon Doctrine on record and having begun to put pressure on Hanoi, I decided it was time to assume the offensive in the public forum of the Paris peace talks, he says .
 Cabot Lodge: "We have done all that we can do by ourselves to bring a negotiated peace in Vietnam" Lodge's usually complacent demeanor was surprised when he rose from his chair to address the Communist delegates .
 The press called it his toughest talk since taking over in January as chief U.S. negotiator . He has been criticized for his tough talk .
 The U.S. must cease the war of aggression and withdraw their troops from South Vietnam . respect the right of the population of the South and of the Vietnamese nation to dispose of themselves, without foreign influence. For this the United States must cease .
 Considering the tone of my letter to him, there was no doubt that Ho’s reply was a cold rebuff . Ho replied: “I’m not sure what I’ve written to him. It was not the first time I had heard from such a
 "I knew that I had to prepare myself for the tremendous criticism and pressure that would come with stepping up the war. After receiving this unpromising reply, I knew that . I knew . I had had the enormous pressure and pressure to step up the battle," he said .
 There were rumors of a struggle over the succession for several days . Premier Pham Van Dong emerged as the Hanoi Politburo’s leading figure .
 Veteran Vietnam-watchers were at a loss to predict what effect this would have on the war . Veteran Vietnam watchers said it would be difficult to predict how the war would change .
 In the middle of September I announced the withdrawal of another 35,000 troops by December 15 . The withdrawal was announced in September . In December, the withdrawal was also announced .
 This announcement was intended to let the new leaders of North Vietnam know that I was not assuming that they were bound by Ho’s reply to my letter . I was trying to make clear that Ho was not bound by his reply .
 Two days later, in a speech at the opening of the UN General Assembly, I said that “the time has come for peace.” I said “time has come to peace. Two days after that, in his speech, he said: “The time has
 On September 20 Kissinger received a letter from Sainteny, who had been in Hanoi for Ho Chi Minh’s funeral and had a long conversation with Pham Van Dong . Kissinger received the letter on September 20 .
 The new Premier was notably unvituperative in his references to the United States . The Premier League leader made no reference to the U.S.
 Sainteny stressed that he knew how eager I was for peace from his own conversation with me, Dong said . Dong said, “I see that they have convinced you.” Dong said he knew that he was eager for peace and that they had convinced him .
 "I felt that I had supplied the deed to prove our words. Since this conversation had taken place before my mid-September troop withdrawal, I felt that it was the right thing to do," he said .
 "In the weeks remaining before November 1, I wanted to orchestrate the maximum possible pressure on Hanoi," she says . "I wanted the most possible possible pressure," she adds .
 I was confident that we could bring sufficient pressure to bear on the diplomatic front. I was also confident we could get sufficient pressure from the UK to pressure the Russian president .
 The only chance for my ultimatum to succeed was to convince the Communists that I could depend on solid support at home if they decided to call my bluff . But the only chance was to . convince them that . I could . depend on . solid support in home if . they decided
 "The chances I would actually have that support were becoming increasingly slim. However, the chances of me actually having that support are becoming increasingly low. I'm not going to be able to get that support," he said .
 There had been riots and disorders on more than a score of college campuses during the winter and spring of 1969 . Vietnam was by no means the predominant one of which Vietnam was the predominant cause .
 Students at Berkeley demanded an autonomous College for Ethnic Studies . Students demanded an independent college for ethnic studies . Students also called for an autonomous University of California .
 Black students seized the administration building at Duke University . They demanded a nongraded black education program and money for a black student union . They also demanded money for the black student unions .
 I was disgusted—and I said so, by the capitulation of professors and administrators to students using force . "I was disgusted" by capitulation, he said, "and said so"
 Rev. Hayakawa ripped out the wires of a public address system set up by radicals in violation of campus regulations . The public address was set up on campus by radicals who ripped out wires of the system .
 Theodore Hesburgh of Notre Dame announced he would suspend protesters who substituted “force for rational persuasion” from the university . Hesburgh: If protesters continued to disrupt, they would be expelled from Notre Dame if they continued the disturbance .
 During the first months of my presidency Vietnam was not the primary issue in campus demonstrations largely because Johnson’s bombing halt had suspended the most actively controversial aspect of the war . My announced plans to establish an all-volunteer Army and our reform of the draft also helped in this
 As the fall term began on college campuses, signs of a new level of intensity in the antiwar movement . Antiwar movement intensified as Congress returned from recess .
 There was talk of holding a “Moratorium’s” a nationwide day of protest, on October 15, right in the period most crucial to the success of my November 1 ultimatum . There was also talk of a ‘Moratorium,’ a nationwide
 In a press conference on September 26, President Obama said, “Now, I understand that there has been and continues to be opposition to the war in Vietnam on campuses, and also in the nation”
 I felt that I had no choice but to carry it through. But having initiated a policy of pressure on North Vietnam that now involved foreign governments as well, I felt it had to carry through .
 Prime Minister David Cameron says protests will not affect his decisions . Cameron: "I was faced with the prospect of demonstrations at home that I could not prevent"
 Kissinger told Dobrynin that the apparent failure of all our requests for Soviet help toward ending the war made it very difficult for us to carry on more than basic diplomatic relations between our two countries . Kissinger: "The apparent failure" made it difficult for the U.S. to carry
 "I telephoned Kissinger in the middle of this discussion, and we talked for a few minutes," Kissinger said . Kissinger called the president of the United States in the midst of the discussion .
 Dobrynin tried to ease the atmosphere with a diplomatic turn of phrase . The Russian president tried to calm the situation by saying: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 Kissinger replied, “The President chooses his words very carefully, and I am >» sure he meant what he said.” Kissinger replied .
 As another part of our efforts to apply pressure on Hanoi, I ordered a survey of non-Communist nations shipping to North Vietnam . The survey was ordered as part of an effort to pressure the government .
 Cyprus, Malta, Singapore, and Somalia are among the countries with registered ships going to Hanoi .
 When the first two governments refused to cooperate with us, I ordered their foreign aid programs cut off, he ordered them to be cut off . President Barack Obama has ordered foreign aid to be turned off .
 Singapore and Somalia agreed to cut down the shipping under their flags . The two countries have agreed to reduce the shipping of their ships . The countries have been accused of shipping illegally .
 I met with the Republican congressional leadership and told them that the next sixty days would be of the utmost importance for the ending of the war . I told them, "Sixty days are the next 60 days," he said .
 Later the same day I moved the pressure on Hanoi up a notch when I met with nine Republican senators and planted a story that I knew would leak . The story was planted in advance of a meeting with nine GOP senators and leaked .
 In eight days Rowland Evans and Robert Novak ran a column saying that I was considering blockading Haiphong and invading North Vietnam . In that time, the two columnists said they were considering a possible invasion of North Vietnam.
 "Mel Laird" attracted the attention of Mel Laird, author says . "I never knew for sure that it did," he says .
 He and Bill Rogers urged that before taking any drastic action I consider the very low American casualty rates over the last few months and the improved performance of the South Vietnamese as a result of our stepped-up Vietnamization program .
 Anti-war forces coalesced around the Vietnam Moratorium scheduled for October 15 in Washington . The Moratorium was scheduled to take place in Washington, D.C., October 15 .
 The plan was to hold similar demonstrations in different cities on the fifteenth of each month until the war was over . Similar demonstrations were planned to take place in each month .
 The White House is reeling under siege, writes President Obama . Obama's nomination of Clement Haynsworth, welfare reform, the defeat of a Republican incumbent by an antiwar Democrat in a special election in Massachusetts .
 These factors were lumped together in the media and labeled a crisis of leadership . The media labeled the situation as a 'crisis of leadership'
 Pronouncements of no confidence and predictions of political paralysis were widespread . Pronounces of no-confidence and predict political paralysis was widespread .
 David Broder wrote in the Washington Post that “it is becoming more obvious with every passing day that the men and the movement that broke Lyndon Johnson’s authority in 1968 are out to break Richard Nixon in 1969 .
 "My deliberate refusal to acknowledge these dire predictions itself became an element of the supposed crisis," he says . "I deliberately refused to acknowledge the dire predictions myself," he adds .
 "My real concern was that these highly publicized efforts aimed at forcing me to end the war were seriously undermining my behind-the-scenes attempts to do just that," he said . "I was worried that these efforts were undermining me," he added .
 North Vietnamese ambassador recited statements made by leading Senate doves . Weeks later, in a meeting with Cabot Lodge, he recited those statements . The North Vietnam ambassador said the statements were made by senators .
 On October 13 Ron Ziegler announced that I would make a major address to the nation concerning Vietnam on Monday, November 3 . Although publicly I continued to ignore the raging antiwar on October 13 .
 This announcement was generally interpreted as either an attempt to undercut the October 15 Moratorium, then only two days away, or as a sign that the Moratorium had already been successful in forcing me to reconsider my Vietnam policy .
 The announcement of a major speech for two days after the November 1 deadline would give Hanoi second thoughts about fishing in our troubled domestic waters . In fact, I hoped that the announcement of the announcement would give the Vietnamese government second thoughts .
 Kissinger's ultimatum failed when Kissinger informed Kissinger that Hanoi had just broadcast a letter from Premier Pham Van Dong to the American people . Kissinger knew he had failed when he told Kissinger that the letter had just been broadcast . Kissinger: "I knew for sure that my ult
 We are confident that with the solidarity and bravery of the peoples of our two countries and with the approval of peace-loving people in the world, the struggle of the Vietnamese people and US. progressive people against United States aggression will certainly be crowned with total victory .
 "To indicate the seriousness with which I viewed this blatant intervention in our domestic affairs, I asked Agnew to hold a press conference at the White House," he says . "I wanted Agnew's press conference to indicate that he was serious," he adds .
 He called Dong’s letter an “incredible message” and read excerpts of it for the cameras . He read excerpts from the letter from Dong . Dong: "It's an incredible message"
 Agnew: "I considered the question period that followed Agnew’s remarks a disgraceful performance on the part of the White House press corps" Agnew says Agnew's remarks were "disgraceful"
 Dong wrote a letter to the Vice President, asking him to "take the bull by the horns" Dong said, “Mr Vice President’s responsibility for the letter.”
 The media generally either played down the Dong letter or indicated that the administration had unreasonably fastened upon it as an excuse for the repression of legitimate dissent .
 I knew that unless I had some indisputably good reason for not carrying out my threat of using increased force when the ultimatum expired on November 1, the Communists would become even more difficult to deal with . The Communist Party would become contemptuous of us and even more hard to
 American public opinion would be seriously divided by any military escalation of the war, author says . "I knew, however, that after all the protests and the Moratorium, I knew, but I knew it would be very difficult," he says .
 A quarter of a million people came to Washington for the October 15 Moratorium . The Moratorium was held on October 15 .
 Despite rumors that some of the more radical left-wing organizations would provoke violent confrontations with police, the demonstrations were generally peaceful . Despite widespread rumors, the protests were mostly peaceful .
 Kissinger urged that I do nothing at all and let the protest run its course, lest I upset our foreign policy strategy . Kissinger urged me to do nothing . Kissinger: "Let's not upset our policy strategy. Let's let's let the protests run their course" Kissinger said .
 John Ehrlichman was upset by our apparent indifference to the sincere fervor of many of the protesters . He urged that I declare a National Day of Prayer on October 15 as a show of tacit support for the underlying goal of peace .
 The Washington Post praised the protesters and said that the Moratorium was “a deeply meaningful statement” of the anguish they felt about the war . The D.C. Post also praised the protest .
 Vietcong Radio said that the Communists had gained “strong encouragement” from the Moratorium . The Moratorium has been in place since April 1 .
 "I had strong opinions about this question, and I decided to address it head on," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I was very happy to answer this question"
 I asked that one letter be selected from all those we had received criticizing my press conference statement that I would not be affected by the protests and that a reply be prepared to it . I asked for one letter to be selected among all those who had received criticism of my statement saying I would
 In it, he stated that it has been my impression that it is not unwise for the President of the United States to take note of the will of the people .
 President Obama said if a President allowed his course to be set by demonstrators, he would betray the trust of all the rest of the rest .
 To allow government policy to be made in the streets would destroy the democratic process . Whatever the issue, it would destroy democratic process, says David Cameron .
 On the night of October 15, October 15 I thought about the irony of this protest for peace . I thought of the irony that this protest was being held in honor of peace . It's not the first time I've seen a protest in the U.S.
 It had, I believed, destroyed whatever small possibility may still have existed of ending the war in 1969 . I believed it had destroyed any small possibility that may still be possible of ending it in 1969, he said .
 I would have to adjust my plans accordingly and carry on as best I could, I said . I would be happy to be able to continue my career as a result .
 After the Moratorium attention immediately began to focus on my speech, attention immediately started to focus upon my speech . The silent majority was the silent majority of the audience .
 Most doves in the media and Congress assumed that I had been so impressed— or so frightened — by the Moratorium . I had decided to announce major new troop withdrawals in order to blunt the impact of the next Moratorium scheduled for November 15 . The Moratorium is scheduled to be
 AP wire story on October 20 stated that I might offer a cease-fire in the speech, and some papers reported this in frontpage headlines . Some papers reported that this was in response to the story .
 Flora Lewis, writing in the Boston Globe, stated categorically that I would announce the withdrawal of 300,000 men during 1970 . I had ordered the Pentagon to work out the necessary schedules, she said .
 Dan Rather said he was considering stepped-up troop withdrawals, fewer B-52 raids, and perhaps even a cease-fire before the end of the year . Dan Rather, on a special CBS news report on the Moratorium, claimed that I was considering stepping up troop withdrawals .
 Since he was Minority Leader, his statement was widely interpreted as a White House trial balloon . His statement has been widely interpreted .
 Hubert Humphrey predicted that I would announce a major program for the “systematical and accelerated withdrawal of U.S. forces” from Vietnam . The Vietnam withdrawal program was announced by President Nixon .
 As the November 1 deadline approached, three factors strongly influenced my thinking about the ultimatum . The deadline was November 1 .
 American casualty figures in Vietnam have reached new lows . The first was that American casualties in Vietnam had been reaching new lows. The other was that U.S. troops were losing ground in Vietnam .
 "I knew that these reductions might be a ploy on the part of the Communists to make escalating the fighting that much more difficult for me," he says . "These reductions may be the result of a ploy," he adds .
 The second factor was the possibility that the death of Ho Chi Minh might have created new opportunities for reaching a settlement that deserved a chance to develop . The death of the Vietnamese leader might have led to new opportunities to reach a settlement .
 The third factor was a conversation I had with Sir Robert Thompson, the British expert on guerrilla warfare . Sir Robert is a former British guerrilla warfare expert and author of guerrilla warfare. He says the U.S. has been in contact with the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Thompson was clearly not in favor of escalation because it would risk a major American and worldwide furore and still not address the central problem of whether South Vietnamese were sufficiently confident and prepared to defend themselves against a renewed Communist offensive .
 His estimate was that continuing the current U.S. policy and assuming South Vietnamese confidence that we would not pull out, victory could be won within two years, he said .
 He thought that our only chance of a negotiated settlement would be if it were clear to Hanoi that we were there for the duration . He said that the only chance was to negotiate a deal was to make it clear that the U.S. would be clear that we would stay
 I asked if he would go to Vietnam and make a personal study of the situation there for me and report as soon as possible . I asked him to go to the country to study the situation and report .
 Thompson said he thought it was important for us to see it through in Vietnam . Thompson: "Absolutely. It's important to see the U.S. stay in Vietnam"
 In view of these three factors, I began to think more in terms of stepping up Vietnamization while continuing the fighting at its present level . The Moratorium had undercut the credibility of the ultimatum .
 In many respects Vietnamization would be far more damaging to the Communists than an escalation that, as Thompson had pointed out, would not solve the basic problem of South Vietnamese preparedness .
 It was important that the Communists not mistake as weakness as weakness the lack of dramatic action on my part in carrying out the ultimatum . The Communist Party did not mistake the decision as weakness .
 We would be able to demonstrate our continuing resolve to the North Vietnamese on the battlefield, but I thought that the Soviets would need a special reminder . We would demonstrate our continued resolve to North Vietnamese, he said .
 Ambassador Dobrynin came to the White House for a private meeting on the afternoon of October 20 . President Obama used the meeting to make his position clear to the Soviet leadership, he says .
 Kissinger accompanied Dobrynin to the Oval Office, where he was greeted by the ambassador . The ambassador said he had received an aide-mémoire from his government, with instructions to read it to Kissinger .
 Dobrynin seemed a little uncomfortable with his silence when he finished reading from the paper . He seemed uncomfortable with my silence .
 After a moment I leaned back in my chair and opened the center drawer of my desk . After a few minutes, he opened the drawer of his desk . "I don't know what I'm doing," he said .
 The Middle East, trade, security and Berlin are among the major issues facing the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration . Obama has been criticized for his handling of the Middle East .
 "Anything we have done or are doing with respect to China is in no sense designed to embarrass the Soviet Union," he said . Turning to China, he said, “Anything we do or . doing with . respect to . China is no sense of embarrassment,” he said
 China and U.S. cannot tolerate having a situation develop in which we are enemies . China and the United States cannot tolerate being enemies, any more than we want to be enemies of the Soviet Union .
 "We expect to make moves in trade and exchanges of persons and eventually in diplomacy," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Within ten years, China will be a nuclear power, capable of terrorizing many other countries . China's nuclear power will be able to terrorize other countries, experts say . China has a history of nuclear power .
 They said that the Soviet Union would be very active with its help if we stopped . They said they said that they would help us if we did not stop .
 At this Dobrynin raised his hand as if to be called on, but I waved it down . At this he raised his hands as if he had been called on .
 I concluded that perhaps perhaps the Soviet Union did not want to end the war in Vietnam . I said that I had concluded that . perhaps perhaps perhaps . perhaps the . Soviet Union does not want the war to end, he said. I said .
 You may think that the war in Vietnam costs the Soviet Union only a small amount of money while it costs us a great many lives . Or you may think . That war costs us only small amounts of money . Or that war costs the Soviets a great amount of time while it cost us
 The Soviet Union is going to be stuck with me for the next three years and three months, Ambassador says . Ambassador: "During all that time I will keep in mind what is being done right now, today, today"
 "If the Soviet Union will not help us get peace, then we will have to pursue our own methods for bringing the war to an end," he says . "We will have our own ways of bringing war to a end," says the Russian leader .
 "We cannot allow a talk-fight strategy to continue without taking action. We cannot allow it to continue," says Daley . Daley: "We are not going to let it continue without action"
 "The humiliation of a defeat is absolutely unacceptable to my country. It is time to get discussions started," he says . "It's time to start discussions," he adds .
 "The war can drag on, in which case we will find our own way to bring it to an end," he said . The war can dragged on, he said. "We will find a way to end it."
 "The whole world wants us to get together. I wanted no reply to this, so I brought the meeting to a close by saying, “the whole world . wants us together.”
 "I, too, want nothing so much as to have my administration remembered as a watershed in American and Soviet relations," says President Obama . "I want nothing to be remembered as an American-Russian relations. My administration will be remembered," he says .
 I received much conflicting advice concerning what I should say on November 3 . I received conflicting advice about what I needed to say, including what I would like to say . I'm not sure what I need to say on Nov 3 .
 Rogers and Laird urged me to concentrate on the hopes for peace, Rogers emphasizing the Paris talks . Laird stressed the prospects of Vietnamization .
 The majority of the White House staff, the Cabinet members, and the congressional leaders I consulted advocated that I use the speech to establish beyond any doubt my sincere desire for peace, he says . "I'm not going to apologize for any harm," he writes .
 He felt that if we backed off, the Communists would become convinced that they could control our foreign policy through public opinion, he said . "If we backed down, we would become totally convinced," he added .
 Dean Acheson sent word that any announcement of withdrawal schedules would put us at a disadvantage in negotiations . Dean said it would be a disadvantage to the U.S. negotiating team .
 Speculation about the speech reached fever pitch as the date approached . Speculation was rife as the speech was made public .
 "I welcomed this because I knew that the more it was talked about, the bigger the audience would be. I welcomed this," she said . "The more it's talked about would be the bigger it would be," she added .
 "I kept my own counsel, and very few people knew the way my thinking was really going or the surprise I was planning for the antiwar agitators," he says .
 "I went to Camp David for a long weekend on October 24 and worked twelve to fourteen hours a day writing and rewriting different sections of the speech," he says . He says he spent the weekend at Camp David writing, rewriting and rewriting the speech .
 Haldeman cleared most of his schedule during the following week so that he could continue the work uninterrupted . "I don't think it's the perfect time to get back to work," he said .
 By Friday the speech had gone through twelve drafts, and I was ready to take it to Camp David for a final review . By Friday, the speech was in place of a final draft .
 Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield had written down his thoughts in a memorandum . Mansfield asked that I read it before I made any final decisions about what I would say . "I read it," he said, "and he asked me to read it"
 He said that it was more than just the loss of lives or the waste of money and resources that concerned him . He said he was concerned about waste of resources and money .
 He then listed actions that amounted to a unilateral cease-fire and withdrawal . The U.S. military says it has withdrawn from the Syrian conflict .
 I interpreted his references to it as a “conflict of dubious origin” and to the military positions “unfortunately” assumed over the past few years as signals that he would even allow me to claim that I was making the best possible end of a bad war my
 "I knew that the opponents of the war would irrevocably become my opponents if my speech took a hard line. I knew that . I knew . that . opponents of . the war . would irrevably become . my opponents . If my speech . took a harder line,
 "I could not escape the fact that I felt it would be wrong to end the Vietnam war on any terms I believed to be less than honorable," he says . But he says he could not . escape the . fact that he felt it . would not . end the . Vietnam war
 I went to bed, but after two hours of restless sleep I was wide awake, so I got up and began work again . I went into work again, but I went back to bed .
 The message of my November 3 speech was that we were going to keep our commitment in Vietnam . President Obama said in a speech that the U.S. will keep its commitment to the Vietnam mission .
 We were going to continue fighting until the Communists agreed to negotiate a fair and honorable peace or until the South Vietnamese were able to defend themselves on their own—whichever came first . The U.S. went to Vietnam in 1968, but the war was over .
 "I emphasized that our policy would not be affected by demonstrations in the streets," says President Obama . "We are not going to tolerate demonstrations," he says .
 "My strongly expressed determination to stand and fight came as a surprise to many people," he said . The speech had a greatly increased impact because of the different expectations that had been built up around it, he added .
 It was one thing to make a rhetorical appeal to the Silent Majority—it was another actually to hear from them . Its impact came as a surprise to me; it was one of many things I'd hoped to do .
 I did not listen to the TV commentators, but the rest of the family did, and they were livid with anger . "I didn't listen to them, but my family did," she says of her family .
 They said that the comment and analyses broadcast by the network news correspondents criticized both my words and my motives . They said they said that . They also said that they criticized both . My words and motives were criticized by both my . words and those of the journalists .
 Instead of presenting impartial summaries of what I had said and cross sections of political and public reaction, most of the reporters talked about the speech they thought I should have given, he says .
 There were signs that the critics and commentators were unrepresentative of public opinion . But there was signs that there were signs of public support for the government .
 The White House switchboard had been lighted up from the minute I left the air . The switchboard was lit up in the wake of his departure from television .
 The calls continued for hours, and soon the first waves of telegrams began to arrive . The calls were answered by people who wanted to know more about the family .
 "Reaction to the speech was exceeding my most optimistic hopes. After I took calls from Cabinet officers, staff, and others, I began to realize that . I began . realize that the reaction to the . reaction to . the speech .
 The various reports of the public response to the speech excited me, but the coverage of the speech rankled me . "The various reports ... excited me," she says. "But the television coverage of this speech was rankled."
 By morning the public reaction was confirmed. That was the theme of November Be By morning . November Be Be Be .
 The White House mail room reported the biggest response ever to any presidential speech . The biggest response to any president's speech has been reported by mail room .
 More than 50,000 telegrams and 30,000 letters had poured in, and the percentage of critical messages among them was low . More than half of the critical messages had been critical messages .
 A Gallup telephone poll taken immediately after the speech showed 77 percent approval of the speech . A Gallup phone poll taken after it was taken into account that 77 percent of Americans approve of it .
 There was no mistaking that the Silent Majority speech had hit a responsive chord in the country . It was a response to the speech by President Obama's administration .
 In fact, for the first time, the Silent Majority had made itself heard . The Silent Majority was making itself heard in the Senate .
 The outpouring of popular support had a direct impact on congressional opinion, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It's a good sign that Congress is listening to the issue of immigration reform .
 Fifty-eight senators—21 Democrats and 37 Republicans —signed letters expressing similar sentiments . Fifty-six senators signed letters expressing their sentiments .
 The November 3 speech was both a milestone and a turning point for President Obama, Obama says . Obama's speech was a "turn point" for the administration, Obama said in a statement .
 The enemy could no longer count on dissent in America to give them the victory they could not win on the battlefield . Now, for a time at least, the enemy can no longer rely on dissent .
 I had the public support I needed to continue waging war in Vietnam and negotiating for peace in Paris until we could bring the war to an honorable and successful conclusion . I had to continue to continue a policy of waging war and negotiating in Paris .
 Gallup's overall-approval rating soared to 68 percent in the weeks after November 3 . President Obama's approval rating was the highest it had been since taking office .
 Congressional reaction was so positive that I took the unprecedented step of personally appearing before both the House and Senate and addressing them separately to thank them for their support .
 At the same time I was under no illusions that this wave of Silent Majority support could be maintained for very long . At the end of the day, I'm not sure if this wave will continue to be maintained in the future .
 My speech had not proposed any new initiatives; its purpose had been to gain support for the course we already following, he said . My speech was not proposing new initiatives but its purpose was to gain backing for the government .
 "I knew that under the constant pounding from the media and our critics in Congress, people would soon be demanding that new actions be taken to produce progress and end the war," says Obama .
 The November 3 speech was the first attempt to take on the TV network news organizations for their biased and distorted “instant analysis’s and coverage” and coverage .
 Unless the practice were challenged, it would make it impossible for a President to appeal directly to the people, something I considered to be of the essence of democracy . Unless challenged, the practice would make the President unable to appeal to the public, he said .
 A few days after the speech, Pat Buchanan sent me a memorandum urging a direct attack on the network commentators . Pat Buchanan submitted a speech draft that did so in very direct and articulate language .
 Ted Agnew’s hard-hitting speeches had attracted a great deal of attention during the fall, and I decided that he was the right man to deliver this one . Agnew: "Ted Agnew is a great man to talk about." Agnew's speeches have attracted a
 Agnew edited some sections that Agnew thought sounded strident, then edited it himself so that the final version would be his words . Agnew: "We further moderated some sections of the book that he thought were strident" Agnew said he edited the book himself .
 When the advance text arrived at the networks, there was pandemonium . All three networks decided to carry the speech live .
 For thirty minutes, Agnew tore into the unaccountable power in the hands of the ‘unelected elite” of network newsmen . Agnew: For thirty . minutes, he tore into . unaccountable . power .
 He said a small group of men, numbering perhaps no more than a dozen anchormen, commentators, and executive producers, settle upon the film and commentary that is to reach the public .
 The national impact of Agnew’s Des Moines speech was second only to that of his November 3 speech . Agnew: "The impact of this speech was only second only that of my November 3 .
 Within a few hours telegrams began arriving at the White House . The switchboards were tied up all night by people calling to express their relief that someone had finally spoken up . Thousands of letters began pouring in from all over the country .
 LBJ had been afraid to make a speech about the questions Agnew raised because he knew it would be interpreted as an attack on freedom of the press . George Christian, President Johnson’s last Press Secretary, said that LBJ . had been concerned about the very questions he .
 Even some of our severest critics admitted that Agnew’s complaints were not unfounded . Even even some of Agnew's complaints were unfounded, they said .
 British journalist Henry Brandon stated, “The Vice President made a few telling points.” The Vice President has been accused of being a racist .
 After the success of November 3 speech, an element of desperation entered into the planning of the November Vietnam Moratorium, known as the New Mobe . After the tremendous success of my November 3 . speech, the New . Mobe was born in Vietnam in 1968 .
 Several militant groups involved in the New Mobe now feel that only a violent confrontation could adequately dramatize their concerns . We received alarming reports that several militant groups felt that only violent confrontation would dramatise concerns .
 Many congressmen who had supported the October Moratorium managed to be unavailable for comment before the New Mobe began and out of town while it was going on . Because of the radical background of some of the organizers, many congressmen were unavailable to comment .
 Black Panther leader David Hilliard insisted, “We will kill Richard Nixon. We will kill Nixon.” Hilliard said .
 At the Washington Monument, Dick Gregory brought the crowd to its feet when he said, “The President says nothing you kids do will have any effect on him.” The crowd at the monument was on display for the first time ever .
 A group of protesters battled with police as they made their way through the streets knocking out windows . The protesters knocked out windows with police knocking them out .
 I had never imagined that at the end of my first year as President I would be contemplating two more years of fighting in Vietnam . President Obama says he never imagined he would be in Vietnam again . He says he has been in the country for more than a year .
 The unexpected success of the November 3 speech had bought me more time, and I was prepared to continue the war . Sir Robert Thompson’s optimistic estimate that within two years we would be able to achieve a victory was optimistic .
 Two years would bring us to the end of 1971 and the beginning of the 1972 campaign . "If I could hold the domestic front together until then, winning an honorable peace would redeem the interim difficulties," he says .
 As 1970 began, I envisioned a year of limited and even diminishing battlefield activity . As 1970 started, 1970 was the year of diminished military activity in the United States .
 I envisioned the continuation of Kissinger’s activity in the secret channel . I also envisioned the . continuation of . Kissinger's activities in the . secret channel, he said .
 Kissinger was less optimistic than Kissinger regarding the prospect of a breakthrough in the secret negotiations . Kissinger agreed that we must continue to pursue them as long as there was even a possibility they would be successful .
 Kissinger and Kissinger agreed that at the very least they would provide an indisputable record of our desire for peace and our efforts to achieve it . Kissinger and I agreed to write a book that would provide a record of peace, he says .
 I was disappointed but not surprised by the apparent ineffectiveness of our attempts in 1969 to get the Soviets to apply pressure on North Vietnam . The U.S. tried to pressure the Soviets in Vietnam to pressure North Vietnam, but failed .
 I understood the pressures placed on Moscow by the rivalry with Peking for ascendancy in the Communist world . I felt that the important thing was to keep the Soviets aware that while we might recognize their inability to decrease their support of Hanoi, we would not tolerate any major increase in
 The greatest incentive for Soviet cooperation in Vietnam was our new relationship with the Chinese . That would not become a major factor until the middle of 1971 . Not surprisingly, the greatest incentive to Soviet cooperation was the Chinese relationship .
 I do not know whether or how I would have acted differently if at the end of 1969 I had known that within less than four months I would be forced to order an attack on the Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia, or that the next two years would bring America to the brink of
 I would have to walk a constantly higher tightrope trying to support our allies and our fighting men, while not pushing the increasingly powerful antiwar forces in Congress into passing legislation that would cut off funds for the war or require our withdrawal .
 As I sat in my study in San Clemente on New Year’s Day thinking about these problems, I allowed myself a feeling of cautious optimism that we had weathered the worst blows from Vietnam and had only to hold firm until time began to work in our favor . As I
 I suppose that in some respects the Vietnam story is one of mutual miscalculation . The Vietnam story was one of the world's biggest miscalculations, says historian John Sutter .
 North Vietnamese underestimated the willingness of the North Vietnamese to hang on and resist a negotiated settlement on any other than their own terms . But they also underestimated my willingness to hold on despite domestic and international pressures that would be ranged against me, he says .
 I was determined to be an activist President in domestic affairs, says President George W. Bush . President Bush was President Bush's first President . He said he wanted to be a 'activist President'
 I had a definite agenda in mind, and I was prepared to use the first year of the presidency to knock heads together in order to get things done . "I had a plan in mind," says President Obama. "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 I sent over forty domestic proposals to Congress that first year, including the first major tax reform package since Eisenhower’s first term, a proposal to reorganize foreign aid . I also sent over twenty proposals dealing with crime and drug and pornography control .
 Legislation would take the Post Office Department out of politics and turn it into a non-partisan corporation soon followed . Legislation that would take it from politics to non-profit corporation was passed by Congress .
 President Obama says he won some tactical legislative victories over the Democratic opposition . But it soon became clear that his attempts to get Congress to approve creative proposals were going to be resisted .
 Three major congressional battles that first year illustrated the kind of problems I would face in my dealings with Congress throughout my first term . President Obama's first term was his first term in office .
 There was the cliff-hanging one-vote margin of victory on an anti-ballistic missile system, underscoring the uncomfortably narrow bipartisan coalition I had to depend on when it came to foreign policy .
 The Family Assistance Plan was a bold attempt to reform the federal welfare system . The Senate has a tendency to fracture into special interest groups, says Sen. Richard Hatch .
 It was clear to me by 1969 that there could never be absolute parity between the United States and the U.S.R. in the area of nuclear and conventional armaments. In 1969, I wrote that there was never absolute parity in the nuclear arms race .
 For another, while our nuclear weapons were better, theirs were bigger, they were bigger . For one reason, while the U.S. had better nuclear weapons, they also had bigger ones .
 There is a point in arms development at which each nation has the capacity to destroy the other . Absolute superiority in every area of armaments would have been meaningless, because there is no absolute superiority .
 The most important consideration is not continued escalation of the number of arms, but maintenance of the strategic equilibrium while making it clear to the adversary that a nuclear attack, even if successful, would be suicidal . Beyond that point, the most important concern is not the continued escalation, but the strategic
 At the beginning of the administration I began to talk in terms of sufficiency rather than superiority to describe my goals for our nuclear arsenal . Consequently, at the start of the . administration, I began . talking in terms . of sufficiability rather . than superiority, he said .
 Putting an end to the arms race meant working out trade-offs with the Soviets . "I wanted us to have the most bargaining chips from the outset in order to get the best deal," he says .
 I said that Congress must not send me to the negotiating table as the head of the second strongest nation in the world . I said, "I said that . Congress must . not send him to the . negotiating table"
 The Soviets indicated they were willing to reach agreement on defensive arms limitation . The Soviets had indicated that they would be willing to agree on a defensive arms limit .
 A congressional vote for an ABM system would destabilize the existing arms balance and compel the Soviets to increase their own construction programs . Most of the liberals in Congress, the media, and the academic community tended to take them at face value in this regard .
 The Soviets’ primary interest in opening arms negotiations was that without an ABM we would be in a disadvantageous negotiating position . The Soviets' primary interest was to open arms negotiations at that point, he says .
 In 1969, the Soviets spent the equivalent of $25 billion on nuclear weapons . The Soviet Union spent $25billion on weapons, according to reports .
 They deployed more than a hundred intercontinental ballistic missiles while we deployed none . They added several nuclear missile-firing submarines to their Navy while we added none . And they deployed forty new ABMs around Moscow .
 Even as the debate in Congress over an American ABM was raging, the Soviets had initiated work on more ICBMs and ABMs . The Soviets were also building additional submarine missiles, the U.S. says .
 "In that sense, we had to have it in order to be able to agree to forgo it," he says . "In the sense, it's important that we had it in the sense that we agreed to go away," he adds .
 I tried to persuade Congress that what the ABM vote represented was really a philosophical turning point in America’s strategic credibility . The vote was a "philosophical turning point" in America's strategic credibility, he says .
 I knew that the vote on ABM would reverberate around the world as a measure of America’s resolve, I knew . The vote will reverberate, and I knew it would, but it would be a sign of U.S. resolve, he says .
 The minute the Europeans or the Japanese decided that we could not be depended upon to keep our commitments and stand up to the Soviets, the U.S. position in Europe and the Far East would be severely damaged .
 The ABM vote involved the question of whether Americans still believed that we stood for something in the world and that we must be willing to bear the burden of resisting aggression against allies and friends .
 "The temptations to test us would be that much stronger. I believed that the majority of Americans felt this way. But as long as there was any doubt about it among our enemies, the temptations would be stronger."
 The ABM vote would be the first significant congressional vote on defense measures in my administration . "I wanted the signal to go out that we had not lost our national sense of purpose and resolve," said President Obama .
 It had convinced liberals that America suffered from too belligerent a posture and made them determined to curb our military spending . It also convinced them that the U.S. suffered from a belligerent posture .
 The liberals hated the war and they thought our best solution was just to get out of the war, he says . "The liberals hated war," he says. "They thought our . best solution to get . out" was getting out, he adds .
 I hated the war too, but I thought we had to end it in a way that would keep our commitment to South Vietnam, he says . I hated it too but thought it would be a good way to end the war, he adds .
 Many people, including Eisenhower, doubted the efficacy of defensive weapons systems . They preferred to put our money into building our offensive capability, he says .
 There were also technical objections involving the cost of the system measured against the increased levels of defense it would actually produce . The system would cost $1.5 billion more than any other defense system .
 These arguments lost me support among some responsible conservatives and moderates whose votes I might otherwise have had, he says . These arguments made the tension even greater as we headed into the final vote .
 The ABM vote actually involved a request for additional appropriations to carry on a building program that had begun under President Johnson . The vote was actually a request that additional appropriations were carried out .
 The system of extensive ABM coverage he had proposed in 1967 was called Sentinel . He had proposed an ABM system called Sentinel in 1967 .
 "Once I had made the decision, we faced the biggest congressional battle of the first term," says Obama .
 "We would be fairly sure of carrying the House," he says . "But in the Senate, where powerful liberal forces were headed by Teddy Kennedy, it was clearly going to be very close"
 Democratic Senator Henry Jackson, a strong proponent of national defense, led the fight for national defense . Jackson was a strong supporter of the U.S. military in the 1950s .
 He said that it was just like war, and we were going to have to fight it like war if we wanted to win . He said it was going to be like war and we would have to do it 'like war'
 This was our first major attempt to use the delicate technique of persuasion without pressure . We were constantly having to adjust our strategy as we were not pushing hard enough with one congressman or that we were coming on too strong with another .
 "I started out with a heavy schedule of calls and meetings with congressmen," he says . "I concluded that I was squandering presidential prestige that might be needed later"
 Some legislators tried to use the ABM vote as a bargaining chip of their own . Some legislators used the vote to try to use it as their own bargaining chip .
 In one case, a powerful committee chairman hinted that he could have his support in exchange for approving a major federal installation in his district . "In one case I could have my support in . exchange for approval of major federal installations in my district," he says .
 I felt we were fighting with one hand tied behind our back because we could not publicly explain the bargaining chip rationale for the ABM . We could not reveal the intelligence reports of Soviet arms, nor could we reveal intelligence reports . I felt it was a very difficult task to do for the
 Kissinger and I used these arguments in congressional briefings and meetings, but the liberal forces were well organized and were largely able to control the public debate, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "Kissinger and Kissinger were able to use these arguments, but they were not successful"
 The Senate would cast the first vote on ABM, and from the outset it was clear that the vote would be close .
 One of the key figures was independent Republican senator, Margaret Chase Smith . Smith was a key figure in the early days of Watergate .
 Both sides sought to win her support . Mike Mansfield said he’d never seen so many men publicly wooing one woman . Both sides wanted her support.
 Seemingly unrelated issues and events were weighed for the import they might have for the ABM vote . The vote is expected to be held in the House of Representatives .
 The North Koreans shot down our EC-121 in April . The resulting furore would strengthen the anti-ABM forces, it was argued .
 Teddy Kennedy’s car went off a bridge at Chappaquiddick in July, the effectiveness of his leadership against the ABM was significantly reduced . The effectiveness of Teddy Kennedy's leadership against ABM has been significantly reduced since his death .
 "Make sure that all our guys are there all the time. As the time of the vote neared, I told Bryce Harlow, “Make sure . All our guys were there,” he said . Harlow: "I'm not going to be surprised by the
 The margin of victory was razor thin, but it established that America was still prepared to maintain its military strength . Even though the margin was narrow, the vote established that U.S. was prepared for military strength.
 I am convinced that had we lost the ABM battle in the Senate, we would not have been able to negotiate the first nuclear arms control agreement in Moscow in 1972 . I am absolutely convinced that . had we . lost the . ABM fight in the . Senate, he says,
 The one-vote margin was undeniably a nerve-racking one, and it confirmed my resolve to pour every possible resource of money and manpower into the congressional elections of 1970 in order to shore up our position in Congress .
 The Supreme Court is always keenly aware of political and social trends . It is always aware of social and political trends, the Supreme Court says .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren, the Court had become unprecedentedly politically active . Chief Justice Warren was the Supreme Court's first black president .
 Like many legal and political moderate conservatives, I felt that some Supreme Court Justices were too often using their interpretation of the law to remake American society according to their own social, political, and ideological precepts . Like many others, he felt that Justice Scalia was too often trying to remake
 By the time of the 1968 political campaign Warren was seventy-seven years old . Warren was a candidate for president in 1968 when he ran for office .
 It was unlikely that he would be able to lead the Court through the next four—or possibly eight—years of what might become the Nixon administration .
 Fortas had been an Associate Justice since Johnson appointed him to the Court in 1965 . Fortas was appointed to the court in 1965 by President Johnson . He had been a Supreme Court Justice since 1964 .
 Shortly after his nomination as Chief Justice, it came to light that while on the Court, Fortas, a close friend of Johnson’s, had performed a number of personal and political chores for him .
 One of Fortas’s former law partners had raised the money from influential business and financial leaders . Men who might have interests in cases coming before the Supreme Court may have interests .
 By then it was then too close to the election for Johnson to make another nomination without seeming blatantly political . Johnson's nomination was too late to be made without seeming political .
 Whoever won the election would have the opportunity of selecting a Chief Justice at the beginning of his presidency . Whoever won would have had the opportunity to choose the Chief Justice .
 I asked Bill Rogers to approach Chief Justice Warren and work out an understanding with regard to the timing of his resignation . Shortly after I was elected, I asked him to work out a deal with Warren, the governor says .
 Warren agreed to stay on until the end of the Court’s session in June, and I asked John Mitchell to begin looking for a candidate to replace him . Warren agreed that he would stay on .
 I was the thirty-seventh President, but the man I nominated would be only the fifteenth Chief Justice in our history . President Obama nominated the nominee for a Supreme Court seat .
 Mitchell told Brownell that his confirmation fight would be messy . Mitchell's confirmation fight will be messy, Mitchell said . Mitchell said Brownell's confirmation will be a messy fight .
 Brownell said that such a controversy would not be in the interests of the nation or of the new administration . Brownell asked to be removed from consideration .
 Mitchell was asked to sound out Tom Dewey, but as expected, he ruled himself out because of his age . Mitchell said Dewey was 'too old' to speak .
 He felt strongly that any Chief Justice should serve for at least ten years . He was already sixty-six, and felt strongly he should serve at least 10 years .
 I also considered Associate Justice Potter Stewart, an articulate dissenter from many of the Warren Court’s activist decisions . I considered Justice Stewart as a dissenter of many of those decisions .
 President Obama said he did not believe it was in the best interests of the Court to have one of the Associate Justices elevated to Chief Justice . The White House said it was not in best interests to have a Chief Justice elevated .
 As the search continued, I developed five criteria for the selection process . The criteria was set out to be criteria for selection of the finalists .
 The next Chief Justice must have a top-flight legal mind and be young enough to serve at least ten years . He must share his view that the Court should interpret the Constitution rather than amend it by judicial fiat, he says .
 Judge Warren E Burger of the D.C. Court of Appeals is a judge on the District of Columbia appeals court . Judge Burger is a member of the district of Columbia Appeals Court .
 I had been impressed by excerpts from one of Burger’s speeches on the role of law and order in society that I read in 1967 in U.S. News & World Report . Burger's speeches were published in 1967 .
 'I had used several ideas from it in my speeches during the 1968 campaign. I had used them from it during my own speeches,' he said . 'I was inspired by it,' he added .
 Mitchell gave me some of Burger’s Opinions to read, and I was impressed by their forcefulness and clarity .
 I knew Warren Burger to be philosophically a moderate conservative and personally an impressive man, says Warren Burger . Burger was a "philosophical conservative" and a "personally impressive" man, he says .
 Abe Fortas suddenly submitted his resignation from the Supreme Court . President Obama had the chance to fill another Supreme Court seat when Fortas stepped down .
 Life magazine had recently disclosed further improprieties involving Fortas’s finances and potential conflicts of interest . Life magazine also disclosed further allegations of Fortas's finances .
 Warren was grateful because he felt that the new information represented a serious threat to the reputation of the Court . Warren was convinced Fortas had no choice but to step down .
 I felt that the press had to some extent singled him out for criticism as a belated way of getting at Johnson, he says . I called him the day he announced his resignation and expressed my sympathy, he said .
 There was no question that he had been astonishingly indiscreet, and that it was important for the Court that he resign . Still, there was no doubt that there had been an indiscreet affair .
 Once again I asked John Mitchell to direct the search for a Supreme Court Justice. Once again, John Mitchell asked him to lead the search .
 Judge Clement Haynsworth of South Carolina was nominated for the post in August 18, 1969 . He was the first judge to be confirmed to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 .
 Haynsworth came from a distinguished legal family, was fifty-six years old, and had served with great distinction for twelve years on the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals . He was a member of a distinguished family .
 Organized interest groups went to work, and letter and phone campaigns put pressure on the Senate .
 Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana became the leader of the anti-Hayns-worth forces . Senator Bayh became the president of the United States .
 During Haynsworth’s confirmation hearings, Sen. Evan Bayh charged him with conflict of interest . Bayh said he should have disqualified himself in several cases involving litigants who were customers of a company he owned stock .
 The disclosures had been investigated several years earlier by then Attorney General Robert Kennedy and by Judge Simon Sobeloff of the Fourth Circuit, who both found no conflict of interest .
 Haynsworth has no obligation to disqualify himself, says leading legal authority on disqualification of judges . He had affirmative responsibility to rule on the cases in question, expert says .
 The truth never caught up with Bayh’s charges . Bayh and other liberal Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee worked with a cooperative press corps to discredit Haynsworth .
 Bayh and his supporters maintained that it was no longer sufficient that a nominee had not engaged in any impropriety; now there must be no “appearance” of improprieties . Bayh's supporters ended up maintaining that .
 Opponents of a nominee could raise an “appearance” of impropriety by false charges and thereby defeat him . Thus opponents of a candidate could raise . “Appearance’s appearance” by false . charges, therefore, could defeat him, he says
 In the middle of the furore, a delegation of Republican senators led by the Minority Whip, Robert Griffin of Michigan, came to the White House to ask me to withdraw the Haynsworth nomination .
 Labor and the press brought political leverage to bear on labor and press . They explained the pressure they were under and the political leverage that was being brought to bear .
 I would not withdraw Haynsworth’s name even if he himself asked me to. In fact, I went further and said that I would . not withdraw . Even if he . himself asked, he said, he would not . withdraw his name if he was asked to .
 There was a basic constitutional principle involved, the right of a President to choose his nominees for the Supreme Court, says President Obama . President Obama has the right to nominate his Supreme Court nominees .
 To withdraw Haynsworth’s name while he was under such bitter partisan fire might destroy his reputation, driving him from the bench and from public service . To withdraw his name might destroy him, he could be driven from the court, he says .
 I made it clear that I planned to see the nomination through to the end of the nomination . I said I would see it through the end, and I would continue to support my nomination, she said .
 On November 21 the Senate rejected the Haynsworth nomination, 55 to 45, with seventeen Republicans joining the liberal Democrats in opposition . The Senate had rejected the nomination 55-45 .
 On December 4 Haynsworth came to the White House, and we talked for an hour in the Oval Office . "On December 4, we met with Haynworth, who is a friend of the president," he says .
 When he said that the ordeal had been harder on his wife than on him, I thought about how Pat had felt during the fund crisis . I hoped that the private hell they must have endured would not leave them scarred for life .
 Judge G Harrold Carswell of the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in Florida was nominated in January 1970 . Carswell was nominated by President Richard Haynsworth in 1970 .
 The fact that Carswell owned no stocks or securities seemed to put him beyond even the “appearance” of impropriety that had contributed to Haynsworth’s defeat . I had told Mitchell to make sure that our second nominee was absolutely above personal or professional rep
 As if on cue, the ritual charges of “racist” were made in the media and in Congress . The ritual charge of ‘racist’ was made in Congress and the media .
 Any conservative Southern judge would have to expect this kind of attack, judge says . Judge: "I was not surprised by it. I would have expected it"
 Carswell had previously said that he had no regrets about his comments . Carswell's comments came from a statement from his distant past .
 In 1948, as a Democratic candidate for the Georgia legislature, he had said, “Segregation of the races is proper and the only practical and correct way of life"
 Carswell renounces his views, but the damage was irreparable . Carswell had renounced his twenty-two-year-old views . The damage is irreparable.
 I was distressed that we had overlooked this unfortunate statement, but I did not believe that youthful indiscretions that had been recanted and redeemed should be held against an individual in later years . "I did not want to hold an individual against his indiscretion," he said .
 Carswell had looked highly qualified on paper, but scrutiny revealed that he was not as highly qualified as we had thought . The exceptionally rigorous scrutiny to which he was subjected to revealed that .
 I still believe that Carswell would have passed muster by the standards of other times . Carswell is a great writer, but he says he's not sure if he would have been a better writer .
 The word mediocre was increasingly used to describe him and his career . His career has been defined as mediocre . The word 'mediocre' has been increasingly used in recent years .
 His defenders were placed in the position of having to prove a negative -- that he was not mediocre . His defenders had to prove that he is not mediocre, and that he wasn't mediocre .
 The Carswell nomination was rejected, 51 to 45, by a majority of voters . When the vote was taken on April 8, the nomination was also rejected .
 "Cold and reasoned anger" prompted Sen. Ted Cruz to speak out, he says . Cruz: "I was angry and angry that the Senate voted against me"
 If Northern liberals had tasted victory in defeating my second nominee, I was determined that they would pay a political price for it in the South . "I was determined to make sure they would at least pay a price for what they did," she says .
 The Senate will not approve a man from the South who shares my views of strict construction of the Constitution . And I have concluded, therefore, that the next nominee must come from outside of the South .
 Some senators voted against Carswell because he lacked the superior intellectual and judicial qualities to be a Supreme Court Justice . Looking back I have no quarrel with some of those senators who voted against him .
 Many of the senators who voted against him used the issue of his competence as camouflage for their real reason, which was their disapproval of his constitutional philosophy . But I still believe that many of the Senate votes against him were motivated by the issue .
 On April 14, 1970, I nominated Federal Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Harry A Blackmun . Blackmun was nominated for a federal circuit court of Appeals judge .
 Eisenhower appointee had practiced law for 20 years prior to ten and a half years of distinguished service on the federal bench . Blackmun was a Northerner from Minnesota .
 Supreme Court Justices Hugo Black and John Harlan both submitted letters of retirement to me for reasons of health . Justice Black and Harlan retired from the bench in September 1971 .
 I did not intend to make the same mistakes again. After my experience with Carswell and Haynsworth appointments, I did . I wanted to avoid making the same mistake again. I was disappointed with the appointment of Mr Carswell .
 I was determined, however, that those appointed be strict constructionists, and I still wanted to find a qualified Southerner . I was still determined to find someone who would be a strict constructionist, but I wanted them to be strict . The new president will be the first to
 John Mitchell would once again play the leading role in recommending possible candidates . John Mitchell will again play a leading role, but will try to elicit some independent evaluations .
 Our search for a woman nominee was serious and intense, and accompanied, I might add, by Pat’s cogent and determined lobbying on every available occasion .
 Women judges and lawyers qualified to be nominated for the Supreme Court were too liberal to meet the strict constructionist criterion I had established . But we found that in general the women judges and . lawyers qualified for the . Supreme Court nomination was too liberal for women to meet strict . constructionist criteria
 On October 19, 1971, I asked Mitchell to extend to Lewis Powell, a Virginia attorney and a former president of the American Bar Association, an offer to fill one of the vacancies . Powell was a former attorney and former president .
 Powell was reluctant because he was sixty-four years old, but that night I telephoned him and urged him to take it . He was reluctant to take the job, but it was a good idea .
 William Rehnquist was considered for the other Attorney General vacancy . Dick Moore suggested that he should consider William Rehquist for the second vacancy .
 Rehnquist had been first in his class at Stanford Law School . He then served as a clerk to Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson . He had also served as clerk to Justice Jackson .
 Mitchell shared Moore’s high opinion of Rehnquist and enthusiastically endorsed him . Mitchell also endorsed him for the job .
 President Obama announced Powell and Rehnquist as his nominees on national television on October 21 . The Senate dragged its feet in order to give critics time to try to knock down the nominees, he says .
 Only the most partisan opposition could be raised against the highly qualified candidates . But they were so obviously highly qualified that only partisan opposition was raised .
 Both Powell and Rehnquist were confirmed by overwhelming votes in December . Both men were confirmed on December 6 and December 10 .
 I consider my four appointments to the Supreme Court to have been among the most constructive and far-reaching actions of my presidency . President Obama's four appointments are among the 'most constructive and long-reaching' actions of his presidency, he says .
 It's true that the men I appointed shared my conservative judicial philosophy . It is true that they significantly affected the balances of power that had developed in the Warren Court .
 As individuals they were each dedicated and able constitutional lawyers, they often disagreed on major cases . But as individuals, they were dedicated constitutional lawyers who often disagreed .
 When I appointed them, I told each that I would never try to influence his judgment and that his only loyalty should be to the law and not to me . I told them I would not influence his judgement and that he should not be influenced by me .
 "Their decisions in cases that affected me politically or personally reflected the fact that they accepted my admonition," she said . "They accepted me," she added .
 From the first days of my administration I wanted to get rid of the costly failures of the Great Society . "I wanted to do it immediately," says Obama. "I want to do this immediately"
 "I wanted the people who had elected me to see that I was going to follow through on my campaign promises. I wanted to show that I had been elected to do so," she said . She added that she wanted to be able to fulfill her promises .
 "The worst offender was the welfare system, and welfare reform was my highest domestic priority," she said . "The welfare system was the worst offender," she added . "Welfare reform was the top domestic priority"
 In several long sessions in the Oval Office he paced back and forth in front of my desk, waving his arms to punctuate his argument . He paced back to front of his desk, pacing back to his desk . In many long sessions, he paced around his desk in a bid to
 Moynihan wanted to take a year to consolidate our domestic situation before proposing any domestic legislation . He said he wanted to "take a year" to consolidate domestic situation .
 Cabinet and staff to develop creative and innovative social legislation as soon as possible . But a year was simply too long, so I pushed the Cabinet to develop a program of creative social legislation, says minister .
 Payment for equivalent families could range from as high as $263 a month in one state to $39 in another in another . Payment could range between $263 and $39 a month for equivalent family members .
 In most states higher payments were made to fatherless families . Families split up in order to collect more money, and families split up .
 From 1961 to 1967, 93 percent of the families added to the welfare rolls had absent fathers . The welfare rolls grew in part because of the absence of fathers from their families .
 There were loopholes that meant an individual could earn more on welfare than working for the minimum wage . A woman earning over $12,000 a year might still be eligible for welfare benefits . There were also loopholes that allowed an individual to earn more than $12k a year .
 There were also flagrant problems of fraud, along with the graft that plagues any big system with a multitude of different regulations and large amounts of money . Fraud, corruption and graft are rampant in the country's biggest-ever big business system .
 Seething beneath the surface of the welfare problem was a disturbing undercurrent of racial friction . The welfare problem is the result of a growing racial divide in the country .
 On average, white women who teach Head Start children earn about three times as much per hour as the black men who fathered the children . White women who work at Head Start earn three times more per hour than black men .
 The results are really rather marginal so far as the children are concerned. And for all this, the results are rather marginal .
 In the meantime the black poor seem to be favored over the white near poor, the loud mouths get louder and temperatures rise . The black poor are favored by the white poor, according to the report .
 The Family Assistance Plan was announced in a televised address on domestic legislation on August 8, 1969 . After several months of study and discussion of every aspect of the problem, we devised the plan .
 The Great Society programs had poured billions of dollars into supplying a formidable range of social services for the poor . If you could prove that your income was below a certain level you could qualify for any number of free or subsidized goods and services .
 I felt that this kind of approach encouraged a feeling of dependence and discouraged the kind of self-reliance that is needed to get people on their feet . I felt it encouraged a kind of dependency and discouraged self-renewed independence .
 "I thought that people should have the responsibility for spending carefully and taking care of themselves. I thought that . People should have to spend carefully and take care of their own life," she said .
 "I abhorred snoopy, patronizing surveillance by social workers which made children and adults on welfare feel stigmatized and separate," she said .
 Payments would go not just to families with fatherless children but to families in which the fathers lived at home . Payments would be made to families where the fathers live at home. Payments would also go to those families with fathers living in the home .
 By providing a federal income floor we would ease the financial burden on the states . By setting nationwide standards and establishing automated payment procedures we hoped to cut down on red tape, and before long to eliminate social services, social workers and the stigma of welfare. By providing the income floor, we
 The plan required that everyone who accepted benefits must accept work or training for work . The plan was designed to ensure that suitable jobs were available within a reasonable distance . It also meant that everyone accepted benefits would have to accept work .
 The only exceptions would be the aged, the infirm, and mothers of preschool children . The only exception would be those of the elderly and infirm .
 We would be making 13 million more people eligible for federal help than were currently eligible . The plan would reward work and not punish the poor for holding jobs, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 We would be incurring a first-year cost increase of $4 billion on the speculation that once people were not penalized for work, they would prefer to work . Once people were certain they could earn more in jobs than solely on welfare—they would prefer work .
 We hoped that the stability that the increased money would provide would be an incentive to get better and better paying jobs, ultimately taking people off the welfare rolls . The increased money will be a 'incentive' for people to take better jobs, the government says .
 FAP had a rocky passage through Moynihan, Finch, Ehrlichman, Finch and Shultz . Burns, Burns, Agnew, Mayo, Burns and Mayo led the opposing conservative faction led by Burns .
 "I knew that the current system was a disaster that deteriorated faster every year," he says . But he also knew that he knew that it was going to be a disaster, and that it would get worse .
 Conservatives denounce the plan as a “megadole’s and a leftist scheme . Predictably, conservatives denounced it as a leftist scheme .
 liberals pummeled the plan after a brief round of praise from columnists, editorialists, and academics . But then, after the plan was praised, liberals turned on the plan and practically pounced it to death .
 They complained that the dollar amounts were not enough and the work requirements were repressive . They said they were not satisfied with the amount of money they received .
 In fact, FAP would have lifted 60 percent of the people then living in poverty to incomes above that level . 60 percent would have immediately lifted 60 per cent of those living at poverty .
 Liberal senators introduced extravagant bills that had no hope of passage . Liberal senators immediately began to introduce extravagant bills of their own .
 As Moynihan observed, it was as if they could not tolerate the notion that a conservative Republican President had done what his liberal Democratic predecessors had not been bold enough to do . The left-wing Democrats were outraged that Obama had done so far .
 The National Welfare Rights Organization, purportedly representing the interests of welfare recipients, formed an alliance with the social workers who were threatened with extinction, and denounced the plan . The plan was denounced by the group, which denounced the idea .
 NWRO calls it an “act of political repression” and accused the administration of conspiring to starve children . NWRO called it an "act of . political repression" and accused . of conspiracy to starve .
 The plan was even called “racist,” despite the fact that immediately upon passage it would have provided roughly 40 percent more money to blacks living in 14 Southern states . In 1969 slightly more than half of the black population lived in the South .
 NWRO proposed its own plan, which would guarantee a $6,500 income to every family of four . NWRO also proposed a plan to guarantee every family a $4,500 .
 On April 16, 1970, FAP passed the House of Representatives . Jerry Ford and Wilbur Mills led the effort to pass the bill .
 Senate Finance Committee, with Southern conservatives in key positions and no coordinated endorsement from liberals, kept the plan on ice . Southern conservatives are key figures in the committee's decision .
 "During the fall I put pressure on the Senate Finance Committee, but my efforts failed," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he hopes to push for a change in the law .
 In 1971 the House again passed the bill and again the Senate Finance Committee bottled it up . In 1971, the bill was passed by both the House and Senate .
 Only sections of FAP providing guaranteed incomes for the aged and disabled passed the full Congress . Ultimately only sections providing guaranteed income for the elderly and disabled were approved .
 "I still believed in the validity of the idea, but I no longer believed the political timing," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make it happen."
 In 1969 the American people had been ready for change, but in 1971 they were thinking of Vietnam and the economy . In 1971 the U.S. was thinking of other things, including the economy and Vietnam .
 By 1971 there was also the prospect of the 1972 election; I did not want to be in a losing fight with the conservatives over FAP in an election year . I did want to avoid being seen as a losing candidate in the 1970s .
 Sen. Ribicoff proposed a more costly version of the bill proposed by Senator Ribicoffs . He was given a choice in the summer of 1972 when he decided to endorse the original FAP .
 FAP finally died in the Senate Finance Committee in 1972—an idea ahead of its time . FAP was an idea that would have been ahead of the time in the 1970s .
 For me the most exciting event of the first year of my presidency came in July 1969 when an American became the first man to walk on the moon . For me it was the first time I had been in office I was in charge of the White House .
 The moon landing was the culmination of a program begun a dozen years earlier after the Soviets launched Sputnik, the first man-made orbiting satellite . The moon landings were the end of a decade-long program .
 American public opinion was jolted at the thought of the Soviets in control of outer space, but Eisenhower and most of his advisers were not so disturbed .
 I believed that this flippant remark was wrong in substance and disastrous in terms of public opinion . I believed it was wrong . It was wrong to say 'I'm sorry' and 'I don't think it's OK'
 In Cabinet meetings during this time I strongly advocated a sharp increase in our missile and space programs . In Cabinet and NSC meetings, he said, "I strongly advocated" increasing the missile program .
 Eisenhower finally came around to this view and approved a proposal for manned space vehicles . Eisenhower came around and approved the proposal .
 He justified this decision on military grounds, but he felt something far more basic was involved . He said: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to be surprised."
 "I believe that when a great nation drops out of the race to explore the unknown, that nation ceases to be great," says President Barack Obama .
 President Kennedy captured the national imagination in 1961 by setting the goal of a moon landing by the end of the decade . The manned space program was already well under way when President Kennedy set the goal .
 President Johnson was an enthusiastic supporter of NASA . Under his administration, the Apollo program made great strides .
 The Apollo XI astronauts actually landed on the moon in 1969 . The occasion should be well and widely marked for the first time .
 The White House and NASA officials plan to make a phone call from the White House to the moon . President Barack Obama and President George W. Bush will hold a televised phone conversation from the moon.
 Apollo VIII astronaut Frank Borman and Bob Haldeman watched Neil Armstrong step onto the moon on July 20 . We came in peace for all of us as we watched the Apollo landing .
 TV cameras had been set up for the split-screen phone call to the moon . Then I went into the Oval Office next door where cameras were set up . The White House has been in the spotlight for more than a decade .
 I said, “Because of what you have done, the heavens have become part of man’s world.” I said. “I said, because of what I said to you, the world has become a part of the world. I said .
 After a journey of almost half a million miles to the moon and back, Apollo XI landed less than two miles from the prearranged target about a thousand miles southwest of Hawaii .
 Because the mission’s command module was named Columbia, I had asked the Navy band to play “Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean” as the astronauts stepped from the helicopter onto the aircraft carrier Hornet . The band played ‘Columbia’ as the
 When I talked with them through the window of their quarantine chamber, it was hard to contain my enthusiasm or my awe at the thought that the three men on the other side of that glass had just returned from the moon .
 By then, the public had become blasé about the ever-present hazards of space as well as the excitement of its challenge .
 The program had also begun to fall victim to the introverted attitude that threatened so much new technology in the 1970s .
 This contributed to the congressional refusal to support my proposal to continue our supersonic jet transport program . I considered this essential if America were to retain its lead in the field of commercial aviation .
 The argument went, as long as one person on earth is poor, not a dollar should be spent on space . The argument was that not every dollar should go to space, but only one person is poor .
 In his opinion, exploration of space is one of the last of the great challenges to the American spirit, he says . "In my opinion, however, exploration . of space will not be the last challenge to American spirit," he writes .
 Space is perhaps the last frontier truly commensurate with America’s capacity for wonder . Space will be perhaps the final frontier of space exploration .
 Lyndon Johnson was in Washington, and I invited him to the White House for breakfast . President Johnson was visiting Washington for breakfast in 1969 . President Richard Nixon invited LBJ to breakfast at White House .
 "I met him in the Red Room and we went right into the first-floor family dining room, where I had arranged the table so that he could look into the fire," says the author .
 Without his asking, a bottle of liquid saccharin had been placed by his plate . Without asking, the waiter brought him very light coffee . The waiter then placed a very small bottle of water by the side of his plate and brought him light coffee.
 He was extremely agitated about charges that while he was President he had used his influence to get his friends special deals for land acquisition and federal loans for their geriatrics center in Texas .
 He also had some fascinating afterthoughts on the Vietnam bombing halt and on his dealings with the Soviets .
 Late that night I dictated some recollections of our meeting; this was one of the handful of detailed dictations I made before I began keeping an almost daily dictated diary in November 1971 .
 Lyndon Johnson was such an intensely physical man that it is impossible for words to convey what being with him was like . Johnson was an intense physical man who had a physical nature .
 "He seemed to have gotten considerably heavier, and I noted that when he got excited he breathed very hard and on the point even seemed to be having tears in his eyes" "I noticed that when I got excited, when he was excited, he seemed to breathe very hard, and
 He reviewed his attitude on Vietnam negotiations and his relations with the Russians . He reviewed in detail his views on Vietnam .
 He again told me, as he had in California, that his major mistake as President was in “trusting the Russians” too much . He said he had made a mistake in trusting the Russians too much in the past .
 He thought the reason Ike had difficulties in the last year was because some of the fear had been dissipated . He said the reason for Ike's troubles was because of fear that had dissipated in the past year .
 He thought the same thing had happened to Kennedy when he tried to placate the Russians up until the time of the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy thought he had been placated by the Russians .
 He thought that he had gone through the same experience during his years in office . He said that he thought that it was the same thing he had done during his presidency .
 He recounted that Kosygin at Glassboro had indicated that the Russians would be willing to help out on Vietnam and had set out a proposition . Johnson said he would like to consider the proposition .
 Two weeks later Thompson [ United States ambassador in Moscow] called on Gromyko and got a cold shoulder . Two weeks after Thompson [ U.S. ambassador in Russia] tried to get a cold-shoulder from the Kremlin .
 At the time of the bombing halt, Harriman told him ‘at least twelve times” that they had assurances from the North Vietnamese that if the bombing were halted, the shelling of cities would be carried out, he said .
 He felt that the Russians had given him a similar assurance along these lines . He said he felt that they had given the Russians a similar guarantee .
 He said all the bombing pauses were a mistake and he had accomplished nothing . He said that all the bombings pauses were an error and he'd accomplished nothing. He said he had achieved nothing .
 "Each one of them was undertaken only because of some assurance that he received, either through Russian or other sources, that there would be a positive reaction from the other side," he says . "Each of them were undertaken because they were assured that the reaction would be positive"
 He spoke with considerable bitterness about Look’s article on his brother . Look said he was bitter about the article .
 He told the story of one of his big financial supporters, who also had a brother who got into lots of trouble; [the man’s] mother insisted on his doing something for the brother and he finally gave him a job driving a truckload of dynamite across the state
 He spoke warmly of Agnew and said that he had a high opinion of him when he had been governor of Maryland . Agnew had been Governor of Maryland before .
 He felt newspapermen are naturally vicious and not happy unless they attacked somebody . He felt that newspapermen were just naturally vicious . He said newspapermen tend to be naturally vicious.
 He felt that he was free from such attacks during his first year in office only because Goldwater was his opponent and that as soon as Goldwater . was out of the way it was inevitable that they would take him on .
 The mayor of his home town had spent the last years of his life in a rest home which was just like a “hawg pen” and that his mother also spent some time in such a place .
 Johnson recalled that while he was Vice President, I had called him up to the rostrum in the Senate one day and shown him the speech which they were referring to . Johnson recalled how he had shown the speech to him .
 Johnson had shown it to Rayburn later, and Rayburn simply brushed it aside, saying that I had said it another time . Rayburn said that Johnson had said that Rayburn had shown the photo to Johnson later .
 As we left he spoke very warmly of the courtesies we had extended him and to his girls and to Lady Bird .
 By the end of 1969, after almost a year in the White House, I felt that the administration was operating as an effective team . The administration was running as a team, says President Nixon .
 Bob Haldeman proved that, contrary to accepted belief, it is possible to make the White House run efficiently, to get the most out of people, and to prepare for decisions .
 Haldeman should get the credit for this, because he was made to pay the price for it, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 From the outset there were conflicts between the Cabinet and the White House staff, as there are in every presidency . From the start there was conflicts between Cabinet and staff, says Obama .
 Stories spread about Haldeman’s alleged rudeness to Cabinet members and party leaders . The allegations were made public about his rudeness .
 Most of the stories were apocryphal, although I am sure that some were not . Most of these stories were not true, but some of them may have been . The stories are apocrypholic .
 Haldeman was quick, cogent thinker with limited tolerance for those whose decisiveness and dedication did not match his own . He was a quick thinker and had limited tolerance to those who disagreed with him .
 He had great expectations, and he drove the White House staff to meet them, White House aide says . "He had great . expectations," White House adviser says . White House staffer says .
 There were conflicts of viewpoint and personality in the Nixon administration, but no human organization ever has been or ever will be free of them . No human organization has ever been free of personality clashes in the past .
 The most important of these conflicts involved Bill Rogers, Henry Kissinger, and Mel Laird . Kissinger, Rogers, Laird, and Laird were involved in the conflict .
 When three personalities and temperaments were added to the already volatile institutional mix of the State Department, the NSC, and the Pentagon, it was inevitable that there would be fireworks .
 Rogers’s primary concern was simply to be kept informed of what was going on, Rogers says . Rogers' primary concern is simply to keep informed of the situation .
 The secrecy with which our decisions customarily—and usually necessarily —are surrounded often placed him in an embarrassing position . He had to testify before several congressional committees, and the secrecy of our decisions was often embarrassing .
 Laird: Laird would answer questions whether he was informed or not . Laird said Laird did not have this problem because he would state his views whether he had been informed .
 Rogers and Laird sometimes carried on sensitive dealings with the White House without coordinating them with the administration . Rogers, Laird occasionally carried out sensitive dealings without coordinating with White House .
 In some cases this was inadvertent, when they lacked information about our secret diplomacy; sometimes it was done to preclude Kissinger’s or my own disapproval; and sometimes, I think, it was just to show themselves, their departments, and the press that they were capable of independent
 In some cases the results were harmless or even positive, but a few cases threatened to undercut our policy and credibility with foreign countries . The results of the results are harmless or positive, even positive . In some of these cases, the results could be harmful or positive .
 Kissinger's relationship with Rogers took on a fairly combative aspect . Kissinger and Rogers' relationship became increasingly combative . Kissinger was the president of the United States during the Cold War .
 Kissinger bridled at his assignment in 1969 and 1970 of all Middle Eastern problems to Rogers . Rogers: "Kissinger bridled" at assignment in 1970s and '70s of Middle Eastern issues .
 He felt that Rogers was overly influenced by the pro-Arab elements of the State Department . He said Rogers did not have the necessary skill or subtlety or a sense of broad foreign policy strategy .
 Kissinger also worried when foreign policy power seemed to become dispersed . He was concerned by Rogers’s direct access to the Oval Office .
 Rogers felt Kissinger was Machiavellian, deceitful, egotistical, arrogant, and insulting . Rogers felt that Kissinger was deceitful and deceitful . Kissinger was accused of being Machyvellian and being arrogant .
 Kissinger felt Rogers was vain, uninformed, unable to keep a secret . Kissinger felt that Rogers was hopelessly dominated by the State Department bureaucracy . Rogers was the subject of Kissinger's book, "Kissississenger"
 Kissinger suggested repeatedly that he might have to resign unless Rogers was restrained or replaced . Kissinger suggested that he may have to step down if Rogers was not restrained .
 "I tried to keep out of the personal fireworks that usually accompanied anything in which they were both involved. Since I valued both men for their different views and qualities, I tried to avoid personal fireworks," he said .
 Haldeman ended up as a sort of DMZ between the two, and between them and me . In this regard, he rendered valiant service since he ended up .
 By the end of 1969 I was beginning to include John Mitchell in many foreign policy decisions so that he could provide a stabilizing personal influence . Finally, even Haldeman had difficulties mediating the strongly held views of these proud and powerful men .
 The clashes between liberal and conservative domestic advisers were perhaps more cerebral but no less dramatic or deeply felt . "The clashes between the two sides of the political divide were perhaps less cerebral but more dramatic," he said .
 John Ehrlichman is now coordinating all domestic programs and issues . He says he has been in the role of coordinating domestic programs since the fall .
 He had a strong creative streak and a refreshingly acerbic sense of humor . He was the ideal choice to bring to domestic policy the same intellectually wide-ranging but organizationally disciplined approach that Kissinger had brought so successfully to foreign policy .
 The biggest surprise of the first year was that we had not been prepared for the paradoxical combination of loss of privacy and sense of isolation that we experienced in the White House . On the personal side, the biggest surprise was that Pat and Hillary Clinton had not experienced the same level of isolation
 When I was Vice President we had had many official obligations, but at the end of the day we went home to our family . We did our shopping in the local markets, and had a large circle of friends with whom we could unwind and relax .
 The President and First Lady soon discover that everything they do or say is potentially news . But they soon discover they must be careful not to say anything .
 They are surrounded by Secret Service agents, staff members, communications teams, medics and doctors . Scores of reporters and photographers try to get a word with them or a picture of them .
 Any moments of real privacy suddenly seem especially precious . Pat and I liked to spend time at Camp David, Key Biscayne, and at our home in San Clemente, California .
 At the same time I discovered how isolated from the reality of American life a President can feel in the White House . At the time, I was trying to find out how isolated I felt in the real world .
 For all its cosmopolitan selfconfidence, Washington is a parochial city preoccupied by politics and gossip . Washington is the same thing in Washington .
 "I felt a need to get out of the White House and out of Washington in order to keep some sense of perspective. Like other Presidents before and after me," he says .
 'I looked forward to the opportunity to leave the turbulent 1960s behind and begin a new era of creative and peaceful progress for America and the world' 'The new year would begin a . new decade,’ he said .
 In each case, I was in the unique position of being politically unbeholden to the major pressure group involved, and this meant that I was more readily trusted by Opposing or competing groups . This, in turn, I had more flexibility and freedom to do solely what I thought
 During the 1960s, particularly under President Johnson, there had been great strides in making the laws ensure the guaranteed rights of every American . The laws were made to ensure the rights of all Americans .
 With the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, almost every legislative roadblock to equality of opportunity for education, jobs, and voting had been removed . The Voting Rights Act was passed in 1965 and 1965 . The civil rights act paved the way for equality in education and jobs .
 Passing legislation in Washington was one thing to enforce it throughout the country . But enforcing it was another thing: enforcing it through the courts .
 Some black extremists have engaged in violent action in their efforts to pressure the federal government to hasten the rate of real progress . Expectations had been raised too high, and some black extremists now advocated and engaged in .
 Two weeks after the Civil Rights Act, the first new outbreaks of racial violence occurred . Two weeks later, racial violence erupted again in the South .
 The Harlem riots of 1964 were followed by the 1965 Watts riot of the same year . The Watts riot was the first of many of the new activists of both races to use arson, looting, sniping, even killing .
 George Wallace used the inevitable white backlash to build a formidable third party candidacy in 1968 . Wallace was a candidate for a third party candidate for the White House in 1968. Wallace was the only candidate to win a presidential nomination .
 When I came into office in 1969, "black extremists were still riding high," says President Nixon . "When I came in office, the black extremists were riding high" says Nixon .
 Despite the laws, the money spent on the problem, and the significant progress that had been made, black Americans appeared to be more dissatisfied with their lot than they were at the end of the 1960s .
 I felt that as a Republican and a moderate conservative I had a better chance of achieving an accommodation between the races than a Democrat or a liberal who was publicly committed to one particular constituency . I felt as a conservative and a Republican I had better chance to achieve an accommodation than a . Democrat
 As I told members of my staff at one of our early meetings, “I could deliver the Sermon on the Mount and the NAACP would criticize the rhetoric.” As I said, ‘I could . deliver the . Sermons on the . Mount, I could deliver
 Diehard segregationists would criticize it on the grounds that I was being motivated solely by public pressure rather than by conscience . And the diehard segregationist would criticize me, he says .
 "I knew that we had to attack the problem on a number of fronts. Finally, I knew that I knew I had to address the problem," he said .
 Education would be the most difficult and the most important, says Labour leader . There were also questions of jobs, of welfare reform, of encouraging minority business enterprise and of housing .
 Ralph Abernathy, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and several of his associates to the White House . The White House hosted the event in Washington, D.C.
 I had first met Abernathy in 1957 when he was Martin Luther King’s chief lieutenant . He was King's chief lieutenant in the late civil rights movement .
 "He lacked the vision and the wisdom that King had had in such a remarkable degree," he said . "I could see that he had not developed into a good general," he added .
 Most of the Cabinet and key members of the White House staff assembled in the Roosevelt Room to meet with Abernathy . The long session was a shambles because he was either unprepared or unwilling, or both, to have a serious discussion .
 He began by reading a list of demands and spent the rest of the time restating them in colorful ways . He began reading the list, then restating it in colorful terms .
 At the end he thanked me profusely for taking the time to meet with them . Nonetheless he seemed pleased that we had made this effort and seemed pleased .
 He came into the Oval Office and paced the floor and said, “After the way you and the rest of us listened and indicated our sincere desire to find solutions to the problems, he went into the press room and pisses on the President of the United States. “He
 I said, “The problem as I see it, is that they don’t think that I care. I’m not going to care. The problem is they don't think I care,” he said .
 It was ironic that Moynihan provided the words over which we were accused of being reactionaries in a memo he wrote to me early in 1970 . Moynihans was among the strongest advocates of civil rights programs in my administration .
 In it he set forth a number of positive initiatives he felt we should undertake . In it, he also outlined what he wanted to do with the country .
 "The forum has been too much taken over by hysterics, paranoids, and boodlers on all sides. The forum has become too much over-run by hysterical hysterics and paranoids . The forum is now too full of boodles and hysterics .
 We may need a period in which Negro progress continues and racial rhetoric fades . We may also need to see the end of racial rhetoric fade . We need to have a period of progress continue and racial discourse fades .
 The phrase benign neglect was seized upon out of context to characterize the administration’s attitude toward blacks and other minorities . Obama administration has been criticized for its attitude toward minorities .
 It was a term that caught on and was played back to us every time we tried to do something constructive in the civil rights area . It was the term that was used to refer to the Civil Rights movement in the 1960s .
 A good job is as basic and important a civil right as a good education, says President Obama . "Many blacks and members of other minorities were being prevented from getting good jobs," he says .
 He proposed a plan which would require all contractors working on federally funded construction projects to pledge a good faith effort toward the goal of hiring a representative number of minority workers .
 Of the 1. million construction workers in the United States, only 106,000 were black . 80 percent of those were in the lowest paid category of laborers . Of the 130,000 building apprentices in the country, only 5,000 are black .
 As Vice President I had been chairman of Eisenhower’s Committee on Government Contracts, which made substantial progress in using persuasion and publicity to encourage companies with government contracts to hire more minorities .
 Shultz's plan would require such action by law was both necessary and right . Shultz: "I felt that the plan Shultz devised, which would need such a law, was both needed and right"
 We would not fix quotas, but would require federal contractors to show “affirmative action” to meet the goals of increasing minority employment . The White House would require that federal contractors show ‘affirmation action’
 In Philadelphia the goal would be to increase it from 4 percent to 26 percent between 1969 and 1973 . For example, in Philadelphia it would be 4 percent . In Philadelphia, the goal was to increase the city's unemployment rate from 4% to 26% .
 Congressional conservatives joined organized labor in vehemently opposing this plan . Congressional conservatives join organized labor against the plan .
 They considered it heretical for a Republican President to propose such a thing . And heresy is rarely politically popular .
 Right up to his death in September 1969, Everett Dirksen urged me to abandon it. Right up . up until his death he urged me . to abandon my career, he said. "I'm not going to do it," he said .
 In a meeting in the Cabinet Room with the legislative leaders he said, “It is my bounden duty to tell you that this thing is about as popular as a crab in a whorehouse.”
 By the end of October 1969, a contract was awarded that put the plan into effect for six construction unions working on a federally funded hospital in Philadelphia .
 George Meany hit the roof, charging that the administration was making the unions a whipping boy . Meany: Administration was trying to score “brownie points” with civil rights groups .
 Union lobbyists applied tremendous political power and pressure to members of Congress . The amendments were adopted by the Senate, and damaging amendments were .
 Jerry Ford and Hugh Scott led the effort to win the White House nomination for President Obama . The White House won't accept the nomination for the nomination of a candidate for the presidency .
 Both the Senate and House rejected amendments, which would have gutted the Philadelphia Plan . The amendments were rejected by both chambers and the Senate .
 Getting the plan written into law turned out to be easier than implementing the law . Getting the law passed into law was easier than getting it into law .
 There were some initial successes, but I was disappointed that we received only lukewarm support from most of the national black leaders, who tended to minimize the results we had achieved, or to complain that we had not gone far enough .
 Once again I had to wonder whether the black leadership was not more interested in dramatic tokenism than in the hard fight for actual progress . The black leadership is not interested in tokenism, it's just about tokenism rather than actual progress, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 An important area where we were able to make a considerable impact was in the field of minority business enterprise . An important part of the success of the British government was in minority business .
 During the 1968 campaign I had delivered a radio address entitled “Bridges to Human Dignity” in which I urged new efforts to bring members of minority groups into the economic mainstream .
 We had to find ways to give qualified blacks and other minorities a stake in the American private enterprise system . Unless they were to be a permanent inferior economic class apart from other Americans, we had to give them a stake .
 I delegated this responsibility to Secretary of Commerce Maurice Stans and told him that I considered it to be of the highest priority . During the transition period, I delegated the responsibility to Mr. Stans .
 The statistics show that while we did not attain all the goals we set for ourselves, we made substantial progress in this area . The statistics demonstrate that while . we did . not attain . all the . goals we . set for themselves, the statistics demonstrate . that .
 When I entered office in 1969, minority enterprises were getting only $8 million of business through government contracts . Minorities were getting $8million of business from government contracts, President Nixon says .
 In the same period, all government grants, loans, and guarantees directed toward helping minority business enterprises had jumped from $200 million to $472 million . The total of all government loans, loans and guarantees to help minority businesses has jumped $472million .
 receipts of black-owned businesses jumped from $4. billion in 1968 to $7 billion in 1972 . Most important, all of this activity was reflected at the cash register, where receipts rose to $8 billion .
 The most explosive of the civil rights issues during my presidency were the questions of school desegregation and busing . "The most explosive" issues during his presidency, he says, were the school deseguregation .
 Fifteen years ago, the Supreme Court handed down its landmark decision that laws requiring segregated schools were unconstitutional in Brown Board of Education .
 After the Brown decision, segregation by law was illegal as well as wrong; where it could be proved to exist, the law could be used to stop it . After Brown, segregation was illegal, but where it was proved, it was possible to use the law to prevent it .
 It was more difficult to deal with the problem of unequal education for black and white students because of segregation which existed, not as a result of conscious discrimination by law, but as the natural outgrowth of economic and social patterns within individual communities and neighborhoods .
 Despite a great deal of rhetoric and a few symbolic confrontations during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, very little progress was made in ending the dual school system .
 When I came into office in January 1969, 68 percent of black children in the South were still going to all-black schools . 78. percent were going to schools that were 80 percent or more black, he says .
 The question in 1969 was whether the courts should try to correct the remnants of de jure segregation, which existed primarily in the South, by forcibly mixing the races in schools .
 The principal tool by which this was to be accomplished was busing, whereby schoolchildren would be put on buses and driven to different schools within the district until the racial balance in each school reflected in the community as a whole . This was meant to be achieved by busing .
 One alternative to busing was for Congress to provide money to upgrade inferior education wherever it existed . Congress should upgrade inferior schools to remedy the problem without disrupting the neighborhood school, he says .
 "I wanted to eliminate the last vestiges of segregation by law, and I wanted to do it in a way that treated all parts of the nation equally," says Sen. Mitch McConnell .
 "I was determined that the South would not continue to be a scapegoat for Northern liberals. I was determined to be determined," she said .
 "I was not willing to impose wholesale busing, because I believe strongly in the neighborhood school," she says . "I'm not willing, however, to ... impose wholesale school busing"
 I do not believe schoolchildren should be torn from their home environments and, solely because of their race, be forced to go to distant schools where they might not be welcome or even safe . Even more important, I don't believe that schoolchildren are torn from home environments .
 Compulsory segregation was wrong; but compulsory racial balancing was also wrong . Compulsive racial balancing is also wrong, says Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. King .
 I believed that with the right approach we could persuade people in the South and elsewhere not just to obey the law because it was the law, but gradually to bring them to an understanding and acceptance of the wisdom and humanity that lay behind it . I believed with the correct approach, we could
 Federal government should be instrument of persuasion rather than engine of coercion, says President . President should be the conciliator rather than the divider, he says .
 Plans for desegregation should be made by school boards, local communities, and the courts in each area or region, rather than by bureaucrats in Washington .
 Many school districts decided not to forestall the inevitable and simply complied with the desegregation deadlines which had been laid down by the Supreme Court in 1968 . Many schools were forced to comply with the requirements of deserregation .
 Some districts decided to resist any change and submitted proposals for delays that were patently obstructionist . Some districts submitted proposals that would be patently obstructive .
 Some districts have been given limited and supervised delays . Others, however, tried to find solutions in responsible and responsive ways .
 On October 29, 1969, the Supreme Court handed down a unanimous decision that required every school district to terminate segregated school systems at once . The decision came just as the school year was getting under way .
 I felt that the Court had set a deadline that was unrealistic and would be impossible to meet, but I had no choice other than to enforce the ruling . I felt it was set to set an unrealistic deadline, but it was impossible to do so, he said .
 "At my next press conference I was asked about my policy on school desegregation," says President Obama . "I'm not sure what my policy is," says Obama .
 I replied that it was “to carry out what the Supreme Court has laid down’s laid down. “I replied “yes” to the question: “Yes”
 I felt obliged to uphold the law; but I did not feel obliged to do any more than the minimum the law required, while hoping that the Court would eventually see how its well-intentioned ruling was both legally and socially counterproductive . I felt compelled to do what the court required,
 Justice Department's Civil Rights Division's civil rights chief says he's determined to ensure that young liberal lawyers won't treat decision as a carte blanche .
 The Court’s February deadline for immediate desegregation passed without incident . The court's February deadline was met with no incident .
 Some of the remaining segregated schools complied; some closed down . Others ignored it and waited to see what would happen . Some schools complied, some closed, others ignored it .
 Wallace urged the South to defy the federal government and talked about running for President in 1972 . Even before that, George Wallace had urged the Southerners to defy government .
 Gallup poll found that more than half of those responding felt that school integration was going too fast . Gallup poll: More than half felt that integration is going too quickly .
 I appointed a Cabinet Committee on Education to consider the problem at the highest level . Cabinet Committee will consider the issue at a higher level .
 The President cares about the situation and he plans to do something about it, CNN.com's John Sutter says . The President plans to take action against the situation .
 The important thing, however, is to keep things in their proper perspective . "The important thing is that we don't have to think about what's going on," he says .
 No segregation is legal anywhere in the country, but we should take into account that local communities, black and white, might want to keep a certain degree of separation .
 Sen. Ted Cruz says he wants to put federal money into the best possible education in each school . Cruz: "That’s why I want to put our federal money . That's why I'm putting federal money in the schools," he says .
 We’ve got to stop using the classrooms and the kids as the cutting edges for social and economic problems that will have to be solved elsewhere . We've got to get rid of the classroom and kids as a cutting edge for social problems that need to be addressed elsewhere .
 Senator Richard Russell of Georgia said HEW bureaucrats were going around the South stirring up trouble and inciting suits . A week later, four Southern governors came to the White House to express their views . Senator Russell said the Southern governors were concerned about the situation .
 I decided that the time had come to issue a major policy statement from the White House. I decided to make a major statement .
 "On March 24, I released an 8,000-word statement covering every aspect of the civil rights issue," he says . "I don't think it's the first time I've seen a civil rights advocate in the U.S.
 I reaffirmed my support for desegregation and my opposition to busing . I also indicated that the primary reliance should be on cooperation with local authorities and on voluntary compliance, rather than on federal involvement .
 I said that my first priority would be maintaining and improving the quality of public education . I announced that I would request $1.1 billion over two years for helping school districts desegregate . I said I would ask for $1 billion in two years to help desegregation .
 Reaction to this statement split between those who wanted to coerce the South to comply with the Court’s ruling and those who were willing to take a chance on persuasion . Reaction to the Supreme Court's decision was split between the two sides .
 "I was convinced that involvement on the part of local leaders and officials was the first prerequisite for a successful policy of persuasion," he said . He added that involvement was the key to a successful campaign of persuasion .
 Seven of the Southern states which were still in various degrees of noncompliance with the Court’s ruling formed State Advisory Committees on school desegregation .
 On June 24, Mississippi State Advisory Committee met with White House . There were fifteen members, nine whites and six blacks, nine white and six black members .
 One of the black members said to me, “The day before yesterday I was in jail for going to the wrong beach.” Another member of the group said he had been in jail the day before . The day before, he said, "I was in prison for going
 "Over the next few weeks I met with all of the other state committees, and with each of them I stressed the same points. Over the course of the week, I would meet with all the other committees,’s meeting with each other, to stress the same point.
 First, I condemned the hypocrisy in much of the North about the segregation problem . Second, I said it was the hypocrisy of segregation in the North .
 I affirmed my belief that the South should be treated with understanding and patience, but I also stressed the need to solve the problem through peaceful compliance . "I also stressed that solving the problem would be peaceful compliance," he said .
 Second, I emphasized my commitment to the principle of local leadership to solve local problems . I emphasized that I'm committed to a commitment to local leadership .
 I got across subtly but unmistakably the point that if they did not act to solve the problem I would be forced to act to carry out my responsibility to enforce the law of the land . I got the point out that if . they did . not act, I would have to
 Most of the whites who attended these meetings believed that the Court’s decision was wrong . Some of the blacks entered the meetings with a skeptical view because they thought that only strong federal intervention would bring about compliance with the law .
 The meetings showed that it was possible for both sides to meet and talk about their concerns . The meetings show that it is possible to meet both sides of the debate .
 I knew that I was walking a fine line between integrationists and segregation-forever extremists, but I felt that the risk would be well worth it if we could solve the problem without getting the federal government involved, he says .
 At the end of July, I received a long memorandum from Harry Dent, my Southern political liaison man . Harry Dent was my Southern liaison man. I'm not surprised by the memo, he says .
 On August 6, the same day that the Georgia State Advisory Committee came to the White House, I met with leading conservative senators and Southern Republicans, including Ed Gurney of Florida, Barry Goldwater, Strom Thurmond, and John Tower .
 They complained bitterly that the administration had turned sharply to the left on the civil rights issue . The administration has been criticized for its policies on civil rights .
 Demands were made that I fire Jerris Leonard, Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division, and others who had been working to implement my policies, he says . He says he was forced to fire the civil rights chief .
 I told them I was restraining bureaucrats from HEW and the Justice Department who wanted to move more aggressively, and in my opinion irresponsibly, on the South . I listened to them and told them, "I was actually restraining bureaucrats"
 I had a responsibility to carry out the law of the land and that I was determined to meet that responsibility . At the same time I emphasized that I had . a responsibility, he said. At the . same time, he emphasized that he had a . responsibility .
 Louisiana State Advisory Committee is holding its first meeting in New Orleans . The committee was formed in 2009 .
 "I was able to convince them of the need for progress and they agreed to make another try," he said . "After talking to each one individually, I was able . After talking to them individually, each one of the players agreed to give up."
 As the beginning of the new school year approached, tension began to mount . As the . school year approaches, tensions rose .
 At the end of August I personally asked Billy Graham to record some TV appeals in support of voluntary compliance . Billy Graham recorded some of the TV appeals .
 "He made a videotape that was shown in all the Southern states, and I am convinced it had a very positive and powerful influence," he says .
 Schools in the South and all across the country opened in the fall of 1970 without violence and in compliance with the Supreme Courts order . Schools across the U.S. and all over the country were closed without violence .
 "The dramatic success of our Southern school desegregation program is eloquently told by the statistics," says the author . The dramatic success in Southern schools has been a success story .
 By 1974 only 8 percent of black children in the South were attending all-black schools . That's down from 68 percent in the fall of 1968 . By 1974, only 8% of black kids in the south were attending schools that were black .
 Freedom of choice in housing, education, and jobs must be the right of every American, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I begin with the proposition that freedom of choice is the right to every American"
 Sen. Ted Cruz says he supports family assistance, but doubts as to whether it will work . Cruz: Only by such a program does freedom of choice have any chance to become a reality for millions of families .
 The term was used in the school cases in the South in 1966—67 and 68 . The term "freedom of choice" refers to freedom of choice, not "obstructionist"
 Legally segregated education, legally segregated housing, legal obstructions to equal employment must be totally removed . The U.S. should end segregation of education, housing, housing and employment, the author says .
 Legal segregation is totally wrong, but forced integration of housing or education is just as wrong as legal segregation is wrong .
 "I realize that this position will lead us to a situation in which blacks will continue to live for the most part in black neighborhoods," she says . "There will be predominantly black schools and predominantly white schools in the metropolitan areas," she adds .
 In any event I believe there may be some doubt as to the validity of the Brown philosophy that integrating education will pull up the blacks and not pull down the whites . I believe it may not be true .
 There may be some doubt as to whether segregated education is inferior . But there is no doubt whatever on another point —that education requiring excessive transportation for students is definitely inferior .
 Having made all these points, I come down hard on another point which I think is absolutely overriding. I think it's absolutely overriding, and I'm not going to give up on it. I'm going to make it clear that we're not going away with it. We're not
 "We simply have to face the hard fact the law cannot go beyond what the people are willing to support," says David Cameron . The law cannot be changed, he says, even if the public wants to change .
 Even if I should become convinced—and I don’t think it would be possible to convince me— that forced integration of education and housing was in the best interests of blacks . I could not possibly support it in good conscience, he says .
 "As a matter of conscience I have reached a conclusion motivated not by politics but by my considered evaluation of all the issues involved," he writes . "I must speak to these two controversial issues now firmly without equivocation and if necessary through the advocacy of a constitutional amendment"
 I considered the idea of a constitutional amendment at that time, I now believe that it would have exacerbated the already volatile issues of integrated education and housing with which we were confronted . Although I considered it at the time, he now believes it would've exacerbated the problems we faced .
 "The real issue in school desegregation was that of quality education," he said . "I had always felt that the real issue was that . quality education"
 The Brown decision was based on the principle that the dual school system in the South was wrong . In practice it produced Negro schools that were educationally inferior, he says .
 Court decisions have muddied the waters by assuming, incorrectly, that the issue involved race rather than education . "To my mind, I think ... the issue is not race, it's education," says author .
 I simply do not believe that education is the great leveler of social barriers that it was thought to be by the framers of the Great Society programs . I simply believe education is not the great leveller of the social barriers .
 Busing black children from poor families to richer white schools will have little effect on how they learn . I feel that home environment has more to do with success in life than has any amount of integrated education .
 During the years I was President I placed primary emphasis on better education in neighborhood schools . President Obama said he was putting emphasis on neighborhood education .
 In 1972, President Richard Nixon proposed directing over $2.2 billion to improve education of children from poor families . He proposed directing the money to improve the education of poor children .
 I hoped by doing this that we could retrieve a lost generation of children who had been doomed to inferior education in the central cities, I said . I hoped this would be a way of retrieving lost generations of children .
 Controversy continued to rage over the interpretation of the Supreme Court’s decisions on busing . The Supreme Court's busing decisions have sparked controversy .
 In 1972 Chief Justice Burger issued a memorandum for the guidance of courts across the country . It made it clear that the high Court did not require busing for the purpose of achieving racial balance .
 Just before I resigned in 1974, the Supreme Court said school districts were gerrymandered for the purpose of segregating blacks from whites, the law did not require busing to ensure racial balance .
 As far as my administration’s overall record on civil rights is concerned, I believe we can point with justifiable pride to what was accomplished in the area of peacefully desegregating schools in the South .
 As 1970 began, intelligence indicated that Communist infiltration from North into South Vietnam was increasing .
 North Vietnamese had also begun moving large numbers of troops and equipment into Cambodia and Laos . The North Vietnamese are also moving large number of troops into Cambodia, Laos .
 In view of this enemy activity, I felt that we had to think about initiatives we could undertake to show the enemy that we were still serious about our commitment in Vietnam . I felt it was important to show that we still had a commitment to Vietnam, he said .
 On February 21 Kissinger had his second secret meeting in Paris with the North Vietnamese . Kissinger had a secret meeting with North Vietnamese in Paris .
 The situation had changed dramatically since the first meeting in August, largely because my November 3 speech had strengthened my position at home . "The situation has changed dramatically," he said .
 A Gallup poll at the end of January found that 65 percent of the nation approved of my handling of Vietnam . 65 percent approved of his handling of the Vietnam crisis .
 This time Le Duc Tho joined Xuan Thuy in participating in the talks with Kissinger . This time the two leaders took part in a joint session of talks .
 Tho was a member of the Hanoi Politburo, which meant that the talks now had at least reached the decision-making level . The talks now have now reached the . highest level of the talks .
 Kissinger: 'Don't underestimate the strong support I had for my Vietnam policy' Kissinger: Kissinger was trying to capitalize on the reaction to his speech . Kissinger: "I'm not exaggerating my support for Vietnam policy"
 In the last election the big bloc of votes was not on the left but on the right . But in the last year's election, the majority of votes were from the right, not the left .
 President Nixon can appeal to people whom President Johnson could not reach,” he told them . “President Nixon can appeals to people which President Johnson can not reach," he said .
 Antiwar movement in the U.S. has surged higher than ever, says Le Duc Tho . He said it was his impression that since August the antiwar movement had surged higher in the country .
 Kissinger had felt from the start that Tho’s bombast concealed genuine North Vietnamese doubts and worries . Kissinger said he had felt the bombast was concealed from the North Vietnamese . Kissinger: "Tho's bombasting concealed genuine concerns and worries"
 This appraisal seemed to be borne out later in the meeting when the North Vietnamese became more conciliatory . This appraisal was borne out by the meeting's outcome . The North Vietnamese appeared to be less hostile to the West .
 In fact, it appeared that they were ready to begin serious negotiations in the private channel . The two sides appeared to be ready to start serious negotiations .
 Kissinger wrote a short note about the way he should deal with the North Vietnamese at their next session, Kissinger wrote . Kissinger's memo proposed our strategy for the next secret meeting, Kissinger said .
 "Come directly to the hard decisions on the two major issues," Obama says . "We will leave details to subordinates," he says. "Otherwise you will spend two days on details and make no progress"
 Kissinger told the North Vietnamese that if a settlement could be reached, we would have all our troops out of Vietnam within 16 months . Kissinger: If a settlement was reached, the U.S. troops would be out within sixteen months . When they met again on March 16, Kissinger told
 On March 18, while the Cambodian head of state Prince Sihanouk was visiting Moscow, he was overthrown by a bloodless military coup . General Lon Nol, a strong anti-Communist, was brought to power by the coup in March .
 The CIA had received no indication that the opposition to Sihanouk had gone so far . The opposition to the president had gone too far, CIA said .
 Lon Nol's immediate inclination was to do everything possible to help him, but Rogers and Laird strongly recommended that we hold back . "Lon Nol" was the subject of a new book, "Lion Nol," he says .
 Moscow, Peking, and Hanoi would be in great turmoil and suspect us of having financed and staged the coup . They pointed out that Moscow, . Peking and . P.K. would be . in turmoil, they pointed out . They said .
 If we provided economic and military aid now, they would confirm suspicions and possibly even supply the North Vietnamese with a pretext for abandoning their official facade of noninvolvement and thereby a full-scale invasion of Cambodia .
 It would put us in a very bad light, he said, to rush aid to a government that might be overthrown even before our aid arrived, he added . It would be 'putting us in bad light', he said .
 I decided to withhold any aid for at least a week, during which time Lon Nol's troops fought surprisingly well against the highly trained Khmer Rouge and North Vietnamese . I decided on his own to cut off a major source of Communist supplies .
 Kissinger prepared for another meeting with the North Vietnamese in Paris . Kissinger prepared to meet with North Vietnam in Paris in the 1970s .
 Before he left, he sent me a memo requesting approval for the strategy he wanted to follow, he said . Before leaving, he wrote a memo asking for approval .
 He felt that the time had come for our side to be very firm and find out whether the Communists really meant to negotiate . He said: "We need to find out if the Communists are really trying to negotiate"
 Kissinger felt that they had been confused by the events in Cambodia, which they charged us with having engineered, Kissinger said . Kissinger said that Kissinger felt they had had been 'confusioned' by events in the country .
 He proposed that a time limit be set for reaching an agreement in secret talks . Following my instructions, he proposed that the talks be held in secret .
 He suggested that the channel be closed down until one side or the other had something new to discuss . When they would not agree to this, he suggested that they had to close the channel .
 "The whole situation over Cambodia and Vietnam was becoming so tense that I felt I had to make a very painful personal decision," says former president of Cambodia . "It was becoming very tense that [Vietnam and Cambodia] became so tense," he says .
 David and Julie will graduate from Amherst and Smith later in the spring . Pat and Julie were counting on it for David's graduation, Julie's from Smith .
 Pat had never known the joy of having a parent attend any of her daughter's graduations . She had been looking forward to Julie’s graduation .
 She tried to hold back her tears, and she pointed out that only a few small radical groups were involved . Everyone she knew — including students who opposed the war and my administration—felt that I should be able to attend the ceremony, she said .
 "The Secret Service had received reports of several protest demonstrations that were already being planned against me," she says . "The possibility of an ugly incident that would mar the graduation, not just for us but for all the other students and parents," she adds .
 Despite impasse in secret talks and the worsening military situation in Cambodia, I decided to go ahead with the troop withdrawal scheduled for April 20 . Despite the impasse, the withdrawal will go ahead .
 Kissinger: Time had come to drop a bombshell on the gathering spring storm of antiwar protest . Kissinger: "I discussed the issue at length with Kissinger, and we agreed that the time had come for a bombshell"
 Vietnamization has progressed to the point that, for the first time, we felt we could project our troop withdrawals over the next year . Vietnamization had progressed to a point where it felt it could project its troop withdrawals . The U.S. felt it was safe to project troop withdrawals
 The withdrawal of 150,000 men will take place over the next year, the PM says . The withdrawal will be announced over a shorter period, he says .
 The withdrawal figure came as a dramatic surprise when I revealed it in a speech on April 20 . It was a surprise that the withdrawal figure had been revealed in an April 20 speech .
 By the end of April, the Communists had a quarter of Cambodia under control and were closing in on Phnom Penh . The Communists had been in control of the country since April .
 If the Communists succeeded in overthrowing him, South Vietnam would be threatened from the west as well as the north . The Communists would be able to threaten the country from both the west and north .
 This situation would jeopardize our troop withdrawal program . It would also virtually assure a Communist invasion of South Vietnam as soon as the last American had left. This would virtually assure an invasion of the South Vietnam .
 I think we need a bold move in Cambodia to show that we stand with Lon Nol. I think that I feel the way today at our meeting as I feel this morning , I think . Assuming that I . feel the . way at our . meeting today, I feel that I
 There is, however, some chance that he might, and in any event we must do something symbolic to help him survive . There is no guarantee that he will survive, but we must help him .
 We have really dropped the ball on this one due to the fact that we were taken in with the line that by helping him we would destroy his “neutrality” and give the North Vietnamese an excuse to come in. We have been taken in by the line of thinking that
 "Over and over again we fail to learn that the Communists never need an excuse to come in," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says. "We should learn that Communists never have an excuse"
 They didn't need one in Hungary in 1956 when the same argument was made by the career State people and when Dulles bought it because he was tired and it was during the campaign. They didn’t need one .
 They didn't need one in Czechoslovakia when the same argument was made by the State people. They didn’t need one, they said . The State people are responsible for their actions in the Czech Republic. They were responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union.
 The U.S. failed to make the strike that might have blunted the whole offensive before it got started in Laos, Cambodia and Laos . The US has taken a completely hands-off attitude by protesting to the Senate that we have only a delegation of seven State Department jerks
 The Parrot’s Beak is a sliver of land that pushes into South Vietnam . It reaches within thirty-three miles of Saigon .
 A particularly strong ARVN [South Vietnamese Army] force was stationed on the border in this area . "A particularly strong [ARVN] force" was stationed in the area .
 The heaviest Communist concentration was in another border area, the Fishhook, a thin, curving piece of Cambodian territory jutting right into the heart of South Vietnam, about fifty miles northwest of Saigon .
 This was the primary area of operation for what intelligence referred to as COSVN— the Central Office of South Vietnam . This is the main area of operations for the Vietnamese government .
 COSVN was the Communists’ floating command post of military headquarters, supplies, food, and medical facilities . The Communists were in control of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 The Fishhook was thus the nerve center of the Communist forces in the sanctuaries, and it would be strongly defended . It would be a nerve center for the communist forces, and would be strong defended .
 The initial intelligence estimates projected that the heavy fortifications and the concentration of Communist troops in the area might result in very high casualties in the first week of the operation . Initial intelligence estimates .
 I began to consider letting the ARVN go into the Parrot’s Beak and sending a mixed force of American and South Vietnamese troops into the Fishhook . “I began to . consider sending mixed force into the . Parrot's Beak .
 Giving the South Vietnamese an operation of their own would be a major boost to their morale . The operation would provide a practical demonstration of the success of Vietnamization .
 It would also be a good diversionary cover for the more important and more difficult Fishhook operation . The operation would be a distraction from the more serious and difficult .
 "I never had any illusions about the shattering effect a decision to go into Cambodia would have on public opinion at home," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be surprised by the impact of this decision," he says .
 "I knew that opinions among my major foreign policy advisers were deeply divided over the issue of widening the war," Obama says . "I recognized that it could mean personal and political catastrophe for me and my administration," he says .
 The ARVN would go into the Parrot’s Beak and a joint ARN—U:S. force would go in the Fishhook . The ARN would then go into a Parrot's Beak . The Fishhook would then be used in the Par
 Rogers and Laird had by now given up hope of dissuading me from taking some action in Cambodia . They still thought they could convince me not to involve American troops in the country .
 He was more upset, it seemed, with an apparent snub of the Pentagon in our decision-making process . He was upset with the snub .
 He also suggested that General Abrams might not approve of the COSVN operation, but backed away when Kissinger contradicted him . He backed away from the suggestion when Kissinger said he didn't agree with the operation .
 Abrams sent a backchannel cable to Abrams, ordering him to send the "unvarnished truth" about the way he felt, he says . Abrams: "I sent a cable to tell him the truth" Abrams: 'I don't think he's lying'
 A joint response from Abrams and United States Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker indicated full support on their part . Abrams and U.S. Ambassador Bunker indicated support on the issue .
 I took a pad and began to make a list of the pluses and minuses of both operations . "I took a note of the positives and negatives about both operations," he said .
 The risk and danger involved was undeniably great; there was no assurance of success on the battlefield and there was the certainty of an uproar at home . There was no guarantee of success in the battlefield or success in Europe .
 There was no question that the continued existence of the Cambodian sanctuaries would threaten the safety of the remaining American troops in South Vietnam . But there was also no question . It would almost guarantee a Communist invasion as soon as we had pulled out .
 He blinked his eyes as he took a piece of paper from a folder he was carrying and handed it to me . He took a picture of the scene from a file in his folder and said: 'I'm sorry for what I've done.'
 I said that as far as I was concerned, the simple fact of showing the Communists that we intended to protect ourselves and our allies put all the weight on one side. I said as far . I said .
 South Vietnam's announcement of the Parrot’s Beak operation came over the wires on Wednesday, April 29 . South Vietnam announced the operation on April 29.
 Within minutes, leading Senate doves were in front of the TV cameras, demanding that I disavow Thieu’s offensive and not send any American troops into Cambodia . Within minutes the . leading Senate . doves demanded that . I disavowed Thieu's offensive .
 All during the day I continued to work on the speech I would deliver the next night announcing the operation . The next night was the night I would announce the operation, he said . The operation was the first of its kind in the world, he added .
 "I got up and sat in the Lincoln Sitting Room until 5:30. After tossing fitfully for an hour or so, I got up to 5:00 a.m. to go to bed .
 At nine o'clock I walked over to my EOB office to go over the first pages of the typed speech . "I'm going to be in my office at 9:30 a.m. for the first time," she says .
 Haldeman and Kissinger come over so I could read the announcement to them . That afternoon, Kissinger and Kissinger were at the White House to hear the announcement .
 I asked Kissinger to brief George Meany, because I knew that labor support would be vital, he says . Kissinger's brief to Meany: "I asked Kissinger for brief" Meany . Meany says Meany's labor support was vital .
 "Meany supported my decision wholeheartedly. Meany supported me wholeheartedly," he said .
 Three of his top assistants decided to resign in protest over his decision . Three of the top assistants quit in protest .
 Shortly before delivering the speech from the Oval Office, I went to the White House Theatre to brief the bipartisan congressional leadership . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of the budget cuts .
 I said I understood that many of them would oppose the decision I had made. I told them I understood they would oppose it . I said that I understood it would be difficult for them to accept the decision, but it was not the best decision .
 "The sincerity of my words must have reached them, even though they remained opposed to the decision I had made," he said . The sincerity of his words must've reached them .
 I began the speech by describing how the Communists had responded to my recently announced troop withdrawal by stepping up their attacks throughout Indochina . The speech was a response to the President's announcement of a troop withdrawal .
 I used a map to explain the geographic and strategic importance of the Cambodian sanctuaries and to describe the South Vietnamese operation in the Parrot’s Beak .
 A joint U.S.-Vietnamese force would go into the Fishhook, Vietnam . Then I announced that a joint force would be deployed, he said . Then he announced that the two countries would join forces together .
 The sanctuaries were completely occupied and controlled by North Vietnamese forces . They were occupied by the North Vietnamese government .
 We would withdraw once they had been driven out and once their military supplies had been destroyed, says the British Prime Minister .
 The purpose, I said, was not to expand the war into Cambodia, but to end the war in Vietnam by making peace possible . The purpose of the mission was to make peace possible in Vietnam, he said .
 For an hour after the speech, I sat with my family in the Solarium while they discussed the speech and tried to gauge the reactions to it . For the first time I sat in the solarium to try and gauge reactions to the speech .
 President Obama spoke at a White House event in Washington, D.C. on Tuesday night . He said he was returning calls that had come in after Obama's speech .
 Chief Justice Warren Burger was at the gate with a letter for me. Just after 10:30 he informed me that Chief Justice Burger was there with a note for me . "Just after 10,30 I was informed that Chief Burger was here with me," he said .
 "I instructed the Secret Service agent on duty to have him shown up immediately," says President Obama .
 I said that critics had already begun denouncing the speech and the decision, but he said that he was sure it would be supported by the people . I told him that critics already had already started denouncing the decision and the speech .
 He also pointed out that anyone who thought about it would realize that, as a shrewd politician, I would obviously not do anything that might damage Republican chances in the November elections unless I felt that it was absolutely necessary for national security, he said .
 When I finally went to my bedroom around three o’clock, I found a note from Julie. Julie. When I went to bed at 3:30 p.m. I found her note . Julie’s note: ‘I’m sorry. I�
 You explained the situation in Vietnam perfectly, says President Obama . "I'm sure the American people will realize why you made your decision," he says .
 I especially want to tell you how effective—and heartfelt—your final message to the people of South and North Vietnam, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. was. "I'm glad to see how effective your final message was. It was," he writes .
 We cannot abandon 17 million people to a living death, and we cannot jeopardize the chances of future world peace by an unqualified pull-out of Vietnam, says President Obama . Vietnam is a major source of conflict in Vietnam .
 "Despite very little sleep, I was up early on the morning after the speech," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I went to the Pentagon for a firsthand briefing on the Cambodian operation from the Joint Chiefs and their top advisers . CNN's John Sutter was briefed on the operation in Cambodia . Sutter says the operation is a success in the region .
 "As I walked through the halls to the briefing room, I was mobbed by people cheering and trying to shake my hand," CNN's John Sutter says .
 The atmosphere in the briefing room was generally positive if somewhat more restrained . The atmosphere was generally more restrained than usual at the White House .
 Different colored pins indicated the positions and movements of the various forces . Different colored pin colors indicated the position and movement of forces .
 As briefers described the initial success of the operation, I found myself studying the map more and more intently . As the briefers . described the . initial success . of the . operation, he found himself studying . the map .
 I noted that in addition to the Parrot’s Beak and the Fishhook, four other areas were marked as occupied by Communist forces .
 The reply to my question emphasized the very negative reaction any such action would receive in the media and Congress . The reply was "very negative reaction" to such an action, the congressman said .
 "I made a very uncharacteristic on-the-spot decision. Usually I like to mull things over, but I made a decision on the spot," he said .
 As I left the Pentagon after the briefing, once again employees rushed into the halls of the Pentagon . The Pentagon has been briefed on the Iraq War .
 By the time I reached the lobby, I was surrounded by a friendly, cheering crowd . By the end of the day, I had been greeted by a crowd of cheering fans .
 One woman thanked me on behalf of her husband, who was serving in Vietnam . One woman was particularly emotional as she thanked me for her husband .
 As I thought of these men and women with loved ones fighting in Vietnam, I could not help thinking about those students who took advantage of their draft deferments and their privileged status in our society to bomb campuses, set fires, and tyrannize their institutions .
 The White House was in the midst of a tempest of reaction over Cambodia . President Obama decided to get his family away from the White House for a few hours of relaxation .
 It was a warm, clear day, so I suggested that we sail down the Potomac to Mount Vernon on the Seguoza . It was warm and clear .
 It is the custom for all naval vessels passing Mount Vernon to honor George Washington . George Washington is buried there .
 "When we neared the spot, I had everyone move onto the deck and face the shore," says the author .
 By the time the Sequoia had returned to Washington, the indignant reaction had almost overwhelmed the response to the speech itself .
 All through the spring of 1970 the country had faced wave after wave of violent campus unrest . The country faced waves of unrest throughout the spring and spring of that year .
 Issues were largely campus-oriented, dealing with disciplinary regulations, campus administration, and minority admissions . As with the disturbances at the beginning of 1969, the issues were largely .
 1970s campus disturbances saw increase in bombings and violence connected to them . Violence increased in the 1970s, with the increase in the number of bombings .
 Radical groups openly encouraged the bombing of institutions of which they disapproved of . Radical groups actively bombed institutions in the name of those they were opposed to .
 Governor James Rhodes finally had to call in 1,200 national guardsmen and impose a curfew to quiet the campus . Governor Rhodes calls in the National Guard to impose the curfew . Rhodes says the curfew is necessary to keep students quiet .
 It was criminal and barbarous to burn banks as a protest against capitalism or to burn ROTC buildings in protest against militarism, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: It was a crime and barbarity to burn a bank or a college building as a demonstration against capitalism .
 Most shocking incidents were directed at the very quality of intellectual life that should characterize a university community, says professor .
 At the end of April, $2,500 worth of books were set on fire in the basement of the Yale Law School . The books were part of a demonstration in support of Black Panthers charged with murder in New Haven .
 On April 24 an anti-ROTC group set a fire at the university’s center for behavioral studies . The fire was set on the campus of the behavioral studies center .
 As did countless other Americans, I responded with disbelief at the news that your study at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences had been firebombed . "Much of the work of a lifetime had been destroyed," he writes .
 It can be small consolation for you to know that the overwhelming proportion of the American people, and of the . American academic community, utterly reject the tactics of the person or persons who did this. The overwhelming .
 To say that they are simply evil, does not make them go away . To say, what is more likely to be the case, that they're simply evil does not stop .
 "I hope that the great insights of social anthropology that you have brought to your studies might serve to help you understand this tragedy," says President Obama . "We are here to learn about the tragedy," he says .
 "Please at all events know that you are an honored and welcome guest, whose work is appreciated and valued in this nation," says author .
 I do not think that anyone who heard my comments at the Pentagon or who heard the tape recording of it, had any doubt that when I talked about “bums burning up the books and blowing up the campuses, I was referring to the arsonists at Berkeley and Yale and the
 Nixon Puts “Bums” label on some College Radicals; and the inside continuation of the story was headlined: Nixon Denounces ‘Bums on Campus’ on Campus .
 The media coverage and interpretation of the “bums” statement added fuel to the fires of dissent that were already getting out of control on many campuses . The media .
 The National Student Association called for my impeachment, and editors of eleven Eastern colleges, including most of the Ivy League schools, ran a common editorial in their campus newspapers calling for a nationwide academic strike .
 On Monday, May 4, I asked Haldeman to come to the EOB office to go over trip schedules with me . On May 5, he met with EOB to discuss travel plans .
 It appeared that an uneasy confrontation had begun brewing around noon . It appeared to be brewing at the scene of the confrontation .
 A large crowd of students threw rocks and chunks of concrete at guardsmen, forcing them up a hill . Finally, a large crowd forced the guardsmen up a small hill . The guardsmen were forced to climb a hill after the incident .
 In the newspaper the next day I saw the pictures of the four young people who had been killed . The next day we saw the photos of the victims in the car crash .
 Two were bystanders; the other two had been protesting a decision they felt was wrong . Two had been bystanders; two were protesting against the decision . Two of the three were bystanders .
 All four students were killed in the line of protest and student strikes . A call was going out for nationwide demonstrations, student strikes and demonstrations .
 I could not help thinking about the families receiving the news that their children were dead because they had been shot in a campus demonstration . I could also think of the families who received the news of their children being killed .
 "I wrote personal letters to each of the parents, even though I knew that words could not help," says author . "I was very sad to see my daughter's death, but I knew she was going to die," she says .
 Those few days after Kent State were among the darkest days of my presidency, says President Obama . "Kent State" was among the darkest days of his presidency .
 Members of his staff had resigned because of Cambodia . Former Harvard colleagues wrote bitter letters to him demanding that he make his professed moral position credible by resigning .
 On a day several of these letters arrived, he came into his office and sat staring disconsolately out the window . He sat staring out of the window as letters arrived .
 "I still think you made the right decision as far as foreign policy considerations involved," he said .
 "I told him that I had been fully aware of both the military and the political risks," she said . "I said I had told him I was fully aware that I was aware of the risks"
 "I had made the decision myself, and I assumed full responsibility for it. I had made it myself," she said . She said: "I was in the process of making the decision, and it was a decision I made myself"
 "I was shocked and disappointed when an apparently intentional leak to the press revealed that Bill Rogers and Mel Laird had been opposed to my Cambodian decision," he said .
 The operation was still in a critical stage, and I called Rogers and told him that I felt the Cabinet should get behind a decision once it had been made by the President . I told Rogers that he should be supported by the Cabinet once the President made a decision .
 Walter Hickel, the Secretary of the Interior, chose a more public way to express his conviction that I should listen to the students and spend more time with the Cabinet, he says .
 A copy of a letter he had written to me raising these points was already going out over the AP wire before it had been delivered to the White House . In what he later explained as a mishap, a copy of the letter he wrote to me was already being sent over the wire
 Several Cabinet members took public positions of less than full support . Several other Cabinet and administration members also took public support of President Barack Obama .
 In the midst of all the furore, it meant a great deal to me when one of the two living Americans who could really know what I was going through wrote to me .
 “Nixon was elected to make a choice and he made it," Roche said . Roche concluded by noting examples of Cabinet members dissociating themselves from my Cambodia decision .
 One can attack it on the merits if he so chooses, that is, say it was mistaken . One can also attack it with the merits of saying it was wrong, or attack it as a mistake .
 Daily news reports conveyed a sense of turmoil bordering on insurrection . The daily news reports conveied a sense that the country was in turmoil .
 Hundreds of college campuses went through a paroxysm of rage, riot, and arson . Hundreds of colleges across the U.S. have been involved in a rioting and arson crisis .
 Before the month was over, the National Guard had been called out twenty-four times at twenty-one campuses in 16 states . The National Guard was called out 24 times in one month .
 A national day of protest was hastily called to take place in Washington, D.C. on May 9 . The protest is the first of its kind in the United States .
 I felt that we should do everything possible to make sure that this event was nonviolent and that we did not appear insensitive to it. "I felt that ... we should be nonviolent," she said .
 Ehrlichman urged that we make whatever gestures we could be possible . He urged us to make gestures of communication as possible . The U.S. government has been in touch with the world since 1968 .
 Kissinger took a particularly hard line on the demonstrators . Kissinger, however, took a tough line on demonstrators .
 He was appalled at the violence they provoked and at the ignorance of the real issues they displayed . He said he was appalled by the violence and the ignorance they showed .
 He felt strongly that I should not appear more flexible until after the Cambodian operation was successfully completed, he said . He said: "He felt strongly . I should ... not appear . more flexible"
 "We had to make it clear that our foreign policy was not made by street protests," he said . As he put it, we had to . make it . clear that . our foreign . policy was made by protesters, he added .
 "The risks were high, and my staff were deeply divided about the wisdom of having one at this time," says President Obama . The risks are high, he says, and his staff was deeply divided .
 Most of the reporters and commentators were bound to be bitterly critical . It's highly possible that an acrimonious session would only make things worse .
 The conference was announced for prime time on Friday evening, May 8 . It will be held in prime time .
 "I could feel the emotions seething beneath the hot TV lights as I entered the East Room at ten o'clock Friday night," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't think it's the right thing to do"
 Almost all the questions were about the Cambodian operation and Kent State . Almost all of the questions are about the Cambodiaian operation .
 The first question was whether I had been surprised by the intensity of the protests and whether they would affect my policy in any way . I asked if I was surprised by how intense the protests had been, he said . He said: "I'm not surprised. It's not surprising that
 I replied that I had not been surprised by the intensity of the protests . "I'm not surprised," he said. I replied .
 "I knew that those who protested did so because they felt that my decision would expand the war, our involvement in it, and our casualties," he said . "I'm not surprised by the protests," he added .
 "I know that what I have done will accomplish the goals that they want," she says . "But I know that . what I've done will ... accomplish the . goals that . they want. But I'm not sure if that will happen."
 The 150,000 Americans that I announced for withdrawal in the next year will come home on schedule, says President Obama . Obama says he will withdraw from the U.S. from the State of the Union .
 Students protest in Washington, D.C., to protest President Obama's immigration policies . Students say they want to see more of the country's immigration reform .
 Immediately after the press conference, I began returning some of the dozens of phone calls that had come in and placing calls to others . Immediately after, I started returning phone calls to other people .
 "I was agitated and uneasy as the events of the last few weeks raced through my mind. I was agitated, uneasy as I thought of the events . I was anxious and uneasy," she said .
 I put on a record of Rachmaninoff’s Second Piano Concerto and sat listening to the music . I put a record on the record of the Concerto to listen to it .
 Manolo heard that I was up and came in to see if I would like some tea or coffee . He said: "Manolo came in and asked me to have a cup of coffee or tea"
 Looking out the windows I could see small groups of young people beginning to gather on the Ellipse between the White House and the Washington Monument .
 I mentioned that I considered the Lincoln Memorial at night to be the most beautiful sight in Washington, and Manolo said that he had never seen it . Manolo says he has never seen Lincoln Memorial .
 This event was spontaneous on my part and I purposely did not take any staff members along or alert any reporters to accompany me . "This is a spontaneous event," says President Obama. "This event was a spontaneous and spontaneous decision to take part in it."
 Newspapers reported that I had been unable to communicate with the young people I met . I had shown my insensitivity to their concerns by talking about inconsequential subjects like sports and surfing, he says .
 Some of this mistaken impression apparently came from students themselves . Some of the students themselves were mistaken .
 Another said that he had been tired and dull and rambled aimlessly from subject to subject . Another said he had rambered aimlessly and had been dull .
 John Ehrlichman referred to the problems that I had created by talking about sports to students who had traveled hundreds of miles to protest my war policies . In a meeting a few days later John Erlichman pointed out the problems he created .
 "I was tired and tense, and I snapped at him about the problems a President has when even his own staff believes the false stories that are spread about him," he said .
 The attached is a memorandum of what actually took place at the Lincoln Memorial . This is a copy of what took place in the memorial ceremony .
 I think you will share my complete frustration with regard to coverage of my activities . After you read it, I think it will share your frustration with the coverage of me .
 This was the only time this group of students had ever talked to a President of the United States . Most of the students were about as poor as I was when I was in college and who had driven all this long distance to Washington . This is the first time they had ever spoken to
 "They will see me many times discuss these heated, angry subjects that they would hear about later at the Monument, and that they hear in their classrooms," she says .
 Perhaps the major contribution I could make to them was to try to lift them out of the miserable intellectual wasteland in which they now wander aimlessly around. Perhaps, perhaps, they should be lifted out of this wasteland, perhaps .
 I do not write this memorandum to you critically of our staff, because I think it is the best staff any President has had by far in terms of loyalty, willingness to work, etc. President Obama's staff, says .
 The only problem is that we seem to lack on the staff any one individual who really understands or appreciates what I am trying to get across in terms of what a President should mean to the people .
 Not news; not gimmicks like rushing out to that Negro junior college with a covey of newsreels following . Not news. Not news . Not gimmicks . Not gimmicks like rushing .
 All of this seems to be big stuff and I realize makes big news—perhaps it is . Perhaps it is, perhaps it is. All of the big stuff seems like big stuff .
 "I really wonder in the long run if this is all the legacy we want to leave. But on the other hand, I really wonder . The other thing is that this is not all that we are leaving. We are not going to be able to do this again,”
 If it is the case, perhaps we should do our job as easily as we can, as expeditiously as possible, and get out and leave the responsibilities of the government to the true materialists, the socialists .
 I dictated this long diary-like memorandum describing the visit to the Lincoln Memorial . "I wanted to make a record of what was for me a memorable event," he says . He wanted to knock down the idea that he would have engaged in the kind of inane conversations the news reports
 By this time a few small groups of students had begun to congregate in the rotunda of the Memorial .
 As a matter of fact, they seemed somewhat overawed, and, of course, quite surprised . "They seemed quite surprised," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "When I first started to speak to the group there were approximately eight in it. When I started speaking there were about eight people in it," he says .
 Two or three of them volunteered that they had not been able to hear the press conference because they had been driving all night in order to get here . "Two or three" volunteer that they didn't want to hear it because they'd been driving for hours to hear .
 I said I was sorry they had missed it because I had tried to explain in the press conference that my goals in Vietnam were the same as theirs—to stop the killing and end the war—to bring peace . I said he was sorry that they missed it .
 "Our goal was not to get into Cambodia by what we were doing, but to get out of Vietnam," says Marine Corps officer . "We were not going to go into Cambodia, we were going to get to Vietnam," he says .
 "I realized that most of them would not agree with my position, but I hoped that they would not allow their disagreement on this issue to lead them to fail to give us a hearing on some other issues where we might agree . They did not respond, so I took it from there
 "I hoped that their hatred of the war, which I could well understand, would not turn into a bitter hatred of our whole system, our country, and everything that it stood for," she said .
 I said, "I know that probably most of you think I'm an SOB, but I want you to know that I understand just how you feel," he said . "I said, I know that . probably most people think I’m an . SOB," he
 I recall when I was just a little older than you, right out of law school and ready to get married, how excited I was when Chamberlain came home from Munich and made his famous statement about peace in our time . I recall that when I . was just out of . law school
 "I had so little in those days that the prospect of going into the service was almost unbearable," he says . "I felt that the United States staying out of any kind of conflict was worth paying any price whatever," he adds .
 When I read Churchill’s all-out criticism of Chamberlain, I thought Churchill was a madman . As a result I thought at that time, that Chamberlain was the greatest man alive, and when I read . I thought that at that . time I thought . that Chamberlain .
 Churchill had the courage to carry out the policies that he believed were right even though there was a time when both in England and all over the world he was extremely unpopular because of his “anti-peace” stand . I think now that Chamberlain was a good man, but that
 I then tried to move the conversation into areas where I could draw them out, I said . I then moved the conversation to areas where we could draw out, and I tried to make it easier to draw out .
 I said that since some of them had come to Washington for the first time I hoped that while they were young that they would never miss an opportunity to travel . "I said that . while they are young that while . they would . never miss a opportunity to . travel," she said
 One of them said he didn't know whether he could afford it, and I said I didn’t think I could . But my wife and I borrowed the money for a trip we took to Mexico and then one to Central America .
 At that time a girl joined the group and since I had been discussing California I asked if anybody there was from California . At the time, a girl from California had joined the girl's group .
 "I said that was one of my favorite towns in Northern California and I hoped it was as beautiful as I remembered it. She spoke up and said she was from Los Altos," she said . "I hope it was beautiful as beautiful," she added .
 I told the rest of the group that when they went to California that they would see there what massive strides we could take to deal with the problem of the environment which I knew they were all interested in . In trying to draw her out, I told her that when the group went to
 I said that right below where I live in California there was the greatest surfing beach in the world . It was completely denied to the public due to the fact that it was Marine Corps property, and that I had taken steps to release some of this property for a public beach .
 Environmentalists want government property to be put to better uses, not just military or other purposes . "Quality of life" environmental program is to take government property and put it to better use, he says .
 I then spoke of how I hoped that they would have the opportunity to know not only the United States but the whole world . I then said that I hoped they would be able to know the U.S. but also the world .
 It is worth seeing, but the place that I felt they would particularly enjoy visiting would be Asia . Asia is a great place to visit, especially in the region of the world .
 Leningrad is one of the most important cities in the world to visit in Russia . Moscow is important for visitors to Russia because of its historical and governmental operations . But if you really want to know Russia, its exciting variety and history, you must go to Lenedrad .
 In Russia Leningrad was really a more interesting place to visit than in Russia . I said that in Russia Lenedrad was more interesting to visit. I said .
 The people were really more outgoing there since they were not so much under control and domination of the central government . The people would be more outgoing than they were under control of the government .
 Prague and Warsaw are of much more architectural beauty than Moscow, says author . Moscow is one of the most beautiful cities in the world, he says . Prague is more beautiful than Moscow and Warsaw, he adds .
 I made this point because I was speaking directly to one of the students who said he was a student of architecture . I made the point because of the student's interest in architecture, he said .
 "I thought that they would be interested. In fact, there were two who said they were studying architecture," she said .
 Novosibirsk, a raw, new city in the heart of Siberia, and Samarkand in Asian Russia where the people were Asians rather than Russians . But the most important point I made about Russia was that they should go to places where people were not Russians .
 One of them asked whether it would be possible to get a visa to such cities, and I said I was sure they could . I would help out if any of them took a trip to Russia and wanted to contact my office, he said .
 I then moved back to the problem and my thrust then was that what really mattered in the world was people rather than cities and air and water and all other things that were material . I then said: 'What really mattered was people. rather than city and air, water and other things
 "Of all the countries I have visited in Latin America, Haiti is probably the poorest .. . But that the Haitians, as I recalled from 1955, while they were poor, had a dignity and a grace which was very moving . I always had wanted to return, not because there
 President Obama emphasized the importance of not becoming alienated from the people of this country, its great variety . Obama: "I then made this same point again with regard to the people I had seen in Asia and India and returned again to the United States"
 This seemed to get through, although none of them had much to say . None of them responded specifically to the comments .
 The original group of approximately eight to ten had now become perhaps thirty . Some of those who seemed to be more leader types and older began to take part in the conversation .
 "The point is that we were trying to build a world in which you will not have to die for what you believe in," he says . The point is "You will not be able to live for it," he adds .
 I put in one brief comment with regard to the point I had made in the press conference, that while we had great differences with the Russians we had to find a way to limit nuclear arms . I had hoped that we could make some progress in that direction .
 Perhaps it was because we moved through so fast and perhaps because they were overawed by the whole incident . Perhaps because of the speed they moved through, perhaps because of their reaction to the incident .
 "We are not interested in what Prague looks like," says one man . Then another spoke up and said, “We're not interested . Prague is not what Prague should look like,” says another man .
 I said the purpose of discussing Prague and other places was not to discuss the city but the people . I said, "I said the whole purpose of talking about Prague was to talk about the people. I said this was not the city, it was the people."
 We are going to be living in all parts of the world and it is vitally important that you know and appreciate and understand people every place, wherever they are, and particularly understand the people in your own country . We are all going to live in different countries and it's vitally
 "We have a very bold program going further than any has ever gone before to deal with some of these subjects," Obama says .
 Cleaning up the air and the water and the streets is not going to solve the deepest problems that concern us all, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cleaning the air, the water, the streets will not solve the deep problems, he says .
 Something that is completely clean can also be completely sterile and without spirit . But you must remember that something that is . completely . clean can . also be . sterile and . without spirit, says author .
 What we all must think about is why we are here, what are those elements of the spirit which really matter . What we must think is why are we here? What are elements of spirit that really matter? What do you think? Share your thoughts .
 I returned to my theme of thinking about people rather than about places and things . And, here again, I . returned to the theme of think about people, not places, but people .
 "I said candidly and honestly that I didn’t have the answer, but I knew that young people today were searching, as I was searching forty years ago, for an answer to this problem," he said .
 "I said I had to go, and shook hands with those nearest to me, and walked down the steps," he said .
 A bearded fellow from Detroit was taking a picture as I began to get in the car . A bearded man from Detroit took a picture of me as I got in the vehicle .
 The President's doctor took the picture, and Tkach took it, CNN's John Sutter said .
 He seemed to be quite delighted—it was, in fact, the broadest smile that I saw on the entire visit . He was quite delighted .
 As I left him I said . . I knew he had come a long way for this event and I knew, too, that he and his colleagues were terribly frustrated and angry about our policy and opposed to it .
 I said, I just hope your opposition doesn’t turn into a blind hatred of the country, but remember this is a great country, with all of its faults . I said: "I just hope [the opposition] doesn” turn into an opposition to the country .
 I said, If you have any doubt about it, go down to the passport office. Go down to a passport office, you can find out . I said: If you want to know if you're going to get a passport, you should go to passport office .
 "I knew that those days in April and May were as hard for my staff as they were for me," says President Obama . "Those days were hard for me and my staff," says Obama .
 Haldeman, Ehrlichman, Kissinger, and Kissinger, had borne the brunt of the Cambodian crisis . Kissinger, who had been in charge of the crisis, had been critical of the situation .
 "I wanted to do something to show how much I appreciated their strength and support. I wanted to show their strength, support," she said .
 Bebe asked his girl friend, Jane Lucke, to do a little sewing for him . Bebe and Jane were in Key Biscayne over the weekend of May 15 .
 On the plane back to Washington I asked Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Kissinger to come to my cabin . Kissinger: "On the plane home to Washington, I asked him to come with me. I asked them to come back with me." Kissinger: 'On the
 Public opinion seemed to rally during the weeks after Kent State, when the military success of the Cambodian operation became increasingly apparent .
 There had already been scattered incidents of scuffling between hardhats and antiwar demonstrators . Mayor John Lindsay had ordered the flag on City Hall to be flown at half-staff .
 The hard-hats decided to show their support for our war aims . More than 100,000 people came out to march with them in support of their aims .
 I invited the leaders of the construction workers’ unions to come to the White House. I invited them to come and meet with the president, President Obama said . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Fifty percent approved of my decision to send troops into Cambodia; 39 percent disapproved; 11 percent had no opinion . Fifty percent of Americans approved of sending troops into the country .
 On May 30, one month after the Cambodian operation began, I made a televised report to the nation on the progress to date . I made the nation's first televised broadcast on May 30 .
 After conferring with General Abrams, I could state that this had been the most successful operation of the Vietnam war. I could . state that it had been . The operation had been a successful operation, General Abrams said .
 We had already captured almost as much in enemy arms, equipment, ammunition, and food during the past month in Cambodia alone as we had captured in all of Vietnam during all of 1969 . We had captured as much as we did in Vietnam during that month alone .
 On June 30, exactly on schedule and exactly as I had promised, we announced the departure of the last American troops from Cambodia . President Obama: "Exactly on schedule" on June 30 .
 Most important, the Cambodian operation had destroyed the Communists’ capability of launching a spring offensive against our forces in South Vietnam . Most important was the success of the operation in Cambodia .
 Our casualties had dropped from 93 a week in the six months before the operation to 51 per week in six months after . The performance of the ARVN had demonstrated that Vietnamization was working .
 The 150,000-man troop withdrawal I had announced on April 20 could go forward on schedule, says President Obama . President Obama says withdrawal could go ahead on schedule . Obama: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 The pressure against Lon Nol had been reduced, and he was now expected to be able to survive . And, finally, the pressure against him has been reduced . The pressure has now been reduced and he is expected to survive.
 Sihanoukville, the major port of entry for Soviet and Chinese heavy weapons into the Cambodian sanctuaries, would remain closed . That would mean that the port, which is a major source of entry to weapons into Cambodia, would be closed .
 On the day of the previously announced departure from Cambodia the Senate passed the Cooper—Church amendment, the first restrictive vote ever cast on a President in wartime . The amendment was passed the day before the President left Cambodia .
 In essence it demanded that all American troops be removed from Cambodia by July 1 . "It demanded that [the U.S. troop withdrawal] be done by the end of July 1," says President Obama .
 The symbolism of the timing was as serious as the timing of the action itself, since all Americans had already left Cambodia . The action itself was meaningless, as all Americans were already leaving Cambodia .
 Kissinger’s first secret meeting with the North Vietnamese since the Cambodian operation took place on September 7 . Kissinger met with North Vietnam for the first time since the operation in Cambodia .
 Instead of the propaganda and vituperation he had expected, he found the friendliest atmosphere of any of the sessions so far . He found the atmosphere of the session so far to be the most friendly of all sessions .
 President Obama and his staff changed their tone and indicated a readiness to move on substance, he wrote . He said they changed tone, but also indicated they were ready to "move on substance"
 They dropped their demand for a six-month ‘unconditional’ withdrawal schedule . They made no mention of the ten points, and indicated that they would reconsider their political proposals .
 North Vietnamese still insisted that a settlement could be reached only if we deposed President Thieu . I was somewhat skeptical about his optimism, because of the friendly atmosphere and the new elements of accommodation .
 Kissinger’s memo: “This is probably the breaking point unless we can find a formula” It was hard to see how even Kissinger's negotiating skill could find a middle ground on that particular issue . Kissinger: "This was probably the break point"
 They made it clear that their tactic would be to isolate Thieu as the man who stood in the way of peace . They made the clear that they would be using this tactic to isolate him as a leader .
 Kissinger broke off the meeting without setting a date for another one . Kissinger ended the meeting with no date set for another meeting . Kissinger: "I don't think it's a good time for the world"
 "I decided to present publicly a significant new peace plan," he says . "It seemed unlikely that secret talks were going to produce any solid progress"
 For the first time, we could consider agreeing to a cease-fire in place without first requiring that the North Vietnamese agree to withdraw their forces . Because of the success of the Cambodian operation, I felt that now, for the first .
 As long as the Communist troops in South Vietnam could not depend on the Cambodian sanctuaries for supplies, ammunition, and reinforcements, I felt that the ARVN forces would soon be able to defend themselves and their country . I felt .
 In addition to a cease-fire in place throughout Indochina, the other key points of my new plan were an all-Indochina peace conference to be followed by a negotiated timetable for the withdrawal of all U.S. troops, a political settlement .
 I announced that 40,000 more troops would be withdrawn by Christmas. Five days later I announced . Five days after that, I announced 40,00 more troops will be withdrawn from the UK .
 The two moves effectively silenced the domestic antiwar movement by placing the burden squarely on the North Vietnamese to begin serious negotiations . These two moves went so far toward removing the obstacles to a settlement that they effectively silenced antiwar .
 Hanoi stayed silent, and the secret channel in Paris remained closed . The secret channel remained closed, but Hanoa stayed silent .
 The most prominent of these groups were the Black Panthers and the Weathermen . The Weathermen were among the most prominent groups in the country .
 The Black Panthers were founded in 1966 by Bobby Seale and Huey Newton . They were working for the Office of Economic Opportunity at the time .
 Newton said they would exert power not through political channels but through a capacity for destruction . Newton: 'They will exert power through capacity to destroy' Newton said the group would exert their power through destruction .
 "Because their organization was small and highly disciplined, it was extremely difficult to obtain advance information about their plans or places they intended to strike," the author says . "Because of the organization's small and disciplined, the organization was extremely hard to get advance information"
 In 1969 and 1970 two members pleaded guilty to the murder of a suspected informant . Two members of the FBI were convicted of the murder in 1969 and 1971 .
 In 1969 police said they found a cache of Panther weapons that included a submachine gun, thirteen rifles, a handmade grenade, and thirty firebombs . Police said they also found a sub machine gun and thirteen rifles . In 1969, the Panther weapons were found .
 Five policemen were wounded in a Chicago gun battle in July . In November, again in Chicago, two policemen were killed and six wounded, and one Black Panther was killed in another shoot-out .
 In December, Los Angeles police and Panthers engaged in a four-hour gun battle .
 Weathermen were a terrorist offshoot of the Students for a Democratic Society . The Weathermen are a terrorist group that terrorized the U.S. in the 1960s .
 At their National Council meeting in 1969, the Weathermen decided to begin a new campaign of underground warfare, police murder, and bombing . The Weathermen are known for their underground warfare and bombings .
 With as many as a thousand estimated members, the Weather Underground separated into secret floating commandotype units . With up to a thousand members, Weather Underground split from each other .
 As with the Black Panthers, there was no way of knowing where or how they were going to strike . No way of predicting when or where they would strike .
 Three bodies were found in the wreckage, along with fifty-seven sticks of dynamite, plumbing pipes stuffed with dynamite and roofing nails, and fragmentation bombs .
 There was evidence of Weatherman involvement in the planting of two bombs that same day in police facilities in Detroit . Weatherman was involved in planting two bombs in Detroit that day .
 On March 12 explosions in three midtown Manhattan buildings caused the evacuation of some 15,000 people . The explosions occurred in three buildings in midtown New York .
 A terrorist group calling itself Revolutionary Force 9 took the credit for the attack . The terrorist group has been blamed for the incident .
 On March 30 police found dynamite in a Weatherman bomb factory in Chicago . Police say dynamite was found in the bomb factory .
 J Edgar Hoover informed me that FBI agents had begun to pick up rumors of a calculated nationwide terrorist offensive by radical student groups using arson, bombing, and kidnaping of university and government officials . Hoover: FBI agents picked up rumors that the groups were using arson and bombing to attack government officials
 From January 1969 through April 1970 there were, by conservative count, over 40,000 bombings, attempted bombings, and bomb threats . An average of over eighty a day bomb threats were reported in January 1969 to April 1970 .
 Of 40,000 incidents, 64 percent were by bombers whose identity and motive were unknown . 64 percent of those incidents were by bomber whose identity or motive was unknown .
 On March 25 I sent Congress a message asking for urgent legislation to mete out the death penalty in cases where bombs caused the death of others . "On March 25, Congress should pass urgent legislation," he says .
 The Black Panthers were closely affiliated with North Korean groups and with radical Arab terrorists . The group was closely associated with North Korea and radical Arab terrorist groups .
 We knew that Weathermen identified with North Vietnam, Cuba, and North Korea . Weathermen also identified with Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea, Vietnam and Cuba . Weatherman identified with Vietnam and North Vietnam .
 I was eager to learn whether the foreign support went beyond ideological sympathy . I wanted to know whether the support of the West had gone beyond ideological sympathies .
 "Season of mindless terror has fortunately passed," says Obama . "It was this epidemic of unprecedented domestic terrorism that prompted our efforts to discover the best means by which to deal with this new phenomenon," he says .
 I turned for assistance in this effort to the various intelligence agencies, I turned to them for help . I turned . assistance to the agencies, including the CIA, for assistance .
 Working together, they developed a program to counter revolutionary violence . The program was developed to counter terrorist violence .
 Three years later this program would be publicly revealed and labeled the Huston Plan . Three years after this program was revealed, it would be known as Huston .
 It was attacked as an authorization of Gestapo tactics bent on violating personal liberties . It was also attacked as a violation of personal liberty .
 "This program did not involve the use of any measures not previously employed by federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies," the government says .
 J Edgar Hoover had become director of the Bureau of Investigation in 1924 . Over the next forty years he was hailed as a national hero . Hoover had been hailed as national hero for his work in the FBI .
 In the mid-sixties, however, he sensed that the temper of the times was turning against him . He sensed that he was being turned against him.
 A new liberalism was fashionable, in which there appeared to be more concern for the rights of the accused than for the protection of the innocent . A new liberal was fashionable in Britain, writes Andrew Hammond .
 He was determined not to give anyone ammunition in his last years to damage him or his organization . Now that his career was nearing its end, he was determined to give people ammunition to damage his career . He said he wanted to make sure people didn't try to harm his career or his
 He totally distrusted the other intelligence agencies—especially the CLA—and, whenever possible, resisted attempts to work in concert with them .
 He was sensibly reluctant to go out on a limb for anyone, lest he find himself suddenly alone . He said he was 'sensible' and 'skeptical' about going out on limb . He was 'resluidly reluctant' to go on limb, but was
 For more than twenty years, FBI agents gathered foreign intelligence and evidence of foreign subversion by secret break-ins . FBI agents had collected foreign intelligence, evidence of subversion, domestic violence .
 Hoover canceled all FBI black bag jobs and secret mail-opening operations in 1966 . In 1966, threatened with a congressional investigation and liberals in control of the Justice Department, Hoover summarily canceled them .
 He also drastically decreased the use of room bugs since they, too, required surreptitious entry, and in 1967 he also cut back the recruitment of student and campus informants .
 Hoover cut back on these practices, but domestic violence began increasing at an alarming rate . Domestic violence has increased in recent years .
 Top administration officials put pressure on FBI to obtain information about potential rioters and their activities . They even developed extraordinary additional programs of their own .
 Clark and Doar set up a central unit for coordinating riot intelligence from informants in the Great Society poverty, community relations, and legal services programs .
 In the late 1960s, under pressure from the White House and from Ramsey Clark at the Justice Department, the small domestic intelligence division at the Pentagon was dramatically expanded . The division was created in 1963 .
 By 1968, 1,500 Army intelligence agents were monitoring various civilian groups, including the Poor People’s March and the Mobilization Committee . The protests included protests by welfare mothers and classes in black studies .
 Later, in 1971, Mel Laird, with his approval, abolished the military intelligence program .
 CIA refused to give Hoover the name of an FBI agent who had assisted them on a case without first having sought Hoover’s permission . In 1970 the already uneasy relationship between the CIA and FBI was exacerbated by the CIA refusing to give the agent's name .
 Hoover’s action, coupled with the general lack of coordination among the various intelligence agencies, had left us with an insufficient intelligence capability at a time when terrorist violence was at fever pitch . I received reports that Hoover's action, . coupled with a general lack . of coordination, had
 Weeks later, reportedly irritated by criticism within the intelligence community, he cut off all liaison with all other intelligence agencies, retaining communication only with White House .
 National Security Agency Director Noel Gayler speaks to reporters . Defense Intelligence Agency Director John D. Bennett and Vice Admiral Noel. Gayler . National Security Council Director Michael Hayden to speak .
 Huston was a young lawyer and former Defense Intelligence Agency aide . His assignments on the White House staff included the problem of violence from radicals . Huston is a former lawyer and ex-White House aide .
 He was seriously concerned about the inadequacies of the U.S. intelligence apparatus, both in the face of domestic violence and in comparison to the intelligence capabilities of Communist-bloc countries, he said .
 I told the group that I wanted to know what the problems were in intelligence-gathering and what had to be done to solve them . I told them what I wanted was to know, and what was needed to solve it, he said .
 I wanted their report submitted to me jointly, and I asked Hoover to act as chairman . Hoover was chairman of the Joint Committee of Representatives .
 The committee formed a study group to evaluate the situation and draw up alternatives . The committee has been formed to look at the situation .
 Hoover added personal objections to several sections of the document . Hoover added footnotes as footnotes to body of body of document, including his personal objections . Hoover: "I'm not sure what I'm doing here, but I'm sure I'm not going to do it"
 The report opened with a brief analysis of the problems confronting us, ranging from the Black Panthers and the Weathermen to Communist infiltrators . The report was released on Monday .
 It differentiated radical terrorist groups from those that merely indulged in incendiary rhetoric, it said . It said: "Radical terrorist groups are not merely indulging into incendiary rhetoric"
 It gave a summary of the available intelligence techniques, the current restrictions on them, and the advantages and disadvantages of lifting those restrictions . It also outlined the advantages of lifting restrictions on certain intelligence techniques .
 Hoover had no objection to expanding the National Security Agency’s coverage of overseas telephone and telegraph communications . Hoover wanted to expand the agency's coverage of the communications system .
 The group also requested budget increases for each agency, which Hoover approved . Hoover approved the recommendations .
 Former CIA officer says he was unable to overcome resistance to cooperating with CIA . He says he felt it was primarily a case of his inability to overcome his natural resistance .
 He was afraid that if he agreed to cooperate, and was on record as having done so, the other agencies might use this to undercut him . Beyond that, he thought he was afraid he would be undercut by leaks from other agencies .
 On July 14, following Huston’s recommendations, I turned down an increase in military intelligence activities and approved relaxation of restrictions on other techniques .
 I was satisfied that none of the special techniques would be used indiscriminately, and that they represented any threat to legitimate dissent . I was happy that no special techniques were used in the U.S. government .
 The Black Panthers and the Weathermen had announced their intentions to kidnap and assassinate . The Weathermen were already building an arsenal of weapons to carry out their threat . The express domestic targets were the Black Panthers .
 On July 23 Huston sent a memo to heads of the heads of intelligence agencies notifying them of his decision . Huston: "On July 23, Huston wrote a memo informing them of my decision to withdraw."
 He said he thought the possibility of public exposure was too great to justify the risks . He said the risk was too high to justify public exposure .
 Mitchell conveyed Hoover’s arguments to me, adding that he agreed with Hoover . Mitchell conveyed the arguments to CNN.com.com . Mitchell said he agreed .
 "I knew that if Hoover had decided not to cooperate, it would matter little what I had decided or approved," she said . "It was a good thing that I knew that Hoover would not cooperate," she later said .
 Even if I issued a direct order to him, while he would undoubtedly carry it out, he would soon see to it that I had cause to reverse myself . Even if he issued an order to carry out it would be difficult for him to reverse himself .
 "I withdrew my approval. On July 28, five days later, before the plan could be implemented, I withdrew it," she said . "I withdraw my approval five days after I approved it, before it was implemented," she says .
 The irony of the controversy over the Huston Plan did not become apparent until a 1975 investigation revealed that the investigative techniques it would have involved had been carried out long before I approved the plan but continued to be carried out after I rescinded my approval of it .
 It's clear that when a nation confronts dire situations someone is going to act . It is clear that someone will act when faced with dire situations .
 If the President does not decide how to meet the emergency, someone at a lower level will. Someone at a higher level will decide .
 I would rather it be the President exercising his judgment than the FBI agent in the field, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I would rather [President] exercise his judgment," than the agents involved .
 The Huston Plan, if it had been in operation, might have detected and prevented the death and destruction . The bombing and violence continued unabated, and more than once I wondered whether the plan might have prevented some of the carnage .
 In August a policeman was killed and six others were wounded in a series of gun battles with the Black Panthers and another black militant group in Philadelphia .
 On March 1, 1971, the United States Capitol was bombed by the Weather Underground . The Weather Underground bombed the U.S. Capitol in March 1971 . The Capitol was the site of the first bombing of the Capitol .
 I believe today as I believed then that in view of the crisis of terrorism and violence visited upon countless innocent people, the recommendations made to me by the interagency intelligence group in its 1970 report were justified and responsible . "I believe today I believed today as . I believed . that in
 Critics who later contended that the recommendations were repressive and unlawful had the luxury of a calmer environment . Critics later contended . Critics had the . luxury of the . freedom of a more relaxed environment .
 They did not face the exigencies of a critical period in which the President, whose paramount responsibility is to ensure the safety of all citizens, was forced to consider measures that would be unacceptable in more tranquil times .
 In the 1960s an FBI official report claimed that the results of just one surreptitious entry helped bring about the “near disintegration” of the Ku Klux Klan .
 President Roosevelt to incarcerate thousands of JapaneseAmericans will always be debated . President Lincoln to suspend the constitutional guarantee of habeas corpus, Lincoln .
 When the issue juxtaposes the lives of innocent citizens against the possible curtailment of personal liberties we all cherish, the answers are never easy . The issue is never easy.
 Sometimes the letter of one law will conflict with the spirit of another, the President must choose . President Obama must choose between the letter and spirit of the law .
 He cannot throw up his hands in dismay, because inaction may be as devastating as wrong action . "I'm not giving up my hands," he says. "I can't throw up my arms in dismay. I'm not going to do anything," he writes .
 Precedents have sanctioned some degree of latitude in the use of emergency measures to meet emergency situations .
 I believe such latitude is necessary, and at times vital, to defend the nation and protect innocent people whose lives are threatened by criminal forces . "I believe such liberties are necessary and vital, and I believe that they are necessary," he said .
 A strict observance of the written laws is doubtless one of the high duties of a good citizen, but it is not the highest . A strict adherence to the law is a duty of a citizen, not a citizen of the highest, it is .
 To lose our country by a scrupulous adherence to written law, would be to lose the law itself, with life, liberty, property and all those who are enjoying them with us . The end to the means would be absurdly sacrificing the end, the means, to lose life,
 I think it would be disastrous if, in an excess of prohibitory zeal, we were to tie the President’s hands now and in the future, limiting him to the mechanical functions of executing the precise letter of the law . Laws cannot foresee every circumstance, and laws cannot foresee
 We have to weigh the potential for abuse of power if we allow him reasonable latitude to act, against the potential harm that may result if we too narrowly restrict that latitude . We have faith in his judgment, we have to place faith in him, we must weigh the risk of abuse of
 America’s Middle Eastern policy under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson was aimed at supplying the arms and money to enable Israel to defend itself against its potential enemies . Israel's Mideast policy was aimed primarily at supplying arms to Israel .
 In 1967 the numerically inferior Israeli forces were able to defeat and humiliate the Soviet-armed Egyptians and Syrians in less than a week of fighting . In 1967, the Israeli forces defeated and humiliated the Egyptian and Syrian forces .
 Six-Day War saw Israel occupy several areas along the banks of the Suez Canal, on the Sinai Peninsula and on the west bank of the Jordan River, in Jerusalem, and in the Golan Heights along the Israeli-Syrian border .
 The victory was overwhelming, so overwhelming that it was inevitable that further wars would be fought by Israel’s neighbors for repossession of these conquered and occupied territories . Israel's neighbors would be fighting for repossessing these conquered territories .
 After the war high-level visits between Moscow and Cairo, Damascus, and Baghdad produced a massive new infusion of Soviet money, men, and matériel .
 The Soviets wanted to maintain their presence in the Middle East, not because of ideological support for the cause of Arab unity, but because it was through Egypt and the other Arab countries that the Soviets could gain access to what the Russians had always wanted . The Russians wanted land, oil, power
 As I commented to Bill Rogers, “The difference between our goal and the Soviet goal in the Middle East is very simple but fundamental,” he said . The difference between the U.S. and the former Soviet Union is “simple but fundamental.”
 The potential for a confrontation between the United States and the U.S.R. loomed large . The potential of a clash between the two nations is still a mystery .
 If the Soviets were committed to Arab victories, it did not require much imagination to see how we both might be drawn in even against our wills . And almost certainly against our national interests, they might well be .
 At the beginning of my administration, I assigned the Middle East exclusively to Bill Rogers and his Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Joseph Sisco . The Middle East was assigned to Rogers and Sisco exclusively .
 I did this partly because I felt that Kissinger’s Jewish background would put him at a disadvantage during the delicate initial negotiations for the reopening of diplomatic relations with the Arab states . I did not want Kissinger's Jewish background to put him in a position during the negotiations .
 The Middle East required full time and expert attention, he says . Primarily, however, he felt that the Middle East needed full time, expert attention .
 It was clearly in America’s interests to halt the Soviet domination of the Arab Mideast, writes Peter Bergen .
 To do so would require broadening U.S. relations with Arab countries, Obama administration says .
 "Within the first few months of my administration I began taking the first steps in this direction," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be afraid of the future," says Obama .
 At the beginning of April 1969, King Hussein of Jordan made a state visit to the United States . King Hussein visited the U.S. in 1969 . Hussein's visit was the first state visit of the King of Jordan .
 In our last meeting before he left I told him that I was deeply troubled because of the absence of diplomatic relations with some of the governments in the Middle East precluded our playing a constructive role in the region .
 I knew that Hussein would carry this message back to the other Arab leaders. Although he made no reply at the time, I knew he would carry the message back . I knew Hussein would return to the Arab world .
 Mahmoud Fawzi came to Washington as a personal emissary of President Nasser of Egypt . The next day, he met with Fawzi, who had come to Washington to meet with him . Fawzi was the Egyptian ambassador to the United States .
 I told him that we regretted the U.S. did not have formal relations with Egypt, he said . The Egyptian president said he regretted the United States had not formal ties with Egypt .
 I said that I did not believe there would ever be a settlement that would fully satisfy either side . But I was confident that a mutually acceptable compromise could be achieved if the United States could establish a new relationship with Egypt and the Arab nations .
 The key to peace in the Middle East lay as much in Moscow as in Cairo or Damascus, says Moscow . Moscow was key to the peace in Syria as much as Cairo, Damascus, Cairo and Damascus .
 Former ambassador to Soviet Union Jacob Beam delivered a personal letter from me to Premier Kosygin . Beam had to deliver the letter when he presented his credentials in April 1969 .
 In it I said that it was essential that both our countries exert a calming influence in the Middle East . No outside power seek any advantage in the area at the expense of any other, he said .
 On September 25, 1969, Golda Meir came to Washington for a state visit . Meir's visit was the first state visit to the U.S. since 1964 .
 In Israeli terms she was a “hawk,” and a hard-liner opposed to surrendering even an inch of the occupied territory Israel had won in the 1967 war . Israel won the 1967 Israel-occupied territory in Israel .
 Meir conveyed simultaneously the qualities of extreme toughness and extreme warmth . When the survival of her country was involved, the toughness was predominant . Meir's toughness was dominant when she was in charge of Israel .
 She requested twenty-five Phantom jets and eighty Skyhawk fighters . She complained about the delays in delivery of planes that had already been approved .
 She asked for low-interest loans of $200 million a year for periods up to five years . She also asked for $200 billion in low interest loans for periods of five years.
 At the state dinner in her honor she expressed concern regarding our moves toward détente with the Soviets . She expressed concern about the moves . At state dinner she expressed her concern about denteente with Russia .
 In December 1969, Bill Rogers gave a speech in which he outlined what became known as the “Rogers Plan” for peace in the Mideast .
 This plan was based on the principle of the return of the occupied Arab territories in exchange for Arab assurances of Israel’s territorial integrity . Israel's territorial integrity would have to be protected by Arab assurances .
 The Rogers Plan had absolutely no chance of being accepted by Israel . The provision for return of occupied territories meant that the Rogers Plan was not likely to be accepted .
 Rogers and the State Department argued that the plan offered the best hope for peace . The return of the occupied territories would remove for the Arabs the hated reminder of their defeat .
 Kissinger countered that the plan encouraged the extremist elements among the Arabs . Kissinger said the plan was gratuitously offended the Israelis, and earned the contempt of the Soviets .
 The Rogers Plan could never be implemented, but it was important to let the Arab world know that the United States did not automatically dismiss its case regarding the occupied territories or rule out a compromise settlement .
 With the Rogers Plan on the record, I thought it would be easier for the Arab leaders to propose reopening relations with the United States without coming under attack from hawks and pro-Soviet elements in their countries .
 Kissinger: Kissinger received what Kissinger termed the first Soviet threat of his administration in 1970 . Kissinger: "On January 31, 1970, I received what I thought was a threat of my administration"
 I urged a more positive Soviet response to the Rogers Plan and proposed discussions on limiting arms supplies to the Middle East . I urged the Soviets to take action to limit arms supply to the region .
 In the meantime a different kind of diplomatic problem had arisen closer to home . In the U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his comments .
 Many members of the American Jewish community and its political friends had decided to boycott the state visit of President Georges Pompidou of France as a protest against his recent sale to Libya of more than a hundred Mirage jet fighters . The state visit was a protest over the sale of more
 I told Kissinger, “I consider this unconscionable conduct towards an official guest of the United States of America, and I will not tolerate it,” he said . Kissinger was Kissinger’s guest at the White House .
 After four days in Washington, the Pompidous visited Cape Kennedy and San Francisco before flying to Chicago .
 There, obscenity-screaming demonstrators broke through police lines and jostled the Pompidou party . Demonstrators also broke into police lines in Paris .
 Madame Pompidou was shaken by the incident, and Bus Mosbacher, our Chief of Protocol, informed me that she was going to fly home to Paris .
 French President Nicolas Sarkozy attended a dinner at the end of the year . Sarkozy's appearance at the dinner was a "dramatic surprise," he says .
 At the beginning of March I decided to postpone our delivery of Phantom jets to Israel . The decision was made to postpone the delivery of the jets to the Middle East .
 I had heard that the Soviets were coming under renewed pressures from their Arab clients to surpass new American deliveries to Israel . I hoped that since Israel was already in a strong military position, I could slow down the arms race without tipping the fragile military balance in the region .
 U.S. influence in the Middle East increasingly depends on renewing diplomatic relationships with Egypt and Syria, Sen. Rand Paul says .
 She said, “It is true that our pilots are very good, but they can’t be good only when they have planes. She said .
 Lately some rumors have reached me that your decision may be negative or at best postponed . Lately, some rumors of a negative reaction to your decision have been circulating .
 Israel had survived only because its people were ready to fight and die for it . Israel's people had been ready to die for its people, Israel's prime minister says .
 I could understand their reluctance to accept our assurances instead of our jet fighters at a time when they faced a possible attack . I could . understand that they were reluctant to accept . Instead of . accepting our . assurances, they should have accepted our . jet fighters, he said .
 Pompidou: "If you put yourself in the position of Dayan, Rabin, Eban, or Mrs. Mrs. Dayan," he said .
 Meir: "If it ever came to the test of a crisis, then we would be found fully and firmly on Israel’s side" Meir said in 1970s and 1973, Meir told Meir that Israel would be on the side of Israel .
 "In the meantime, I realized that my new policy would cause much pain and many problems," says President Obama . "I realized that [Obama] would cause a lot of pain," says Obama .
 "I realized that it would be misunderstood and denounced by many on both sides," she says . "I also realized that many would be outraged by many of them," she adds. "They would be offended by both sides"
 "I was trying to construct a completely new set of power relationships in the Middle East," he says . Israel and the Arab world were at the heart of the U.S., Western Europe, and the Soviet Union, he writes .
 One of the main problems I faced was the unyielding and shortsighted pro-Israeli attitude prevalent in large and influential segments of the U.S. Jewish community, Congress, the media, and in intellectual and cultural circles .
 Many saw the corollary of not being pro-Israeli as being anti-Israeli, or even anti-Semitic . In the quarter century since the end of World War II this attitude had become so deeply ingrained that many saw it as anti-Israel .
 "There was a wave of criticism in the media and in Congress when my decision to postpone the Phantom deliveries was announced," says President Obama .
 Israeli Ambassador Rabin knew the decision was coming and complained to Kissinger that we were failing to meet our responsibilities . Kissinger said that Israel had failed to meet its responsibilities .
 I was annoyed that a number of senators who were urging that we send more military aid to save Israel were opposing our efforts to save South Vietnam from Communist domination . "I'm annoyed that some of the senators who wanted to send more aid were opposing us," he said .
 They will give Israel a lot of lip service, but they are peace at any price people . They are peace-at-any-price people, they say . They say they will give Israeli lip service .
 When the chips are down, the U.S. will cut and run in Mideast, writes Andrew Hammond . The U.N. has a long history of cutting and running, he says . Hammond says when the chips go down they will run, not only as they are
 "They must recognize that our interests are basically pro-freedom and not just pro-Israel because of the Jewish vote," he says . Israel must be pro-free, he says, not just because of its Jewish vote .
 We are for Israel because Israel in our view is the only state in the Mideast which is pro-freedom and an effective opponent to Soviet expansion . We are against Israel because it is pro, freedom and an opponent of Soviet expansion, we say .
 "We will oppose a cut-and-run policy either in Vietnam or Cuba or the Mideast or NATO or anyplace else in the world," Obama says .
 "It is a question of all or none. We are going to stand up in Vietnam and in NATO and in the Mideast," says President Obama . Obama: "We are standing up" in Vietnam, NATO and Mideasts .
 This is it cold turkey, and it's time that our friends in Israel understand this . This is the cold turkey for the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 We are going to be in power for at least the next three years and this will be the policy of this country. We're going to have this policy for the next 3 years, says President Obama .
 Unless they understand it and act now, they are down the tubes . Unless they act now they are going to be in trouble, they will be down the tube .
 Throughout the spring there were sporadic but bitter outbreaks of fighting between Israel and Egypt and Syria . Israel, Egypt, Syria and Syria have been at odds for years .
 The cease-fire was violated by Egypt almost before the ink was dry . It established the U.S. as the honest broker accepted by both sides . Egypt violated the ceasefire almost before it was signed .
 Meir and the Israeli government were unsettled because the U.S. did not seem to accept the evidence that serious Egyptian cease-fire violations were taking place . Meir was unsettled by the United States' refusal to accept evidence .
 Soviet surface-to-air missiles had been moved into the forward area along the Suez Canal . The move changed the entire balance of power in the area, he said .
 Unless something were done, it would be just a matter of time before the Egyptians attacked . Unless something was done, the Egyptians would be ready to attack .
 The Israelis wanted to send air strikes against these missile complexes . The Israeli government wanted to use air strikes on the missile complexes in Israel .
 The attrition of their aircraft would be very high, however, unless we gave them the special electronic jamming equipment and missiles they were requesting . We would not be able to give them the equipment or missiles they requested .
 "We have launched our cease-fire initiative with no preconceived notions as to Soviet good will. We have no preconceptions as to Russian good will," says Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 I pointed out that American public opinion would be very important if another war began in the Middle East . I also said that U.S. public opinion is very important in the region .
 This was why I had wanted America to be the prime mover of the cease-fire proposal, and why I wanted Israel to be scrupulously careful in observing it . This was the reason I wanted the U.S. to be involved in the peace process, he said .
 I said I would approach the Soviets through special channels concerning their involvement in the current crisis . I said that I would . approach them through special . channels . Putin said he would approach them via special channels .
 A month later our policy of building a new balance of power in the Middle East was put to the test of war . A month after the war, the U.S. faced a new test of its policy in the region .
 At the beginning of September, the extremist Palestinian guerrillas became increasingly active . Extremist Palestinian guerillas have become increasingly active in recent months .
 One group hijacked four commercial airliners and blew them up after holding hundreds of passengers hostage for several days . Most of the passengers, most of them Americans, were Americans .
 It seemed likely that a serious showdown was going to be unavoidable, so I decided to revoke my earlier order and send more military aid and more Phantom jets to Israel .
 Palestinian extremist leaders, backed by Syrian arms and aid, had stirred up Palestinian refugees living in Jordan . They threatened to provoke a civil war against Hussein’s regime .
 Kissinger said it looks like the Soviets are pushing the Syrians and the Syrians are pushing Palestinians . Kissinger: It looks like it's like the Soviet-led forces are pushing Syrians and Palestinians .
 The situation was confused, and until we had reliable information or intelligence about what was really going on, I felt it was important to keep as cool as possible . The situation in the U.S. was confused and confused .
 I was scheduled to leave on a two-day trip to Kansas City and Chicago, and I decided to keep to the schedule . I was going to go on a trip to Chicago and Kansas City .
 We could not allow Hussein to be overthrown by a Soviet-inspired insurrection, says President George W. Bush .
 The U.S. could not stand idly by and watch Israel being driven into the sea . The possibility of a direct Soviet-Israeli confrontation was uncomfortably high . The United States could not be indifferent to Israel's plight .
 'It was like a ghastly game of dominoes, with a nuclear war waiting at the end', says David Cameron . It was 'like a game of domininoes', he says. 'It's like a game that was going to end'
 Kissinger called with the news that civil war had broken out in Jordan . Kissinger was Kissinger's first secretary of state in the U.S. Kissinger was in Jordan when the war broke out .
 Palestinian rebel forces were fighting Hussein’s troops, and Syrian tanks were poised and ready on the border . The Syrian government was in control of the situation .
 Syrian tanks or troops could move against Hussein, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I talked to a group of reporters and editors and told them that we might have to intervene if Syrian tanks and troops moved against Hussein."
 The next day, September 18, we received a note from the Kremlin stating that the Soviets had no intention of intervening in Jordan, urging us not to intervene, and suggesting that we discourage others from doing so .
 Mike Mansfield was in a breakfast meeting with his boss at the end of the day . Mansfield: "I had one of my regular breakfast meetings with Mike [Mansfield] that morning. I had a regular breakfast meeting."
 Mansfield strongly opposed any American military involvement in the Mideast . Mansfield was able to tell him that, based on the Soviet note, I was optimistic that we could work things out without confrontation .
 At eleven o'clock that same morning I had an appointment with Golda Meir, who was in the U.S. on an unofficial visit . Meir was visiting the United States .
 Meir was ushered into the Oval Office, she was in a very stern mood . Meir could see from her fixed smile that she had been in a stern mood. She was in the mood of sternness .
 I opened by saying that I was not naive about Soviet intentions . I was aware of the difficulties that ceasefire violations had caused Israel, he said . He said that he was aware that the Soviet intentions were not naive .
 Rabin spread out three large Israeli intelligence maps pinpointing the specific violations . She asked Rabin to explain. She asked him to explain .
 Meir said that Israel's problems were not caused primarily by the Arabs . Meir: Israel’s problems are not caused by the Arab population .
 They were the direct result of the Soviet presence and Soviet military equipment . The Soviet presence was the result of a Soviet presence in the Soviet Union .
 The Egyptians did not even know how to operate the surface-to-air missiles the Soviets had given them . Soviet personnel had had to be interspersed at all levels within the Egyptian military .
 Israeli pilots have already met Soviet pilots in air-to-air combat over the Suez Canal . Israeli pilots had already met Soviets in air to air combat .
 Meir: "We had already sent several strong notes to the Soviets through diplomatic channels" Meir says he told Meir that the Soviets had already been in touch with Israel .
 I said that I wanted her to understand the major principles underlying American policy in the Mideast . I said she wanted to understand some of the principles underlying U.S. policy . She said she wants to know more about Mideasts in the Middle East .
 "We recognized that something had to be done about Egyptian cease-fire violations," says President Obama . "We were under no illusions concerning the Soviet intent and involvement in the region," says Obama .
 We did not intend to permit the military balance in the Middle East to be disturbed, says Israel . We were prepared to work with her in developing a military aid program that would be appropriate for the strategy the Israelis adopted .
 Meir said that Israel would not move precipitately into Jordan; she agreed that it was preferable to have Hussein solve the problem himself . Meir agreed that Israel wouldn't move into Jordan .
 Reports from Jordan indicated hard fighting throughout the country, with Hussein’s troops holding their own or better . Reports indicate hard fighting in Jordan, with reports of hard fighting .
 Syrian tanks crossed the border into northern Jordan on September 18 . White House Situation Room flashed word of Syrian tanks crossing border into Jordan . Syrian tanks were seen in the Situation Room .
 The next day we learned that the invasion force had numbered at least a hundred tanks . "The next day, we learned . The invasion force . had numbered . at least 100 tanks," the author says .
 Kissinger drafted a very stern note and delivered it to the Soviets . Rogers issued a strong public statement calling on Syria to halt its invasion . Kissinger drafted the note and Rogers issued the statement .
 By early evening it appeared that about half the Syrian tanks had returned to Syria . About half of the tanks had been captured .
 They had broken through Jordanian defenses and were rumbling almost unopposed along the roads toward Amman . They were unoppested by the Jordanian defenses . They had been rumbling nearly unoppopposed .
 By the next morning, most of the tanks had also been pulled back . The next day, the tanks were also pulled back from the area .
 "We would have to decide what to do very soon, or it might be too late to do anything," says President Obama . "We might not be able to find out what we need to do," says Obama .
 Kissinger authorized Kissinger to call Ambassador Rabin and suggest that he inform his government that we would be fully in support of Israeli air strikes on Syrian forces in Jordan if this became necessary .
 I decided to put 20,000 American troops on alert and moved additional naval forces into the Mediterranean, says President Obama . "I decided ... to put the U.S. on alert," he says .
 By the morning of September 22, the Syrian tanks were once again heading back toward the border .
 Rabin called early in the afternoon to confirm that the tanks had left Jordan and that the rebel forces were in disarray . Rabin: "The rebels are in a state of disarray" Rabin says the tanks have left Jordan .
 He ascribed Hussein’s victory to the tough American position, the Israeli threat, and the superb fighting . Hussein's victory was attributed to the American position and Israeli threat .
 Kissinger sent Kissinger urgent memo on Friday, September 18, about the crisis in Cuba . Kissinger was waiting for Golda Meir to arrive for her meeting in the Oval Office . Kissinger: "There is a crisis in crisis in the country"
 If the intelligence was correct, it meant that the Soviets were building a nuclear submarine base on Cuba . The base is believed to be located in Cuba .
 On August 4 Yuli Vorontsov, the Minister Counselor of the Soviet Embassy and Chargé in Dobrynin’s absence, had delivered a note to Kissinger expressing concern over alleged anti-Castro activity by Cuban revolutionary groups in the U.S.
 The Soviets were adhering to the understanding President Kennedy had agreed to in 1962, which included a provision that the Soviets would not put nuclear weapons on Cuban territory in return for our assurance that we would not undertake or support military action to overthrow Castro .
 Regular U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba in August showed nothing unusual . U.2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba was routine in August .
 Alcatraz Island is a tiny dot of land off Cuba’s southern coast in the middle of Cienfuegos Bay . In September, photographs revealed that construction had begun on the shores of the island . The island is one of Cuba's most isolated islands in the
 A submarine tender was anchored to four buoys in the deep-water basin, and submarine nets were strung across the harbor . Submarine nets were also strung out of the harbor, with a submarine tender anchored .
 A large complex of barracks, administrative buildings, and recreation facilities, is almost completed on Alcatraz Island . A complex complex of . barracks, . administrative buildings and . recreation facilities are almost completed .
 U-2 discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba in October 1962 . President Kennedy revealed their presence in a nationwide television speech . Adlai Stevenson displayed enlarged photographs at the UN General Assembly .
 Khrushchev's actions placed him in an almost impossible situation in terms of his international prestige . These actions placed the Soviet Union leader in a difficult position .
 He was able to use the universal fear of war to put pressure on Kennedy, thus making himself appear responsible for resolving the crisis and reaching a peaceful settlement .
 Kennedy agreed to refrain from anti-Castro activities in return for Khrushchev’s removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy ended up by agreeing to refrain . from any anti- Castro activities in . return for the removal of Soviet missiles .
 In view of what had happened in the 1962 crisis, I decided that I would not force a public confrontation unless I had no other choice . I decided to not deal with the Soviets from anything less than a position of unyielding strength, and I decided not to force confrontation .
 Further U-2 flights confirmed our worst fears, says U.N. agency . U.S. officials say they are 'confirming' their fears .
 The construction was proceeding at a rapid pace, and unless we acted quickly, we would wake up one morning to find a fully functioning Soviet submarine base ninety miles from our shores . The construction of a nuclear submarine base was under way .
 Bill Rogers was particularly forceful in an NSC meeting on September 23, urging that we keep the situation completely quiet until after the November elections . Rogers: "Bill Rogers was very forceful in a meeting on Sept. 23."
 "I did not feel, however, that the crisis would keep that long, and I directed the NSC to work on a contingency plan," says President Obama .
 Dobrynin requested an appointment with me to deliver the Kremlin’s reply concerning proposals we had made recently regarding a possible summit meeting . The Kremlin has not responded to any of the proposals made recently .
 The Soviets apparently thought we were still unaware of what they were doing in Cuba, and were clearly planning to take us by surprise with a fait accompli, just as they had in 1962 . In 1962, the Soviets were planning to surprise us with a surprise attack on Cuba .
 Kissinger and Kissinger agreed that he should meet with Dobrynin to see what the Soviets were up to . Kissinger and I agreed that Kissinger and . Kissinger . agreed that . he should met with Dobynin and see what . was up to, Kissinger said .
 Initial information suggested a naval installation for nuclear submarines was being built in Cienfuegos, says Sulzberger .
 Sulzberger's column appeared on the paper's editorial pages . Because the information was vague and unconfirmed, there was a chance that the story might not be picked up for several days .
 When Kissinger and Dobrynin met in the Map Room that morning, neither mentioned the column nor the alleged base . Kissinger: "I'm not going to be surprised if you're going to find out"
 Dobrynin reported that the Soviet leaders were interested in holding a summit, and he even proposed dates . The summit was held in the Soviet Union in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 Kissinger suggested he return to the White House later that afternoon for a reply . Kissinger suggested that he return later that day for a response . Kissinger said that he would respond to Kissinger's request for a White House reply .
 At a press briefing across the river in the Pentagon, a Deputy Assistant Secretary inadvertently revealed that there was evidence that a Soviet submarine facility was possibly being constructed in Cuba . However, at the same press briefing, the Pentagon inadvertently revealed the existence of the facility .
 He tried to finesse the situation as much as possible, but the story was in the news that evening . The story was on the front page of the New York Times .
 Kissinger told me that when Dobrynin came back to the White House at 5:30 that afternoon his face was ashen . Kissinger said that when he came back from the day the president's face was "ashen" Kissinger: "Dobrynin's face is ashen
 Kissinger studiously ignored Dobrynin’s surprise and discomfort, and began by stating calmly that he had my answer concerning the proposed summit . Kissinger then said: “I have my answer.” Kissinger then sat down and said he had the answer .
 In principle, he said, he would agree to a meeting in Moscow in either June or September 1971 . The meeting would take place in Moscow between June and September 1971.
 He said he wanted to talk about the press statements that had come out of the Pentagon and his own press conference earlier that afternoon . Finally he said that he also wanted to discuss the Pentagon statements .
 He had implied to reporters that we did not yet know whether there actually was a submarine base in Cuba .
 He told Dobrynin that he had done this deliberately in order to give the Soviets an opportunity to withdraw without a public confrontation . He said he had given the Soviets a chance to withdraw .
 "We were giving the Soviets an opportunity to pull out because we did not want a public confrontation," says Putin . Putin: 'We did want to avoid public confrontation'
 "We would not shrink from other measures, including public ones, if we were forced into them," says minister . But we would not be forced into such measures, he says .
 Dobrynin asked whether we considered that the 1962 understandings on Cuba had been violated . He asked whether it was considered a violation of the 1962 understandingings on the island .
 Cuba was a place of extreme sensitivity for us, and we considered that the installation of the submarine base had been carried out with maximum deception . Cuba was considered to be an extremely sensitive place for the CIA .
 Dobrynin said that he would immediately inform the Kremlin of what Kissinger had said . He said he would inform them of Kissinger's comments .
 I gave orders that no further news leaks about the submarine base were to occur until we received the Soviet reply . I gave . orders that absolutely no further . news leaks . were to be made until we . received the . Soviet reply was to the U.S.
 "The entire success of our strategy of keeping the crisis low key depended on keeping a tight lid on the story. The success of this strategy depended on the fact that the story of the crisis was kept low key," says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 I knew from the 1962 experience that a serious war scare would sweep the country if the real story of Cienfuegos hit the headlines . The story of the war scare in 1962 will be told in a new documentary, "Cienfuesgos"
 Several prominent political leaders and journalists dismissed Cienfuegos as a trumped-up crisis . We were able to keep the secret so well that during the next few days several prominent politicians dismissed it as a hoax .
 Senator Fulbright, the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, charged the administration with “hoodwinking the American people” and said that stories of nuclear submarine bases in Cuba were aimed at getting Congress to approve generous appropriations for the Pentagon . Fulbright said the stories were aimed
 I did nothing to discourage such mistaken opinions; I did everything possible to carry on business as usual . I did not discourage such mistaken opinions; in fact, I did . "I did nothing possible," he said .
 The most recent U-2 flights indicated a slowing of activity at Cienfuegos, so on September 27, I left for a week-long trip to Europe . I'm going to spend the rest of the week in Europe .
 On October 6, Dobrynin called to arrange an appointment with Kissinger . Kissinger was Kissinger's first time in Washington since leaving the U.S.
 The Soviet government reaffirmed the 1962 understanding about Cuba and stated that it was not doing anything in Cuba that would contradict that understanding . Kissinger handed Kissinger a note in which he said the Soviet government was reaffirming the agreement .
 The Soviets had decided to take advantage of the maneuverability a low profile afforded . The Soviets decided to use the maneuverable maneuverability of the Soviet Union .
 They were backing away from the crisis by denying that it had ever existed, they said . The government was backing away by denying it had even existed .
 We could not accept Dobrynin’s vague declaration as the definitive settlement of such a serious incident, we said . We would not accept a vague settlement as definitive settlement .
 A few days later Kissinger handed him a note from Kissinger that outlined our interpretation of the 1962 understanding . Kissinger handed Kissinger a note that welcomed the Soviet reply but specifically outlined the interpretation . Kissinger's note was a few days after Kissinger handed it to Kissinger .
 Five specific actions that we would consider violations of the 1962 agreement . To nail down the details, I listed five specific actions .
 Dobrynin objected to the bluntness of some of the language, but he hinted that the question would soon be put to rest . He hinted that he would soon put it to rest, but said he would not give up .
 A few days later TASS issued a statement that no submarine base existed, thus putting the Soviets officially on record . The Soviet government news agency said no submarine bases existed in the Soviet Union .
 Through strong but quiet diplomacy we averted what would have been known as the Cuban Nuclear Submarine Crisis of 1970 . This might have taken us to the brink of nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union .
 The events at Cienfuegos Bay convinced me that I had chosen the right course in dealing with another Communist threat in Latin America, this one in Chile . The events convinced me I had . chosen the . right course, dealing with . another Communist . threat in . Latin
 Salvador Allende came in first with a 36. percent plurality in the 1970s Chilean presidential elections . Allende was a pro-Castro Marxist who came in with a plurality of votes in 1970s elections .
 Under Chilean law Allende’s slim plurality was insufficient for election, and the Chilean Congress would choose the new President on October 24 . The new President will be chosen by the Congress .
 The CIA estimated that Cuba had pumped about $350,000 into the Allende campaign . The CIA estimates that Cuba spent about $300,000 on the campaign .
 Allende had run for President three times before and was defeated each time . Allende was elected president of Chile in 1973 .
 In the Chilean elections of 1962 and 1964 Presidents Kennedy and Johnson had authorized CIA expenditures of almost $4 million to avert a Communist takeover in Chile . The CIA expenditures were intended to avert the takeover of Chile .
 The CIA directed the CIA to provide support for Allende’s opponents in order to prevent his election by the Chilean Congress . Nearly twothirds of Chile's voters had rejected Allende .
 As long as the Communists supply external funds to support political parties, factions, or individuals in other countries, the U.S. can and should do the same and do it secretly so that it can be effective .
 Under Communist standards of morality, governments are meant to be subverted and elections influenced . Under Communist morality, government is meant to subvert and influence elections .
 To me it would have been the height of immorality to allow the Soviets, the Cubans, and other Communist nations to interfere with impunity in free elections while America stayed its hand . The U.S. should not interfere with free elections .
 It is a peculiar double standard that would require us alone to stand abjectly aside as democracies are undermined by countries less constrained by conscience . It is not only the UK, it is the only country that has a double standard for conscience .
 In Chile we sought to help non-Communist parties have at least the same resources as the lavishly financed pro-Allende forces. In Chile, this was the case for the non-communist parties to have the same money as the pro-allende forces .
 In mid-October I was informed that our efforts were probably not going to be successful; therefore I instructed the CIA to abandon the operation . In mid October I was told that our . efforts probably not . going to . be successful, he said .
 Cuba exported violence, terrorism, and revolution throughout Latin America was dangerous enough, says President Obama . "I believed, as had my two predecessors, that a Communist regime in Cuba exporting violence and terrorism was dangerous," he says .
 An Italian businessman who called on me before the Chilean election had cautioned, “If Allende should win, and with Castro in Cuba, you will have in Latin America a red sandwich,” he said .
 Cuban intelligence agents began operating from a base in Chile soon after Allende came to power . Cuban agents began exporting revolution to Bolivia, Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, and Uruguay .
 Allende was overthrown by the Chilean military in September 1973 . According to conflicting reports, he was either killed or committed suicide during the coup .
 America was being tested in the fall of 1970—by war in Vietnam, the threat of war in the Middle East, and by the introduction of threatening nuclear capabilities in Cuba . America was tested by Vietnam, Mideast, Vietnam, and the threat to Cuba .
 I feared that in our handling of the EC-121 incident in 1969 the Communists may have thought they had encountered mush . I had feared that . in . handling of . the . incident in . 1969 the . Communists thought they may have encountered mush. I feared they might think they had
 In 1970 in Jordan and Cuba, their probing had encountered our unmistakable steel . While our effort to prevent Allende from coming to power failed, our efforts to prevent it failed, they did .
 Scammon described the average American voter in the next election as a forty-year-old housewife from the outskirts of Dayton, Ohio, whose husband was a machinist .
 The purpose of The Real Majority was to persuade Democrats to stop playing so heavily to the fashionable but unrepresentative constituencies of the young, the poor, the racial minorities, and the students . It was designed to persuade the young and the poor that Democrats should not play so heavily .
 We should aim our strategy at disaffected Democrats, at blue-collar workers, and at working-class white ethnics, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: We need to target disaffected Dems, disaffected voters, and working class whites .
 We should set out to capture the vote of the forty-seven-year-old Dayton housewife, says Rep. Bob Greene . Greene .
 His salvos were remarkably restrained for campaign rhetoric and hit right on target . Hubert Humphrey called him the “brass knuckles of the administration” but his rhetoric was remarkably restrained . He stirred up predictable emotions, but his salvos hit on target with his rhetoric .
 When the campaign began to heat up around the middle of September, I was deeply involved in preparations for my second European trip, which lasted from September 27 to October 5 . When I was preparing for the campaign, I spent the last few weeks preparing for a second European visit .
 When I left, it seemed as if we actually had a chance to pull off an upset victory and pick up some seats . When I . left, I thought that we actually have a chance of pulling off a . surprise victory .
 When I returned, I discovered that we were in serious trouble in almost every major race. When I went back, I found that we had serious problems in many of the major races. We are not going to be able to win races again. We need to win more races.
 Democrats know how to read too, and they had obviously taken the lessons of The Real Majority to heart . The Democrats are taking the lessons from the book "The Real Majority" to heart.
 Adlai Stevenson III, running for the Senate in Illinois, responded to attacks on his ultraliberal record with an emotional invocation of his war record . Stevenson III is running for a seat in Illinois .
 Ted Kennedy’s liberal protégé John Tunney used TV commercials that showed him riding around in a police car . Tunney was running for the Senate in California .
 They hammered at the fact that unemployment had climbed to 5.0 percent and insisted it was going to go higher still . They insisted unemployment was going higher still.
 We commissioned a quick poll that indicated that as things stood we were going to lose thirty House seats and possibly all but one of the key Senate seats . The poll was commissioned by CNN iReport.com .
 I decided to reverse my earlier decision and announced that I would campaign personally for our candidates in a number of key races . "I decided to campaign personally," she said .
 During the three weeks before the election, I devoted seven full days to campaigning for candidates in twenty-two states . During the election I devoted 7 full days . to campaigning .
 Almost everywhere I went during the campaign there were bands of demonstrators . Almost everywhere in the campaign I went there was a band of demonstrators.
 As I was entering a hall in New Jersey, a young man reached out and as he shook my hand shouted a few obscenities at me . As he shook his hand, the young man said, "As he shook me, I was a man of God," he said .
 By this time, he had released his grip on my arm, and I walked directly into the hall . "I walked directly out of the hall," he said .
 I would not have wanted Pat or the girls to see some of the things demonstrators did or hear some of them shouted . I was concerned about the vast majority of individuals and families who had come out in high spirits for a presidential rally and suddenly found themselves .
 While I was talking to a crowd of about 5,000 supporters at California’s San Jose Municipal Auditorium, 2,000 demonstrators beat on the doors all around the building .
 As I walked the few steps to my car after the speech, I could see protesters gathered on the other side of the police barricades just a hundred feet away .
 They were chanting their favorite slogans, including “One, two, three, four—we don’t want your fucking war,” and I could not resist showing them how little respect I had for their juvenile rants .
 'I stood on the hood of the car and gave them the V-sign that had become my political trademark,' says David Cameron . 'I stand on the roof of a car and give them the 'V-sign' he gave them,' he says .
 Secret Service agents were following emergency evacuation procedures . "Within seconds I was inside the car and Secret Service agent was following evacuation procedures," she said .
 One of the cars in the motorcade behind us stalled, and its windows and windows in the press bus were broken by rocks . Unfortunately one of the vehicles stalled and the windows were broken .
 Several people, including Secret Service agents, were hit by rocks and flying glass . Several people were injured in the incident .
 The local police chief may have exaggerated when he said it was an act of God that I got out safely . "It may have been a miracle," the chief said .
 The possibility of a more serious incident having developed was very disturbing . The dents in the presidential limousine and the broken glass from the bus were real enough .
 "That night I sat in my study for over an hour, thinking about what had happened and about how I should respond," he says . "I was in San Clemente from San Jose," he writes .
 "This was the first time in our history that a mob had physically attacked the President of the United States. As far as I knew this was . First time in . history that . a mob physically attacked . President of . United States . The president was attacked by a mob of people
 "I did not care what these demonstrators or their leaders thought about me personally," he said . "If they did not respect the office of the presidency, I thought that people should be made to recognize that fact and take sides on it"
 Two days later, at a rally at Sky Harbor Airport in Phoenix, Phoenix, I discussed the San Jose incident . Two days after the incident, I met with President Obama at a Phoenix rally .
 "I wanted to cut through the fashionable notion that all our troubles were the result of the supposedly immoral war in Vietnam," he says . He says he wanted to clear up the notion that Vietnam war was immoral .
 It was time to brand this alibi for violence as the pure nonsense it was. "It's time for us to brand it as nonsense. It is time for you to be tough on the alibi," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The speech was interrupted many times by loud cheers from the noontime audience . President Obama was interrupted by the cheers of the audience .
 The terrorists, the far left, would like nothing better than to make the President of the United States a prisoner in the White House, says President Obama . The far left wants to make President Obama a prisoner, says Obama .
 "As long as I am President, no band of violent thugs is going to keep me from going out and speaking with the American people wherever they want to hear me," says President Obama .
 "This is a free country, and I fully intend to share that freedom with my fellow Americans," she says . "I'm not afraid to share my freedom," she adds .
 I told Haldeman that I wanted to have the film of this speech rebroad-cast as my election night address to the nation . The film will be rebroadcast as President Obama's election night speech, he said .
 What happened next was one of those mistakes that it is hard to believe could actually have been made . The incident happened in a series of unfortunate incidents in the past .
 The film we had of the Phoenix speech turned out to be a poor quality black-and-white videotape . Phoenix speech was a speech made by President Barack Obama in 1992 .
 The picture was grainy, and the sound, bouncing from the walls of the huge airport hangar, was shrill and occasionally slightly garbled . The sound bounced off the walls from the huge hangar .
 Everyone who worked on it remarked that it was terrible; some of the TV technicians wondered whether it was even of minimum broadcast quality . Some of the television technicians wondered if the broadcast quality was even at minimum .
 Election eve is two days away, there is no time for lengthy debates, and no one wanted to assume the responsibility for saying that we should not use it . But election eve was two days ago, there was no time to debate .
 The editing was completed just in time for the tape to be rushed to the studios for broadcast . It was the first time the tape had been edited and edited for a reason .
 The quality was so bad that many TV stations received calls from outraged Republicans . Republicans were convinced that the program must have been sabotaged by the Democrats .
 Senator Muskie’s election eve broadcast on behalf of the Democratic candidates . Even worse, it was followed immediately by Senator Elon Muskie's election eve broadcasts .
 Muskie sounded calm and measured as he spoke from the homey setting of his summer house in Cape Elizabeth, Maine, Maine . Muskie's summer home is in the state of Cape Elizabeth .
 There was no doubt that Muskie emerged the winner. What should have been a comparison based on substance thus became a comparison .
 The Phoenix speech made me sound as if I were running for District Attorney of Phoenix, rather than the President of the United States addressing the American people at the end of an important national campaign, John Mitchell said .
 In this age of television, technical quality is probably more important than the content of what is said . Technical quality of television is more important in this age than content content is said, says David Cameron .
 We learned this from the first debate with Kennedy, and now we have had to relearn it in a less decisive forum in our handling of this particular matter . We learn this from first debate, and it's not the first time we've had to re-learn it .
 The important thing is for us not to brush it off as something that “wasn’t all that bad” but to recognize that it was a mistake . We need to be sure that kind of mistake is not made again, he says .
 In past election years in which unemployment was on the rise the average loss of seats by the party controlling the White House was forty-six . In fact this was an excellent showing because of the fact that in past election .
 Some extreme liberals were among those senators retired by the voters . It was also gratifying to see that some extreme liberals are among those retiring by voters .
 The greatest disappointment was the drubbing of the gubernatorial contests, where we lost eleven state houses and ended up with only twenty-one Republican governors in the fifty states .
 The most important result of the 1970 election was that the shaky coalition of support we had to rely on in the Senate was replaced by a slim but more dependable majority on foreign policy and national defense issues . The shaky coalition was now replaced with a slim, but dependable, majority on
 Rep. Ted Cruz lost his seat in the House of Representatives in the mid-term election . He says the media treated the election as a significant political failure for him and a serious setback for being re-elected .
 News-week’s cover featured Senator Muskie and the story inside reported that the Democrats now dared to dream that I might be “retired” in 1972 . The story inside said Democrats now dare to dream .
 In the lengthy post-mortem I dictated for Haldeman, I turned my sights toward 1972 . In the long-running, I focused on 1972, when I was in charge .
 I said that we should start now to weed out lackluster Republican House, Senate, and gubernatorial candidates . Help them get other jobs, and replace them with candidates who could win, he said .
 At least two major candidates had been defeated in 1970 because of their involvement in political scandals, says President Nixon . Nixon urged that we take precautions against this particular hazard .
 "The personal ethics and conduct of our candidates had to be above suspicion or reproach," says the PM . The personal ethics of the candidates must be "above suspicion" of reproach .
 I said it was imperative that we get politics out of the White House either by introducing dynamic campaign management into the Republican National Committee or by setting up a special presidential reelection committee . I said that I thought it would be imperative that .
 He should be shown fighting for something, rather than just railing against everything . He should have been shown fighting against everything, not railing against it .
 This extended to my own schedule, where I wanted more spontaneity and less gimmickry, I said . I wanted to be more spontaneous and less gimmicky, he said . This extended into his own schedule .
 "We weren't getting across to people all the activities at the White House," says President Obama . "The social evenings, the worship services, the special parties," says White House aide .
 I wrote that I was going to take the advice of nearly all those around me and firmly and flatly keep out of my re-election campaign until as late as possible in 1972 . I said I would not run for office until 1972 .
 In fact my determination to keep politics out of the White House was short-lived. In fact, I was not quite quite sure what to do with the presidency .
 As each day brought the election closer, the need for action and information became irresistible . The need for information and action became irresistible.
 Democratic Presidents have excelled in flexing political muscle that goes with being the party in the White House . Democratic Presidents since FDR had excelled—and reveled—in flexing their political muscle . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 "I ended up keeping the pressure on the people around me to get organized, to get tough, and to get information about what the other side was doing," he says .
 Sometimes I ordered a tail on a front-running Democrat; sometimes I urged that department and agency files be checked for any indications of suspicious or illegal activities involving prominent Democrats . Sometimes I had a tail ordered on front-runner Hillary Clinton, sometimes I ordered it .
 I told my staff that we should come up with the kind of imaginative dirty tricks that our Democratic opponents used against us, others in previous campaigns. I told his staff that . I told them that we were going to use the same kind of dirty tricks as Democrats did against us and others
 John Mitchell was going to be John Mitchell's campaign manager, but he would have his hands full organizing and running the Committee to Re-elect the President . John Mitchell would have to run the committee to re-elect Barack Obama .
 Colson had joined the administration in late 1969 in the role of White House liaison with special interest groups . Colson joined the White House in 1969 and served as liaison to special groups .
 He spent hours with labor groups, veterans' organizations, ethnic minorities, and religious groups . He met with labor, veterans, and ethnic minorities .
 His instinct for the political jugular and his ability to get things done made him a lightning rod for his own frustrations at the timidity of most Republicans in responding to attacks from the Democrats and the media . His instinct was to attack the media and the Democrats .
 "When I complained to Colson I felt confident that something would be done, and I was rarely disappointed," says Ms Colson . "I was never disappointed. When I complained, I was confident something would happen," she says .
 I was confident that I could win re-election in a contest on the issues in 1972, he says . He was confident he could win a contest in 1972 .
 President Barack Obama won't let the other side be politically tougher than we were. That only reinforced my determination not to let the opposing party be tougher than I was. I'm not going to let that happen, but I'm going to do it .
 "The problems we confronted were so overwhelming and so apparently impervious to anything we could do to change them," he says . "I might not even be nominated for re-election in 1972," he writes .
 Unemployment at 6 percent is the highest point since 1961 . Jobless rate is 6 percent, the highest in the country's history . The unemployment rate has reached 6 percent .
 In February we became involved in the Laotian operation, which turned out to be a military success but a public relations disaster . In February, we became . became involved . in February . The operation was a success for the military, but a PR disaster for the public .
 In May 200,000 antiwar demonstrators converged on Washington and, led by hard-core agitators who had been openly encouraged by the North Vietnamese, mounted a violent but unsuccessful attempt to close down the government for a day .
 The economy was in bad shape and did not look like it was going to get better very soon . The economy did not seem to be going to improve very soon.
 On the foreign exchange markets the dollar hit its lowest point since 1949 . The dollar hit a record low of $1.2 billion on Tuesday .
 The Soviets had set back détente by their adventurism in Cuba and the Middle East . The likelihood of a breakthrough in SALT or the other outstanding issues between us seemed remote . The Soviet Union's 'adventurism' in the Mideast and Cuba set back
 Our tentative approaches to Communist China appeared to have fallen on deaf ears . Similarly our tentative approach to the Communist China also appeared to be met with failure .
 Without these levers to bring pressure to bear on Hanoi it looked as if the war could drag on indefinitely . Increasing strength and confidence of the antiwar forces in Congress might mean a sudden termination vote or cutoff of funds at almost any time .
 Having hit the lowest of low points in 1971, the U.S. rebounded with a series of stunning successes, says President Nixon . Nixon: "We suddenly rebounded" with series of successes .
 "These and other things gave us a momentum that carried right into the presidential election year of 1972," says President Nixon . "These things ... gave us momentum," says Nixon .
 1971 proved the political maxim that one should never despair until the votes have been cast and counted . The year 1971 proved that 1971 proved to be the year of the greatest political triumphs .
 Something can always turn up, often from an unexpected source or quarter, that utterly transforms one's situation and one's prospects . Something can turn up from unexpected sources or quarter can transform one’s situation .
 Before our successful Cambodian operation in 1970, it was estimated that 85 percent of the heavy arms used by the Communists in South Vietnam had come by sea .
 Everything had to come overland through Laos down the Ho Chi Minh trail . Once we closed that route, everything had to be overlanded through Laos .
 By mid-December 1970, Laos was clogged with men and supplies, the bulk of which would be moved into Cambodia for a 1971 spring offensive . The bulk of the supplies would be sent to Cambodia for the spring offensive in 1971 .
 President Nixon authorized a major military operation to cut the Ho Chi Minh trail by attacking enemy forces in Laos . Nixon authorized the operation in January 1971 .
 The operation would be an ARVN exercise; the United States would supply only air cover and artillery support . Because of the problem of American domestic opinion, the South Vietnamese wanted to prove how successful Vietnamization had been, the operation was decided to be an exercise .
 The principal American contribution would be ferrying troops and supplies by helicopter, gunship support, and B-52 raids .
 The Communists put up stronger resistance than had been anticipated . The U.S. military command in Saigon failed to respond to this unexpectedly intense level of combat .
 The resulting ARVN casualties were heavy, but they continued to fight courageously . The resulting deaths were heavy for the NVA .
 The South Vietnamese forces quickly recovered from these initial setbacks, and most of the military purposes of Lam Son were achieved within the first few weeks . The Communists were deprived of the capacity to launch an offensive against our forces in Vietnam in 1971 .
 In view of the operation’s substantial success and because of signs that the Communists were trying to prepare a major counteroffensive, the ARVN commanders decided to withdraw early . The operation was a success and there were signs that Communists were preparing a counteroffensive .
 Our air support was inadequate, however, and under severe enemy pounding some of the ARVN soldiers panicked, says the author . The author says, "Under severe enemy bombardment some of our soldiers panicked"
 It took only a few televised films of ARVN soldiers clinging to the skids of our evacuation helicopters to reinforce the widespread misconception of the ARVVN forces as incompetent and cowardly . It took just a few TV films to reinforce a widespread misconception .
 The net result was a military success but a psychological defeat, both in South Vietnam and U.S. morale was shaken by media reports of the retreat, and in America, where suspicions of escalation had been aroused .
 Sir Robert Thompson wrote to Kissinger from Vietnam shortly after Lam Son ended . Thompson wrote that Kissinger wrote that Lam Son was a mistake .
 He praised its military success and stated that the major factor in the war was now the question of South Vietnamese psychology and confidence .
 Thanks to Lam Son there was no Communist offensive in 1971 despite the largest influx of matériel in the history of the war . Lam Son was the only person to stop the Communist offensive .
 American and South Vietnamese casualties were reduced, and Vietnamization continued at a steady pace .
 First Lieutenant William Calley, Jr., Jr., was found guilty by an Army courtmartial of the premeditated murder of twenty-two South Vietnamese civilians in 1971 . Calley found guilty of premeditating murder of two Vietnamese civilians on March 29, 1971 .
 The public furore over Lam Son had just begun to settle down, and now we're faced with still another Vietnam-related controversy . Lam Son is the son of a former soldier who was killed in 2007 .
 This one had been simmering since the fall of 1969, when the murders were first revealed . This one was simmering for decades .
 The village had been a Vietcong stronghold, and our forces had suffered many casualties trying to clear it out of it . The village was a 'Vietcong stronghold' and 'suffered many casualties' The villagers were killed by the Vietcong .
 Calley had his men round up the villagers and then ordered that they be shot . Many villagers were left sprawled lifeless in a drainage ditch . Calley's men shot villagers and left them to die .
 Many commentators and congressmen professed outrage about My Lai case were not really as interested in moral questions raised by the Calley case as they were interested in using it to make political attacks against the Vietnam war . But I felt that many of the commentators and . congressmen who profess
 For one thing, they had been noticeably uncritical of North Vietnamese atrocities . For one reason, they seemed uncritical . For another reason, the U.S. should not have been afraid of North Vietnam atrocities .
 The calculated and continual role that terror, murder, and massacre played in the Vietcong strategy was one of the most underreported aspects of the entire Vietnam war .
 Much to the discredit of the media and the antiwar activists, this side of the story was only rarely included in descriptions of Vietcong policy and practices .
 On March 31 the court-martial sentenced Calley to life in prison at hard labor . Calley was found guilty of sexual assault and sexual assault in February .
 Public reaction to this announcement was emotional and sharply divided . Public reaction was emotionally divided .
 John Connally and Jerry Ford recommended in strong terms that I use my powers as Commander in Chief to reduce Calley’s prison time . Calley has been sentenced to prison time in Texas .
 Connally said that justice had been served by the sentence, and that now the reality of maintaining public support for the armed services and for the war had to be given consideration .
 All the lawmakers agreed that emotions in Congress were running high in favor of presidential intervention . All of them agreed that the president should step in .
 I called Admiral Moorer on April 1 and ordered that, pending Calley’s appeal, he should be released from the stockade . He should be confined instead to his quarters on the base, he said .
 When this was announced to the House of Representatives, there was a spontaneous round of applause on the floor .
 George Wallace, after a visit with Calley, said that he had done the right thing . George Wallace: "George Wallace said that I had done . I'm glad that I did it," he said .
 Ehrlichman announced that he would personally review the Calley case before any final sentence was carried out . Two days later he announced he would review Calley's case .
 By April 1974, Calley’s sentence had been reduced to ten years, with eligibility for parole as early as the end of that year . Calley's sentence was reduced to 10 years, and he could be eligible for parole in April 1974 .
 I reviewed the case as I had said I would but decided not to intervene. I reviewed it as I said I . would, but decided to not intervene . The case was reviewed by the judge, who said he would not intervene.
 Three months after I resigned, the Secretary of the Army decided to parole Calley . Calley was paroled three months after he was released .
 My Lai massacre was used by the media and antiwar forces to chip away at our efforts to build public support for our Vietnam objectives and policies . I think most Americans understood that the massacre was not representative of our people, of the war we were fighting, or of our men who
 From the very beginning I had decided that my administration would be the best chronicled in history . The White House tapes will be released in the spring of 2015 .
 I wanted a record of every major meeting I held, ranging from verbatim transcripts of important national security sessions to “color reports” of ceremonial events . I wanted to be able to track down every meeting I had, including that of the president .
 The system proved cumbersome, because it was not always convenient or appropriate to have someone in the room taking notes . Unfortunately, it proved cumbersome because of the need for someone to take notes .
 Too many of the reports ended up more hagiography than history . The quality of prose varied as much as the quality of perception, we found .
 During the period that Lam Son was being planned and discussed, I decided to reinstall a tape recording system . Finally, during the . period that . was being . re-installed a tape . recording system.
 The existence of the tapes was never meant to be made public—at least not during my presidency . The tapes were never intended to be released during the president's presidency .
 I thought that afterward I could consult the tapes in preparing whatever books or memoirs I might write, I thought . I thought afterwards I could . consult . The tapes will be used to help people who want to know more about their lives .
 An objective record might also be useful to the extent that any President feels vulnerable to revisionist histories, whether from within or without his administration, he says . Such an objective record could be useful, he adds .
 The first President known to make tapes of his conversations was Franklin Roosevelt, who reportedly had a microphone placed in a lamp in the Oval Office . Franklin Roosevelt reportedly used a microphone to record conversations .
 Lyndon Johnson had a taping system for his office phone, his bedroom phone, Camp David, his ranch in Johnson City, and the phone at his office in Austin .
 In addition to the phone equipment, he had room microphones placed in the Cabinet Room and in the private office next to the Oval Office .
 At one point there was also a recording device that could pick up conversations in the room outside the Oval Office where Johnson’s visitors would wait .
 The Johnson system was operated manually, which permitted him to decide which conversations to record . Johnson was able to choose which conversations he recorded .
 In the Cabinet Room buttons were attached to the underside of the table in front of his chair, and in the private office the system was activated by buttons concealed behind the television console in the Oval Office . In the . private office, buttons were concealed behind a television console .
 Johnson frequently had the tapes transcribed as soon as the conversation had ended . Johnson often had to transcribe the conversations as soon after they ended .
 According to the White House grapevine, Johnson taped the conversation when he met privately with Bobby Kennedy to inform him that he would not be the 1964 vice presidential nominee .
 Johnson asked to have the tape transcribed after the meeting . Johnson asked for the tape to be transcribed .
 When the typist played the tape, however, she found that the entire conversation was inaudible .
 A tape technician concluded that Kennedy must have carried a small scrambling device with him as a precaution . Kennedy was carrying the device at the time of his death .
 Johnson thought that his decision to remove his taping system was a mistake . Johnson felt his tapes were invaluable in writing his memoirs .
 Although I was not comfortable with the idea of taping people without their knowledge, I was at least confident that the secrecy of the system would protect their privacy .
 President Barack Obama says recording only selected conversations would undercut the purpose of having the taping system . Obama: "If our tapes were going to be an objective record of my presidency, they could not have such an obviously self-serving bias"
 Talking would trigger the tape machines . A system was installed that was voice-activated . The tape machines were programmed to be voice activated .
 Beginning in February recording devices were placed in the Oval Office, the Cabinet Room, and the EOB office .
 I rejected the suggestion that recording equipment be placed on phones in the Family Quarters and in Key Biscayne and San Clemente . I wanted to record only the official business of the presidency, he says .
 Initially, I was conscious of the taping, but before long I accepted it as part of the surroundings. Initially, it was a bit of taping .
 Bob Greene says he never listened to a tape until June 4, 1973, when he had to do so because of the Watergate investigation . He says he was forced to listen to tape because of Watergate probe .
 "None of the tapes was transcribed until September 1973, when I was faced with the subpoenas of the Ervin Committee and the Special Prosecutor," he says .
 In February 1971, Pat invited Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and her children to have dinner with our family and see the official portraits of President Kennedy and herself before the unveiling ceremony .
 It was a particularly moving occasion for us because none of them had been inside the White House since the agonizing days immediately after President Kennedy’s assassination . None of the staff had been there since the assassination .
 Pat gave explicit orders that the visit be kept secret until it was over so that no reporters or cameramen would intrude on their privacy . The visit was kept secret .
 John Kennedy, Jr., Jr., and his sister, Caroline, 13, were very enthusiastic about each of the portraits .
 I thought that this might be because she was embroiled in a controversy with the artist who had sold a reproduction of the painting and sketches of her to a national magazine . She thought that she might be embroiled in the controversy .
 Pat later told me that when she invited Rose Kennedy to see the portraits, Mrs. Kennedy refused to see them . Pat later said that Rose Kennedy was not impressed with the portraits .
 Kennedy stood silently in front of her son’s bowed figure for a long time . Kennedy had stood silently for a time before her son's bowed figure was seen .
 The butler, Allen, had been in the White House while the Kennedys were here, and he greeted Jackie warmly . Allen was a butler who had been with the family at the time of the visit .
 He put ice in her white wine at dinner, and she explained that it had been her custom to have this when she was here .
 The children were served milk at Jackie’s request, and John, Jr., said, “Milk is so bad in foreign countries.” Jackie, Jr. Jackie and John Jr. Jr. were in the U.S.
 As we went into the second-floor Dining Room, which she had converted from Margaret Truman’s bedroom, we talked about how Alice Longworth had her appendix out in it . We also talked about the Second-floor dining room .
 She said she and Jack and she practically suffocated when the room was being renovated because of the paint smell .
 In fact, they had moved to the other end of the floor until the painting was completed . They had moved from the floor to the floor of the painting until it was finished .
 I recalled that one of the problems of campaigning was that in many hotels, and particularly in the smaller cities, the rooms were often freshly painted before we arrived . The rooms are often freshened up with new paintings before they arrive in the city .
 It is difficult enough to sleep on the road, but the smell of paint makes it impossible . It is impossible to sleep in a car on a motorbike without being covered in paint .
 She also recalled the picture that was taken in Chicago when the three of us arrived on the same plane early in 1960 .
 I reminded her that she had been reading Allen Drury’s Advise and Consent on the plane . She had read the book on her way to the airport .
 The White House has been in the spotlight since President Barack Obama took office in 2009 . President Obama's first term ended in June 2013 .
 Of course I was determined to keep the conversation away from anything that would distress her or make the visit sad . Of course she was determined not to make the trip sad .
 Tricia first met Ed Cox at a high school dance in 1963 . Tricia and Ed first met at a school dance . Ed first married Tricia at the age of 17 .
 They began to date but found themselves falling into disagreements about politics . They began dating at the age of 18 .
 Ed was a Republican, but in the Eastern liberal tradition . During the summer of 1968 he worked for Ralph Nader . Ed was also a Republican .
 One day late in 1969 Tricia told me that they were becoming serious about each other, but she was concerned about their continuing political differences . Tricia was concerned that their political differences were continuing .
 Both were extremely strong-willed and articulate, these discussions were often heated . Since both of them were very strong, they often had heated discussions .
 I said that the important thing was the way they felt about each other . If they were truly in love, that was all that mattered, he said . Political problems would work themselves out, he added .
 As time went on, their political differences virtually evaporated as their affection for each other grew steadily stronger . The two men were married at the time .
 Ed Cox came into his study at Camp David and said he was very much in love with Tricia . Cox said in 1970, "Mr President, as I’m sure you know, I am very much . in love" President Richard Nixon said, "I'm very much
 I had known Ed for several years, and I told him that what was important was what Tricia wanted and that I was sure she would say yes . She said she had known him for years and told him she would be happy to marry him .
 We announced their engagement on Pat’s birthday, March 16, after a dinner in honor of Prime Minister John Lynch of Ireland .
 It was entirely up to her and Ed, but we felt it would be something they would remember all their lives . It was up to them, but they wanted it to be a memorable experience for them, she said .
 Pat suggested that, since they had chosen June 12, we could have it outdoors in the Rose Garden . Pat suggested, since the date had been chosen, it could be June 12 .
 The night before the wedding I wrote a short note to Tricia and slipped it under her door after she had gone to bed . The note was slipped under the door of Tricia's bedroom after she went to sleep .
 Intermittent light drizzle was predicted until around four—just when the ceremony was scheduled to begin . The ceremony was set to begin at 4 p.m. ET .
 Tricia says she is taking the risk and counting on the weather clearing as forecast as forecast . Tricia: "I don't think it's a good decision to take the risk" Tricia is confident that the weather will clear .
 When I left for the Residence around three, the rain had tapered off slightly, but the sky was still a threatening, sullen gray .
 Tricia described the scene in the Family Quarters when she emerged from her room dressed in her wedding gown and veil . Pat and Julie were waiting for her in the West Hall when she arrived .
 Mama and Julie looked so beautiful that suddenly I felt the event would be beautiful too, I felt like it would also be beautiful .
 The diamond pendant necklace Edward had given me was the perfect length for the V-neck gown .
 Daddy appeared from the elevator, and said that everyone looked lovely . "Daddy said everyone was looking lovely," she said .
 He went into his room and reappeared shortly in a morning coat and striped pants . He has the height to do it justice .
 A clearing front that would last for about fifteen minutes was expected to move into the area at about 4:30. Now a clearing front is expected to last about 15 minutes . The clearing front will move in the area around 4.30.
 At 4:30 Julie and the bridesmaids began the procession down the long curving white staircase into the garden . Julie's mother and father were married at the end of the day .
 The Army Strings sounded glorious as we approached the garden entrance . It was the first time we had seen the band at the centre of the festival .
 Lucy Winchester smiled from ear to ear like the Cheshire Cat as we walked through the entrance . Lucy Winchester smiles from ear-to-ear like she did at the entrance to the theatre .
 Julie was ahead of us in her ephemeral-looking palest of mint gown, walking in a stately manner . It was the most breathtaking sight I had ever seen in the United States. Julie was on her way to the U.S.
 The Rose Garden was a crown of natural beauty, with the gazebo the most spectacular jewel of the crown .
 Flowers which were exquisite in their own right were intertwined with one another . Out of this composition emerged a creation of beauty that surpassed the beauty of individual flowers .
 Lucy whispered, “Go,” to us. When Julie had almost reached the steps leading to the platform where the minister stood waiting, Lucy whispered "Go" to us .
 "The crowd was one blur until we reached the first row and I saw Mama and gave her a special smile," she said . The crowd was "one blur" until we got to first row, she said, "I saw Mama"
 Eddie and Eddie exchanged little smiles as Eddie and I ascended the steps of the steps . "I'm so proud of my dad," Eddie said .
 Tricia and Ed had written the wedding ceremony for themselves . Ed and Tricia were married in a beautiful ceremony .
 When it was over and the groom had kissed the bride, instead of walking immediately up the aisle, they went over first to Pat and me and then to the Coxes, to embrace us and to thank us for this day .
 When the band began playing “Thank Heaven for Little Girls,” I broke in to dance with Tricia while Ed danced with Pat . Tricia and Pat danced with Ed, Tricia .
 She is an excellent dancer, and guests broke into delighted applause as she steered them around the floor .
 "I knew that she missed David, who was now in the Navy and had been assigned to sea duty in the Mediterranean," she says . "She missed David," David's son, who is in the navy .
 I whispered in her ear that I would never forget how beautiful she was on her wedding day two and a half years before . "I whispered in . Her wedding day," she said to her husband, who had been married for two years, before she died .
 I saw Lynda Bird Johnson, standing alone, and I asked her to dance and told her how impressed I had been by her beauty and grace when I saw her on television when she and Chuck Robb had been married in the White House .
 After the newlyweds had left for a honeymoon at Camp David, Pat, Julie, Bebe Rebozo, and I sat in the Residence watching the TV specials . Bebe and Pat were there for the honeymoon .
 "It was a day that all of us will always remember, because we were beautifully, and simply, happy," she said . "All of us were beautifully and simply happy"
 In the top left-hand corner there was a picture of me standing with Tricia in the Rose Garden . In the right left corner, a photo of Tricia and Tricia were taken in the garden .
 Vietnam Archive: Pentagon Study Traces 3 Decades of Growing U.S. Involvement in Vietnam . Pentagon Study: Vietnam has been involved in Vietnam for decades .
 The story described a 7,000-page study of American involvement in Southeast Asia from World War II through 1968 . It had been commissioned by Robert McNamara, Johnson’s Secretary of Defense . The study was commissioned by McNamara .
 It contained verbatim documents from the Defense Department, State Department, the CIA, the White House, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The document was released in March .
 The Times announced that it planned to publish not only portions of the study but many of the original documents as well .
 In fact, this was the most massive leak of classified documents in American history . The leak was a massive leak in the U.S.
 The documents had been illegally turned over to the Times, and I believed that the paper acted irresponsibly in publishing them . The documents were turned over illegally, he said .
 The Times admitted having been in possession of classified material for more than three months before publishing them . The Times had never once sought comment from anyone in the government, or inquired whether publication of any classified material might threaten national security .
 The defense and intelligence agencies raced to obtain copies of the study in order to assess the impact of its disclosure . The study was commissioned by the U.S. Defense and National Security Council .
 The National Security Agency was worried that some of the more recent documents could provide code-breaking clues . The agency is worried that the documents could contain code-cracks .
 They feared information about signal and electronic intelligence capabilities would be spotted by the trained eyes of enemy experts . The U.S. feared that information about signals would be seen by trained eyes .
 The State Department was alarmed because the study would expose Southeast Asia Treaty Organization contingency war plans that were still in effect . State Department: Study would expose S.A. treaty plans that still remain in effect.
 The CIA was worried that past or current informants would be exposed . The study would contain specific references to the names and activities of CIA agents still active in Southeast Asia .
 A tremor shook the international community because the study contained material relating to the role of other governments as diplomatic go-betweens . Several of them made official protests .
 Dean Rusk issued a statement that the documents would be valuable to the North Vietnamese and the Soviets . Rusk said the documents were valuable to both the North Vietnam and the Soviet Union .
 Policy argued for moving against the Times; politics argued against it . Policy argued against moving against it; policy argued for it .
 The McNamara study was primarily a critique of the way Kennedy and Johnson had led the nation into war in Vietnam . The study was published in 1968 .
 News reports said the document proved that Johnson had told the American people that he was not going to escalate the war, while privately planning an escalation of 185,000 American men .
 There was an even more fundamental reason for taking action to prevent publication. But to me, there was a bigger reason for stopping publication. There was also a more important reason for preventing publication.
 Mel Laird felt that over 95 percent of the material could be declassified, but we were all still worried about whatever percent—even if it were only 1 percent—that should not be—that shouldn't be . Laird: "Over 95 percent" of declassified material could
 If we did not move against the Times it would be a signal to every disgruntled bureaucrat in the government that he could leak anything he pleased while the government stood by . The government simply stood by.
 The Times's decision to publish the documents was clearly the product of the paper's antiwar policy rather than a consistent attachment to principle . The Times’s decision not to publish documents was the result of a consistent anti-war policy .
 Otto Otepka, a State Department employee, showed classified documents to senators investigating lax security procedures in the Department of State Department in the early 1960s . He had shown classified documents relating to lax State Department security procedures .
 Otepka believed that his action was justified because it was the only way to correct what he considered a dangerous situation . Otepkas said that his actions were justified because he was trying to correct the situation .
 Orderly procedures are essential if the division of power between legislative and executive branches is not to be undermined . Orderly procedure is essential for the vital division of the power between the two branches, says the author of the book .
 The use of “underground” methods to obtain classified documents from lower-level officials is a dangerous departure from such orderly procedures, the author says .
 If any underling in the State Department were free to disclose confidential cables or if any agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation could leak the contents of secret files whenever he felt like it, the Executive Branch of the Government would have no security at all .
 The Justice Department moved to enjoin the Times from publication until the government could review the documents and verify that they caused no national security problems . On Tuesday, June 15, the Justice Department filed the request . The Times is being sued by the government .
 The St. Louis Post-Dispatch had obtained copies of the book and started publication on their own . The book was published by the newspaper's publisher, the St. MoD .
 "I did not consider that rights conveyed by the First Amendment for the publication of these documents superior to the right of an American soldier to stay alive in wartime," he said .
 At the outset I had hoped that former Presidents Truman and Johnson would join me in taking a strong public stand against such leaks of classified material . At the beginning of this article I had asked that former President Truman and . Johnson join me .
 Johnson accused "professors" of misconstruing contingency plans as actual presidential decisions . Harlow said Johnson had talked in bitter outbursts, accusing the “professors” who wrote the study .
 The authors of the study had all been involved in the actions they were ‘bitching” about now, Johnson had said . Johnson said he had never made a decision of any consequence on escalation without the full concurrence of McNamara and others in his administration .
 One of the majority opinions agreed that the disclosures might have a serious impact on the national interest but said this was still no basis for sanctioning entire restraint on the press . The majority opinions said this is still not enough to sanction restraint on press .
 Kissinger's secret trip to China was just three and a half weeks away from Kissinger’s secret trip . SALT talks were under way . Kissinger's visit to China is just three weeks before Kissinger's SALT trip .
 Kissinger offered Kissinger's most far-reaching proposal yet at secret Paris talks . Kissinger's proposal is the latest in a series of proposals from the U.S. State Department of Energy .
 Before long, the North Vietnamese would slam the door on our new proposal and begin building up for a new military offense . The U.S. would likely be building up on its own military offense, the U.N. says .
 We had lost our court battle against the newspaper that published the documents, but I was determined that we would at least win our public case against the man I believed had stolen them .
 Ellsberg had come under suspicion soon after the first installments from the study appeared . A former Pentagon aide, he was accused of leaking classified classified documents .
 Ellsberg had revealed government foreign policy secrets during wartime . "I considered what others may have thought, I considered what I had done to be despicable and contemptible," he writes .
 On June 28, a Los Angeles grand jury indicted him on one count of theft of government property . He is also accused of unauthorized possession of documents and writings related to national defense .
 Kissinger, Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Kissinger met on the afternoon of June 17 to assess the situation . Kissinger: "Kissississian, HALDeman, and I had met on June 17"
 Kissinger had known Ellsberg at Harvard and said he was bright but emotionally unstable . Kissinger said he had known him at Harvard, but said he would be "emotionally unstable"
 Ellsberg had said he was convinced that I intended to escalate the war rather than pull troops out of Vietnam . In various interviews, he said he had been convinced that .
 He said increased public opposition would be necessary to force unilateral withdrawal . He said the withdrawal would be needed to force withdrawal .
 "I felt that there was serious reason to be concerned about what he might do next," says former President Obama . "There were serious reasons for concern," says Obama .
 Defense Department official says he had access to some of the most sensitive information in the entire government . He worked for the Department of Defense .
 I wondered how many of these Ellsberg might have and what else he might have to give to the newspapers . I wondered if he had more than he had to share .
 Ellsberg's friend was a former Defense Department employee who was then a Brookings Institution Fellow at the Brookings Institution . The earliest report, later discounted, centered on a friend of Ellsenberg, was later discounted .
 I wanted to know what had actually happened; I also wanted the information as potential leverage against those in Johnson’s administration who were now trying to undercut my war policy . I wanted information as a potential leverage, he says .
 I was told that a copy of the bombing halt material and other secret documents had been taken from the Pentagon to Brookings by the same man . The same man also took the same document to Brookings .
 I wanted the documents back, but I was told that one copy of the report had already “disappeared” I was sure that if word got out that we wanted it, the copy at Brookings might disappear as well . I wanted it back but was told it had already
 When I was told that it was still at Brookings, I was furious and frustrated. When I told that . I was angry and frustrated that it is still there, he said .
 Top-secret government reports were out of reach in the hands of a private think tank largely staffed with antiwar Democrats . In the midst of a war and with our secrets being spilled through printing presses all over the world, top-secret reports were not available .
 I could not accept that we had lost so much control over the workings of the government we had been elected to run . I saw absolutely no reason for that report to be at Brookings, and I said I wanted it back right now . Even if it meant having to get it back,
 Ellsberg was given access to the current Vietnam documents in 1970 . An aide to Elliot Richardson at the State Department at the time had given him access . The State Department aide to Richardson gave him the documents .
 Richardson refused to remove the aide after Ellsberg leaked the information . The aide was removed from the White House .
 Kissinger's staff had friends and contacts at Brookings, and I wondered if any of them had provided Ellsberg and his friends with documents and materials . It was also well known that a number of people on Kissinger’s staff had close ties to Brookings .
 Ellsberg was successfully using the press, television talk shows, and antiwar rallies to promote the concept of unlawful dissent . In the meantime, he was using the media to promote his views .
 J. Edgar Hoover was dragging his feet and treating the case on merely a medium-priority basis . He had assigned no special task forces and no extra manpower to it .
 He evidently felt that the media would automatically make Ellsberg look like a martyr, and the FBI like the “heavy,” if it pursued the case vigorously . He evidently thought that the FBI would make the case look like the "heavy"
 Mitchell had been told that Hoover was sensitive about his personal friendship with Ellsberg’s father-in-law . Mitchell had told Hoover that Hoover had been sensitive about the relationship .
 Hoover strongly resisted sharing his territory with anyone . Other agencies, such as the Defense Department, were also conducting simultaneous investigations . Hoover was never involved in the investigation .
 I wanted someone to light a fire under the FBI in its investigation of Ellsberg . I wanted to keep the departments and agencies active in pursuit of leakers, she says .
 "If a conspiracy existed, I wanted to know, and I wanted the full resources of the government brought to bear in order to find out," she says . "I wanted to see if there was a conspiracy," she said .
 "If the FBI was not going to pursue the case, then we would have to do it ourselves," says the FBI . "We would have had to deal with the case ourselves. If the FBI were not to pursue it, then the case would be solved," she says .
 Ellsberg was having great success in the media with his efforts to justify unlawful dissent, and while I cared nothing for him personally, I felt that his views had to be discredited . I thought his views must be discredited, he said .
 I urged that we find out everything we could about his background, his motives, and his co-conspirators, if they existed . I urged us to look into his background and his motives .
 I was determined not to sit back while the Democratic architects of our Vietnam involvement tried to make me pay for the war politically . "I was determined to not sit back," he says. "Not sitting back. I was not sitting back."
 We were heading into an election year, in which the Vietnam war was almost certainly going to be the biggest issue . We were going into a year, and Vietnam war would be the big issue, the author says .
 I wanted ammunition against the antiwar critics, many of whom were the same men who, under Kennedy and Johnson, had led us into the Vietnam morass in the first place . I wanted to fight back, but many of the critics were those who led us .
 Only legitimate foreign policy secrets were classified, but those that were classified stayed secret . Finally, I wanted a revision of the classification system that would ensure that only legitimate foreign secrets were kept secret .
 On July 17, 1971, Ehrlichman assigned Egil "Bud" Krogh, a young lawyer on the Domestic Council staff, to head the leak project . Krogh was the first person to be assigned to lead the project .
 David Young, Howard Hunt and G Gordon Liddy worked with him . David Young is a lawyer who was formerly a Kissinger aide . Howard Hunt is a former CIA agent and a former FBI man .
 I tried to motivate Krogh in the strongest terms, and I told him, “We’re not going to allow it," he said . Krogh: "We're going to not allow it"
 Plumbers pushed the departments to investigate with interviews and polygraph tests . The Plumbers push the police to get involved in the investigation .
 The information in the story was traceable to a highly secret CIA intelligence source . The information was traced to a secret CIA source .
 By fall the CIA reported that we were in the midst of the worst outbreak of leaks since 1953 . The CIA said it was the worst leak of the year since 1953.
 On Labor Day weekend, 1971, Krogh's group organized a break-in at the office of Ellsberg’s psychiatrist in an attempt to get information from his files on his motivation, his further intentions and any possible co-conspirators .
 I do not believe I was told about the break-in at the time, but it was clear that it was at least in part an outgrowth of my sense of urgency about discrediting what Ellsberg had done and finding out what he might do next .
 Given the temper of those tense and bitter times and the peril I perceived, I cannot say that had I been informed of it beforehand, I would have automatically considered it unprecedented, unwarranted, or unthinkable . The president's decision to step down from the White House was a major mistake,
 Ehrlichman says he did not know of it in advance, but that he told me about it after the fact in 1972 . He says he didn't know about it beforehand .
 "I do not recall this, and the tapes of the June—July 1972 period indicate that I was not conscious of it then, but I cannot rule it out," he says . "I cannot rule out"
 The break-in at Ellsberg's psychiatrist’s office seems wrong and excessive . Today, the break in at the psychiatrist's office seems too excessive .
 Bud Krogh and John Ehrlichman went to jail and Daniel Ellsberg went free . But I do not accept that it was as wrong or excessive as what Daniel Ell'sberg did, he says .
 In hindsight I can see that, once I realized the Vietnam war could not be ended quickly or easily, I was sometimes drawn into the frame of mind I so despised in the leaders of that movement . In hindsight, I can now see that .
 They came to justify almost anything in the name of forcing an immediate end to a war they considered unjustified and immoral . They increasingly came to justifying almost anything to force an end to the war .
 I was similarly driven to preserve the government’s ability to conduct foreign policy and to conduct it in the way that I felt would best bring peace, he said .
 I still believe it today, and in the same circumstances, I would act now as I did then . "I still believe that today," he says of the incident .
 History will make the final judgment on the actions, reactions, and excesses of both sides, he says . "It is a judgment I do not fear," he says. "History will make its final judgment"
 Helms refused to give Ehrlichman the agency’s internal reports dealing with either subject . Helms would not have given the agency's internal reports .
 At one point he told Ehrlichman on the phone that even he did not have a copy of one of the key Bay of Pigs reports .
 Helms finally brought me several of the items after I had requested them from him personally . Helms had been working on the project for a year .
 When Ehrlichman read the materials Helms had delivered, he found that several of the reports, including the one on the Bay of Pigs, were still incomplete . The next day, he read the material Helms delivered to him .
 "The CIA was closed like a safe, and we could find no one who would give us the combination to open it," says CNN.com's John Sutter . The CIA was "closed like a . safe," he says .
 I have always believed that America’s economy operates best with the least possible government interference . I have also said that U.S. economy should not be subject to government interference. I believe that America's economy is best with less government interference in it .
 In August 1971 I proposed a series of economic controls and reforms that left even long-time wage and price control advocates breathless . Yet in August 1971, 1971, I proposed an economic controls that left some of the country's longest-serving politicians breathless. Yet, in 1971,
 Eisenhower bequeathed to Kennedy in January 1961 . The economy was remarkably stable, with a rate of inflation of about 1. percent . Eisenhower's bequestment of power was a remarkably stable .
 By 1968, inflation had soared to 4. percent . Inflation was due to the effects of the Vietnam war, inflation was 4.1 percent .
 Johnson encouraged the American people to believe that even in time of war they could have butter as well as guns . Johnson had tried to satisfy everyone; he had encouraged the U.S. people .
 The expansion of the Great Society was financed by deficit spending, says President Obama . The fact was that the expansion, he says, was financed in the form of deficit spending .
 The major theme of my economic policy in 1969 and 1970 was the rejection of government “jawboning” of business and labor as a way of restraining inflation . The policy was rejected by the White House in 1970 and 1980 .
 It had become clear during the Johnson administration that voluntary ‘guideposts’ for wage and price increases were ineffective . The Johnson administration made it clear in 1964 that voluntary "guideposts" for wage hikes are ineffective .
 I also strongly opposed mandatory government controls on wages and prices . I felt that controls would constitute interference in the free market, once begun, would end up building a bureaucracy that would have .
 By the end of 1969 there were hopeful signs that inflation was abating . But inflation was still rising in the 1970s and '60s .
 Unemployment fueled in part by the reduction in the armed services resulting from our troop withdrawals, rose to 5 percent . Inflation rate had still not declined and inflation rate had not declined . A sharp decline in the stock market further intensified apprehension about the economy .
 Congress passed legislation that empowered the President to control prices, wages, and salaries . Over his objections Congress sent him sweeping legislation . Over my objections Congress passed me sweeping legislation, he says .
 The bill was a political ploy on the part of the Democratic Congress aimed at putting the ball publicly in my court . Since my strong opposition to controls was well known, I viewed the bill as a . political ploy .
 I would not accept a complete move to a mandatory system of wage and price controls . I feared that if I refused to take some action I might exacerbate the general lack of confidence that was itself beginning to harm the economy and hamper its recovery .
 In June 1970, I made a televised address on the economy that contained the basic steps I was proposing to try to slow the rate of inflation . President Richard Nixon made the announcement in June 1970 .
 I announced plans to appoint a National Commission on Productivity, with members to be chosen from business, labor, the general public, and the government . The commission will be appointed by President Obama .
 The job of the commission would be to achieve a balance between costs and productivity . That would lead to more stable prices, the commission says . The commission would aim to achieve the balance between productivity and costs .
 I instructed the Council of Economic Advisers to issue periodic “inflation alerts” that would spotlight significant areas of wage and price increases and analyze their impact on price levels .
 This move was intended to test the idea that publicity about past or prospective price and wage increases would deter business and labor from inflationary behavior . The move was meant to test whether the idea would deter businesses from inflationing .
 President Obama established an interagency Regulations and Purchasing Review Board to determine whether federal actions were driving up prices and costs . The board was set up to determine if federal actions are driving up costs .
 The budget I submitted in January of 1971 was set to be balanced at full employment and run a deficit to help take up the slack when unemployment was high . In 1971, the budget was supposed to run the deficit and balance the budget with full employment .
 Along with this new “full employment” budget policy, there would have to be a rate of monetary expansion sufficient to move the economy up on the desired path . The U.S. would need to be able to keep the economy on track .
 There were signs of improvement ahead, but patience had worn thin, and we ran out of time . There are signs of improvements ahead but patience has worn thin .
 Republicans and Democrats called for new policies to deal with unemployment and inflation . Republicans as well as Democrats reflected the pressure they were receiving from their constituents .
 We discussed the problems and our options for dealing with them at great length . We also discussed how to deal with them with the government . We discussed our options and how we would handle the problems .
 "After weighing all the factors, I decided to remain on the present course with one exception," he says . "I decided to stay on the course," he adds .
 For several months I had been concerned about conflicting views on the economy that filtered out of different parts of the administration . This helped to create a sense of disarray and confusion in the country, says President Obama .
 As Treasury Secretary, Connally was the senior Cabinet officer with economic responsibility . Connally served as the Treasury Secretary of the Treasury .
 He was an articulate speaker who could convey his determination to carry out presidential decisions vigorously . More important, he was a strong speaker, he said . He said he was able to convey the president's determination .
 On June 29 Connally briefed the White House press corps on the decisions we had reached at Camp David . Connally: "On June 29, Connally gave a briefing on Camp David decisions"
 There would be no mandatory wage and price review board, no mandatory price controls, no increase in government spending, and no tax cuts .
 Connally forcefully insisted that the economy was expanding and that better days lay ahead . In response to reporters’ questioning, Connally said that the country's economy is expanding .
 Connally’s skills could not redeem the troubled economic, psychological, and political situation that had been building up over several years . Connally's skills were not enough to redeem a troubled state of Texas .
 In briefing with congressional leaders after China announcement, many expressed concern about U.S. economic policies . At least twice as many used the opportunity to express concern about our domestic economic policies, he says .
 After this meeting Connally and I concluded that the time had come to act, we decided to act . The time was come to an end, and it was time for action .
 I authorized him to obtain the views of our senior economic advisers, then prepare a report for me that included action options for me to consider . I knew that he was right, and I authorized that he . I authorized .
 "Even I was not prepared for the actions he proposed. By nature he always favored the “big play,’ even I was . prepared for such a proposal, he said .
 He urged, in effect, total ‘total ‘’ so I had expected that he would recommend something bold. ‘I had expected him to be bold,’ she said . ‘He urged, effectively, total '’
 But war on all economic fronts, including across-the-board wage and price controls, is on the cards . The government is trying to control the economy .
 He also advised me to let the issue “sit and simmer” for a while, even if it meant letting matters worsen a bit . He also said to let it sit and simmer for a bit.
 An unexpected development forced us to accelerate dramatically our economic timetable . However, it is not the first time we have seen an increase in the pace of growth .
 The British ambassador appeared at the Treasury Department to ask that $3 billion be converted into gold . In the second week of August, the British ambassador asked that the money be converted to gold .
 If we refused, then that would be an admission of our concern that we could not meet every potential demand for conversion into gold, the government says . If we did it, it would be admitting that we couldn't meet all potential demand, he says .
 Connally deferred giving his answer, but we knew that we would very soon have to confront a major crisis concerning the international economic position of the U.S. He says . Connally: "We knew that [the] United States. would very well be confronted"
 A high-level meeting at Camp David is scheduled for August 13 . President Obama has called for a meeting with congressional leaders . The White House says the meeting will take place in the near future .
 Fifteen economic experts, White House staff members, and a speechwriter assembled . Some arriving by secret routes to avoid news of the meeting .
 John Connally, Arthur Burns, George Shultz, Paul McCracken, and Herbert Stein from my Council on Economic Advisers . Peter Peterson, head of the Council of International Economic Policy; and Paul Volcker, Treasury Undersecretary for Monetary Affairs .
 From my personal staff there were Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Bill Safire . From his personal staff, there were also Haldman, E. Haldem, and Safire. From my own staff, I was in charge of my staff .
 No large or permanent bureaucracies would be created; these controls would be monitored for the duration by a Pay Board, a Price Board, and a Cost of Living Council .
 While there was relatively strong, though skeptical, support among those present for the freeze and the other domestic actions . But there was substantial disagreement on closing the gold window .
 The strongest opposition came from Arthur Burns, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board . Arthur Burns was the strongest opposition to the proposal .
 Even if all the arguments are right, he said, he still felt that there was no rush . He said he still feels that there is no rush to rush .
 This was to be one of the few cases in which I did not follow his recommendations . This was one of a few cases I did follow him recommendations .
 As events unfolded, this decision turned out to be the best thing that came out of the whole economic program I announced on August 15, 1971, President Nixon announced .
 I decided to announce these decisions on Sunday night so that the new policy would be known before the stock markets opened on Monday morning . The new policy will be known by the end of Monday morning, the president said .
 Having talked until only recently about the evils of wage and price controls, I knew I had opened myself to the charge that I had either betrayed my own principles or concealed my real intentions . Having spoken until recently, I felt I had exposed myself to . the charge of either betraying my
 I was convinced that the objective reality of the economic situation forced me to impose them . Philosophically, however, I was still against wage-price controls, he says . He says .
 "The public reaction to my television speech was overwhelmingly favorable," says President Obama . "I'm not surprised that the reaction was overwhelmingly positive," he says .
 On the networks, 90 percent of the Monday morning newscasts were devoted to it . Most of the focus was on the brilliant briefing that John Connally had given during the day .
 It fell to 1.1 percent during the freeze, and then, after a bulge when the freeze ended, it ran around 3.3 percent for the rest of 1972 .
 The unemployment rate, which had been 6. percent when the new policy was initiated, fell to 5. percent at the end of 1972 . The new policy saw the unemployment rate fall to 6.3 percent .
 A Harris poll taken six weeks after the announcement showed that, by 53 percent to 23 percent, Americans believed my economic policies were working . The poll also showed that Americans believed Obama's policies are working .
 Over the next two and a half years the economy went through three additional phases of wage and price controls . All controls were finally lifted in the spring of 1974 .
 Phase II, which began in November 1971, was our answer to getting out of the controls before they broke down or became permanent . Phase II was our aim to get out of control before the controls broke down . We are proud to be able to get our hands on the controls .
 In this phase the controls, although still mandatory and widespread, were much less comprehensive . The controls were still mandatory, but still widespread .
 The switch into Phase III in January 1973, as we expected, caused some outcry as repressed prices began moving up . Repressed prices were moving up in the 1970s .
 In June 1973, this time over the objection of many of my advisers, I reimposed a temporary, limited freeze to settle public anxiety, which by then was compounded by Watergate, and to dampen a rise in prices taking place .
 Mandatory wage and price controls came to a complete end in 1974 . The aftermath of the end of the policy was far from pleasant .
 Energy shortages and high food costs contributed to an increase in inflation and to recession . Pressure built up after the period of controls led into the destructive double-digit inflation .
 Three years after controls had completely ended, both unemployment and inflation hovered around 7 percent . There was even nostalgia for the “good old days” in 1971 when we had only 4 percent inflation and 6 percent unemployment .
 The August 15, 1971, decision to impose them was politically necessary and immensely popular in the short run . The decision was political necessary and popular in short run, but unpopular in short term .
 The piper must always be paid, and there was an unquestionably high price for tampering with the orthodox economic mechanisms . There was a high price to tamper with the orthodoxy economic mechanisms, says David Cameron .
 Inflation is the most urgent economic problem of the Obama administration, he says . He says he has tended to highlight the area in which we felt it was necessary to depart dramatically from the free market .
 President Barack Obama's administration took steps that reflect his economic philosophy, Obama says . Obama: "There were also a number of economic steps during my administration that better reflected my economic philosophy"
 In 1969 we reduced income taxes and relieved more than six million low-income people from the burden of paying any income taxes at all . For example, in 1969, in that year, more than 6 million people were relieved from paying income taxes .
 By 1973 we had freed agriculture of almost all production controls for the first time in thirty-five years . By 1973, agriculture had been freed from production controls . Agriculture was freed of production controls by 1973 .
 We abolished controls on international capital movements that had been imposed in the 1960s . We took the lead in establishing a worldwide system of free exchange rates . We abolished numerous controls on foreign capital movements .
 Congress pushed legislation through Congress authorizing negotiations for reduction of barriers to international trade . The first of these negotiations was held in Tokyo in September 1973 .
 We also began moves to reduce or eliminate regulations in the fields of transportation and finance that are burdensome on industry and expensive to consumers .
 Some people think of the free market as a matter of concern only to businessmen . The free market is not only a concern for businessmen, it is also a problem for the rest of us .
 The draft is a way of compelling service from everyone rather than hiring service from those who supply it voluntarily . President Obama says the draft is an unfair restraint on the free market . The draft was one of the severest and most unfair restraints on free market, he says .
 The elimination of the draft and the introduction of a volunteer Army in January 1973 were also major steps to meaningful economic freedom . Thus the elimination and introduction of the volunteer Army were major steps .
 It is unfortunate that the politics of economics has come to dictate action more than the economics of economics . It's unfortunate that it's come to dictating action rather than economics of economic policy .
 When prudence clashes with political reality, the latter sometimes triumphs . Not surprisingly, when prudence and reality clash with reality, it does not always win .
 Even someone with strong ideas can be affected by criticism and the sting of those who want a different policy . Like all oversimplifications, this one sounds too cynical .
 Government enterprise is the most inefficient and costly way of producing jobs, says John Defterios . Government enterprise enterprise is most inefficient, costly way to produce jobs, he says .
 Private enterprise is an instrument that produces change and encourages progress . Government enterprise almost invariably discourages change and inhibits progress . Private enterprise produces change, but government enterprise discourages it, says author .
 It is significant to note that our major Communist competitor, the Soviet Union, has found it necessary to turn to our way to increase production .
 At a time when the Communists are by necessity providing increased incentives for more efficient producers, the U.S. seems to be slowly but surely turning their way by discouraging incentives .
 America today is at a watershed as far as our economic and political system is concerned . America is at an economic watershed as well as our political system, says President Obama .
 Federal, state, and local taxes now take 40 percent of our net national product . The tax rate is now $1.5 trillion .
 If this percentage continues to rise, we will soon reach a point at which people will be working more for the government than for themselves . People will soon have to work more for government than themselves, says David Cameron .
 "If that day ever comes, then we will no longer have the private enterprise system that has made America the freest and most prosperous nation in the world," says President Obama .
 We can only hope that statesmen of both parties will see the danger of this situation and not allow it to come to pass .
 There were dire predictions that the announcement that I would be going to China, which I made on July 15, 1971, would damage U.S.-Soviet relations .
 On October 12 a joint announcement issued issued in Washington and Moscow confirmed that I would visit the Soviet Union three months after returning from China . The announcement was made by the U.S. and Russia .
 The SALT talks, which had begun at the end of 1969, had quickly bogged down because the two sides differed on the proper scope of an agreement . The talks had quickly stalled because of differences on the scope of the agreement .
 The Soviets wanted to conclude an agreement dealing only with the limitation of defensive ABM systems . Stated in its simplest form, the Soviets wanted only to limit the limits of defensive systems .
 On January 9, 1971, I sent a personal message to Brezhnev stressing the necessity of linking offensive and defensive weapons if an agreement were to be reached, he says .
 Two weeks later Kissinger met with Dobrynin, who had just returned from lengthy consultations with Brezhnev in Moscow . Kissinger was in Moscow for two weeks to discuss the Soviet Union .
 Dobrynin delivered a reply to our proposed SALT agreement that seemed to return to earlier hard-line insistence on ABM-only terms . On March 12, however, Dobrynins said that he would not agree to a SALT deal .
 It looked as if we were in for another period of testing by the Soviets . After having made what appeared to be considerable progress in our relations, it looked as though it was in for more testing .
 The SALT talks in Vienna, under the leadership of our chief negotiator, Gerard Smith, became more intense and serious . The secret exchanges of messages through Kissinger and Dobrynin immediately became more serious and serious.
 "The major problem, as I saw it, was going to be the American negotiating position," he said . The major problem was the U.S. negotiating position, he added .
 Congressional doves were treating the Soviet ABM-only proposal as a way to chalk up a belated victory over the administration on the ABM issue and urged that I accept immediately .
 "I felt that it would be disastrous to go into the final SALT negotiations in this position," says President Obama . "It would be a disaster for the U.S. to be in this way," says Obama .
 I believed that the only effective way to achieve nuclear arms limitation was to confront the Soviets with an unacceptable alternative in the form of increased American armaments and the determination to use them, he says . I believed .
 On April 20, Sen. Ted Cruz met with a group of Senate Republicans in the Cabinet Room . Cruz: "On April 20 I met for an hour and a half in the . Cabinet Room"
 I said, “If SALT is to have a chance, we cannot give away in the Senate things we might want to negotiate with the Soviets.” “SALT’s” is to be a success in negotiations with the U.S. Senate,
 I appeared before the television cameras in the White House briefing room at noon on May 20 . I appear before the cameras at noon, May 20, for the first time since May 21 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's statement was being released in Moscow at the same time as the statement . Putin: "I read the statement, which is being released by the same moment in Moscow. I read it, which was being published in Moscow."
 The U.S. reached an agreement with the Soviets on Berlin that dissipated some of the tension accumulated over twenty-six years of the city’s divided existence . After sixteen months of negotiation in which we were represented by our Ambassador to West Germany, Kenneth Rush, the United
 The agreement contained provisions that would prevent harassment of travelers and visitors from West Berlin to East Berlin and East Germany . West Berliners passports would be made available to the Communist-controlled section of Berlin .
 Before 1971, it was common to consider Berlin and the Middle East as the greatest stumbling blocks in U.S.R. relations .
 "By removing at least one of these obstacles we were able to clear the way for a summit meeting," he says .
 The announcement of the Soviet Summit for May 1972 came as a complete surprise . The Soviet Summit was held in May 1972 .
 The Detroit Free Press titled its editorial Another Rabbit from Hat of the Ever-Amazing Nixon . The editorial was titled Another Rabbit .
 George Meany suggested that I might also want to visit Allende in Chile and Castro in Cuba . Meany was able to restrain his enthusiasm for the China announcement, now suggested that he might also visit Chile and Cuba .
 The important thing is that our patient preparation of linkage had paid off handsomely, says Dr. John Defterios .
 On the morning of November 4, November 4 I met in the Oval Office with the Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi . President Obama met with India's Prime Minister in the early hours of that morning .
 Eight months earlier there had been a rebellion in East Pakistan against the government of President Yahya Khan .
 Indian officials reported that nearly 10 million refugees fled from East Pakistan into India . Nearly 10 million people fled the East Pakistan border to India .
 We knew that Yahya Khan eventually would have to yield to East Pakistans demands for independence . We urged him to take a more moderate and conciliatory line .
 We could not have known the extent to which India would seize this Opportunity not just to destroy Pakistan’s control of East Pakistan but to weaken West Pakistan as well . We could have known it would be a huge opportunity for India to seize .
 Gandhi complimented me highly on the way I was winding down the war in Vietnam and on the boldness of the China initiative . Gandhi said he was winding the war down in Vietnam . Gandhi also complimented the way he was closing the war with Vietnam .
 India must not take any actions that would exacerbate the situation in Pakistan, says PM . "We talked about the uneasy situation," he says of Pakistan .
 She earnestly assured me that India was not motivated in any way by antiPakistan attitudes . She assured her that India's anti-Pakistan attitudes were not motivated by anti-Islam attitudes .
 Gandhi knew that her generals and advisers were planning to intervene in East Pakistan and were considering contingency plans for attacking West Pakistan as well . Gandhi also knew that she was planning to attack East Pakistan as also .
 Even though India was officially neutral and continued to receive foreign aid from us, Mrs. Gandhi continued to give aid to India . Even though she was neutral, India was still receiving foreign aid .
 Gandhi had gradually become aligned with the Soviets and received substantial economic and military aid from Moscow . Gandhi had become increasingly aligned with Moscow in the 1930s .
 President Ayub Khan and his successor, Yahya Khan, had responded by developing Pakistan’s relations with the People’S Republic of China . Pakistan has a long history of developing its relations with China .
 The potential for the subcontinent’s becoming a dangerous area of confrontation between the Communist giants was great . Moscow tied to New Delhi and Peking tied to Islamabad .
 In our conversation that morning I was disturbed by the fact that although Mrs. Mrs. Smith was disturbed, she was not so disturbed that she had a daughter .
 Gandhi would not make any concrete offers for de-escalating tensions . Gandhi professed her devotion to peace, but would not offer concrete offers . Gandhi was assassinated at the hands of the Indian president in 1921 .
 Yahya Khan had agreed to move his troops away from the border if India would do the same . But she would not make a similar commitment, she said . Khan said he would move troops away if India did the same, but India would not .
 I said, “Absolutely nothing could be served by the disintegration of Pakistan’s Pakistan,” I said . I said that “absolutely nothing could have been served’t by Pakistan disintegration,’I said. ‘Absolutely nothing would be served
 A month later, primed with Soviet weapons, the Indian Army attacked East Pakistan . The Indian Army invaded East Pakistan with Soviet-made weapons .
 Fighting also erupted along the border with West Pakistan, but it was impossible to tell whether the action was the prelude to a full-scale attack . Fighting also broke out in Pakistan's West Pakistan .
 Battle plans of such dimension are not formulated in less than a month, and I could help thinking that Mrs. Mrs. Obama's plans are not as quick as Mrs. Bush's .
 I was also concerned that the Soviets had ignored several clear signals from us that we would react very unfavorably if they supported India in an invasion of Pakistan . The Soviets ignored clear signals that Pakistan was prepared to support India in a war, he says .
 I felt that one of the primary Soviet motives was to show the world that, despite the much heralded Sino-American rapprochement, the US.S.R. was still the premier Communist power . The Soviet Union wanted to show that despite the Sino.R
 The Soviets moved troops to the Chinese border in an unsubtle attempt to tie up Chinese forces and prevent them from going to the aid of Pakistan . In fact, the move was an attempt to stop Chinese forces going to Pakistan .
 I felt it was important to discourage both Indian aggression and Soviet adventurism . I agreed with Kissinger’s recommendation that we should demonstrate our displeasure with India and our support for Pakistan .
 State Department felt that independence for East Pakistan was inevitable and desirable . India had limited aims in East Pakistan and no designs on West Pakistan, he found .
 The risk of Soviet or Chinese intervention, according to this reasoning, was small . The risk was small, the reasoning was small.
 The State Department argued that we should keep calm, sit back, and let the inevitable happen . State Department: We should sit back and let it happen .
 I wanted to let the Soviets know that we would strongly oppose the dismemberment of Pakistan by a Soviet ally using Soviet arms . Pakistan is a major ally of the Soviet Union in the region, Pakistan says .
 Kissinger summoned Soviet Chargé Vorontsov to the White House and told him that this crisis had once again brought our relations to a watershed because we considered that promoting a war in the Indian subcontinent was inconsistent with improved relations between us . Kissinger, therefore, summoned Soviet .
 Kissinger said that we wanted a cease-fire and the withdrawal of all Indian troops from Pakistan . Kissinger said we wanted to withdraw all Indian forces from Pakistan.
 Once the fighting had stopped, the parties could begin to negotiate a political settlement of the problem . The parties could then begin negotiating a political solution .
 We recognized that political autonomy for East Pakistan would be the probable outcome of a political solution, and we were willing to work in that direction . We were willing in the past to work with East Pakistan, says the PM .
 The main point was that the fighting should stop and the danger of a great power confrontation should be removed . The danger of such a confrontation should also be removed from the country, says the BBC .
 The objective fact now is that Indian military forces are being used in an effort to impose political demands and to dismember the sovereign state of Pakistan . Pakistan is being used as a tool for political purposes, says Pakistan's prime minister .
 I am convinced that the spirit in which we agreed that the time had come for us to meet in Moscow next May requires from both of us the utmost restraint and the most urgent action to end the conflict and restore territorial integrity .
 At eleven that night, Vorontsov delivered a note replying to the points Kissinger had made the day before . At 11 that night he delivered the note to the Kremlin .
 It proposed an immediate ceasefire coupled with a demand that Pakistan immediately recognize the independence of East Pakistan . It accused the United States of not having been active enough in maintaining peace . The United States has been accused of not being active enough .
 "What we had to do, therefore, was remain absolutely steadfast behind Pakistan," says Pakistanis. "We had to remain very steadfast behind them," she says .
 If we failed to help Pakistan, Iran or any other country within the reach of Soviet influence might begin to question the dependability of U.S. support . If we fail to help, then Iran or other countries within reach of Russia might question the American support .
 In an attempt to put the shoe on the other foot, he said that the crux of the problem lay in finding ways to exert influence on Yahya Khan .
 Kissinger felt that the cordial tone of the letter at least indicated some responsive movement on the Soviet side, but I expressed my doubts . Kissinger said he felt the letter was cordial, but Kissinger expressed his doubts .
 At a meeting of the Indian Cabinet Mrs. Banjojojo is believed to have met with the foreign minister . She is accused of trying to kill the US ambassador to Afghanistan .
 Gandhi led a discussion of plans to expand the war on the western front and to invade West Pakistan . Gandhi had led the discussion of expansion of the Western front .
 Kissinger called in the Indian Ambassador, virtually told him that we knew his government’s plans, and demanded that the Ambassador urge New Delhi to reconsider any precipitate action . Kissinger called the Ambassador in India to urge him not to take action .
 The Soviet Minister of Agriculture happened to be visiting Washington at this time . The Soviet minister of Agriculture was visiting Washington .
 I asked him to carry back a personal message to Brezhnev from me, conveying my seriousness in saying that it was incumbent upon the two of us as the leaders of the two nuclear superpowers not to allow our larger interests to become embroiled in the actions of our smaller friends
 Admiral Moorer dispatched a task force of eight ships, including the nuclear aircraft carrier Enterprise, from Vietnam to the Bay of Bengal . Later that afternoon, he authorized a . task force from Vietnam .
 Yahya Khan’s forces were in total retreat . The numerically superior Indians had been joined by fierce Bengali rebels, and the rebels had joined them . The Indian army was defeated by the Bengalis rebels .
 The almost unbelievable cruelty of the fighting on both sides had turned the situation into a nightmare . Both sides were fighting for control of both sides at the time of the attack .
 Pakistan accepted the UN General Assembly’s call for a cease-fire on December 9 . On December 9, Pakistan accepted UN's call for the ceasefire . Pakistan has been battling the Taliban in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 I wrote another letter to Brezhnev, calling on him to join me in ending the crisis before we ourselves were dragged into it . India rejected it, however, and tension was still rising along the border in West Pakistan .
 I began by stating that, in our view, his proposal for the political independence of East Pakistan had been met by Pakistan’s own action . I said, in the view, our view was that, we view, that, . His proposal for political independence in East Pakistan was
 If this does not take place, we would have to conclude that there is in progress an act of aggression directed at the whole of Pakistan, a friendly country, we have obligations to do .
 I propose an immediate joint appeal for a complete cease-fire . I therefore propose a joint appeal . I propose a full-fire. I propose it .
 Meanwhile, I urge you in the strongest terms to restrain India with which, by virtue of your treaty, you have great influence and for whose actions you must share responsibility . Meanwhile, he urges you to restrain yourself from dealing with India .
 This delay was intolerable, since the possibility of an Indian attack on West Pakistan increased with each passing hour . This delay is intolerable, says Dr. Ghaffar Hussain .
 Moscow replied that India had no intention of taking any military action against West Pakistan . The reply arrived shortly before I was to fly to the Azores for a Franco-American Summit with President Pompidou .
 I immediately sent back a message that the Indian assurances lacked any concreteness . "I immediately sent . back a . message that [Indian assurances] lacked any concrete concreteness," he said .
 I proposed that we continue consultations through the secret KissingerDobrynin channel . In view of the urgency of the situation and the need for concerted action, I propose that we . continue consultations .
 I could not emphasize too strongly that time was of the essence to avoid consequences that neither of us wanted . I added that I could . emphasize that . time was . of the utmost to avoid . consequences . Neither of the two countries wanted to be involved in the same way .
 The Soviets were conducting a “clarification” of the circumstances in India and would inform us of the results without delay . Despite the urgent tone of my message, the hot-line wires were cold until 5 A.M. the next day, when a three-sent
 In Washington on December 14 Vorontsov handed Haig another message from the Kremlin . In Washington, Haig received a message of support from Russia .
 India offered only vague assurances that India had no intention of taking any military action against Pakistan . Once again it said it would not be taking any action .
 Kissinger agreed with Kissinger that Haig should call Vorontsov and tell him so . Haig then agreed to make the phone call . Kissinger then agreed with Haig that Vorontov should call Haig to tell him .
 Kissinger talked to reporters aboard Azr Force One on the flight from the Azores back to Washington . Kissinger talks to the three pool reporters on the plane . Kissinger: "It's a great honor for the president to be in the air"
 One of the world's biggest powers powers powers is to hold a summit in Saudi Arabia on Monday . The summit will be held in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on June 25, 2015 .
 The reporters immediately realized that they had just been given a big story . The reporters were given the opportunity to cover up for the story .
 The early evening news programs flashed the report around the country and around the world . Early evening news shows flashed the news around the nation .
 Kissinger summoned Vorontsov to the White House and told him that he was concerned that the Soviet leaders were not doing everything possible to arrive at a settlement . Kissinger: "I had been concerned that [Vorontsov's] leaders weren't doing all possible to reach a settlement"
 In view of their continued delays, I had begun to believe that they were dealing only in words, with the intention of letting events on the ground dictate the ultimate outcome . I was beginning to believe they were only dealing only with words, but I had hoped that they would let events on
 Despite his desire, however, your government has proceeded to equip India with great amounts of sophisticated armaments . India has been given a range of sophisticated weapons by the U.S.
 Kissinger called Vorontsov back and showed him the text of a letter he had written to Kosygin . Kissinger called the next day, and showed the text .
 Vorontsov complained that the Indians were proving very resistant to Soviet pressure . Vorontov complained that he was being pushed back by Indians .
 Vorontsov said that the Soviets were prepared unconditionally to guarantee that there would be no Indian attack on West Pakistan or on Kashmir . The Soviet Union was prepared to guarantee there would not be an Indian attack .
 To do this publicly would mean that they were, in effect, speaking for a friendly country . It would mean they were speaking for the country, but to do this would be embarrassing .
 In other words, the Soviets would urge the Indians to accept a ceasefire as long as they did not have to do so publicly . The Soviets would not want to accept the Indians' ceasefire publicly, they say .
 Without the prospect of Soviet support and aid, the Indians were almost certain to agree to a settlement . The Indians are almost certain that they will agree to an agreement .
 Yahya Khan’s forces in East Pakistan surrendered unconditionally . The next day Yahya . Khan's forces in . East Pakistan surrender unconditionally. Khan's troops in East . Pakistan .
 On December 17 the explosive situation on the western front was also resolved when Pakistan accepted the Indian offer of a cease-fire there . Pakistan accepted India's offer of an end to the conflict in Afghanistan .
 By using diplomatic signals and behind-the-scenes pressures, we had been able to save West Pakistan from the imminent threat of Indian aggression and domination . We had used diplomatic signals to save Pakistan from Indian aggression .
 We had also avoided a major confrontation with the Soviet Union. We had once again avoided a confrontation with them .
 The Indo-Pakistan war involved stakes much higher than the future of Pakistan . The stakes were high enough for Pakistan, and that was high enough .
 It involved the principle of whether big nations supported by the Soviet Union would be permitted to dismember their smaller neighbors . The Soviet Union was involved in the decision to dismembered its neighbors .
 Once that principle was allowed, the world would have become more unstable and unsafe, he says . "Once that principle would have allowed it to be allowed, it would have been more unstable," he adds .
 They feared the Soviets might use this action as an excuse for attacking China . They had troops poised on the Indian border, but they would not take the risk of coming to the aid of Pakistan .
 The presence of their forces probably had a deterrent effect on India, says historian . They consequently did nothing, but the presence of them probably had an effect .
 Three days after the cease-fire was arranged, we sent the Chinese a brief description of its major points . Three days later, we asked the Chinese to explain the ceasefire .
 U.S. view that recent events in South Asia involve sobering conclusions . We concluded, “It is the United States view . Recent events in . South Asia have sobered conclusions.
 As a result of the Indo-Pakistan crisis, my respect and regard for Mrs. Hamid Hussain has been restored, he said .
 A few months later, in March 1972, after having seen a film biography of Mahatma Gandhi—who was no relation to her—during a weekend at Key Biscayne, I dictated a brief reflection in the diary I had begun keeping in November 1971 .
 As I saw Gandhi’s assassination and heard his words on violence, I realized how hypocritical the present Indian leaders are . Indira Gandhi had made up her mind to attack Pakistan at the time she saw me in Washington and assured me she would not .
 Those who resort to force, without making excuses, are bad enough . But those who use force while preaching about their use of force deserve no sympathy whatever .
 One of the most serious incidents of the Indo-Pakistan crisis occurred on our domestic front . The most serious incident occurred on the domestic front, writes Shah Shah .
 On December 14, while we were still uncertain whether India would attack West Pakistan, syndicated columnist Jack Anderson published verbatim excerpts of the minutes of the meetings of the WSAG meetings .
 Minutes revealed Kissinger’s statements to the group relaying my strong pressure to “tilt” toward Pakistan, Kissinger said . Kissinger said he wanted to exercise greater leverage on all parties . Kissinger's statements differed from the posture that had been adopted by some State Department sources,
 From a diplomatic point of view, the leak was embarrassing, it was intolerable . From the point of national security, national security was intolerable, he said . The leak was "embarrassing" and "intolerable"
 The leak came as a shock because WSAG meetings had been attended by only the highest-ranking members of the military intelligence organizations and the State Department . The leak comes as a surprise because the meetings were only attended by the highest ranking officials .
 Rear Admiral Robert O Welander believed that one of the leaked documents had to have come from his office . The office handled liaison between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the National Security Council . Rear Admiral Welander believes one leaked document had to come from that office .
 Suspicion centered on a young Navy yeoman assigned to Welander’s office . The Navy was investigating Welander's death . Welander died at the age of 92 .
 Young learned that for some time the yeoman had been making copies of secret NSC documents . The yeoman made copies of the documents, Young said .
 He had regularly rifled burn bags for carbons or Xerox copies . Some cases he actually took documents for copying out of Kissinger's and Haig’s briefcases, he says .
 On one occasion he copied a memo of Kissinger’s conversation with Chou En-lai during the first secret mission to Peking . On another visit to China, he copied the conversation between Kissinger and the Chinese leader .
 We were not able to establish beyond doubt that the yeoman was Anderson’s source .
 Whether or not he had disclosed classified information to Anderson, the fact remained that he had jeopardized the relationship of the JCS to the White House .
 I was disturbed—although not perhaps really surprised—that the JCS was spying on the White House . The JCS has been accused of spying on President Obama's administration .
 I was, frankly, very reluctant to pursue this aspect of the case because I knew that if it were explored, like so many other sensitive matters it would wind up being leaked to the media where it would be completely distorted, and we would end up doing damage to the military .
 I felt the circumstantial evidence that he had provided information to Anderson was convincing, and I knew that such actions could not be tolerated . I felt such actions were unacceptable, and knew such actions couldn't be tolerated, he said .
 Diary Diary: What concerns me about this story is the Ellsberg complex that drove the yeoman to put out the information . Diary: "What concerns me is this story that drove me to do it"
 Spying on the White House for the Joint Chiefs is something that I would not particularly be surprised at, but I don’t think it’s a healthy practice . The Joint Chiefs chief is not particularly surprised at the idea .
 He put out top secret information to a newspaper columnist, because he disagreed with the policy on India, is the kind of practice that must, at all costs, be stopped . It must be stopped, he says, but his proceeding to put out secret information is a mistake .
 I felt it would be too dangerous to prosecute the yeoman. I felt, however, that it would not be possible to prosecute him. The yeoman was found guilty of murder, but was not convicted .
 He had traveled with Kissinger and others on a number of secret missions . He had access to other top-secret information, which, if disclosed, could have jeopardized negotiations with China and with North Vietnam .
 In this respect he was a potential time bomb that might be triggered by prosecution . He was a 'potential time bomb' that might trigger by prosecution, he said .
 "We had him transferred to a remote post in Oregon and kept him under surveillance, including wiretaps for a time," he says .
 Congress's lack of interest in diffusing power and returning it to the people, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I once again urged action on proposals ... that would begin changing the whole size and shape of the federal government"
 In his State of the Union address on January 22, 1971, I used blunt language to describe the need for the programs I was proposing . In his SOTU address, President Richard Nixon said he was concerned about the need to address the problem in 1971 .
 The response from Congress continued to be disappointing and frustrating, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The response to Congress continues to be frustrating"
 Welfare reform, government reorganization, the comprehensive health care programs, and dozens of other programs and pieces of legislation continued to be casualties of congressional inaction .
 Most people would probably say that it takes stamina, strength, or determination to succeed in political life . It takes stamina and strength to succeed political life, says Julian Zelizer .
 Pat once said that what political life most requires is “heart”—and she is right . Pat once once said: What political life requires is "heart" and she was right .
 It was her gift to the White House and to the country from the moment she became First Lady . She was a gift to her country and the world, she said .
 She set up staff offices in the East Wing and took a personal interest in every aspect of the operation of the White House . She also set up a staff office in the West Wing .
 She was as concerned about having fresh flowers in the public rooms for the daily tours as she was in being completely briefed on every state visitor .
 The White House is now a museum in Washington, D.C., thanks to President Obama's efforts to share its history .
 She had loudspeakers set up near the fence on the South Grounds so people standing in line for the tour could hear about the history of the rooms they were about to see .
 She arranged special tours for the blind that allowed them for the first time to touch the historic objects in the different rooms .
 Pat recorded an introduction for the first ‘talking history’ of the White House so that those who could not see it would nevertheless have a sense of sharing and belonging when they were there . Pat also recorded a . introduction to the first . “talking . history” of
 All this was in addition to her regular schedule of receptions, teas, and speaking engagements .
 During our first summer in the White House, Julie volunteered as a guide at the Visitors Office . Julie volunteered to take tourists on special trips through the gardens and up to the historical rooms on the second floor .
 Even when she was studying for a master’s degree and later while an editor for the Saturday Evening Post, she maintained a heavy schedule of speeches .
 Pat arranged for private contributions so that the outside of the White House could be illuminated at night for the city’s residents as well as for tourists .
 Inside, she transformed the House with her unerring sense of color and design, and her extraordinary energy, she said . The House was transformed by the House's extraordinary energy .
 With Carlisle Humelsine, the head of the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, she was instrumental in the refurbishment of the White House's West Wing .
 The girls and I took great pride in the fact that after Pat was finished with her work, the White House had never looked more beautiful . The White House was said to have never looked better .
 I can take credit for only one innovation in our White House redecorating program, says Obama . "I'm not taking credit for it," says White House chief of staff .
 The flags were flying over many of the federal buildings but not over the White House . The flags are flying over some of the nation's most important buildings, including the Whitehouse .
 The flag could be flown at night only if it were lighted . The flag was lighted by a military assistant, Don Hughes, his military assistant .
 I asked him to have a floodlight installed on the roof and, from that time on, the flag flew over the White House day and night . The flag flies over White House every night and every night, says the president .
 There is a deep common bond among all those who have shared life at the White House . There is also a common bond between the former White House staffers .
 Pat and Pat wanted to make the families of all former Presidents and Vice Presidents feel welcome .
 Pat suggested that we compile a register of all living direct descendants of former Presidents . Over the years we invited many of them to White House functions . Pat suggested we compiled a register .
 In this way we met Calvin Coolidge’s son, some of Grover Cleveland's grandchildren . Roosevelts from Oyster Bay and Hyde Park, and dozens of Adamses, also attended .
 The Johnson family was given additional Secret Service protection when they traveled abroad .
 I periodically called Johnson and Humphrey to ask their advice, and sometimes just to chat, to let them know I understood the burdens they had borne . I called them to tell them I understood their burdens and wanted to help them .
 Pat’s idea of having a visitor to the White House was to visit with them . Pat's idea of visiting with a White House visitor was to be with them, he said .
 She has always disliked making formal speeches . Instead of dropping by a reception just long enough to say a few words for the benefit of the cameras, she preferred spending her time mixing personally with the guests and talking to them .
 "It frustrated me that her backbreaking schedule received so little attention from the press," she said . "I'm not surprised that she had to work so hard," she added .
 All that mattered to her was that she had made people feel welcome, she said . But all that mattered was that they had made them feel welcome .
 Each morning Pat would go over some of the more than 1,000 letters she received every week and sign replies to them . Pat would sign replies each morning to the letters received each week .
 She believed that if people took the time to write to her that they deserved a personal reply . She said she believed that people would be happy to receive personal replies .
 In the afternoon, after her regular schedule of receptions and teas, she might take retarded children for a cruise on the Sequoia, or plan a special event such as the Thanksgiving dinner to which she invited hundreds of older citizens .
 In the evenings, she would often have some function at the White House or be scheduled to make an appearance somewhere in the city . Then, in the evening, she was scheduled to appear in Washington .
 By the second year in the White House, we had set a record of 50,000 guests . By that year, we'd set a new record for the first time in our White House .
 There is a modern notion that every First Lady has to have a “project,” one thing with which to be identified . There is the modern notion of a First Lady having a ‘project’ with which she is identified .
 Pat was dedicated to promoting the concept of volunteerism, the idea of people helping each other and not waiting for the government to do things they can do for themselves . Pat is dedicated to the idea that people should not wait for government to help them .
 She bridled at the idea that volunteerism was her “project,” or that her interests had to be compartmentalized . She said volunteerism is not her ‘project’ or that she wanted to be a volunteer .
 She once said, “People are my real project,” and she proved it time and time again . She said she was proud to say, ‘People are her real project’
 She traveled around the country talking with people in every kind of program . Programs to help children get a head start on reading, programs for city beautification .
 "Not once did she lose sight of the fact that she was not meeting groups, but individuals, not constituencies, but people," she said . She said: "And not once did . She was meeting people, not groups, ... but people, and not constituencies."
 She stopped to embrace a little girl blinded by rubella when she was on a tour of a medical facility and embraced her . She embraced the little girl who had been blinded by the disease . She said she had been on tour of the medical facility .
 For a few minutes, while the tour waited, she talked to the child and held her close . For the first time, she held the child close to her .
 Pat answered she had known that the child was deaf as well as blind . When someone came over and told her that she was deaf, Pat said she had always known that .
 "For one thing, it is a city home and there is always the sense and sound of traffic outside," she says . "There is always a sense of traffic in the city," she adds .
 Inside, it often seemed as if there was never any real privacy as the household staff went about their work . In the basement the kitchens were constantly bustling with preparations for the steady stream of breakfasts, luncheons, teas, receptions, and dinners .
 President's aides should be removed from the White House, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Two Navy medics who had served full time as the President’s masseurs were reassigned to some more productive duty .
 The President's bed from the White House was flown ahead whenever he traveled outside Washington so that he would never have to sleep in a strange bed . "I immediately stopped what was to me the almost incredible practice of having the President’s bed flown ahead"
 I said I would need only Manolo and possibly one steward to take care of my clothes and meals when I went on weekend working trips to Camp David or Key Biscayne . I said that I would only need Manolo .
 Two large Navy yachts that had been maintained exclusively for the President's use were decommissioned . We ordered the decommissioning of the two large Navy .
 "We also tried to cut down on the numbers and security requirements of the Secret Service who were always with us," says President Obama . The Secret Service was also involved in the shooting .
 Life in the White House was confining, but this made the home we bought in summer 1969 for our retirement in San Clemente even more special .
 Old Spanish house is situated on a beautiful high point directly above the beach . It is an old Spanish house situated on the beautiful beach .
 The constant sound of the waves gives it serenity, and the palm and eucalyptus trees surrounding it provide natural protection that made it possible to take semi-private walks .
 A small complex of offices was built on the Coast Guard station next door, and these became the Western White House . The complex was built next to the Coast Guards station next to .
 Because of the distance, we were able to visit San Clemente only a few times a year . Because of that distance, the family was able to get together only a handful of times .
 In some respects, Pat ran three households in Washington, California, and Florida . She made each of them a home for us even if we were there for only a few days .
 "Pat’s strength of character continued to grow, and her gentle sensitivity to people became even more acute," her husband says . "Over the years of our life in politics, Pat continued to be the strongest of character," he says .
 She proved that it was possible to be both an independent woman and a supportive wife . And by her actions she proved that she was able to be an independent wife .
 She was not at all dismayed when she was sometimes accused of being inhibited, she said . She said: 'I'm not surprised that she was not always inhibited'
 In personal encounters she is lively, informal, and witty, but she felt that it was important for a First Lady to be dignified .
 She was traditional, but in a warm way that transcended time and place . She was a traditional, traditional, warm woman who transcends time, place . Her funeral will be held in New York City .
 She was comfortable with herself, sure of herself in a world of rapidly changing values . And, most important, she was most confident in her career .
 During the vice presidential years, Pat and Pat had traveled together to fiftythree countries . President Obama and Vice President Joe Biden had traveled to more than 50 countries .
 Eisenhower used to think of us as a team—and so did I Eisenhower . While I spent the days in meetings, she went to meet the local people in schools, hospitals, factories, orphanages . She went on to meet people in factories, hospitals and orphanages. Eisenhower used
 I remember the awe and respect on the faces of our hosts in Panama when she insisted on visiting and shaking hands with the tragic inhabitants of a leper colony there . I remember . The Queen's visit to Panama was an 'awful moment' when she shook hands with residents of a
 At night, she would come back to our rooms in time to change into a gown for glittering state dinners . At night she would go to the dressing room to prepare for state dinners in a glittering gown .
 "That spoke to the people in the countries we visited in a way that speeches, toasts, and communiquaries never could. That spoke to them, and they never could," says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Pat was the first First Lady to serve as the President’s official diplomatic representative abroad . Pat was also the President's official diplomat abroad . She is the wife of President Barack Obama .
 In this capacity she went to Peru to take supplies gathered by volunteer workers in America to the victims of a devastating earthquake .
 She climbed amid the rubble to embrace homeless children and bring a message of American love and concern . She embraced the children and embraced them to bring an American message of love .
 The President of Peru invested her with the Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun, the oldest decoration in the Americas . In gratitude for this trip, she was invested with a Grand Cross .
 She was the first North American woman ever to receive this signal honor . She was also the first woman in North America to receive the honor .
 President Obama visited China and the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s . His wife, Pat, has been married for more than 20 years .
 She shook hands with dancing bears at the circus, drew children to her in schools and hospitals, visited communes, factories, department stores, and danced a step with the Bolshoi Ballet school .
 In 1974, she led the United States delegation to the inaugural ceremonies for Venezuela and Brazil . She led the U.S. delegation to Venezuela and the President of Brazil .
 In 1972 she represented me in Africa at the inauguration of the President of Liberia . She then traveled on for meetings with heads of state in Ghana and the Ivory Coast .
 Many in the State Department don’t like him because he does not take the usual line which is totally anti-South Africa without regard to the consequences, even if it means a war which no one would win . She pointed out that he did not believe in using force against South
 I have concluded, after having grave doubts about the independence movements in Africa, that perhaps it is best to allow these countries to start with their first faltering steps and learn to walk alone .
 'They are going to mess a lot of things up but it allows them to have dignity and develop capability which comes only from having responsibility' 'They will mess up but they will have dignity,' says former Manchester United star .
 They would never acquire it in a colonial status or in a dependent status . They would not acquire it for colonial purposes, they said .
 The amazing thing is that Pat came back looking just as fresh as a daisy despite an enormously difficult, taxing schedule . Pat is back in action for the first time since the start of the season .
 She had press conferences in each country, had conversations with the Presidents, and then carried it all off with unbelievable skill . She had 'unbelievable skill' in carrying off the job .
 As Julie put it, what came through was love of the people of the countries she visited for her, and, on her part, love for them . As Julie said, "What came through is love"
 "Sometimes our family was called square and as far as we were concerned, that was just fine. Sometimes our family is called square," says author .
 In Washington, "square" often means rooted in principles that ignore chic, transitory fashions . In the environment of Washington, “square” often means ‘square’
 On our first Sunday in the White House, we held the first White House worship service in the East Room . We held a worship service for the first time .
 It was our idea to have these short inspirational services, each conducted by a distinguished preacher of a different faith and with choirs from different parts of the country . It was also the idea of using choirs to sing inspirational songs in a short service .
 Each time we would invite between two and three hundred people—from congressional leaders to White House policemen and telephone operators . Each time the White House would invite about two-three hundred people each time . The White House was invited to a White House event every time .
 The worship services meant Pat and I could avoid the exploitation of religion that too often took place when we attended regular church services outside . We were accompanied by television crews and pursued by large numbers of tourists .
 This bothered me personally, and I thought that it must be an irritating nuisance and distraction to the others who had come to worship . This bothered him personally, he said . He said: "I thought that this must be a distraction to others who came to worship. I thought it must
 Traditionalists said they were too watered down to be meaningful . Nonbelievers said religion had no place in the White House . Editorialists complained that we were breaking down the separation between church and state .
 The White House worship services were among the high points of our years in the White House . But the worship services have been among the highlights of our time together .
 Our favorite relaxation after dinner at Camp David or in Florida or California was to watch a movie . "Our favorite relaxation" was watching a movie with us .
 Sometimes we would experiment with films we had never heard of; sometimes we would choose current hits; and sometimes old family favorites . Sometimes we chose current hits and sometimes family favorites, but sometimes old favorites .
 President Barack Obama's White House hosted a White House evening of entertainment . The White House has been in the midst of a turbulent political turmoil . Obama's administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 We felt performers invited to entertain after state dinners should reflect the whole spectrum of American tastes . We felt that performers should reflect a wide range of tastes .
 Golda Meir rushed to embrace Isaac Stern and Leonard Bernstein when they performed after a state dinner in her honor . She rushed impulsively to embrace Stern and Bernstein after they performed .
 Beverly Sills, Roberta Peters, Merle Haggard, and the Carpenters covered the range from classical to country and rock . Beverly and Roberta Sills were among those to perform .
 Pearl Bailey was her warmly humorous and inimitable self . Frank Sinatra had tears in his eyes when he thanked her afterward, she said .
 Tony Bennett, Johnny Cash, Glen Campbell, Art Linkletter, and Bob Hope were among the others who came to perform . Bob Hope was also on the guest list .
 In addition to the after-dinner entertainment, Pat initiated a series of special Evenings at the White House . Nicol Williamson reading from Hamlet, Red Skelton cracking jokes, or Sammy Davis, Jr., singing and dancing .
 Sammy and his wife spent the night with us after his performance and—in fulfillment of a lifelong dream, he slept in the Lincoln Bedroom . Sammy's dream is to perform in Lincoln's Lincoln Bedroom .
 In addition to honoring the performing arts, Pat also took a special interest in handicrafts and the fine arts . Pat took an interest in the handicraft and fine art .
 Craft groups were often displayed in the East Wing corridor of the White House . Craft groups often displayed their work in East Wing .
 Pat was also the first First Lady ever to arrange a one-man art exhibition at the White House, inviting Andrew Wyeth to show some of his paintings in the East Room .
 Duke Ellington’s seventieth birthday on April 29, 1969, was the most memorable of all our White House social occasions . I think that most memorable was the POW dinner in 1973, which was a unique historical event .
 When he started to play it was lyrical, delicate, and beautiful—like Pat . And when he started playing it was lyric, delicate and beautiful .
 The 59th year, now complete, has been perhaps the most successful from the standpoint of accomplishment to date .
 The 60th offers immense opportunities and, of course, equally great dangers . It is the 60th anniversary of the U.S. Supreme Court .
 The main thing is to maintain a cool and objective attitude throughout the campaign, says David Cameron . "If possible, stay above the battle and not be buffeted by ups and downs in the polls"
 On the third anniversary of my inauguration as President, I held a dinner for the Cabinet and the White House senior staff . President Barack Obama held the dinner for Cabinet members and White House staff .
 The football analogy tells us that the fourth quarter really determines the game,” I began. “The football analogy says that the game really determines how much of it takes place.” “I'm going to talk about the game. The fourth quarter is the most important
 Eleven Democrats and two other Republicans sought the presidential nomination in 1972 . Eleven Democrats, two Republicans and two Democrats sought the nomination .
 The other Republicans were antiwar California Congressman Paul McCloskey and right-wing Ohio Congressman John Ashbrook . The other GOP members of Congress were anti-war California Rep. McCloskeys .
 Some of the Democratic candidates hoping to make a national impact by a national showing in New Hampshire . The Democratic candidates are already campaigning in the New Hampshire primary .
 Others—including Hubert Humphrey, George Wallace, Henry Jackson, and John Lindsay—calculated that it was better not to risk an initial battering but to emerge as fresh faces in the second primary .
 The Republican National Committee would have to preserve an official neutrality until the convention . "I wanted to keep politics out of the White House, I decided to set up a separate campaign organization"
 At the end of 1971 he was running even with me in the public opinion polls . He said: "I'm not going to be afraid of him. I'm not scared of him."
 Muskie's liabilities were an explosive temper and a reputation in political circles for indecisiveness . Muskie’s liabilities were a . reputation for indecision .
 His principal problem was the ambition of his former running mate, Hubert Humphrey . Humphrey's entry into the race would draw away from him, many traditional rank-and-file Democrats .
 Of the other Democratic candidates, George Wallace was the one we had to take most seriously . Wallace was one of the other candidates, but not the other . Wallace is a Democrat, but a Republican .
 'If he ran again as a third-party candidate, he would undoubtedly draw a large number of conservative votes from me,' he says .
 George McGovern, the extreme liberal dark horse, attracted only mild interest because his chances of getting the nomination seemed so remote . McGovern's chances of winning the nomination were so remote that he was considered a dark horse . The former Democratic presidential candidate was George W. Bush .
 "If by some miracle he could be nominated, he would be the easiest Democrat to beat," says Hillary Clinton .
 Kennedy probably had no choice in the aftermath of the party at Chappaquiddick, Massachusetts, in July 1969, when his car went off a bridge and a young woman in the car was drowned . Noncandidacy would have been the best strategy for Kennedy in any event,
 Kennedy was given nationwide television time to explain his version of the events . Kennedy's version of events was aired on national television . Kennedy: "It was a terrible mistake. It was a mistake"
 Many felt that his story was full of gaps and contradictions . His speech was finely crafted, but many felt that he was not fully rounded .
 If anyone other than a Kennedy had been involved and had given such a patently unacceptable explanation, the media and the public would not have permitted him to survive in public life .
 When I saw him at a meeting in the Cabinet Room a few days later, I was shocked by how pale and shaken he looked . I was surprised to see how pale he looked after the incident .
 I spoke to him in the Oval Office for a few minutes afterward and tried to reassure him that he must resolve to overcome this tragedy and go on with his life . President Obama spoke to the president after the shooting .
 In politics it is possible to feel genuine personal concern for an opponent and still be coldly objective about his position as a competitor . In politics you can feel genuine concern for your opponent, but still be objective about your position .
 Even as I felt real sympathy for Teddy Kennedy, I recognized the farreaching political implications of this personal tragedy . I recognized as he must have done, as he had done, the far reaching political implications . Even as he felt sympathy for Kennedy, he felt political implications for Kennedy's life
 In the short term, Chappaquiddick would undermine Kennedy's role as a leader of the Opposition to the administration’s policies . In the long-term, Kennedy would lose his role as an opposition leader to the policies of the administration .
 In the longer term, it would be one of his greatest liabilities if he decided to run for President in 1972 . It would be a liability for him if he ran for President .
 It was clear that the full story of what had happened that night on Chappaquiddick had not come out, and I suspected that the press would not try to uncover it .
 Ehrlichman asked for someone to investigate the case for us and get the real facts out. Therefore I told him to have someone investigate the matter .
 Our private investigator was unable to turn up anything besides rumors . In fact, our private investigator found nothing more than rumors .
 A grand jury heard the case and a judge issued a report stating that Kennedy could not have been telling the truth in his testimony . The presiding judge, James Boyle, issued the report saying Kennedy could have been lying .
 Public opinion polls showed that most people did not think Kennedy was telling the truth about Chappaquiddick . But they also showed that Massachusetts voters didn't think he should have to resign from the Senate because of it .
 The following year they gave him an overwhelming vote of confidence by returning him to the Senate with 63 percent of the vote .
 Even with Chappaquiddick to overcome, Teddy Kennedy would still have been the most formidable Democratic nominee in 1972 . Kennedy would have been a formidable Democratic candidate .
 "I thought that Muskie had a fair chance of beating me and that Humphrey, backed by labor, could come very close," says Muskie . Muskie thought Humphrey could come close .
 Any Democrat would have the advantage of the sheer size of the Democratic party, which in 1972 outregistered the Republican party by millions of voters .
 It also seemed possible that George Wallace would have the added assistance of George Wallace running against me at the head of a third party . George Wallace was also a possible candidate for the White House .
 "It seemed increasingly likely that all of the candidates would be able to campaign against a war that I was not going to win and that I would not yet be able end," he said .
 His solution to an immensely complex problem was appealingly easy to his supporters . But his solution to the problem was appealing to the supporters of the president .
 He said he would withdraw all troops within ninety days, whether or not our POWs were released . The president would withdraw troops within 90 days, regardless of POWs .
 President Thieu should plan to flee to whatever country would take him, he said . He said that President Thieu should plan to escape to wherever he could .
 Muskie’s commanding lead at the beginning of the campaign described the 9 percent margin as a serious setback for him .
 McGovern was a fringe candidate before he became a serious contender for president . McGovern ran for the presidency in 1972 . He ran for President George W. Bush in 1968 .
 Muskie, who had denounced Wallace as a racist, came in fourth with only 8.5 percent . Muskie came in with 8.7 percent .
 McGovern won the important Wisconsin primary on April 4 . He also won in Massachusetts and Nebraska and Massachusetts .
 To me his steady climb was as welcome to watch as it was almost unbelievable to behold. To me, it's almost unbelievable, behold. I'm glad to see him climb up again and again. I hope he'll be back in the top 10 .
 By the end of the spring, only Humphrey and Kennedy were left to stop him . Only Humphrey, Kennedy and Humphrey were able to pull him off .
 Despite no campaigning, I received overwhelming majorities in all the Republican primaries, he says . He says the primary results were no less gratifying because they were expected . "On our side, I did no campaigning," he says. "Despite the fact that I did not campaign, I got
 At 7:30 on the evening of July 15, 1971, I spoke to the nation from a television studio in Burbank, California . China's President Richard Nixon was assassinated in July 1971 .
 I talked for only three and a half minutes, but my words produced one of the greatest diplomatic surprises of the century . I was only three-and-a-half minutes long, but I was able to make the most of the world's greatest diplomatic surprise .
 Henry Kissinger, President Nixon’s Assistant for National Security Affairs, held talks in Peking from July 9 to 11, 1971 . Henry Kissinger held talks with President Nixon's Secretary of State at the end of that year . Kissinger was Kissinger's assistant for national security .
 Premier Chou En-lai has extended an invitation to President Nixon to visit China at an appropriate date before May 1972 . President Nixon has expressed his desire to visit the People's Republic of China .
 The leaders of China and the United States are to seek the normalization of relations between the two countries . The meeting is also to exchange views on questions of concern to the two sides .
 Behind this brief announcement lay more than two years of complex, subtle, and determined diplomatic signals and negotiations . Behind the brief announcement, behind it lay a series of complex and subtle diplomatic signals .
 The China initiative was actually one of the most publicly prepared surprises in history . Despite the almost miraculous secrecy we had been able to maintain, the China initiative is actually a major surprise .
 The first time I raised the idea of the importance of relations between the U.S. and Communist China was in an article in Foreign Affairs .
 Kissinger wrote a memorandum to Kissinger urging that we give every encouragement to the attitude that the administration was exploring possibilities of rapprochement with the Chinese . Less than two weeks later, on February 1, Kissinger urged that .
 During 1969 the Chinese ignored the few low-level signals of interest we sent them . It was not until 1970 that we began to open a dialogue to see where, if anywhere, it might lead .
 The first serious public step in the China initiative had been taken in February 1970 when I sent the first Foreign Policy Report to Congress . China initiative was first serious step in China initiative .
 U.S. policy is not likely soon to have much impact on China’s behavior, let alone its ideological outlook . United States policy is likely to have little impact on the behavior of China's leaders, experts say .
 U.S. takes steps to improve practical relations with China, says Obama . "It is certainly in our interest, and in the interest of peace and stability in Asia and the world," he says . Obama says it is in his interest to improve relations with Peking .
 Leaders in Peking clearly understood the significance of the language in this report . The leaders of Peking and Beijing agreed to the deal .
 U.S. Ambassador Walter Stoessel suggested moving their hitherto sporadic and unproductive meetings to Peking . Two days later, during a meeting in Warsaw with the United States, China offered to move their meetings there . The Chinese ambassador dramatically suggested the move .
 He also hinted that they would welcome a high-ranking American official as head of the delegation .
 In March 1970 the State Department announced a relaxation of most of the official restrictions against travel to Communist China . In April we announced a further easing of trade controls in China . The U.S. State Department has relaxed travel restrictions since 1970 .
 Plans for moving the Warsaw talks to Peking received a setback in May when the Chinese canceled a scheduled meeting in protest of the Cambodian operation . Plans for the talks to be held in Peking were put on hold until the end of May .
 The underlying logic of the initiative was based on clear-cut assessments of mutually advantageous interests . I was not surprised when, after a few months, the Chinese signaled that they were willing to resume diplomatic relations .
 In July, they released American Roman Catholic Bishop James Edward Walsh, who had been arrested in 1958 and held as a prisoner for twelve years . Walsh was released in July .
 We had discussed the idea in general terms when I saw him on my visit to Pakistan in July 1969 . He had discussed it with him on his visit to Lahore in 1969 .
 President Vladimir Putin asked for help as an intermediary to normalize relations with China, Putin says . Putin: "Now I told him that we had decided to try to . normalize our relations with . China, I asked for his help as a . intermediary"
 I had also discussed the need for a new Chinese-American relationship with him in Bucharest in 1969 . In 1969, I had discussed a new relationship with the Chinese-U.S.
 In his meeting with Ceau$escu the next day, I said that, even short of the ultimate ideal of re-establishing full diplomatic relations with China, there could be an exchange of high-level personal representatives .
 It seems to be approaching sooner than we might think when we will not have the votes to block admission . The time is approaching soon when we won't be able to block entry to the country .
 The question we really need to answer is how we can develop a position in which we can keep our commitments to Taiwan and yet will not be rolled by those who favor admission of Red China .
 There is no hurry on this study but within two or three months I would like to see what you come up with it . There is 'no hurry' on the study, says Dr. David Cameron .
 On December 9 Chou En-lai sent word through President Yahya that my representative would be welcome in Peking for a discussion of the question of Taiwan . Chou Enlai said on December 9 that his representative was welcome in China .
 Chou stressed that the message did not come from him alone but had been approved by Chairman Mao and by Lin Piao, still a powerful figure at that time . Chou said the message was approved by the former Chinese president and Chairman Mao .
 Pakistani Ambassador Agha Hilaly proposed that Chinese and American representatives meet in Pakistan to discuss the possibility of a high-level meeting in Peking in the future .
 American writer Edgar Snow had an interview with Mao Tse-tung on December 18 . The interview was published in the New York Times . Snow's interview is published in New York, New York .
 Mao told Mao that the Foreign Ministry was considering the question of allowing Americans of all political colorations to visit China . Mao told him that China is considering the possibility of allowing all Americans to visit the country .
 Snow asked whether a rightist like Nixon, who represented the “monopoly capitalists,” would be permitted to come . Snow: Nixon represented the "monopoly capitalist" Snow asked if Nixon would be allowed to come. Snow: "It's not clear if Nixon will be
 Mao replied that as President I was, after all, the problems between China and the U.S. would have to be solved . Mao replied, "I would be welcomed, because I was the one with whom the . problems between the . U.K. and China would have
 Mao said he would be happy to talk to the President, whether he came as a tourist or as President . Mao said that he would not mind if he came for a tourist, but if he was President .
 Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan called on Kissinger with the news that after our conversation in October, Ceausescu had sent his Vice Premier to Peking, and Chou En-lai had given him a message for me . Kissinger: "I'm glad to have had the chance to
 "There is only one outstanding issue between us -- the United States occupation of Taiwan," says President Obama .
 The P.R.C. has attempted to negotiate on this issue in good faith for 15 years, it has been reported . The government has been trying to negotiate with the U.S. government on the issue for years .
 If the U.S. has a desire to settle the issue and a proposal for its solution, the P.R.C. will be prepared to receive a United States special envoy in P.E. China .
 Chou En-lai had also commented that in view of the fact that I had visited Bucharest in 1969 and Belgrade in 1970, I would be welcome in Peking. I would visit Bucharest, Belgrade and Bucharest again in 1970 .
 Kissinger noted that the tone was reassuringly free of invective, and the absence of any references to Vietnam indicated that Peking would not consider the war an insurmountable obstacle to U.S.-Chinese rapprochement .
 I did my best to make sure that the Lam Son operation at the beginning of 1971 did not cut off this budding relationship as the Cambodian operation had threatened to do the year before . I did not want to cut off the relationship with Lam Son as it did with the Vietnamese .
 In a press conference on February 17 I stressed that our intervention in Laos should not be interpreted as any threat to China . China's intervention in the country's Laos is not meant to be a threat to the country, he said .
 On February 25, 1971, five days after this tirade, I submitted to Congress my second Foreign Policy Report . Five days after the tirade was published, I wrote to Congress .
 In the coming year, I will carefully examine what further steps we might take to create broader opportunities for contacts between the Chinese and American peoples, and how we might remove needless obstacles .
 The People's Republic of China continues to convey to its own people and to the world its determination to cast us in the devil’s role. The Chinese government continues to .
 So long as Peking continues to be adamant for hostility, there is little we can do by ourselves to improve the relationship with China . The Chinese government is adamant that Peking should not be seen as friendly .
 On March 15, the State Department announced the termination of all restrictions on the use of American passports for travel to mainland China . The State Department said the restrictions were lifted on March 15 .
 I had never expected that the China initiative would come to fruition in the form of a Ping-Pong team . The China initiative is the first of its kind in the world to take part in the event .
 The Chinese responded by granting visas to several Western newsmen to cover the team’s tour . We immediately approved the acceptance of the invitation, and the Chinese responded to the invitation .
 "On April 14, I announced the termination of the twenty-year-old embargo on trade between us. On April 14 I announced . The 20-year embargo was terminated on April 14 .
 The same day Chou Enlai personally welcomed our table tennis players in Peking, China . The Chinese president personally welcomed the players to Peking .
 I replied that we were seeing an ordered policy process beginning to bear fruit . I replied to that we are seeing an order process begin bear fruit, he said .
 I said I would have to disappoint the editors if they were looking for hot head-line news, but the nature of the new relationship made that impossible . I said that I would . disappoint the . editors if . they wanted to . disappoint them . But the very nature of this relationship
 I concluded with an observation that I am sure many of my listeners dismissed as simply a personal digression; in fact, it was a direct clue . I concluded that many of the listeners dismissed it as simply an observation, but it was an important clue .
 At this point a bull in the form of Ted Agnew inadvertently careened into this diplomatic China shop . The former New York Gov. Agnew is seen as a key figure in the U.S. State Department .
 Agnew told reporters the favorable media coverage of the table tennis team’s visit to Peking had helped the Communist Chinese government score a propaganda triumph . Agnew was speaking to reporters in his hotel room after he arrived for the Republican Governors Conference .
 Some reporters had sent back almost lyrical descriptions of the contented and productive lives led by the residents of Peking, China .
 Agnew had expressed his reservations about our trade and visa overtures to the Chinese Communists at a recent NSC meeting . Agnew said he had never imagined that he would discuss his doubts with reporters .
 On April 27 Ambassador Hilaly came to the White House with another message from Chou En-lai via President Yahya . On April 28 Ambassador Hilally came to Washington with a message from the Chinese president .
 In some important respects this message raised as many problems as it solved . In some respects, this message raises as many questions as it actually solves .
 I felt that in order for the initiative to have any chance of succeeding, it would have to be kept secret until the final arrangements for the presidential visit had been agreed upon . The initiative would be kept totally secret until final arrangements were agreed upon.
 With advance warning conservative opposition might mobilize in Congress and scuttle the entire effort . With advance notice conservative opposition may mobilize in . Congress and threaten to scutttle the .
 Kissinger and Kissinger spent the next few days trying to decide who to send to Peking for these initial talks . Kissinger and I spent a few days deciding who should be sent to China . Kissinger: "Kissinger and Kissinger decided to send a team to China for the talks"
 David Bruce ruled out because he was our negotiator in Paris and China would resent us sending him so closely identified with Vietnam . The best man, we agreed, would be David Bruce, but the Chinese would undoubtedly resent our sending someone so closely associated with Vietnam. David Bruce would be the best
 "We also considered Cabot Lodge, but he was even more identified with Vietnam than was Bruce," he said . "We were also considered by Cabot lodge, but we also considered Bruce," said Bruce .
 "I knew that he would have opposed Rogers on personal grounds regardless, but he had good policy reasons," he says . "He would have supported Rogers if he'd opposed him on his own," he adds .
 At my news conference on April 29 I gave another major clue to what was going on, he said . At his news conference in April 29 he gave another hint to what's going on .
 Even the most rigorous monitors and analysts of Nixon rhetoric failed to pick up the point I was making. But once again, even the most . Nixon rhetoric .
 CNN's John Sutter asked him to ask if he had been asked about the possibility of a visit to China .
 At the end of his reply to a general question about our China policy, I said, “I would finally suggest—I know this question may come up if I don’t answer it now—I hope, and, as a matter of fact, I expect to visit
 Edgar Snow’s December interview with Mao appeared on the newsstands at the same time the issue of Life containing the interview was published . The interview took place on the same date as the Life issue containing Snow's interview .
 Messages and signals had been going back and forth for more than two years . Messages were going back to each other for over two years, officials say .
 "We had proceeded carefully and cautiously through the Yahya and Romanian channels," says Ms. Ghitis . She said: "We were very cautious about going through channels"
 Kissinger and Kissinger agreed that we had to take the chance of making a major proposal, or risk slipping back into another long round of tentative probing . Now Kissinger and I . agreed that . we had reached a point at which we had . to take a major . proposal, Kissinger said .
 I decided that the time had come to take the big step and propose a presidential visit, I decided . I decided to propose a visit to the White House .
 Kissinger called in Ambassador Hilaly and gave him a message for Chou En-lai via President Yahya . On May 10, therefore, Kissinger gave him the message . Kissinger called the ambassador to give the message to the Chinese president .
 I was prepared to accept Chou’s invitation to visit Peking. It stated that because of the importance I attached to the normalizing of relations between the two countries, I was ready to accept the invitation .
 Kissinger proposed that Kissinger undertake a secret visit in advance of his trip in order to arrange an agenda and begin a preliminary exchange of views . Kissinger's visit would be a "secret visit" to Washington, D.C.
 If we had acted too soon, if we had not established a sufficiently strong foundation, or . overestimated the ability of Mao and Chou to deal with their internal opposition to such a visit, then all our long careful efforts would be wasted . If . we had overestimated their ability of
 I might have to be prepared for serious international embarrassment if the Chinese decided to reject my proposal and then publicize it . I might even have to prepare for serious embarrassment if I'm not prepared for international embarrassment .
 For almost two weeks we waited, wondering what kind of decision-making process was under way in Peking . For nearly two weeks, we waited for the decision to be made .
 Ambassador Hilaly received a message from President Yahya Khan on May 31 . She said the message was from the President of the United States . Hilaly says she hopes the message will be welcomed back to the country .
 Kissinger's visit to China will take place on Chinese soil, says Kissinger . "Travel arrangements will be made by us," Kissinger writes to Kissinger .
 Two nights later, we gave a state dinner for President Somoza of Nicaragua . The two nights later we gave state dinners for both countries in Nicaragua .
 After having coffee with guests in the Blue Room, I went to the Lincoln Sitting Room to do some paperwork and reading . After Pat and Pat had finished having coffee, I had some time to read .
 He must have run most of the way from the West Wing, because he was out of breath . He was running from the White House .
 Premier Chou En-lai has seriously studied President Nixon’s messages of April 29, May 17, and May 22, 1971, and has reported with much pleasure to Chairman Mao Tse-tung that President Nixon is prepared to accept his suggestion to visit Peking for direct
 Kissinger to China as the U.S. representative who will come in advance for a preliminary secret meeting with high level Chinese officials to prepare and make necessary arrangements for President Nixon’s visit to Peking . Kissinger will be the United States representative to China .
 For nearly an hour we talked about the China initiative—what it might mean to America and how delicately it must be handled . We talked about it with CNN iReport.com's John Sutter.com .
 Kissinger rose to go at the end of Kissinger's visit to Washington . It was close to midnight before we noticed the time, and Kissinger rose .
 "I got up and walked down the corridor to the small family kitchen at the other end of the second floor," she said . "I'm not going to be surprised," she added .
 In one of the cabinets I found an unopened bottle of very old Courvoisier brandy . Someone had given us the brandy for Christmas . It was a very old bottle of brandy that someone gave us for Christmas.
 "I tucked it under my arm and took two large snifters from the glass cupboard," she said . "It's a good sign that it's not going to be taken seriously seriously," she added .
 As we raised our glasses, I said, “We are drinking a toast not to ourselves personally or to our success, but to our administration’s policies which have made this message and made tonight possible .
 As I write them now, my words sound rather formal, but the moment was one not just of high personal elation, but of a profound mutual understanding that this truly was a moment of historical significance . The moment was not just an elation but a profound understanding of the significance of
 On July 6 I flew to Kansas City to address a large group of Midwestern news media executives attending one of the periodic briefings on administration policies .
 Kissinger was in the middle of a ten-day mission to the Far East and just days away from his secret trip to Peking . Kissinger is in the midst of a 10-day trip to the East .
 "Before he got there I wanted to place on the record an outline of the reasons for approaching China. Before he got to China he wanted to make clear his reasons for going to China," he said .
 I told the gathering that China's potential was such that no sensible foreign policy could ignore or exclude it . The potential of China, though obscured to most American observers, was obscured by its isolation, I said .
 Despite the recent flurry of activity I said that I did not hold out any great hopes of rapid advances in our relations with Russia . The Russian-Ukrainian relationship has been described as 'fragile'
 Mainland China, outside the world community, isolated, would be a danger to the whole world that would be unacceptable, unacceptable to us and unacceptable to others as well . China's leaders are not in communication with world leaders, according to the Chinese government .
 It received a great deal of attention in Peking, however, as we were to learn later, but it received a lot of attention later .
 Kissinger would fly to Vietnam for consultations early in July, then stop in Pakistan on the way back . Kissinger would then fly to Pakistan on his way back to Vietnam to meet with officials .
 There he would develop a stomachache that would require him to stay in bed and not be seen by the press . There would be no press in attendance at the hospital .
 President Yahya’s cooperation would allow him to be flown over the mountains into China . He would then be taken to an airport where a Pakistani jet would fly him into Pakistan . Then, he would be flown to a Chinese airport in Pakistan .
 Kissinger’s trip was given the codename Polo after Marco Polo . Marco Polo was another Western traveler who made history by journeying to China . Kissinger's trip to China was dubbed Polo by Marco Polo, another Western .
 His indisposition in Islamabad received only minor attention from reporters covering him in Islamabad . He was not allowed to leave the country .
 They accepted the story that he would be confined to bed for at least a couple of days and began making arrangements for their own entertainment . The family was told he would not be able to go home for a few days .
 Kissinger had no word from Kissinger while he was in China . "Because of the need for complete secrecy and the lack of any direct communications facilities between Peking and Washington," he says .
 Kissinger agreed on a single codeword, Eureka, which he would use if his mission were successful and the presidential trip had been arranged . Even after he had returned to Pakistan it would still be important to maintain secrecy, so before he left, we agreed on the single cod
 Taiwan and Vietnam posed for both sides, and I did not underestimate the tremendous problems that both sides faced . Although I was confident that the Chinese were as ready for my trip as we were, I was not underestimating the problems .
 On July 11 Al Haig, who knew our codeword, phoned me to say that a cable from Kissinger had arrived . Kissinger had sent a cable to the White House from Kissinger, Kissinger said .
 The Chinese had agreed to virtually everything we proposed regarding the arrangements and schedule for my trip . The Chinese agreed to almost all of the things we proposed, including the travel arrangements .
 The preliminary talks had covered the whole range of issues and problems that lay between our two countries . The talks had also covered a number of other issues, says the British Prime Minister .
 He found the Chinese tough, idealistic, fanatical, single-minded, remarkable, remarkable and uncomfortably aware of the philosophical contradictions involved in arranging a visit by their capitalist archenemy .
 Kissinger found that Kissinger was equally at home in philosophic sweeps, historical analysis, tactical probing, light repartee . Kissinger and Kissinger spent 17 hours together in meetings and informal conversation .
 Kissinger had to admit that Kissinger had read only the press reports . Chou asked Kissinger about my Kansas City speech, and Kissinger said he had only read the press .
 The next morning Kissinger found a copy of his speech, with Chou’s underlinings and marginal notations in Chinese, lying on the table with a note requesting that he return it because it was Chou's only copy . Kissinger found the next morning at breakfast at breakfast Kissinger found
 Profound differences and years of isolation yawn between us and the Chinese, says Chinese President Xi Jinping . China is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 They will be tough before and during the summit on the question of Taiwan, Taiwan and other major issues . The summit is scheduled to take place in New York City .
 "I assesses these people are deeply ideological, close to fanatic in the intensity of their beliefs," he says . "My assessment of these people is that they are very ideological," he adds .
 Our dealings with the Chinese and others will require reliability, precision, finesse, says President Obama .
 On July 15 I made the televised announcement that I would be going to Peking, China . "On July 15, 2015, I announced I would go to China," he said . "I'm going to be in Peking. It's a very exciting experience," he says .
 Some commentators joined the more partisan Democrats in tempering their praise with speculation that my motives had been political . Some commentators have speculated that I may have been trying to win the election .
 Most of the serious criticism, however, came, as I had expected, from the conservatives, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Most of the criticism came from conservatives"
 Congressman charged me with “surrendering to international communism” by accepting the invitation . Congressman John Schmitz of California charged me . Congressman said he was “saying goodbye” to “international communism .
 Wallace warned against “begging, pleading, and groveling” before the Chinese Communists . Wallace did not actually condemn the trip, but he warned me against ‘begging and pleading’
 The reaction abroad to our China initiative was generally favorable, but there were some understandable reservations . The reaction to the China initiative has been generally favorable but there have been understandable reservations.
 U.S. reassured that we did not withdraw our recognition of their government and did not renounce our mutual defense commitment . However, they were reassured that they did not .
 They resented the fact that they had not been informed in advance, but we had no other choice . "We had to do it," says President Obama . "They resented that they were not informed of it," she says .
 We could not have informed them without informing others, thus risking a leak that might have aborted the entire initiative . We could have informed others without knowing others, so risking the leak .
 As soon as I returned to Washington from San Clemente, I held a briefing for the bipartisan leadership in the Cabinet Room .
 I stressed the need for secrecy, because the more we had to put things into words, the less freedom of movement we would have in dealings with the Chinese . The more secrecy we have, the more freedom to move, we will have in our dealings with China, he said .
 "I had to ask that they trust me. I understood how difficult it would be for many of them to trust me," she said .
 Its purpose was to prepare the agenda for the meetings I would have with the Chinese leaders and to work out the basic language of the communiqué that would be issued at the end of my trip .
 The draft communiqué that I had approved for submission to the Chinese had followed the standard diplomatic formula of using vague and conciliatory language to patch over the most heated and insoluble problems . It was followed by the standard diplomacy formula to patch up the most contentious issues .
 Kissinger was taken aback when Chou stated that our approach to the communiqué was unacceptable . Kissinger was somewhat taken aback by Chou's remarks .
 He dismissed our proposed draft as the sort of banal document the Soviets would sign without meaning it and without planning to observe it . The draft draft was rejected by the Soviets, but the Soviets did not intend to sign it .
 The Chinese then handed Kissinger a counterdraft that took his breath away . Kissinger then received a copy of the draft . Kissinger was stunned by the reaction .
 We could not allow any references to racial discrimination; we opposed it as much as did the Chinese . mention in this communiqué would be interpreted as criticism of American domestic problems . mention of racial discrimination would be seen as criticism .
 The proposed references to China as “the reliable rear area” of North Vietnam were unacceptable phrasing while Americans were fighting or being held prisoner in Indochina . Similarly, references to Chinese support for Indochinese peoples’ “fighting to the end for the attainment of
 Kissinger found that the Chinese were willing to compromise on a communiqué that would state the underlying goals of the summit while retaining each side’s basic position expressed in noninflammatory language . After this initial session, Kissinger found a compromise .
 Kissinger reported that toward the end of the talks Chou had specifically pointed out that they could be in real trouble if my administration was not in power . Kissinger reported . Kissinger: Chou had pointed out . that they were in trouble .
 While Kissinger was in China on Polo H, the U.N. General Assembly moved to vote on the question of admitting the People’s Republic of China as a member nation . Kissinger traveled to China on the Polo H .
 Kissinger instructed Kissinger to stay away an extra day so that he would not have just arrived home when this controversial vote was taken, Kissinger says . Kissinger: " Kissinger was not just arriving home when he was taken. He would have arrived home so he could be there."
 As early as August we had publicly withdrawn our opposition to consideration of consideration of this question . We support the concept of the ‘two Chinas,” Chiang Kai-shek’s Republic of China on Taiwan and the Communist Party of China, each to have membership
 "It had not been easy for me to take a position that would be so disappointing to our old friend and loyal ally, Chiang. Chiang," she said . "It's not easy for us to take such a position," she added .
 The traditional vote bloc opposed to Peking’s admission had irreparably broken up . Several erstwhile supporters had decided to support Peking at the next vote .
 "I have never believed in bowing to the inevitable just because it is inevitable. Personally, I have never . believed in . bowing . to the . inevitable . Just because it . is inevitable, he said. "I'm not going to let it happen."
 "I was determined to honor our treaty obligations by continuing our military and economic support for an independent Taiwan," says President Obama .
 On October 25 the UN voted 76 to 35, with 17 abstentions, to expel Taiwan and to admit the P.R.C. as the sole government representing China . The UN voted in favor of the expulsion of Taiwan and the admission of China's sole government .
 A few days before leaving for China, I invited the great French writer and philosopher André Malraux to the White House . President Barack Obama invited him to China to meet with the world's leading thinkers .
 Malraux had known Mao Tse-tung and Chou En-lai in China during the 1930s . He had kept up intermittent contact with them through the years .
 His description of the Chinese leaders in his Amtz-Memoirs was among the most valuable and fascinating reading I had done in preparation for my trip to China . He said: "His description of China's leaders in Amtz Memoirs"
 "Time had not dimmed the brilliance of his thought or the quickness of his wit," he said . "He was brilliant and quick and witty," he added .
 Even after his elegant French had been filtered through a State Department interpreter, his language was original and striking . Even after he had his language filtered through an interpreter, he was original .
 I asked whether just a few years ago he would have thought that the Chinese leaders would agree to meet with an American President . President Xi Jinping said he would not have thought he would meet with President Obama .
 There was a period when the friendship between China and Russia was cloudless, when they allowed Russian arms to pass over their territory on the way to Vietnam . The friendship between the two countries was clouded, when it was less than cloudless .
 The Chinese themselves do not believe in it; they believe only in China . "The Chinese themselves believe in China," says the Chinese .
 Malraux said that he had not understood what Mao meant by that . He told me, ‘When I have six atomic bombs, no Malraaux said that . ‘He told me ‘when I have . Six atomic bombs. He said that when I had six
 I did not understand that either, but I am repeating it for you because often it is what one does not understand is most important . I am not sure what it is important to say, but it's important to know .
 He meant that in his view the great leaders were created by the kind of traumatic historical events that will not occur in the world anymore, he said . The great leaders, Churchill, Gandhi, de Gaulle were created as a result of traumatic events, he added .
 I once asked him if he did not think of himself as the heir of the last great Chinese emperors of the sixteenth century . He said: "I once asked me if I did think of myself as a great Chinese emperor, I said yes."
 Mr President, you operate within a rational framework, but Mao does not . Mao does . Mao did not. Mr President . Mr President. You operate within . a rational . framework, he says .
 People who knew Lincoln said they always felt he was looking beyond the horizon . Lincoln's gaze was focused on a space between the earth and the sky where he was focused .
 Malraux: "You have spoken of avoiding the shoals to reach the shore. You have ... avoided avoiding shoals," he said . Malraaux: "I'm not going to go to the shore."
 Even though both you and he are aware of the shoals, neither of you knows what lies on the shore beyond . Neither of you know what lies beyond the shores of the ocean .
 "You are about to attempt one of the most important things of our century," Malraux told me . Later, over coffee, he told me, “You are going to attempt ... something that's about to be important .
 I think of the sixteenth-century explorers, who set out for a specific objective but often arrived at an entirely different discovery . The explorer often set out to find out what he wanted, but often came up with a surprise .
 As we stood on the steps of the North Portico, he turned to me and said, “I am not de Gaulle, but I know what De Gaulle would say if he were here,” he said .
 As the plane gathered speed and then took to the air, I thought of Malraux’s words: ‘I thought of the plane gathering speed, then taking to air.’
 "We were embarking upon a voyage of philosophical discovery as uncertain, and in some respects as perilous, as the voyages of geographical discovery of a much earlier time," says the author .
 As Henry and Bob both pointed out on the plane, there was almost a religious feeling to the messages we received from all over the country, wishing us well .
 I told Henry that I thought it was really a question of the American people being hopelessly and almost naively for peace, even at any price . I told him that the U.S. people were hopelessly naive about peace, he said . He added that he thought the U
 He felt that perhaps there was also some ingredient of excitement about the boldness of the move, and visiting a land that was unknown to so many Americans .
 China stopped briefly in Shanghai to take aboard Chinese Foreign Ministry officials and a Chinese navigator . An hour and a half later we prepared to land in Peking .
 The small towns and villages looked like pictures I had seen of towns in the Middle Ages . The town was like a picture of a Middle Ages town in which it was built .
 Our plane landed smoothly, and a few minutes later we came to a stop in front of the terminal . It was the first time the plane had landed in a major airport .
 "I paused for a moment and then returned the gesture, according to the Chinese custom," she said . I paused a moment before returning the gesture .
 Chou had been deeply insulted by Foster Dulles’s refusal to shake hands with him at the Geneva Conference in 1954 . Chou was deeply offended by Dulles's refusal to meet him .
 "When I reached the bottom step, therefore, I made a point of extending my hand as I walked toward him," he said .
 After being introduced to all the Chinese officials, I stood on Chou’s left while the band played the anthems . The band was introduced to each other by the Chinese president .
 As I walked down the long line, each man turned his head slowly as I passed, creating an almost hypnotic sense of movement in the massed ranks .
 When we came into Tien-amen Square at the center of Peking, he pointed out some of the buildings; I noticed that the streets were empty . The streets of the square were empty, he said .
 Madame Chou was waiting for us when we arrived at the two large government guesthouses where our official party was to stay . Madame Chou had been invited to stay in the guesthouses for her party .
 Chou said he was sure everyone would like to rest before the state banquet . Chou said: "We had tea in the sitting room, then Chou said that he would like everyone to rest"
 Kissinger burst in with the news that Chairman Mao wanted to meet him, Kissinger said . Mao was chairman of the Communist Party of China . Kissinger said Mao was "wanting to meet me" Mao died of a heart attack .
 Rogers expressed concern that we ought to have a meeting with Mao very soon, and that we couldn’t be in a position of my seeing him in a way that put him above me, like walking up the stairs or him standing at the top of the stairs .
 Henry came into the room breathlessly, told me that Chou was downstairs and said that the Chairman wanted to see me now at his residence . Our concerns in this respect were completely dissipated when Henry came in the room .
 "I waited about five minutes while Henry went downstairs, then we drove to the residence," she said . "We were there for a few minutes, and I waited five minutes," she added .
 We were escorted into a room that was not elaborate, filled with books and papers . We were taken to a room filled with papers and books .
 Several books were open to various pages on the coffee table next to where he was sitting . Several of the books are open to pages on a book next to him on the couch .
 Chou later told me that he had been sick for about a month with what was described as bronchitis . Chou later said he was sick with what he later said to have been broncheditis . He later said that he was ill for a month and that he suffered from bronch
 Chou waved out of the room about ten minutes through the conversation . Two or three of the military and the civilian people were standing in the room .
 The transcript of the conversation may not have caught probably the most moving moment, when he reached out his hand, and I reached out mine, and he held it for about a minute . "I reached out my hand and it was a very moving moment," he said .
 While it was supposed to be ten or fifteen minutes it extended to almost an hour . He kept bringing Henry into the conversation, and while it was meant to be 10 or 15 minutes long, it extended .
 I saw Chou look at his watch two or three times and realized that I probably should break it up in order not to tax him too much . Chou was looking at his time when he started the show, but realized that he probably should stop it up .
 Chou constantly referred back to the meeting with Mao and what Mao had said . It was interesting to note that later at the plenary session, Chou constantly used to refer back to Mao .
 Chinese photographers rushed in ahead of us to record our first meeting . Several Chinese photographers had rushed in to record the meeting .
 We all sat in overstuffed armchairs set in a semicircle at the end of the long room . We sat in armchairs in the semicircrere at the far end of a long room.
 While the photographers continued to bustle around, we exchanged bantering small talk .
 Kissinger said he assigned Mao's writings to his Harvard classes at Harvard . Kissinger remarked that he had assigned Mao’s writings to Harvard classes .
 Mao said in characteristic self-deprecation, “These writings of mine aren’t anything. These writings of my writings aren”t anything, Mao said . Mao said, ‘These writings are nothing,” Mao said.
 Mao spoke with some difficulty, but it was clear that his mind was moving like lightning . Mao's mind was on the move like lightning when he spoke, Mao said .
 Mao chuckled when his question was translated, but it was Chou who answered . Mao chuckled as he answered the question, but Chou said it was Mao who answered it .
 Mao remarked on Kissinger’s cleverness in keeping his first trip to Peking secret . Mao remarked that Kissinger kept his trip to China secret .
 Mao said in honesty he had to tell me that if the Democrats won the Chinese would deal with them, Mao said . Mao said that in honesty, Mao told me that in . honesty, he had . to tell him that if . the Chinese won, they would deal . with them
 Mao remarked, “The former President of Pakistan introduced President Nixon to us. When the conversation moved to the history of our meeting, Mao remarked . Mao remarked that the former president of Pakistan had introduced him to us . Mao said, ‘The former Pakistan President introduced us to us
 At that time, our ambassador in Pakistan refused to agree to our having any contact with you . At the time, the Ambassador in Pakistan had refused to accept any contact from you .
 President Obama was not happy with your former Presidents, beginning with Truman through Johnson, he said . "I don’t know how he got that impression, although we on our side were not very happy," he added .
 What brings us together is a recognition of a new situation in the world and a recognition on our part that what is important is not a nation’s internal political philosophy. What is important for a nation is not its internal politics, says President Obama .
 Mao's meeting with Mao dealt mainly with what he called the ‘philosophy’ of our new and potential relationship, he says . I raised in general terms the major substantive questions we would be discussing, he writes .
 I said that we should examine our policies and determine how they should develop in order to deal with the entire world, as well as the immediate problems of Korea, Vietnam, and Taiwan . I said: "We should examine how we should deal with our policies"
 Mao was animated and following every nuance of the conversation, but he could see that he was also becoming very tired . Mao is animated but tired at the end of the interview, but also tired .
 Chou had been discreetly glancing at his watch with increasing frequency, so I decided that I should try to bring the session to a close . I decided to try to end the session .
 Mao's face beamed when the translator came to these words from his own poem . Mao’s face was beamed as he read the poem .
 I continued, “I would also like to say in a personal sense—and I also say this to you, Mr Prime Minister—you do not know me.” I continued to say: “In a personal . sense, I would also say in . a personal
 Chou laughed, and it was clear that we were in for another bit of self-deprecation . Chou laughed and said, "I'm not joking"
 Kissinger is "one of those not to be overthrown personally," Kissinger says . Kissinger: "They say that he is also among those who are also not being overthrown personal"
 You came from a very poor family to the top of the most populous nation in the world, a great nation . "I'm a very proud American citizen," says President Obama .
 I came from a very poor family, and to the top of a very great nation. I also came from very poor families, and came from an old family . I am proud to be able to speak to the world's most famous people. I am happy to be here today,
 The question is whether we, with different philosophies, but both with feet on the ground, can make a breakthrough that will serve China and America, but the whole world in the years ahead .
 His walk was a slow shuffle, and he said he had not been feeling well . He said he was not feeling well, and that he had been feeling ill .
 The first plenary session with Chou at the Great Hall of the People was cut short because of an unscheduled meeting with Mao . Chou: "We talked only in general terms about the way our meetings would proceed"
 Chou preferred a format in which one side presented its views on a subject at one session and the other side responded at the next . Chou prefers a format where one side presents its views and the next at the same time . Chou preferred to a format that one side responds to the other at
 The most difficult and touchiest part of the trip would be the joint communiqué, he said . "I reaffirmed our pragmatic approach to it," he said of the communique .
 "As we begin these meetings we have no illusions that we will solve everything," says President Obama . "We are not going to solve everything. We will not be able to solve anything," says Obama .
 'We can set in motion a process which will enable us to solve many of these problems in the future,' says minister . But we can't wait to see if we can solve many more problems, he says .
 The men and women in this room and the women, this room have fought a long hard struggle for a revolution which has succeeded . The men in this . room and women have fought for a long . hard struggle, the men in . this room, the women in the . room have
 We know you believe deeply in your principles, and we believe deeply, our principles. We know that you are deeply committed to our principles . We are committed to the principles of our principles, we say .
 Chou remarked, “As you said to Chairman Mao this afternoon, today we shook hands,” he said . Perhaps the mention of opposing principles triggered the thought, Chou remarked .
 I would say in honesty to the Prime Minister that my views, because I was in the Eisenhower administration, were similar to those of Mr Dulles at that time . I would be honest to the PM, Mr Cameron said .
 The relationship between the People’s Republic and the United States must change too . But the world has changed since then, and the U.S. needs to change too, says President Obama .
 By the time we met for the banquet at the Great Hall of the People an hour later, the Chinese group seemed to be much more at ease . By the end of the meal, the group was much more relaxed .
 Mao had now given his official blessing to the visit, perhaps because Mao had already given his blessing . Perhaps it was simply that we had already begun to get along well with each other .
 "What brings us together is that we have common interests which transcend those differences," says Obama . "We are united in common interests," he says .
 "Neither will compromise our principles. As we discuss our differences, neither will compromise their principles," says President Obama .
 While we cannot close the gulf between us, we can try to bridge it so that we may be able to talk across it . We can't close the gap between us but we can bridge it, says David Cameron .
 Neither of us seeks to stretch out our hands and rule the world . Neither of them seeks the territory of the other; neither seeks domination over the other . "Neither of us seek the territory or domination," the author says .
 Chairman Mao has written, ‘So many deeds cry out to be done, and always urgently urgently.’ Chairman Mao wrote that 'so many deeds are crying out for urgent action' Chairman Mao also wrote that ‘Many deeds are needed urgently. So many deeds should be done
 This is the hour, this is the day for our two peoples to rise to the heights of greatness which can build a new and a better world, says President Obama . "This is the moment," he says .
 After toasts, orchestra played “America the Beautiful,” one of the songs I had chosen for my inauguration in 1969 . I remarked that this song was one of my inauguration songs I'd chosen for 1969 .
 The Prime Minister knows and I know that friendship—which I feel we do have on a personal basis, cannot be the basis on which an established relationship must rest; not friendship alone .
 As I had intended, this statement created a slight stir on the Chinese side of the table . The statement was intended to stir a stir among the Chinese, but it did not .
 "All of my instincts are against a big military establishment and also against military adventures," he said . "I'm against military establishment," he added .
 Prime Minister is one of the world’s leading spokesmen for his philosophy . He has to be opposed to powers such as the U.S. maintaining huge military establishments .
 If the U.S. were to reduce its military strength, the dangers to the United States would be great . But each of us has to put the survival of his nation first, says President Obama .
 The Soviet Union has been moving ahead at a very alarming rate over the past four years . And in terms of the nuclear power balance, the Soviet Union is moving ahead ahead at an alarming rate .
 I think strongly that our policy with respect to Japan is in the security interests of his country even though it is opposed to the philosophic doctrine which he espouses . But I want him to understand why I . think strongly . I think . strongly that . our . policy with . respect
 If we were to leave Japan naked and defenseless, they would have to turn to others for help or build the capability to defend themselves . Japan would need to build its own capacity to defend itself, says David Cameron .
 If we had no defense arrangement with Japan, we would have no influence where they are concerned. We would not be able to influence them in any way, he says .
 We would have no effect, because thousands of miles away is just too far to be heard . We would not be able to hear the sound of the Earth's sound .
 China regarded the Soviet Union with a mixture of utter contempt and healthy fear . The Chinese regarded the USSR with a combination of contempt and fear .
 Chou was aware of the symbolism and impact of his coming to Peking before going to Moscow, and he thoroughly enjoyed the fulminations of the Soviet press against my visit . Chou was completely aware .
 "They are mobilizing a whole mass of their people, their followers, to curse us," she said . "They're mobilizing [their] people, followers," she added .
 Later on, when he had loosened up considerably, he told an amusing story that he said took place during a Sino-Soviet border flare-up in 1969 .
 At the time of the Chen Pao border incident, however, Kosygin picked it up and called us . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Despite his seventy-three years Chou remained alert and attentive throughout the four-hour session . I was impressed by his mental acuity and stamina .
 I said I fully understood the limitations of our talks and that I had no illusions about being able to settle the Indochina war in Peking. I said that I fully understand the limitations . I said: "I fully understood that I have no illusions that we could settle the war
 Chou made clear that, in his opinion, the later we withdrew from Vietnam, the more difficult and unsatisfactory the withdrawal would be for us, he said . Chou said, "The later we withdraw from Vietnam ... would be the more ... unsatisfactory" for us .
 Chou pointed out that I had admitted that de Gaulle acted wisely in withdrawing from Algeria; despite the domestic political difficulties that a similar decision would cause me, he felt that it was nonetheless the right thing to do regarding Vietnam . Chou pointed to the domestic difficulties that would cause him, he
 If I were sitting across the table from whoever is the leader of North Vietnam and we could negotiate a cease-fire and the return of our prisoners, then all Americans would be withdrawn from Vietnam six months from that day, says President Nixon .
 Pat carried out a full schedule that included visits to the Peking Zoo and the Summer Palace . While I was in these meetings with Chou, Chou, he carried out his full schedule .
 When we met at the guesthouse that evening, she remarked that although the Chinese she had met were gracious and eager to cooperate, she felt that our reception was somehow restrained . She said that although she felt the Chinese were gracious, she was disappointed with our reception .
 Only contact she had had with anyone other than her official guides was on a visit to the kitchen of the Peking Hotel . She had been kept from meeting people, and the only contact she'd had was to visit the kitchen .
 China's relations with the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, and the entire Communist world are at risk, says CNN's John Defterios .
 Two decades of virulent anti-American propaganda could not be undone overnight . The Chinese masses would take time to assimilate the new line emanating from Peking .
 Chou and Chiang Ching, Mao Tse-tung’s wife, were taken to the Peking Opera by Chou and by Chiang . Mao's wife was Mao's mistress, Mao's former wife .
 They had arranged a special performance of the theatrical extravaganza The Red Detachment of Women, which she had devised and staged . It was a theatrical extra-aganza staged by her husband and children .
 From briefing material I was aware that Chiang Ching was an ideological fanatic who had strongly opposed my trip . I was also aware of his opposition to his visit to China .
 She had led a checkered and contradictory life, from her younger days as an aspiring actress to her leadership in the Cultural Revolution of 1966 . Her leadership of the radical forces in the cultural revolution of 1966 led to her death .
 Mao’s wife in name only, but there was no better name in China . Mao had used it for all it was worth to build up her personal faction of supporters . For many years she had been Mao's wife only, and used it to support her personal supporters .
 Khrushchev sat in the very place I was now sitting, Chou said . Chou mentioned Khrushvic had come to a performance of this show in 1965 and had sat there .
 Chiang Ching told me about some American authors she had read . While we waited for the overture to begin, she talked about some of her favorite American authors .
 She mentioned John Steinbeck, and asked why another of her favorite authors, Jack London, had committed suicide . Jack London was one of the best-loved authors to commit suicide, she said .
 She asked about Walter Lippmann and said that she had read some of his articles . She also said she had also read some articles about him .
 Chiang Ching had none of the easy humor or warmth of Mao, Chou, and the other men I met, says historian . He says he had "no easy humor" of Mao and other men .
 The young women who acted as interpreters and interpreters in China were the same characteristic in the young women we met .
 The women of the movement, it struck me, were more humorless and more single-minded in their total dedication to the ideology than were the men . The women were more dedicated to their ideology than the men, the author says .
 I had not been particularly looking forward to this ballet, but after a few minutes I was impressed by its dazzling technical and theatrical virtuosity .
 Chiang Ching had been undeniably successful in her attempt to create a consciously propagandistic theatre piece that would both entertain and inspire its audience . The piece was created by Chiang Chiang Cing in an attempt to entertain her audience .
 The result was a hybrid combining elements of opera, operetta, musical comedy, classical ballet, modern dance, and gymnastics . The result of the show was a mixture of opera and musical comedy .
 The story deals with a young Chinese woman in prerevolutionary times . She leads her townspeople in a revolt against an oppressive landlord . The story is based on the story of a young woman who leads her community to revolt .
 "The production was superficial and artificial. Emotionally and dramatically, it was superficial," said the production .
 In many respects, as I noted in my diary, it reminded me of the ballet Spartacus that we had seen in Leningrad in 1959—in which the ending was changed so that the slaves won . The ballet, which we saw in 1959, was a classic of Spartacus
 After each evening’s social event Kissinger would meet with the Vice Foreign Minister and go over each new draft of the official communiqué word by word . Kissinger would go over the draft word-by-word with the vice foreign minister .
 Kissinger would walk across the bridge connecting the two guesthouses and report to me on the progress they were making or problems they had run up against . Sometimes Chou would join them . Sometimes Kissinger would join Chou, sometimes Kissinger would report on progress .
 As a result of these nocturnal negotiations, few of us got very much sleep, and Kissinger got hardly any . Kissinger's "nocturnal negotiating" was a formative period of his life, he says .
 We felt that we should not and could not abandon the Taiwanese; we were committed to Taiwan’s right to exist as an independent nation . We felt we should never abandon Taiwan; we felt we shouldn’t abandon Taiwan,” said President Obama .
 The Chinese were equally determined to use the communiqué to assert their unequivocal claim to the island . The communique was published in the wake of the U.S. State Department's decision to release it .
 Kissinger and Kissinger tried to convince the Chinese of the necessity of exercising moderation, he says . "Domestic political considerations led Kissinger and me to try to convince Kissinger," Kissinger says .
 If the Chinese made a strongly belligerent claim to Taiwan in the communiqué, I would come under murderous cross fire from any or all the various pro-Taiwan, anti-Nixon, and anti-P.R.C. lobbies and interest groups at home .
 If these groups found common ground on the eve of the presidential elections, the entire China initiative might be turned into a partisan issue . The issue could be a political issue in the coming weeks .
 China's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years, says President Xi Jinping . "If I lost the election, whether because of this particular factor or not, my successor might not be able to continue developing the relationship between Washington and Peking," he says .
 I spoke very frankly about the practical political problems a strongly worded communiqué on Taiwan would cause me. In the official plenary sessions with Chou, therefore, I . spoke very frankly about the . practical political . problems a strong worded . communique would cause a strong
 We knew that no agreement concerning Taiwan could be reached at this time, says President Obama . We knew no deal was reached, says Obama .
 We would have to oppose the use of military force by Peking to bring Taiwan under Communist rule . Both sides could agree that Taiwan was a part of China—a position supported by both the Peking and Taiwan governments . We would oppose Peking using military force against Taiwan .
 Kissinger's negotiating skill and Chou’s common sense helped secure the deal . Kissinger and Chou finally agreed to sufficiently modified language . The Chinese agreed to a modified version of the language .
 One reason we found the Chinese appeared to be so agreeable to deal with was their total lack of conceit or arrogance . The Chinese appear to be more agreeable to dealing with than anyone else .
 The Chinese were almost obsessed with self-criticism and with seeking advice on how to improve themselves . Unlike the Soviets, they insisted that everything they had was the biggest and the best .
 As Chou continually referred to their need to understand and overcome their imperfections, I could not help think of Khrushchev’s boastful bombast and how much healthier the Chinese approach was .
 Of course, I knew that it was only an approach, a conscious decision to view themselves in this way . They were convinced of the ultimate superiority of their culture and philosophy, and that in time it would triumph over ours and everyone else’s .
 When Pat and I toured the Forbidden City, our host was the seventy-two-year-old Minister of Defense, Marshal Yeh Chien-ying . Yeh is a former minister of defense, and he is now a senior citizen of China .
 He made the interesting comment that the American music and the Chinese music seemed to fit in together . American and Chinese journalists hit it off well, he said .
 Americans have a little depth and subtlety and are not the abrasive, loud types that would grate upon the Chinese. I think he is totally correct in this respect, particularly .
 "We honestly, almost naively, like people and want to get along with them. We have no sense of arrogance," he says . "We're not arrogant. We honestly like people," he adds .
 We lack often a sense of subtlety but that will come after we’ve had a few hundred more years of civilization, he says . We lack subtlety, but that’s after we've had centuries more of civilization .
 Chou En-lai adds to Chinese subtlety the far-ranging experience of a world diplomat . He adds to the subtlety of the diplomat's experience .
 On our third night in Peking, Pat and Pat were taken to a gymnastics and table tennis exhibition . We were also taken to an exhibition of table tennis in China .
 The gymnastic event was a colorful spectacle and, as was the case with the ballet the night before, had the feeling of enormous dedication and singleness of purpose .
 The way that they brought out their equipment, and the opening march with the red flag, was strikingly strong . The opening march of the first march with a red flag is strikingly strong, says CNN.com.com .
 The appearance of both the girls and men, as well as, the superb Ping-Pong event left an impression that was not only lasting, but also foreboding . The event was held in a bid to raise awareness of the dangers of the Olympics .
 Henry could not be more right in his warning that as the years went on, not only we but all the people of the world will have to make our very best effort if we are to match the enormous ability, drive, and discipline of the Chinese people .
 I climbed back into bed and lighted one of the Chinese-made “Great Wall’s’ cigars my hosts had provided . I sat puffing on the cigar and making notes about the events of the week .
 On Saturday, February 26, we flew with Chou in his plane to Hang-chow, in eastern China . Chou is known for his work in China .
 Diary Diary Chou En-lai and I had a very interesting conversation on the way to the airport in Peking . Chou Enlai had an interesting conversation with the Chinese leader .
 Mao’s poem was written on returning to his hometown after thirty-two years . Mao wrote the poem on returning home to Mao's hometown after 32 years . He spoke of Mao's poem .
 "He returned to the point he has made quite often, that adversity is a great teacher," he said . He returned to his point of the point: "He has made it quite often . He has made this point quite often."
 I related it to adversity generally, and pointed out that an election loss was really more painful than a physical wound in war . I said it was more painful to lose an election than to lose a war .
 On the other hand, the election loss helps to develop the strength and character which is essential for future battles. On the same hand, it also helps the loss of the election .
 I said to Chou that I found that I had learned more from defeats than from victories . All I wanted was a life in which I had just one more victory than defeat, he said .
 I used also the example of de Gaulle in the wilderness for a period of years as a factor which helped to build his character. "I used also used also . The example of De Gaulle ... as a result of being in the . wilderness helped to help build his . character
 He came back with a thought that men who travel on a smooth road all their life do not develop strength . He said he thought that . men who . travel on the smooth road do not . develop strength, he said .
 Chou said that I had a poetic turn of mind like Mao, when I had in my last toast said that it was not possible to build a bridge across 16,000 miles and twenty-two years in one week .
 Much of the Mao poetry, of course, is simply a colorful and vivid example . Much of Mao poetry is simply an example of the poet's vivid and colorful nature .
 He referred again to his admiration for Six Crises, and I jokingly said that he shouldn’t believe all the bad that the press said of me of me, and that I would follow the same practice with regard to him .
 In the days when the emperors used it as a summer resort, it was known as the most beautiful city in China .
 Mao enjoyed taking vacations there and staying in an exquisite old palace that had been turned into a government guesthouse . Mao enjoyed staying in the old palace and staying there . Mao was known to enjoy staying at the palace .
 Even though we were in Hangchow in the cloudy off-season, it was easy to see why Mao was drawn to the city . Even though it was in the dark, there was plenty of reason for Mao's visit .
 Mountains rise mistily in the background, and the lakes are full of lotus flowers . The lakes were full of lotsus flowers.
 It was rather musty, but it was immaculately clean, and it was the most delightful interlude of the trip . Pat and Pat agreed that our stay there was the best interlude .
 Chou spoke for more than 15 hours in talks with CNN's John Sutter . Chou: "During the more than fifteen hours of formal talks we covered a wide range of issues and ideas"
 The Chinese were nervous about the possibility of leaks, says President Obama . "Since all our discussions during this trip were so frank, it was understandable that [China] were nervous," he says . "It's understandable that the Chinese were so nervous that [the Chinese were] nervous about
 I am sure that Chou had no trouble imagining the propaganda use of the transcripts of our talks with the Kremlin would have for the transcripts . Chou: "I'm sure that I had no difficulty imagining the use of these transcripts for propaganda use"
 Chou referred to the Jack Anderson leak during a discussion of the internal opposition to some of his decisions during the Indo-Pakistan war, Chou said . Chou said the leak was a result of internal opposition during the war .
 Chou had mentioned how important the Chinese considered confidentiality in our relationship, and Chairman Mao had made the same point very emphatically during our meeting . Chairman Mao made the point emphatically in his first meeting with Chou .
 To assuage Chou’s fears, I outlined the strict procedures we planned to follow to keep our future contacts secret . Chou: “I outlined strict procedures I planned to use to keep my contacts secret.”
 "I said I was determined that when the fate of our two countries ... was involved, we would be able to talk in confidence," she said . She said she was determined to do so when fate of two countries was involved .
 Chou jokingly jokingly said, “Even Dr. Chou’s wife,” about the situation in the Middle East . Chou: “When we began to talk about the Mideast situation, Chou said: ‘Even even Dr.
 Kissinger’s too, because while he is Jewish he is an American first—our concern is much bigger than Israel . Kissinger's too, says President Obama, who is Jewish, is a "American first"
 We believe the Soviet Union is moving to reach its hands out in that area . We believe it is trying to reach out to the West .
 Democrats and Republicans will now be allowed to visit the U.S. Capitol Hill, Sen. Mitch McConnell says . "I emphasized that my visit had bipartisan support," McConnell said .
 "I want to be sure that whether a Democrat or Republican occupies the presidency, this beginning we have made is carried forward," says Obama .
 As we became more at ease and more familiar with each other, our conversations occasionally became light, even humorous . As we got more familiar, our discussions sometimes became light-hearted .
 Chou told me about a meeting between Chairman Mao and Emperor Haile Selassie a few months before his trip to China was announced . Chou told him about the meeting .
 Chinese leaders were obsessed by the amount that remained to be done and by the little time that was left them in which to do it . As Malraux had said, the Chinese leaders .
 I said that I was enormously impressed by his vitality and that age really was a question of not how many years a person lived but how much he lived in those years . He said that age was a matter of not just how much people lived but what they did .
 I seemed to sense that being involved in great affairs kept a person alive and young, but there was a haunting refrain throughout throughout that he felt that the current leadership was near the end of the road with still very much to be done .
 All the Chinese leaders we met seemed particularly struck by the youth of our entire party. "All of the young people we met were particularly struck," she said .
 Chou singled out Dwight Chapin, who was only thirty-one and looked even younger, in his first meeting . Chou: "In our first meeting, we were impressed with Chapin's maturity, maturity and maturity"
 Marshall Green, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs, was fifty-six . Marshall Green is a former diplomat who served in the US .
 I approached this trip as if it were the last chance I would have to do something about the Sino-American relationship . Despite the fact that I was almost a quarter of a century younger than Mao, I approached it as if this was the last opportunity I had .
 As I put it in a diary dictation shortly after returning home, “I am really probably older than they are—I have only ten months to live —or at most four years and ten months, and I must get results now.”
 Chou said, “I can’t wait ten years.” Chou said he can't wait 10 years for a solution to his problems .
 China's current leaders are too old to be able to take control of the world, says Liu Yadeade .
 You have been Vice President for two terms, then lost and then won an election again . You have lost two elections, then went on to win a second election . You were Vice President of the United States for two years .
 Kissinger broke diplomatic ground by stating significant differences between the two sides on major issues rather than smoothing them over . Following the formula Kissinger had worked out during Polo II, the communiqué was released .
 The U.S. side proclaimed its support for the eight-point peace plan proposed by us and the South Vietnamese in Paris on January 27 . The Chinese side stated its support . The United States side stated support for a seven-point proposal put forward by the Vietcong in February .
 The Chinese endorsed North Korea’s plan for unification of the Korean peninsula, and called for the abolition of the UN presence in South Korea . We stated our intention to maintain close ties with and support for South Korea, the Chinese said .
 The Chinese stated their claim to be the sole legal government of China and their conviction that Taiwan is a province of China . Taiwan is Taiwan, which they say is Taiwan . The Chinese state that they are the only legal government in China .
 They affirmed that the liberation of Taiwan was China’s internal affair in which no country had a right to interfere . They demanded that all American forces and military installations be withdrawn from Taiwan . The liberation was an internal affair, they said .
 By agreeing to this provision both the P.R.C. and the U.S. were imposing restraints on themselves, they were imposing restraint on themselves . The U.N. Security Council has been criticized for agreeing to the provision .
 The provision subtly but unmistakably made it clear that we both would oppose efforts by the U.S.R. or any other major power to dominate Asia . But far more important, particularly as far as the Chinese were concerned, was that the provision subtly .
 As I look back on that week in China two impressions stand out most vividly . As I looked back at that week, I think of that week as one of the most memorable moments .
 China must cultivate China during the next few decades while it is still learning to develop its national strength and potential, says President Xi Jinping .
 "We will one day be confronted with the most formidable enemy that has ever existed in the history of the world," he says . "Otherwise we would one day confront with the greatest enemy that ever existed"
 Chou En-lai is a unique personality that is unique to him, says author . He says his most vivid memory of the trip is the unique personality of the man .
 My meeting with Mao Tse-tung was too brief and too formal to have given me much more than a superficial personal impression . Mao's visit to China in 1960s was too formal and too brief, says Mao .
 Many hours of formal talks and social conversation with Chou made him appreciate his brilliance and dynamism . Chou was a genius and dynamist, Chou said .
 Chou En-lai was able to talk in broad terms about men and history . Unlike many world leaders and statesmen who are completely absorbed in one particular cause or issue, he could talk broad terms .
 Even though his perspective was badly distorted by his rigid ideological frame of reference, the extent of his knowledge was impressive . Even though he had a distorted perspective, he was impressive at the time .
 Chou En-lai has a remarkable knowledge of history that he displays, and, also, how his historical perspective is shaped by ideology .
 For example, he sees the French intervention in the Revolutionary War as being by volunteers [led by Lafayette] and not by the French government . He also sees the intervention by volunteers in France as being led by Lafayette .
 Chou sees Lincoln as one who “after many defeats,” as he put it, finally prevailed because he had the people on his side . Chou also sees Lincoln {as one} who ‘after many loses,’ he said, “but he finally prevailed .
 While it is true that Lincoln is one of the few great figures in history, he was a total pragmatist . Lincoln was a real pragmist, not a great figure in history .
 He did not fight the war for the purpose of freeing the slaves, although he was unalterably opposed to slavery . He freed only the slaves in the South but not in the Northern border states .
 I regret that Chou did not live long enough for me to meet him again when I visited China for the second time in February 1976 . I regret not being able to meet Chou again when he died in 1976 .
 "I feel that although our acquaintance was brief, we had formed bonds of mutual respect and personal esteem," she said . She said: "Although our acquaintance ... was brief and necessarily somewhat restrained and even wary, I feel that . I feel . that although their acquaintance was . necessarily somewhat
 Chou said: “In your dining room upstairs we have a poem by Chairman Mao in his calligraphy about Lushan mountain.” Chou said in his last long session together in the guesthouse in Peking .
 In that poem the Chairman meant that one who makes an initiative may not always be one who stretches out his or her hand . Chairman meant he meant that . One who makes initiative may . not always . one who . makes initiative might not always always stretch out his . hand .
 Ice hangs on a thousand feet of cliff yet at the tip of the topmost branch the plum blooms . The plum blossoms on the edge of the cliff face .
 "You may not be there to see its success, but of course we would welcome your return," he says . “We would welcome you back,” he said .
 Kissinger diplomatically pointed out that even if I won re-election, a return visit would not be very likely . Kissinger said even if he won re - election - it was not very likely he would return to the U.S.
 Chou referred to the fact that I had changed the name of Azr Force One to The Spirit of 76 shortly before this trip . The Spirit Of 76 is the latest in a long-running series of episodes of the show .
 "From the standpoint of policies, I hope that our counterpart will be the same so that we can continue our efforts," says President Obama .
 We hope not only that the President continues in office but that your National Security Adviser and your assistants continue in office . We also hope that the president continues to be in office, but that the National Security . Adviser and his assistants continue to office .
 If I should suddenly die of a heart attack, you would also have to deal with a different counterpart . For example, if you would have a different version of me, I would be dealt with by someone else .
 "I assured him that, on the contrary, I was very interested in what he was saying," she said . She added that she was "very interested" in what she was saying . She said she was 'very interested' in what was being said .
 "This poem was written after a military victory over the enemy. For example,” he said, “this poem was . written after . a military . victory over . the enemy .
 "If the one who wrote that poem took the short view, you would not be here today," he said . "You would not have been here today"
 It is essential to look at the world not just in terms of immediate diplomatic battles and decisions, but the great forces that move the world, says David Cameron . It's essential to understand the world's great forces, he says .
 I described the real nature of my thinking behind the China initiative in notes I made at 2:30 A.M. on Friday, February 24, of points I planned to make in my meeting with Chou that afternoon .
 If I could have publicized these notes the conservative critics of the China initiative would at least have felt reassured that I had not approached the Chinese naively . Perhaps if I could . have publicized this note the conservative . critics would be reassured that . I was not approached naively by the Chinese
 The first was to emphasize the immense potential of the Chinese living overseas, and the need for the P.R.C. to use that potential and learn to live with it, rather than blunt it by trying to blunt it .
 The second was to emphasize that RN would turn like a cobra on the Russians, or for that matter on anyone else, if they break their word with him . RN: "The second was . emphasize that . RN would . turn like an . cobra, if . they break
 The third was to emphasize, in a very personal and direct way, my intense belief in our system, and my belief that in peaceful competition it would prevail . The third, he said, is to emphasize his belief that peaceful competition will prevail .
 I believe it is essential not to let the assumption exist at all on their part that their system will eventually prevail because of its superiority . I believe that it is not the assumption there is that the system will prevail .
 "Our system is not coming apart at the seams," he says . "All of the public criticism, etc., of our system should not be taken as a sign of weakness," he adds .
 In his toast at the banquet on our last night in China I said, “The joint communiqué which we have issued today summarizes the results of our talks.” The joint communique .
 Jack Anderson began a series of newspaper columns in which he claimed to have unearthed a major administration scandal . The day after we returned from China, Jack Anderson wrote about the administration scandal in a column .
 His charges were based on a memorandum allegedly from Dita Beard, a lobbyist for International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, to one of her ITT superiors . Beard allegedly made the allegations in a memorandum to a top ITT official . Beard is a former lobbyist for the company .
 Anderson said that the memo implied that a government anti-trust settlement with ITT had been influenced by an ITT contribution toward the upcoming Republican convention and that John Mitchell and John Mitchell had pushed for favorable treatment for ITT because of this contribution .
 ITT was required to divest itself of holdings representing $1 billion in sales . In fact, the anti-trust settlement in question had been a favorable one for the government and not for ITT . ITT had to divest its holdings of holdings of $1billion in sales to comply
 ITT’s stock fell 11 percent on the first trading day after the settlement . ITT's stock dropped 11 percent in the first day of trading on Monday .
 Mitchell excused himself because ITT subsidiary had been a client of his former law firm . Kleindienst, Mitchell’s deputy, was in charge of the case due to the fact that Mitchell excuses himself .
 As I saw it, the Justice Department suits were a clear violation of my antitrust policy . "As I saw . I saw ... it, as I saw [Obama] Obama's] antitrust policy was clear violation," he said .
 I was convinced that American companies would be able to compete in the international market only if they were as big and strong as government-sheltered monopolies in so many foreign countries . I had instructed that big businesses were to be broken up only when they violated the laws of fair competition
 Justice Department officials "deliberately contradicted" Obama administration policy, he says . "I had made this position clear at staff and Cabinet meetings," Obama says .
 ITT officials felt they were being unfairly sued and descended upon Washington in an effort to get the suits dropped . ITT executives descended on Washington in a bid to get them dropped . The suits were dropped .
 They had seen members of Congress from both parties and also everyone they could reach in the administration who would give them a hearing . They had also seen members from both sides of Congress and the administration .
 When one case came to trial at the end of 1970, the court agreed that the suit was groundless and ruled against the Justice Department .
 Justice Department is appealing decision to appeal decision to a higher court . Several weeks later I learned that Justice Department was going to appeal this decision .
 The original suit had been contrary to my specifically stated policy, and I was was not going to countenance further defiance by any subordinate or by any department, he said . "I was was going to be very difficult to deal with," he added .
 Two days later, when my anger had cooled, I was approached by John Mitchell . John Mitchell approached me when I was angry, I said: 'I'm not surprised'
 "He was sensitive to the tempers and the egos at the Justice Department," he said . He was sensitive about tempers, egos and tempers at Justice Department .
 He urged me to retract my order to Kleindienst, advising that if I did not, there would be resignations within the department . That would mean noisy congressional hearings and a political mess, he says .
 He explained the policy conflict as the result of unintentional confusion . He said it was the first time he had a policy conflict .
 I agreed to refrain from interfering in the Anti-Trust Division’s decision to appeal the case . I will not comment on the decision .
 Justice officials prosecuting the case decided to settle it and not proceed with the appeal . For reasons unrelated to his call to Kleindienst or to any contributions toward the selection of the Republican convention site, the case was settled .
 Watergate Special Prosecutors, Archibald Cox and Leon Jaworski, investigated the ITT case . They concluded that there had been no quid pro quo involved in the settlement . Months later both Watergate Special prosecutors investigated the case .
 When tapes of Mitchell and Kleindienst were turned over, they proved that my motive in ordering that no appeal be filed was policy and not politics, he says .
 In that pre-election spring of 1972, the Democrats played the ITT issue to the hilt . The Democrats played it to a huge advantage in the election season .
 Dick Kleindienst called for new Senate hearings at which he could defend his honor . He was nominated to succeed John Mitchell as Attorney General at the time of the scandal .
 The committee holding the hearings included Teddy Kennedy and his friends Birch Bayh and John Tunney . Teddy Kennedy was a front-running noncandidate, but was not running for president .
 They quickly turned the hearings into a forum in which to berate the administration . The hearings quickly turned to a forum where they berated the administration.
 The networks gave prominence to the easy accusations while the sometimes complicated explanations got lost in the clamor . Larry O’Brien at the Democratic National Committee joined in and the networks gave prominent attention to easy accusations .
 I thought that the committee’s Democrats had traded in hearsay and indulged in melodramatics, I said . I thought they had traded hearsay for melodrama, but I didn't think it was hearsay .
 Diary Diary: If I ever get time to write a book, at some time in the future, there is going to be a hardhitting chapter on this point .
 Where a committee is investigating subversives, inevitably the press attacks the procedures which the committee is following, the committee says . The press attacked the procedures that the committee was following .
 When a committee is investigating business or government officials, including even the President, the press is silent with regard to outlandish procedures that it would immediately condemn if the investigation were aimed at subversives .
 "Fair procedures should be followed in both cases," says the former president . "I have always insisted upon," he says .
 It bugs the press that I have done so, because they know that their objection is not to ow a committee investigation is conducted, but to what is being investigated . The press is not interested in what's being investigated, it wants to know what the committee is doing .
 A year later I was to find out how hypocritical Kennedy in particular had been. A year after he was found to be a hypocrite .
 White House staff raced around trying to minimize political damage and keep any embarrassing material from the committee’s partisan clutches . Day after day the White House tried to minimize the political damage .
 There were rumors that the memo itself was a forgery, so Colson sent someone out to see Mrs. Mrs. Colson . Colson's memo was reportedly a forged document .
 Beard did testify that the memo Anderson had published was a forgery . Beard's secretary filed an affidavit that she had not typed the Anderson version . The man to whom it was addressed testified that he had never received it . Beard did subsequently testify that she did not typed it .
 The whole ITT episode left us, particularly Mitchell and Kleindienst, worn out . The episode was the most entertaining episode of the series . It was an hour-long, long-running episode .
 ITT left a sour taste in the mouths of the public even though they did not know exactly what had been involved . We had lost a massive partisan public relations battle, ITT said .
 "Since I had no other choice, I tried to be philosophical about this situation," she says . "I'm not sure what I will do next," she adds .
 Diary Colson gave me a report on the ITT case, and said that he had really tried to shake up the staff a bit in terms of their pessimism with regard to the attacks . Colson said he was trying to 'shake up' the staff's pessimism .
 I told him this is only the beginning of a much greater assault at a later point—for us to stand firm, he said . "We will stand firm," he said. "I told him it was only the start of the assault at this point"
 "I think we have got to find tougher language to throw at some of our Democratic friends," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: We need to find a tougher language .
 Instead of doing the nation’s business, they are spending all their time in smears, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: ‘They’re spending their time on smears. They’ll spend it on smearing the nation,’ says Cruz
 Haldeman had pointed out that Joe Kraft in his column, and Connally later in the day, in recounting a conversation he had with [NBC news anchorman John] Chancellor, made the same point .
 At the beginning the problem was that we didn’t know what really was involved, and that we should have, as Haldeman suggested, simply laid the whole record on the table, and not have been concerned about it . It is likely that this is the case, but
 The optimistic days when I had envisioned ending the Vietnam war within a year were now long past . NORTH VIETNAM INVADES THE SOUTH . North Vietnam invaded the South in 1968 .
 For more than a year the North Vietnamese had played a cynical game with the peace talks in Paris . The North Vietnamese government had been negotiating a deal with the French government . The talks are expected to take place in the next few weeks .
 Kissinger would make a substantial new proposal in one of the private sessions, they would either ignore or reject it . Kissinger's proposal was either ignored or rejected, Kissinger said .
 In the public sessions they would vehemently attack us for not showing any flexibility or interest in reaching an agreement . Then in the . public sessions, they would . vehemently attack . We would vehemently . attack them for not . showing any . flexibility or . interest in . reaching a deal, they
 On August 16, 1971, we offered the complete withdrawal of American and allied forces within nine months after an agreement; on September 13 they rejected this proposal . On September 13, they rejected the proposal and continued to insist on the overthrow of Thieu as the sine qua non for
 In the meantime they used the public meetings in Paris to berate us for not wanting to negotiate seriously . The EU has been accused of not taking a deal seriously, says the UK .
 It was a very skillful propaganda maneuver, and it took in many American critics of the war . "It was a [propaganda] maneuver," he says .
 In September 1971 McGovern visited Paris and spent six hours talking with Xuan Thuy . McGovern also visited Vietnam in September 1971 and visited Vietnam's former president .
 Afterward he told reporters that he had been assured that North Vietnamese would return POWs as soon as we agreed to set a date for our withdrawal . Afterward, he said he had assured that the North Vietnam would return all our POWs .
 "These were exactly the terms that we had offered on May 31, 1971, and they had rejected, on June 26, 1971," he said . "They had rejected this terms, and that they had offered," he added .
 More to make sure that we had overlooked no opportunity for a settlement than out of any belief that we would succeed in obtaining one, I decided to make another attempt at breaking the deadlock . More to say: 'More than make sure no opportunity has been overlooked'
 U.S. and allied forces to be withdrawn from South Vietnam within six months of an agreement, for all POWs to be exchanged on both sides, and for a cease-fire throughout Indochina .
 Thieu accepted an internationally supervised presidential election in South Vietnam within six months after an agreement was reached . He and Vice President Ky would resign from office one month before the election so that all candidates would run on an equal footing .
 We proposed another secret session for November 1, 1971. Armed with this dramatic new plan, we proposed a secret session . The session would be held in secret .
 The North Vietnamese countered by suggesting November 20, and we accepted . The North Vietnam countered by suggested November 20 . It is not the first time the U.S. has met with North Korea .
 We offered to meet as soon as he was recovered or to meet with any other qualified representative . We offered him a meeting with a qualified representative, but he has not yet been found .
 There are ominous reports of a big military buildup north of the DMZ . No further word came from Hanoi, but there were ominous reports . A continued stepping up of enemy activity in the South .
 When Saigon was shelled, President Nixon ordered bombing raids be resumed over North Vietnam . The bombing was a violation of the terms of the 1968 bombing halt agreement, Nixon says .
 On January 13, 1972, I approved the withdrawal of 70,000 more American troops from Vietnam over the next three months . The withdrawal was approved by President Richard Nixon in 1972 . President Nixon signed off the pullout in 1972 to Vietnam .
 "I felt that the number had to be significant in order to underscore the downward direction of my withdrawal policy," he says . "Coming on the eve of a new session of Congress and just before the beginning of the presidential primaries," he adds .
 By May 1, less than four months away, there would be only 69,000 Americans remaining in Vietnam . They too would be getting ready to leave .
 A successful Communist invasion of South Vietnam might seriously jeopardize the safety of Americans still in Vietnam . Even as I made this announcement, I was facing the unsettling prospect of a successful invasion of Vietnam .
 The leak to columnist Jack Anderson during the Indo-Pakistan war had added a disturbing new element to our situation . The leak was made during the war in Pakistan .
 The Navy yeoman we suspected of being the source of the leak had had access to papers dealing with Kissinger’s secret negotiations in Paris . We had no way of knowing whether any information about them had been passed on to Anderson or others .
 If the U.S. learned about the secret negotiations through a newspaper leak, there would be political and diplomatic hell to pay . The American people would be outraged by the leak .
 One of Kissinger's aides resigned because of Cambodia was now working as Muskie’s foreign policy adviser in his presidential campaign . I was also concerned because one of Kissinger’�s aides who had resigned from Cambodia was working as a presidential campaign adviser .
 Since this man had been privy to the secret negotiations in Paris, we could not be certain that he would not tell Muskie . Muskie is expected to be the next president of the United States .
 I decided to make a speech revealing publicly the peace plan that the North Vietnamese had not been interested in hearing from us privately . The North Vietnamese were not interested in talking to us privately and, at the same time, the secret channel was revealed .
 The time had come to show the sincerity of our approach and expose the cynical tactics of the Communists. The time has come to expose the cynicism of the Communist Party.
 In a speech from the Oval Office on January 25, 1972, I said Kissinger had been holding secret meetings with the North Vietnamese since August 1969 . In the speech, which I made, Kissinger said he had been meeting Kissinger with North Vietnam since 1969 .
 Kissinger, Rogers, and I had carefully tailored our public statements to protect the secrecy of the meetings, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "We were determined to do nothing to jeopardize any chance they had for success. I explained that over the past thirty months Kissinger and Rogers, .
 North Vietnam played a cynical game with McGovern regarding POWs in 1971, he said . “Nothing is served by silence when it misleads some Americans into accusing their own government of failing to do what it has already done,” he wrote .
 I said that just as secret negotiations can sometimes break a public deadlock, I now felt that public disclosure might help to break a secret deadlock . I said just as . secret negotiations sometimes break . up a public . deadlock. I now feel that public . disclosure might . help
 I described the major points of our dramatic new proposal that Hanoi had not even deigned to receive. I described it as a proposal that was not even received by the Vietnamese government. I also described the proposal as a 'dramatic'
 I said that we were still interested in almost any potential peace agreement, but I repeated that the only kind of plan we would not consider was one that required us to accomplish the enemy’s goals by overthrowing our South Vietnamese ally, he said .
 I concluded, “Honest and patriotic Americans have disagreed as to whether we should have become involved at all nine years ago; and there has been disagreement on the conduct of the war. I concluded .
 The path to the Chinese Summit had unfolded relatively smoothly . But the way to the Soviet Summit was strewn with pitfalls .
 Intelligence indicated that vast quantities of Soviet arms were pouring into North Vietnam . In the first few months of 1972, it was believed Soviet arms had been pouring into Vietnam .
 On January 25, I wrote a letter to Brezhnev informing him of my speech that night . “The Soviet Union should understand that the United States would have no choice but to react strongly to actions by the North Vietnamese which are designed to humiliate us.”
 Dobrynin pretended to be surprised that we were thinking so negatively, and Brezhnev’s reply was terse and testy . Dobrynkinin pretended he was surprised that . He replied: “I’m not surprised.”
 Kissinger was in the Oval Office talking to Kissinger when one of his staff members sent a note into him . Kissinger's staff member sent the note to Kissinger in March . Kissinger was talking to the president at the time .
 Over the next few weeks, the main force of the North Vietnamese Army—an estimated 120,000 troops—trampled across the internationally recognized neutral territory of the DMZ and pushed deep into South Vietnam .
 Tragically, the Communist spring offensive also unleashed that barbaric strain of North Vietnamese brutality that so marked their conduct of the Vietnam war . Tragically the spring offensive once again unleashed that . brutality .
 At both An Loc and Quangtri, as terrified civilians rushed to flee the scene of combat, North Vietnamese troops indiscriminately slaughtered thousands of them . Thousands of people were killed at both sites of the conflict .
 During the spring offensive, the Communists took over Binh Dinh province on the central coast of Vietnam . Intelligence reports came in telling of public executions by Communists of individuals suspected of having connections with Saigon government .
 In one hamlet forty-seven local officials were reported to have been buried alive . In another hamlet, 37 officials were reportedly buried alive in a landslide .
 Communist forces gathered together more than a hundred civilians and selected forty of them for execution . A few months later we learned of still another mass murder near Quang Ngai province, where more than 100 civilians were gathered together .
 Land mines were stringed around the chosen victims and detonated as their wives and children watched . The victims were then blown to bits by the men, blowing their helpless captives to bits .
 I felt if we could mount a devastating attack on their home territory while pinning down their Army in the South, we would be in a very good position for the next round of negotiations . I felt that if we were able to mount a . devastating attack . on their . home territory
 We decided to go all out in applying military pressure to North Vietnam and diplomatic pressure to its Soviet suppliers, says President Nixon . "We decided to apply military pressure," says Nixon .
 I issued orders for the Pentagon planners to begin assembling a massive attack force of aircraft carriers, cruisers, and destroyers for sea bombardment and B-52s for aerial raids on North Vietnam . North Vietnam was the focus of the U.S. invasion of Vietnam .
 On April 4, the State Department announced that Soviet arms were supporting the North Vietnamese invasion . The U.S. State Department made the announcement on April 4 .
 At their next meeting, Kissinger confronted Dobrynin with the alternatives that either the Soviets had actually planned the invasion or their negligence had made it possible . The Soviets had not planned to invade the U.S. at the time .
 Brezhnev gave a noticeably warm reception to Secretary of Agriculture Earl Butz when he arrived in Moscow to discuss trade agreements . Butz signed several joint agreements dealing with education and cultural exchanges . Despite this, Brezhnnev said he gave a warm welcome to Butz .
 Moscow seems to be moving ahead on the summit regardless of the flare-up in the war . It seemed clear that Moscow was moving ahead despite the conflict .
 Dobrynin told Kissinger that the North Vietnamese would adopt a very responsive approach when the private talks resumed in Paris on April 24 .
 He also suggested Kissinger make a secret visit to Moscow so that Vietnam and other agenda items could be discussed with Brezhnev before the summit . He also repeated an earlier suggestion that Kissinger visit Moscow to discuss Vietnam and Vietnam .
 President Barack Obama has agreed to meet with Vladimir Putin in Moscow . He has also agreed on his overall strategy and goals as he prepares to meet Putin .
 His opinion on the tactics he should follow in his talks was somewhat different from mine . However, his opinion on his tactics should be somewhat different .
 Kissinger refused to discuss anything that the Soviets wanted until they committed themselves to help end the war . Kissinger said he wanted him to make Vietnam the first order of business in Vietnam .
 Kissinger urged me to let him feel out the situation rather than risk everything by imposing any rigid preconditions . Kissinger, however, continued to feel that flexibility must be the cornerstone of any successful negotiation, he said . Kissinger: "Let's not rush everything, risk everything"
 We were in complete agreement on the importance of keeping up the military pressure on North Vietnam, including the bombing, says the British PM .
 Any sign of weakness on our part might encourage the Soviets to provide more arms in hopes of giving the North Vietnamese a military advantage . The North Vietnamese government is trying to keep the U.S. out of the Vietnam War .
 I also wanted the South Vietnamese to be confident that we still stood resolutely behind them. "I also wanted to . reassure them that the South . Vietnamese are confident that they still stand resolutely . behind them," he said .
 The morale of the South Vietnamese government and armed forces would be crucial to their ability to resist this attack . South Vietnam's morale is crucial to its success in the fight against this attack, says John Defterios .
 I felt that the North Vietnamese invasion had moved the war into a final stage. I felt it was the end of the war. I thought it was a final phase of the conflict in Vietnam . I felt the war had moved into a last stage.
 If the North Vietnamese armies were able to sweep down and join with the Vietcong in routing the South Vietnamese forces and taking Saigon, then the war would be lost . The remaining 69,000 American troops were in serious danger .
 Kissinger agreed that even if the worst happened and we had to pull out in the face of an enemy victory, I would still be able to claim credit for having conducted an honorable winding down of the war by the dignified and secure withdrawal of 500,000 troops . Kissinger agreed, perhaps
 "Most people would give me credit for that, and everyone would be so glad the war was over that the domestic situation would not be impossible to handle," says President Obama . "Everyone would be glad to see the war ended," he says .
 I recorded my reflections on the situation that had now developed in Vietnam . I recorded a video of the situation in the country's capital .
 Diary Diary: It is ironic that having come this far, our fate is really in the hands of the South Vietnamese . Diary diary: Vietnam's fate is now in our hands .
 If we fail it will be because the American way simply isn’t as effective as the Communist way in supporting countries abroad . The U.S. needs to find a way to support countries abroad, says President Obama .
 We give them the most modern arms, we emphasize the material to the exclusion of the spiritual and the Spartan life . It may be that we soften them up rather than harden them up for the battle, and it may be easier than hardening them up .
 The enemy emphasizes the Spartan life, not the material, emphasizes sacrifice and emphasizes sacrifice . The Soviet technical help on missiles, guns, etc. etc., they have a pretty good advantage . On the other hand, the enemy emphasizes .
 I think perhaps I was too insistent and rough on Henry today, but I am so disgusted with the military’s failing to come up with any idea that I simply had to take it out on somebody, I think . I think maybe I was so insistent that I was
 Henry seems too often to be concerned about preparing the way for negotiations with the Soviets . Also, Henry, with all of his many virtues, does seem too often .
 Putin realizes that no negotiation in Moscow is possible unless we come out all right in Vietnam . However, when he faces the facts, he realizes that he realizes the facts .
 Both Haldeman and Henry seem to have an idea—which I think is mistaken—that even if we fail in Vietnam we can still survive politically . Both men seem to think that even if they fail, Vietnam will still be politically viable politically .
 "The United States will not have a credible foreign policy if we fail," Obama says . "I will have to assume the responsibility for that development," he says .
 A subtle occasion to apply pressure on the Soviets arose when I attended a ceremony at the State Department for the signing of an international convention banning biological warfare .
 A great responsibility rests upon the great powers to follow the principle that they should not directly or indirectly encourage any other nation to use force or armed aggression against one of its neighbors . I said we must recognize that a great responsibility .
 There was no doubt that I was talking about the Soviet Union and North Vietnam . "There is no doubt," he said, referring to North Vietnam and Soviet Union .
 Just before I left the State Department Auditorium, I went over to shake hands with Dobrynin . "Just before I . left, I . went over and shook hands with him," he said .
 Dobrynin’s recent invitation to get together for a talk about our trip to Moscow . The pair will discuss their trip to the Russian capital .
 Dobrynin called Kissinger and suggested that the ladies’ meeting be arranged for the next day . Later that afternoon, Kissinger agreed to meet for the first time . Kissinger was in the midst of a crisis in Washington .
 When she raised the point that we did not want anything like Vietnam to interfere with the summit, Mrs. Zhang raised the issue . Zhang said: "When she raised her point, she said she wanted to see the summit be held in a safe place"
 "We pursued a combined policy of applying military pressure on North Vietnamese and diplomatic pressure on the Soviets. During the next weeks we pursued a combination of military pressure and diplomacy," says the British Prime Minister .
 Even while summit plans were going forward, I was determined not to indulge the Soviet fiction that they could not be held responsible for what North Vietnam did, despite the fact that the invasion had been made possible by the massive infusion of new Soviet weapons and ammunition .
 In order to have the necessary military impact, the bombing would have to be brought to the enemy’s heartland around the Hanoi-Haiphong area . The bombing, which had begun in the southern part of North Vietnam, would need to be moved to the H
 Laird expressed grave concern about the congressional furor that would follow further escalation of the bombing . Rogers feared that it might endanger the Soviet Summit .
 Operation “Freedom Porch Bravo” was a weekend of heavy B-52 raids aimed at destroying oil depots around Hanoi and Haiphong . Oil depots were being used to fuel the invasion, which was being used in the invasion .
 This was the meeting that the Soviets hinted might be the decisive one for reaching a settlement . The Soviets had hinted that the meeting might be one of the decisive ones for a settlement.
 I told Kissinger that I did not think he should take his secret trip to Moscow until we found out what kind of game they were playing . Kissinger told Kissinger he should not take secret trip until we knew what was going on .
 Kissinger complained to Dobrynin that we had trusted his assurances about this meeting . Kissinger warned that its cancellation created serious obstacles to his presummit trip . Kissinger complained that the cancellation of the meeting was serious .
 That night I assessed some of the possible political ramifications of these events . That night, I thought about the potential implications of the events in Washington .
 I laid down the law hard to him that under these circumstances he could not go to Moscow. He said he would not be allowed to travel to Moscow . The former KGB chief said he was not allowed to visit Moscow .
 Russia is trying to get Donald Trump to Moscow to discuss the summit, Putin says . Putin says he will meet with Putin in Moscow on June 25 to discuss summit .
 "I can see that this shook him because he desperately wants to get to Moscow one way or the other," he said . "I'm glad he's shaken up, but I'm not sure if he'll go to Moscow," he added .
 I told him that we had to consider our option with regard to imposing a blockade, he said . Then he said he would consider imposing an imposed blockade . The blockade was a 'military option', he said.
 "We stayed down deep on the lawn because there were several groups of tourists, and I was in no mood to talk to anybody at this point," she says .
 Later on in the afternoon I had a pretty candid talk with Henry about what we had to look forward to in the future . Later on, he also talked about the future of the game .
 I said what we were really looking at was a cancellation of the summit and going hard right on Vietnam, even up to a blockade . I said that what we . were really . looking at is a cancellation, even a blockade, he said . The summit will take place in Vietnam,
 I said under these circumstances, I had an obligation to look for a successor . I said I had a duty to find a successor, and I had to look at successor, he said . He added: "Under these circumstances I had been forced to look into successor"
 If we could get him to change his party, Rockefeller, Burger, Reagan, and Connally would have changed his party . Connally is a Republican, but not a Democrat, he says .
 Henry threw up his hands and said that none of the Democrats would do, and that any of them would be out of the question . Henry said any of the Democratic candidates would be considered for the job .
 I said that if we could get Henry to stay on that we could . get continuity in foreign policy, he said . I said if we . could get him to stay, he could get continuity of foreign policy . He said that .
 Henry became very emotional about the point that I shouldn't be thinking this way or talking this way to anybody, he said . "I shouldn't have been thinking that way," he said. "Which, of course, he would have realized I wouldn't," he added .
 He made his pitch that the North Vietnamese should not be allowed to destroy two Presidents . He made it clear that North Vietnam should not have destroyed two Presidents.
 Kissinger called Kissinger after the dinner for the OAS, he says . Kissinger had a call from Kissinger, the former secretary of state said . Kissinger called the president of the U.S. to attend the dinner .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is still desperate to have him come to Moscow, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Dobrynin: "I went up and took it, and he told me that he still wanted to visit Moscow"
 There was some talk even of having the North Vietnamese Foreign Minister there .
 "After the dinner I told Henry that I had reconsidered the situation and felt that we had to have an open option on the summit," she said .
 "We had to play out the string completely on the negotiating front, and he should go to Moscow," says Putin .
 The next day our bombers accidentally hit four Soviet merchant ships at anchor in Haiphong Harbor . The bombers hit the next day . The bombing was the first time the U.S. bombers had accidentally hit Soviet ships .
 An oral protest was made and then a similar note was delivered to the American Ambassador in Moscow . The American ambassador in Moscow was also sent a complaint to the ambassador .
 Diplomatically it was interesting—and important—that these protests were kept relatively low-keyed . It was important to keep the protests low keyed, says Julian Zelizer .
 Soviet weapons had made the North Vietnamese offensive possible, and I was not going to let them get off the defensive on this point. Soviet weapons made the offensive possible . I would not let the North Vietnam offensive go after the Soviet weapons .
 Kissinger sent Kissinger a memorandum before he left for Moscow, he said . Kissinger sent a memorandum describing the strategy he intended to use at the meetings . Kissinger: "Before he left, Kissinger sent me a memorandum about the strategy"
 I felt the memo did not adequately reflect my instructions about insisting upon a Vietnam settlement as a prerequisite for discussions on any other subject . As I read it I felt . I felt it did not . adequately reflect his instructions .
 In our last meeting I had even told Kissinger that if the Soviets proved recalcitrant, he should just pack up and come home . In his last meeting, Kissinger had told him to come home, but he should come back .
 In their first meeting, Brezhnev protested that the Soviet government did not have as much influence in Hanoi as we seemed to think, he said . In the first meeting of the two leaders, they met in 1961 .
 The Soviets refused to answer any new requests for military equipment from the North Vietnamese, he said . He said that the Soviets had refused to respond to any requests from North Vietnamese .
 Kissinger claimed that they had not supplied all that much equipment in the first place . Kissinger reminded him of the massive tonnage they had sent . When he claimed that the equipment had not been supplied, Kissinger pointed out the tonne .
 In the end Brezhnev refused to promise to put any pressure on Hanoi to achieve a de-escalation or a final settlement . In the aftermath of the war, the Soviet Union refused to put pressure on Vietnam .
 The most he would agree to do was to forward our latest proposal to Hanoi even though he expected it would receive a negative reaction there . He said he expected the proposal to be met with a negative response .
 The April 24 meeting in Paris, now canceled, is a far cry from the Soviets’ earlier assurances that the April 24 talks would see the fruition of the negotiations . The Soviets had earlier said they would meet April 24 in Paris but now canceled .
 Kissinger proceeded to move on to further discussions of summit agenda items . Kissinger proceeded on to discuss the summit agenda item . Kissinger then proceeded to discuss other summit items .
 He was able to arrange the entire agenda except for the most sensitive elements of SALT, which would require direct negotiation between Brezhnev and me . The most sensitive parts of the SALT would require a direct negotiation, he says .
 I was disappointed as I read his daily cable reports, because I felt that we might have missed the last Opportunity to see how far the Soviets were willing to go to get the summit . But I felt it might have been the last opportunity to see what the Soviets would do to get a
 Kissinger's willingness to negotiate without first getting a firm Soviet commitment to restrain the North Vietnamese was a sign of weakness, rather than pragmatism . Kissinger feared that they would interpret Kissinger’s willingness to . negotiate without a firm . commitment to . restrain the . North Vietnamese .
 In the other areas of discussion, however, there was remarkable progress . The U.S. Senate will hold a hearing on the issue of immigration to the U.N. on Tuesday .
 Given Kissinger’s achievements on the summit issues, I felt that there was no point in gainsaying his performance after the fact . Given Kissinger's achievements, there was a point in giving Kissinger the credit for his performance .
 If he had followed my instructions and insisted on a Vietnam settlement as the first order of business, perhaps Brezhnev would have dug in, called his bluff, and told him to go home . That might have meant the end of the summit, with everything that it could accomplish,
 Kissinger made a secret visit to Moscow in order to secure a summit with Russia . The summit was held, and undoubtedly it owed a large measure of success to Kissinger’s negotiations .
 Two days after Kissinger’s return I decided to make a short televised speech announcing a troop withdrawal from Vietnam . Two days later, Kissinger made a short TV speech announcing the withdrawal . The speech was the first time Kissinger had returned to Vietnam .
 I felt that a further reduction of our forces while the enemy’s invasion was under way would dramatize our desire for peace, he said . "I felt that . a further . reduction of . forces while . the enemy's invasion was . under way," he added .
 Additional 20,000 troops would be withdrawn from Vietnam over the next two months, bringing our total force there on July 1, 1972, to only 49,000 men . Therefore I announced that an additional 20,00 troops would withdraw from Vietnam .
 I said that the bombing of North Vietnam would continue until the military offensive had stopped . I said I would continue to bomb North Vietnam until the end of the offensive .
 "It was a tough speech, and afterward I wished that I had made it even tougher," he says . "I wish I'd made it tougher. It was the toughest speech," he adds .
 On April 30 Pat and Pat attended a barbecue party at John Connally’s ranch in Texas . Pat says he and Pat went to the party at Connally's ranch .
 One guest wanted to know whether I had thought about bombing the dikes in North Vietnam . One guest asked me whether I'd considered bombing North Vietnam dikes . I said yes .
 I replied that naturally I had thought about it, but that it would involve an enormous number of civilian casualties . I replied to the question: 'Yes, I replied, but I replied yes, yes. I replied .
 North Vietnamese are taking a very great risk if they continue their offensive in the South, says President Obama . I continued, “We are prepared to use our military and naval strength against military targets throughout North Vietnam,” he said .
 I knew that the news of this reply would reach Hanoi before the May 2 meeting, and I thought that it might help to strengthen our hand. "I knew that this news would reach ... before the meeting," he said .
 If they get a delay as a result of their talk with you, we shall lose the best chance we will ever have to give them a very damaging blow where it hurts, not just now, but particularly for the future . What you must have in mind is that if . they get
 Putin: "We cannot let the Soviet Summit be the primary consideration in making this decision" "You have prepared the way very well on that score," he says .
 I intend to cancel the Summit unless the situation militarily and diplomatically substantially improves by May 15 at the latest or unless we get a firm commitment from the Russians to announce a joint agreement to use our influence to end the war .
 In effect we have crossed the Rubicon and now we must win, he says . We must tip the balance in favor of the South Vietnamese for battles to come when we no longer will be able to help them with major air strikes .
 "We know from experience, based on their record, that they will break every understanding," she says . "They will break all understanding. We know from . experience," she adds .
 We know from their twelve secret talks with you that they talk in order to gain time . We also know that they are talking to each other to gain more time .
 As we get closer to the Democratic Convention, the Democratic candidates and the supporters of Hanoi in the Congress will increasingly give them an incentive to press on and not make a deal with us . Another factor is that as we get close to the . election, the . Democratic candidates .
 Ina nutshell you should tell them that they have violated all understandings, they stepped up the war, they have refused to negotiate seriously . In a nutshell, you should say: 'They have violated every understandings. They stepped up war'
 On May 1, the day Kissinger was to leave for Paris, I received a letter from Brezhnev that increased my fear that we had failed to impress upon the Soviet leadership my unshakable determination to stand up in Vietnam .
 Brezhnev bluntly asked me to refrain from further actions there because they hurt the chances of a successful summit . Brezhnnev said he would not take part in any further actions .
 Kissinger was completely absorbed in mapping out his strategy for his May 2 meeting with Le Duc Tho . Kissinger was planning to meet with the Chinese leader in Beijing on May 2 . Kissinger's strategy for the meeting was mapped out in detail .
 I spent several hours trying to make sure that we agreed on the strategy he should follow at the meeting. "We agreed on several hours," he says .
 Kissinger came back into the Oval Office after an hour and a half session on SALT . Kissinger was meeting with Haldeman, who was in the White House at the time of the session .
 "They’ll be riding high because of all this, so you'll have to bring them down to the ground by your manner," he said . They'll be "riding high" when they're riding high, he said. "They'll be riding . high"
 I'm willing to give up the summit if this is the price they have to make us pay for it . And we'll just have to let our Soviet friends know that I’m willing to let them know that .
 It was conceivable that all South Vietnam would fall. And then I thought of the bleak possibility—it was possible that it would fall .
 We would be left with no alternative but to impose a naval blockade and demand back our POWs. We would then be forced to impose an international naval blockade . We would have no alternative to imposing a blockade and demanding back POWs, he says .
 J Edgar Hoover died in his sleep during the night on May 2, 1972 . Bob Haldeman came in with the news that Hoover had died in the night . Hoover was the FBI Director of the United States .
 Even though he was seventy-seven years old, Hoover had a vigor and drive that made him seem much younger . Hoover was a force of force in Washington, Washington, DC, when he died .
 His strong patriotism and political astuteness enabled him to be the loyal servant of seven Presidents . Over the next forty-eight years he was a loyal servant to President Obama .
 He had been a part of our national life for as long as I could remember; he was already a national hero when I first met him in 1947 . He had already been a hero when he first met me in 1947; he had been part of the national life . He was already
 He usually knew something about everything that was going on, and that knowledge made him as valuable to his friends as it made him dangerous to his enemies .
 He reached a pinnacle of power and prestige during the Eisenhower years . He was a top-ranking member of the Cabinet .
 Many of Kennedy’s advisers urged him to replace Hoover . When Kennedy became President, Hoover was already sixty-six years old, and many of his advisers said he should replace him .
 Robert Kennedy found some of his activist plans as Attorney General hampered by Hoover’s influence in the Justice Department . The result was a period of very strained relations between the two .
 I remember sitting with Hoover in his house during a visit to Washington in 1961, listening to him go on about “that sneaky little son of a bitch” who happened to be the President’s brother and Hoover's boss . Hoover was the President's brother, and Hoover
 "Never in all the years I knew him, however, did I hear him speak disrespectfully of John Kennedy or any other President he had served. Never in all of the years he knew him . Never in the years . I know him, he never spoke disrespectfully .
 Hoover became a presidential confidant under Lyndon Johnson . Hoover was a close friend of LBJ . Hoover died of a self-inflicted injury .
 I remembered his telling me in 1968 that if it hadn’t been for Edgar Hoover, he could not have been President. He said in 1968, he remembered his former President telling me that he would have been president if Hoover hadn't been there .
 Hoover's fascination with information and gossip was as insatiable as Hoover’s own . Hoover's obsession with gossip and gossip with Johnson was his obsession with the media .
 Hoover allowed the FBI to reach its peak of political involvement under Johnson . The relationship was probably not a healthy one, but it was under Johnson that Hoover allowed it to peak .
 Hoover was asked to stay on as Director of the Bureau . Hoover's advancing age and internal problems were causing internal problems within the Bureau, he said . Hoover was aware that because of his advancing age, he would have to begin thinking about a replacement . Hoover died of a heart attack in
 In 1971, John Ehrlichman and others on the staff felt strongly that in the interests of the FBI, the administration, and of Hoover himself, we should take the initiative and get him to resign voluntarily . Hoover's resignation from the FBI was announced in 1971 .
 Hoover's discipline and pride were now seen as temperament and ego . Hoover's temperment and pride had been once a source of strength, but now his ego was seen as a problem . Hoover died at the age of 92 in January .
 That year Robert Mardian, an Assistant Attorney General under Mitchell, was told about still other problems . Mitchell was the Attorney General of the United States .
 Sullivan apparently felt that Hoover was trapped in outdated notions of the communist threat . Hoover was not moving with flexibility against the new violence-prone radicals, Sullivan said . Sullivan felt Hoover should have been able to deal with the new threat .
 Sullivan worried Hoover was becoming personally erratic and had recently turned on Sullivan himself and planned to fire him . Sullivan also worried that Hoover was turning on himself and that Hoover had recently fired him .
 Mardian reported that Hoover might try to use the seventeen wiretaps we placed on administration aides and reporters in 1969 as blackmail leverage in order to retain his position in the Bureau . Hoover may have used the wiretaps to try to keep his job .
 There had long been rumors that Hoover kept his position because of threats and subtle blackmail of various Presidents, but I had always regarded them with skepticism . There had always been rumors of blackmailing Hoover, but he kept his job in office .
 Hoover would never deliberately expose national security wiretaps, Hoover says . Hoover was also convinced that however much he might be tempted to disclose political shenanigans, Hoover would not deliberately expose wiretaps . Hoover: Disclosure of wiretaps might have an adverse effect on our efforts to end the war and on
 The taps had been discontinued, but I could not permit the reports of them to fall into the hands of someone who, like Ellsberg, would see the chance to publicize them and become a media hero . But the FBI was in a period of great upheaval, and even though
 Sullivan had the FBI’s copies of the wiretap reports, so I told Mardian to get them from him so that all copies would be kept at the White House . Sullivan had been given the FBI's copies .
 Later Ehrlichman said he was going to keep them himself, and I approved . Later he said he wanted to keep the photos .
 In October 1971 Ehrlichman sent me a brilliantly argued memorandum written for him by G Gordon Liddy, a member of the White House staff and a former FBI agent . Liddy was a White House staffer and FBI agent, Liddy says .
 The memorandum analyzed in detail the complex situation presented by Hoover’s long tenure as Director of the CIA . It concluded with a strong recommendation that he should resign . Hoover should resign, the memo said .
 Ehrlichman favored immediate action, John Mitchell had a more restrained view . Mitchell: "I'm not sure what I really want to do, but I'm sure we're going to do it"
 He knew Hoover’s weaknesses, but he felt that an attempt to replace him could be very difficult for me, he said . Hoover felt that a public confrontation with Hoover could make the administration very unpopular, he added .
 Hoover still had very substantial support in the country and Congress, he says . Hoover's critics have been critical of the Hoover administration, but he says he still has support .
 I told Mitchell and Ehrlichman that I thought most of the new wave of anti-Hoover criticism involved predictable charges from predictable sources . I told them that I think most of this latest wave of criticism involves predictable charges .
 His most prominent public critics opposed him not because of his policies but because he was a symbol of beliefs and values that they opposed . His crusade against domestic communism and subversion, his strong stand for tougher anticrime legislation, and his opposition to legal and judicial permissiveness .
 "I would never desert a great man, and an old and loyal friend, just because he was coming under attack," he said . "He was a great friend, and a loyal friend," he added .
 The real problem, as so often happens, is that the man himself has become the issue, Mitchell says . Mitchell: "The real problem is that he has become an issue"
 "That great ego which for so many years was directed almost totally to serving the Bureau and the nation" is now being put into the service of the man himself . That great ego was directed towards serving the nation .
 I was aware of what could happen to the FBI in the hands of a politically motivated opposition party . The last thing I wanted to do was give the Democrats a chance to appoint a new Director who would carry out their bidding against Republicans .
 Mitchell suggested that the ideal compromise would be to persuade Hoover that he should voluntarily announce his decision to retire on his seventy-seventh birthday in 1972 .
 Such an announcement would both undercut the mounting criticism and avoid charges that he had been forced out of the White House .
 Mitchell would ordinarily have been the one to raise the question of Hoover’s voluntary resignation with him . Since the Director of the FBI is under the administrative control of the Attorney General .
 I decided to invite Hoover to have breakfast with me at the White House and to raise the subject with him then . Although it would be painful for both of us, I invited Hoover to meet with him at breakfast .
 At breakfast Hoover was as alert, articulate, and decisive as I had ever seen him, says Hoover . Hoover was "alert, articulate and decisive" as he was ever seen, Hoover says . Hoover says, "I'm going to make a big difference"
 It was obvious that he was trying to demonstrate that despite his age he was still physically, mentally, and emotionally equipped to carry on . Despite his age, he was able to demonstrate he is still physically and mentally capable of carrying on .
 I tried to point out as gently and subtly that as an astute politician he must recognize that the attacks were going to mount in number and intensity in the years ahead . Having said this, I . tried to . point out that as . well as he did, I tried . to
 It would be a tragedy if he ended his career while under a sustained attack from long-time critics instead of in the glow of national respect that he so rightly deserved .
 He said, “More than anything else else, I want to see you re-elected in 1972," he said . He said he wanted to see his successor succeed in 1972 .
 "If you feel that my staying on as head of the Bureau hurts your chances for re-election, just let me know," says President Obama . "I'm not going to run for another term, but I'm going to keep my job."
 "As far as these present attacks are concerned, and the ones that are planned for the future, they don’t make any difference to me," he said . "I’m not sure if these attacks will be carried out in the future."
 "It was obvious that he was not going to take the initiative in offering his resignation," he said . "He was clearly going to offer his resignation. He was not taking the initiative," he added .
 I had been through this kind of situation in 1952 when I told Eisenhower that he should make the decision whether or not he was a liability to his campaign . I had to tell him whether he should decide whether to run for president in 1952 . He said Eisenhower should make his own decision .
 Hoover’s resignation before the election would raise more political problems than it would solve, he says . Hoover's resignation would raise political problems, he writes . Hoover: “My personal feelings played a part in my decision to resign .
 It has become fashionable to think of our years of concern over organized crime and subversive communism as a national neurosis . It has now become fashionable for the U.S. to worry about organized crime .
 Hoover was at the forefront of the anticrime and anticommunist movements of the postwar period . Hoover has been painted, since the revision, as the chief neurotic . Hoover was a key figure in the anti-communist movement .
 Hoover had done the job that the public demanded for fortyeight years . Hoover had been a hero for the public for more than a decade .
 Critics charged him with being “anti” one group or another . But he took a bad rap from critics who charged him . He took a good rap from the critics .
 He was strongly proAmerican and only against any group or individual he concluded might be engaging in activities that threatened the security of his country, he said .
 It would have killed him had he been forced out of office or had he resigned even voluntarily, he says . It would've killed him if he had resigned voluntarily, the president says .
 "I remember the last conversation I had with him about two weeks ago when I called him," he says . "I mentioned the fine job the Bureau had done," he adds .
 He expressed his appreciation for that call and also expressed his total support for what we are doing in Vietnam . President Obama expressed his "total support" for the Vietnam War .
 I am particularly glad that I did not force him out at the end of last year . I am especially glad that he was not forced out of the job last year, he says . I'm glad he is not being forced out, he adds .
 I tried Buchanan on the statement . I think improved upon it in one respect when I said that while I had ordered the flags to be flown at half-mast the flag at the FBI would always fly high due to the courage of J. Edgar Hoover .
 Kissinger’s report of his May 2 meeting with the North Vietnamese in Paris, Kissinger says . Kissinger's report of the meeting with North Vietnam in Paris was published in May . Hoover's successor was Hoover's replacement .
 The Communists had been icy and snide, and after putting up with three hours of insult and invective, Kissinger broke off the talks . Kissinger: "The Communists were icy and . snide" The Communists were snide and icy, and Kissinger broke .
 Diary diary finds with no surprise that the North Vietnamese had given nothing whatever . It was the most unproductive of all of Henry’s trips to Vietnam .
 He is so understandably obsessed with the idea that there should be a negotiated settlement, that he cannot get himself to see clearly why there really isn’t enough in it for the enemy to negotiate at this time, he says .
 I had a long talk with Haig, in which we concluded that we had to have a two-day strike rather than the one-day-separated-by-another-day as Henry had recommended earlier in the week . I had to decide whether or not to have one
 I have sent Henry a message indicating that I thought he should think seriously on the plane on the way back about our breaking off the summit before the Russians make that move . I have told Henry to think seriously about breaking off summit before Russia makes that move.
 Haig emphasized that even more important than how Vietnam comes out is for us to handle these matters in a way that I can survive in office . Haig: "Even more important" is how we handle matters in Vietnam, and how we deal with them .
 "I am totally committed to the idea that rather than going out like Johnson did, that I must make whatever hard choices have to be made, and take whatever risks need to be taken," he says .
 The weak link in our whole chain is the question as to whether the South Vietnamese have the will to fight. Of course, the weak link is the . question as well as the question is whether the . South Vietnam have the . will to . fight .
 Abrams has been shaken in this respect as we compare his memorandum of May 1, with his memo of just a week before . 'Abrams has been very strongly shaken'
 I wired Thieu today personally to keep his spirits up, I think it is vitally important that we not be responsible for his losing his courage at this very difficult time when bad news is coming in from the war front .
 The real problem is that the enemy is willing to sacrifice in order to win, while the South Vietnamese simply aren’t willing to pay that much of a price to avoid losing . The South Vietnamese are willing to lose, but the enemy isn't willing to be willing to risk losing
 All the air power in the world and strikes on Hanoi-Haiphong aren't going to save South Vietnam if the South Vietnamese aren’t able to hold on the ground . And, as Haig points out, as well as air power, strikes on the world
 Kissinger was discouraged by Le Duc Tho’s arrogant conduct . Kissinger returned from Paris that night still discouraged by his conduct, Kissinger says .
 He felt that there was now almost no chance that the Soviet Summit could take place . He agreed with my initial inclination that we should cancel it immediately in order to prevent the Soviets from doing so first .
 It would dash a lot of domestic hopes for peace, and that would give the Democrats a real issue . The Democrats have a chance to make the issue a major issue, says Julian Zelizer .
 It would unleash a worldwide propaganda offensive in which the Soviets could claim that they had crumbled our foreign policy . The Soviet Union could claim to have crumbled its foreign policy. It would be a major propaganda offensive .
 Kissinger saw the problem was that we could not bomb and have the summit too . Kissinger saw it as a problem for the U.S. to bomb and hold the summit .
 And now we would have to bomb because we had said we would unless we got some meaningful action in Paris, he says . He adds: "Now we would say we would bomb because of the Parisian crisis"
 The Soviets knew this, and unless they thought we were going to back down on our threat, it was highly likely that they would cancel the summit themselves and blame the cancellation on our bombing . The Soviet Union knew this .
 It was hard to see how I could go to the summit and be clinking glasses with Brezhnev while Soviet tanks were rumbling through Hué or Quangtri . The summit was in the midst of the conflict between the Soviet Union and Vietnam .
 "For us to cancel the summit, however, would inevitably be criticized as an impulsive action that dashed the hopes for progress toward a more peaceful world," he says . For us, canceling the summit would be criticized for being impulsive, he adds .
 "I decided to take the risk of postponing a decision for at least a few days. I decided to ... postpone a decision," he said .
 In the meantime I was determined to keep up a strong front despite all the recent setbacks . In the past, I have been determined to stay positive despite the setbacks . I'm not going to give up on my dream, but I'm going to keep it up .
 I began by sending a blunt reply to Brezhnev’s letter of May 1 in which he had warned me against taking any actions in Vietnam that might hurt the chance of a successful summit . “I began by . sending a . blunt reply,” he said
 I must now decide on the next steps in the situation that has been created, he said . But this, Mr General Secretary, will not happen, he added . He said .
 In the light of recent events, there does not seem much promise in communicating to you additional substantive considerations . "There is now no basis for believing that this will have a positive effect on the situation," she writes .
 As Mr Le Duc Tho made clear, Hanoi is contemptuous of communications transmitted by a third party . Hanoisis contemptuous, he said, of the communications .
 The fact remains that Soviet military supplies provide the means for the D.R.V.’s actions and promised Soviet influence if it has been exercised at all has proved unavailing .
 I told Haldeman that he and Kissinger should brief John Connally on the situation and get his opinion . I told him to brief Connally about the situation . I also told Kissinger to brief him on the matter .
 When we didn’t, everybody figured we were pushovers, and we've been paying for that ever since . We've paid for that since. We're paying for it ever since. It’s been a big mistake. We’ve been paying it back,
 When we went into Cambodia, I knew that we should have bombed North Vietnam at the same time. When we were in Cambodia, we knew that . We should have been able to bomb North Vietnam, he says .
 The summit isn’t worth a damn if the price for it is losing in Vietnam, says President Obama . The summit is not worth the price of it, says Obama .
 I believed that it was essential that we take decisive action to cripple the North Vietnamese invasion by interdicting the supplies of fuel and military equipment the enemy needed for its push into South Vietnam .
 I directed that plans be prepared immediately for mining Haiphong Harbor and for bombing prime military targets in Hanoi, particularly the railroad lines used for transporting military supplies . I consequently directed that . be prepared to . attack .
 Diary Julie went up with me Friday at four o'clock, and Tricia and Eddie joined us Friday at six . Tricia, Eddie and Julie joined us around six . Diary Julie and Eddie will appear in a new documentary this week .
 She obviously has done a lot of reading about past failures on the military side in Vietnam . She has also read about the failures of the military in the Vietnam .
 She was aware of the fact that many had become so disillusioned with the war that we might not have enough public support for it . She also was aware that many of the public might not support it .
 President Obama said the U.S. would cease to be a respected great power if it did not do this . Obama said it was necessary for America to be respected in the world .
 She rejoined with the observation that there were many who felt that the U.S. shouldn’t be a great power .
 This, of course, is the kind of poison that is fed into so many of the younger generation by their professors . This is the type of poison they are fed into by their teachers .
 She was sure, however, that David would totally agree with the decision, and she seemed sensitive to what the needs were .
 Tricia’s reaction was immediately positive because she felt we had to do something, and frankly didn't know what else we could do to avoid a continued deterioration in the battle areas .
 I had just come back from Birch where I had been working on the speech . "I had just returned from Birch," he said of his speech .
 John Mitchell said he thoroughly approved of the decision . John Mitchell: "I'm not surprised by the decision"
 Henry seemed pleased by the fact that all but one of his staff were for the blockade, including his Vietnam expert, who is a dove .
 Kissinger discussed the necessity to prepare a contingency plan for summit cancellation, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "I discussed with Kissinger the need to prepare with Kissinger" Kissinger said.
 As of this morning, he had raised his 20 percent possibility of a noncancellation from 20 percent to 25 percent . He still cannot see how the Russians can react otherwise .
 The U.S. must not lose in Vietnam, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Not only the election, but even more important, the country needs that the United States not lose"
 "Everything is to be concentrated toward the goal now of seeing that we do not lose now that we have crossed the Rubicon," says Manuel Pellegrini .
 The drafts we went through on the speech will tell the story of how it developed . The drafts of the speeches will be released on CNN.com .
 "Henry was very impressed with what I finally came up with on Soviet Union," he says . "Perhaps the most important section was that on the Soviet Union"
 It had to be done with great subtlety and I think we have stated the case as well as we possibly can to give them a way out if they want to find one . It was done with subtlety to give the club a way to find a solution, says manager .
 No one knows, as I told Rose, whether we will have it to use after this year . I am so glad that both girls are making great use of it, because I want them to have the most pleasant memories .
 On Monday morning I informed the NSC that I had decided to go ahead with the bombing and mining, and that I would announce the decision in a televised speech that night . I would have announced the decision that night.
 NSC meeting ran over three hours, with Laird opposing the decision . Rogers said he would be for it if it worked, if it did .
 Laird and Rogers have very serious doubts about whether the action will succeed . Both of their reputations are on the line, and I think they have serious doubts .
 The real test, of course, will be whether they support once the decision is made and on that, I have no doubt. I'm sure they will support once they make the decision, says Mark Hughes .
 On Monday morning I sent a four-page letter to Brezhnev explaining what I had decided to do and why . The letter was sent to the former Soviet leader on Monday morning .
 In conclusion, Mr General Secretary, let me say to you that this is a moment for statesmanship. In conclusion: Mr General . Secretary. Let me say, Mr . General Secretary. I say, let's say, this is an opportunity to show statesmanship .
 It is a moment when, by joint efforts, we can end the malignant effects on our relations and on the peace of the world which the conflict in Vietnam has so long produced . It's a moment for joint efforts to end the 'malignant effects' on relations and peace of
 I am ready to join with you at once to bring about a peace that humiliates neither side and serves the interests of all the people involved . I am prepared to join forces that humiliate neither side . I'm ready to help bring about peace that serves all interests of both sides .
 The final copy of my speech was not ready until after five o’clock, and I marked it up for reading and then went to get a haircut at 5:30 . The final version of the speech was ready for reading .
 I had a small bowl of wheat germ for energy around six, and then went over the text until half past seven. I had my usual light prespeech dinner of a small . bowl of . wheat germ . for energy .
 I jogged in place for about ten minutes and took a long cold shower before going over to the West Wing for a meeting with the joint congressional leadership in the Roosevelt Room . "I jogged for ten minutes," said President Obama .
 The room was comfortable and warm, with a fine fire burning in the fireplace . A fine fire was also on display at the hotel .
 Carl Albert, Hugh Scott, Bill Fulbright, Mike Mansfield, John Stennis, George Aiken, Jerry Ford, George Ford, Hale Boggs, and half a dozen others . Carl Albert .
 Some would oppose me, others would only reluctantly support me while wishing that I had not made this decision . Some of the world's most powerful people would be opposed to me, some would regret their decision .
 As I described the situation and the actions I had decided to take no one interrupted or asked any questions . As I explained the situation, no questions were asked . The incident was the first time I had taken part in a public event in the past year .
 "It had been a very difficult decision for me to make and I knew that it would be a very hard decision for them to support," she said . "I knew that I would be very difficult to support. It had been very difficult decisions for me," she added .
 Kissinger invited Dobrynin to come to the White House shortly before I was to deliver the speech . Kissinger had invited Kissinger to meet him shortly before the speech was delivered . Kissinger was invited to give a speech in the wake of his visit to Washington .
 When he described what I was about to say, Dobrynin became terribly agitated . When he . described what he described he became very agitated. When he. described what . I was . about to tell the truth, he became agitated .
 Dobrynin said that he did not see how matters could do anything except take a very bad turn . He said he saw how things could take a bad turn as they did not seem to be going well .
 "There is only one way to stop the killing. After describing the military situation and the deadlock in the . negotiations, I said, “There are only one ways to stop killing. There is only a one way," he said .
 I continued, “I have ordered the following measures which are being implemented as I am speaking to you. I continued . I continued to say, ‘I have orders which are to be implemented . I have ordered a number of measures to be put in place,’ says
 All entrances to North Vietnamese ports will be mined to prevent access to these ports and North Vietnamese naval operations from these ports . North Vietnam naval operations will also be prevented from entering these ports, the U.N. says .
 U.S. forces have been directed to take appropriate measures within the internal and claimed territorial waters of North Vietnam to interdict the delivery of any supplies .
 Rail and all other communications will be cut off to the maximum extent possible . Rail and other communications are to be turned off as soon as possible .
 There must be an internationally supervised cease-fire throughout Indochina. Second, there must be a Cease-fire in the region, he says .
 Once prisoners of war are released, once the internationally supervised cease-fire has begun, we will stop all acts of force throughout Indochina, and at that time we will proceed with a complete withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam within four months .
 Our two nations have made significant progress in our negotiations in recent months . Our two countries have made progress in their negotiations, says the British PM .
 "We are near major agreements on nuclear arms limitation, on trade, on a host of other issues," he says .
 Teddy Kennedy said that the mining was a “futile military gesture taken in desperation” Teddy Kennedy called the mining a ‘futility military gesture’
 The Wall Street Journal reported that informed diplomatic observers are now guessing that the summit would be postponed indefinitely . Diplomats now say the summit will be postponed .
 Most of the television reports were focused on this question, and the network commentators unanimously concluded that my speech had seriously jeopardized the summit . CNN's John Defterios said he was disappointed with the outcome of the summit, which he said was "a very serious mistake"
 The bombing proposals sent to me by the Pentagon could at best be described as timid . The Pentagon has proposed bombing proposals that could only be called timid .
 I was determined to have it carried out the way I intended. Having gone through the agony of making the decision and having accepted the political risks it would involve, I'm happy to have this carried out in the way it was intended .
 "I cannot emphasize too strongly that I have determined that we should go for broke," says President Obama . "I'm going for broke. I'm determined to go for a broke," he says .
 "What we have got to get across to the enemy is the impression that we are doing exactly that. What we've got to do is get the impression we're doing that. We are doing that," he says .
 "Our actions in the next few days will speak infinitely louder than our words," says President Obama . "But our actions will speak out infinitely louder," says Obama .
 "It is far more important to do too much at a time that we will have maximum public support for what we do," says the minister .
 "Now that I have made this very tough watershed decision I intend to stop at nothing to bring the enemy to his knees," he says . "I intend at nothing, to bring [the] enemy to] his knees"
 'To an extent it may have been our weakness where we have warned the enemy time and time again and then have acted in a rather mild way when the enemy has tested us. To an extent, it may be our weakness," says the PM .
 If we now fail it will be because the bureaucrats and the bureaucracy, particularly those in the Defense Department, will find ways to erode the strong, decisive action that I have indicated we are going to take, he says . The U.S. will be vigorously assisted by their allies
 For once, I want the military and the NSC staff to come up with some ideas on their own which will recommend action which will be very strong, threatening, and effective . For once I want to see the military . I want military and I want NSC . Staff to come
 The Soviet news agency TASS issued a stinging denunciation of the mining as “fraught with serious consequences for international peace and security” and an emergency meeting of the Politburo was held in the Kremlin on the morning after the speech .
 I was fully prepared for an official statement condemning my actions and canceling the summit. I was prepared for a statement condemning me, he says . I was also prepared to cancel the summit .
 Dobrynin coldly announced that his government had instructed him to read an official note . Ignoring the usual pleasantries, he coldly said he had been instructed to read the note .
 Kissinger’s immense relief, it turned out to be a relatively mild and private protest about the blockade and about a Soviet seaman who had been killed when a bomb accidentally hit a Soviet ship in Haiphong Harbor . Kissinger's immense relief .
 Kissinger asked why the Soviets had made no mention of the summit . Kissinger casually asked why they hadn't mentioned it in a meeting with Kissinger that day . Kissinger asked, "Why did the Soviets make no mention?"
 I was visiting Manolo at the hospital where he was recuperating from surgery . During their meeting I had been visting Manolo .
 Kissinger rushed into Kissinger's office to tell him the news . Kissinger rushed to tell me the moment I returned to his office, Kissinger said .
 The next day, Dobrynin called Kissinger saying he had a message from Moscow . Kissinger called the next day to say he had received the message . Kissinger: "It's a good thing that you can talk to me about it."
 The Soviets were planning to give me a hydrofoil for use at Key Biscayne, Florida . He said that Brezhnev would not look unkindly on receiving a new car for his collection of luxury automobiles .
 The media pundits and congressional critics who had been predicting disaster dropped the cancellation line and began to concentrate on allegations that our bombers were hitting civilian targets . The cancellation line was dropped and the media pundits began to focus on allegations .
 Early Monday morning, May 15, was back at my desk ready for a heavy day of meetings and appointments . I was back in my office in New York City, New Jersey .
 Bob Haldeman came in and asked to see Don Kendall for a moment in the private office . Don Kendall says he was talking with Don Kendall late in the afternoon when he was asked to sit down .
 He said that the gunman was white, but we didn’t know anything more about him yet . The gunman is white, he said .
 The shock of the Wallace shooting forced memories back to the horror of the assassinations of John Kennedy, Martin Luther King, and Robert Kennedy . Wallace's death forced memories of the Kennedy assassination to recall the Kennedy's assassination .
 I was determined not to let the country be talked into a climate of fear, I said . However terrible and stunning this new blow, it was 'stunning and stunning' However, he said he was determined to not let the government be talked in a climate .
 I told Haldeman that under no circumstances would I let his Secret Service detail be increased . "Under no circumstances," he said, "under no circumstances"
 John Connally came to his office after announcing his resignation and George Shultz’s nomination as Secretary of Treasury . Connally had announced his resignation . Shultz had been nominated for Treasury Secretary by President George Shuster .
 When we emerged from the East Wing just across the street from the Treasury Building a small crowd gathered . A small crowd of young people gathered, and several foreign visitors .
 I stopped in to see Wallace on my way to Washington on Friday morning . Wallace: "I don't think we're going to be able to talk to him again"
 She has great verve, and I can see must be an enormous asset to him in his campaigning . She will be a huge asset to Mr Obama in his election bid, says Mr Farage .
 He seemed very up for the meeting although I sensed that he did not hear or understand too well at times . He seemed to be up for it, but I sensed he didn't hear too well .
 I told him that I would send somebody out to brief him after the Russian trip, which pleased him . He said he would send someone out to give him a brief after the trip .
 He said he would like to consider going to Walter Reed at another time, and I told him it would be available at any time when he was in the D.C. area . He said it provided perfect security and was a particularly nice room .
 He is, though a demagogue, somewhat sentimental in terms of his strong patriotism, like most Southerners . He is a strong supporter of the South .
 He pointed out that he had taken on both Humphrey and Muskie on the ground that they had voted for all the actions that got the United States into the war in Southeast Asia .
 There was a floral flag by his bed, and as I left I told him to keep the flag flying high . As I left, I said: 'As I left he should keep the flags flying high. Keep flying high'
 Azr Force One left Washington for Salzburg, Austria, en route to Moscow . On Saturday, May 20, Azr . Force One departed Washington, Washington, for Austria .
 At 4 PM. on Monday, May 22, after staying overnight in Salzburg, we landed at Moscow’s Vnukovo Airport . At 4:30pm, we arrived at the airport in Russia .
 President Nikolai Podgorny officially greeted me; Kosygin and Gromyko were also there . President Nikolai Podorny was greeted by President Kosygin, Gromyko and Podorny .
 Aside from a small crowd standing behind the fence and waving little paper flags, it was a very cool reception . Aside from the small crowd, there was a cool reception.
 As our motorcade raced along the broad and completely empty streets toward the Kremlin, I noticed that fairly sizable crowds were being kept behind police barriers a block away down the side streets .
 The pair were given an entire floor of rooms in one of the large wings of the Grand Palace inside the Kremlin .
 Kissinger arrived with the news that Brezhnev was waiting to welcome him in his office . Kissinger arrived in his ornately opulent quarters, Kissinger said .
 Brezhnev’s office was the same room in which I had first met Khrushchev, thirteen years before . The Soviet Union broke out of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 I was sure that neither of us, standing shoulder to shoulder in the kitchen at the American Exhibition thirteen years before, had imagined that we would one day be meeting at the summit as the leaders of our countries .
 Soviet translator Viktor Sukhodrev spoke to the author at the end of the book . He gestured to a long table at one side of the room, and he and I sat down on opposite sides of it .
 There had been concern expressed that I should have a State Department translator present also . There was also a concern that the translator should be a translator .
 Sukhodrev was a superb linguist who spoke English as well as he did Russian . He felt that Brezhnev would speak more freely if only one other person was present . But I knew that Sukhod rev was an excellent linguist .
 He said at the outset he had to tell me that it had not been easy for him to carry off this summit after our recent actions in Vietnam . He said that at the start of the summit he had told me that he had not told me .
 Only the overriding importance of improving Soviet-American relations and reaching agreements on some of the serious issues between us had made it possible . The Soviet Union-U.S. relations are now stronger than ever .
 He warmed perceptibly as he began to talk about the necessity and advantages of developing a personal relationship between us, he said .
 I said I had studied the history of the relationships between Stalin and Roosevelt . I said that I had . studied the relationship between Stalin . and Roosevelt and Churchill, he said .
 Differences between subordinates are usually overcome by agreement at the top level . I had found that during the war differences between subordinates were usually overcome . Differences between subordinate and subordinate members of the army were overcome in war .
 State dinner held in the heart of the oldest part of the Kremlin . The dinner was held in a fifteenth-century-century Granovit Hall .
 The parquet floor had been polished to a high gloss, and the vaulted walls were covered with huge icon-like paintings in rich gold and brown tones . The floor was polished to high gloss and the walls covered with rich gold, brown and gold .
 Brezhnev sat next to each other at the head table at a several-times life-size mural of Christ and the Apostles at the Last Supper . The mural was a several times larger than a life-sized mural .
 As usual, the time change made it impossible for me to fall asleep that first night . The time change was the first night of the week .
 CNN's John Sutter woke up at 4:30 a.m. and decided to go out for a walk around the Kremlin grounds . Sutter: "I finally got up around 4.30 and pulled on slacks and a jacket"
 I could hear the boats on the river and the sounds of truck traffic from the streets outside the red brick walls . I could also hear boats and truck traffic outside the walls .
 The U.S. flag is flying atop our residence amid the gold onion-top domes and red stars of the Kremlin churches and towers . I paused for a minute to look up at the American flag flying atop my residence .
 Brezhnev, Kosygin, Podgorny, Gromyko, and Dobrynin met at 11 A.M. in the first plenary session . Putin: "I decided to establish the straightforward tone I planned to adopt during the entire summit. In the
 There must be room in this world for two great nations with different systems to live together and work together . There must also be room for room in the world for the two countries to work together, says David Cameron .
 All the heads nodded on the other side of the table, but I guessed that they would have much preferred a continuation of the mushy sentimentality that had characterized so much of our approach to the Soviets in the past .
 Kissinger and I had a two-hour meeting on SALT with Brezhnev and Andrei Aleksandrov, his adviser on U.S.-Soviet affairs . Kissinger and Aleksanderov met in the early hours of SALT meeting .
 Despite the impatience he affected with the details and numbers, Brezhnev was obviously very well briefed on the subject . Despite the speediness he affected was obviously well aware of the details .
 He used a red pencil to sketch missiles on a notepad in front of him as we discussed the timing and techniques of control and limitation .
 We held another long meeting that evening to discuss the important and controversial question of how far the new Soviet ABM systems would be situated from Moscow . The meeting was held to discuss how far they would be located from Moscow.
 Brezhnev casually cut three hundred kilometers from the figure that had been agreed upon just a few hours earlier . When we began our discussion, he casually cut the figure from the agreed agreed upon .
 It is a technique of Communist negotiators to introduce some ideal but impractical change in an area where the details have already been agreed upon . The details of the details are already agreed upon by the Communist Party .
 Kissinger calmly pointed out that the Soviets themselves had originally wanted the agreement to last for only eighteen months . Kissinger said that the agreement had originally been originally intended to last only 18 months . The Soviets originally wanted to last eighteen months, Kissinger said .
 After the ceremony on Wednesday afternoon, Brezhnev and I walked out of the room together, he said, "We signed an agreement on cooperation in space exploration" He said: "After the ceremony we signed a space exploration agreement we walked out together."
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is hosting a dinner at a government dachas outside Moscow . Putin says the dinner was planned for him and Putin will attend the dinner . Putin has been accused of corruption in the past but insists he is not corrupt .
 He propelled me into an elevator that took us down to the ground floor where one of his limousines was parked . He propelled us down the elevator to a limousine parked .
 The Secret Service and the others rushed around trying to find cars and drivers to follow us . We climbed into the limousine and were on our way while the Secret Service tried to find drivers .
 The middle lane of all the main streets in Moscow is reserved solely for party officials . Party officials drive along at a very fast clip in Moscow .
 As soon as we arrived at the dacha, Brezhnev suggested that we go for a boat ride on the Moskva River . The dacha is located in Moscow, Russia, on the outskirts of Moscow .
 Brezhnev kept pointing to the speedometer, which showed us traveling at ninety kilometers an hour . Brezhnnev pointed out that he was traveling at 90 kilometers per hour . The speedometer showed that the Soviet Union was travelling at the time .
 Churchill had told me that he much preferred to dictate to a pretty young woman . I recalled that Churchill had said that he would prefer dictating to pretty women .
 Brezhnev suggested that we have a meeting before the dinner, which was scheduled for eight o’clock . Everyone was in a good humor when we got back to the dacha, and everyone was in good humor, he says .
 Kissinger and I sat with Winston Lord and John Negroponte of the NSC on one side of the table, facing Brezhnev, Kosygin, Podgorny, and Sukhodrev on the other side . Kissinger and Winston Lord were sat on the same side
 For the next three hours the Soviet leaders pounded me bitterly and emotionally about Vietnam . For the rest of the time I was in the grip of Soviet leaders, I was trying to learn from them .
 I was trying to use the Chinese as a means of bringing pressure on the Soviets to intervene with the North Vietnamese . Brezhnev, who had just been laughing and slapping me on the back, started shouting angrily that instead of honestly working to end the war, he said .
 He said they wondered whether on May 8 I had acted out of thoughtless irritation . They had no doubt that if I really wanted peace I could get a settlement without any outside assistance, he said .
 When Brezhnev finally seemed to run out of steam, Kosygin took up the cudgel . Kosyin: "I'm glad to have been able to do so much for my country," he says .
 He said: “Mr President, I believe you overestimate the possibility in the present circumstances of resolving problems in Vietnam from a position of strength.”
 When I continued to show no reaction to this tirade Kosygin’s composure began to break, he said . When I showed no reaction, he began to tear up his composure and said: “I’m not going to let it go.”
 Brezhnev got up and paced the floor. "While Podgorny and Kosygin were taking their turns at trying to hammer me down," he says . "Brezhnevski was sitting on the floor."
 After about twenty minutes, Podgorny suddenly stopped and Brezhnev said a few more words . After about 20 minutes, he stopped and said: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 "I felt that before I could let this conversation end, I had to let them know exactly where I stood," she said . She said she felt she needed to know where she stood .
 I had shown the greatest restraint when the North Vietnamese began their massive buildup in March, because I did not want anything to affect the summit . I had played a role in the build-up to the summit, he said .
 When the North Vietnamese actually invaded South Vietnam, I had no choice but to react strongly . But when the North Vietnam actually invaded, I was not happy to see the result .
 "That is the way I always act, having in mind the consequences and the risks," he says . "That's the way you always act," he adds .
 I want the Soviet leaders to know how seriously I view this threat of new North Vietnamese escalation . But I want them to know that I view it seriously, writes CNN.com's Richard Quest .
 30,000 South Vietnamese civilians, men, women, and children, have been killed by the North Vietnamese using Soviet equipment . The North Vietnamese are using Soviet-made weapons to kill civilians in Vietnam .
 "They listened intently to what I said, but none of them made an attempt to respond," she said . "None of them tried to respond to me," she added .
 I made a joke about not giving Kissinger too many drinks because he had to go back and negotiate with Gromyko . I made my usual joke about giving Kissinger many drinks . Kissinger had to negotiate with the Soviet Union's president .
 They pretended to ply him with vodka and Cognac . They seemed vastly amused by this and they proceeded in a comic charade .
 There was much laughing and joking and storytelling —as if the acrimonious session downstairs had never happened . There was laughter and joking, but there was no sign of tension .
 While we were eating, Kosygin remarked that it was a good omen for our future relations that after three hours of hard-hitting discussions we could still have a relaxed and personally friendly conversation over dinner .
 I responded that we must recognize our differences and discuss them honestly . I said that we need to recognize differences and talk about them honestly. We need to talk about our differences, he said .
 Kissinger and Gromyko immediately began a meeting on the critical questions still standing in the way of a SALT agreement . Kissinger: "SALT agreement is not a solution to the problem"
 Kissinger came in with the news that the Soviets were continuing to hold out for their position, which was unacceptable to us . Riland around 1:00 A.M. when Kissinger came to the U.S. Riland .
 It was possible that they were hoping that domestic pressures on me to return home with a SALT agreement would force me to settle for their terms . It's possible they were . hoping that they hoped that the domestic pressures . on me would force . force me . to settle . for their
 "I had anticipated this possibility before we left Washington, and I was ready to call their bluff," says President Obama . "I'm prepared to call them bluff. I had anticipated ... this possibility," he says .
 Pentagon in open rebellion over SALT policy . Joint Chiefs backing away from SALT position . Pentagon in 'almost open rebellion' says Pentagon .
 Kissinger did not have to remind me that if word of this split reached the press, or if the Pentagon refused to support a SALT agreement, the domestic political consequences would be devastating, Kissinger said . Kissinger told me in the most urgent terms, that the domestic consequences of the SALT
 "I determined not to allow either the Pentagon on the right or the Soviets on the left to drive me away from the position I believed was in the best interests of the country"
 Kissinger spent several more hours trying to hammer out an acceptable agreement . Kissinger spent the night trying to find a way to reach a deal . Kissinger and Kissinger spent more than two hours negotiating an agreement .
 The meeting broke up in the early morning with the issue still deadlocked . The meeting finally broke up early morning .
 The next night we went to a gala performance of Swan Lake at the Bolshoi Theatre . The performance was the first time we had seen Swan Lake in Russia .
 Protocol did not require Brezhnev to attend, and I welcomed the opportunity to see how his colleagues acted away from his forceful presence .
 We later learned that she was the wife of an Italian journalist who worked for a proCommunist newspaper . She was later revealed to be a wife of a pro-Communist Italian journalist .
 At the next intermission Kosygin remarked that if we left Vietnam our prestige would grow, rather than suffer the way French prestige did after the defeats at Dien Bien Phu and in Algeria .
 Podgorny says his favorite part of the ballet was the dance of the four swans in the second act . That was the only mention of substantive issues all evening, and Podorny immediately moved on to say that he liked the dance .
 The next morning he reported that they had gone as far as they could with the actual negotiations . The next day he reported they had reached an agreement on a deal .
 Kissinger and Kissinger were meeting in his apartment when Dobrynin arrived with the news that the Politburo had held a special session and agreed to accept our final position . Later, Kissinger and I was meeting in my apartment in Moscow, Kissinger said .
 Everyone's spirits were high at the dinner we gave at Spaso House, the ambassador’s residence, that night . ‘Everyone’� was high at that dinner,’ says the ambassador .
 Brezhnev and I signed the ABM treaty and the Interim Offensive Agreement . It established a temporary freeze on the numbers of ICBMs and submarine-launched missiles each side could possess until a permanent agreement was negotiated .
 Since none of the other wives would be there, I suggested that she wait until the official party had entered and then slip in and stand behind one of the large columns . She would then slip into the room and slip behind the columns .
 Many of the hundreds of thousands who died during the Nazi siege of the city are buried in the Piskaryev Cemetery . The cemetery is one of the largest in Russia's history .
 We were running late, so the advance man recommended that I cut the scheduled stop at the small museum there . The advance man also recommended that he cut the stop .
 The young girl who was acting as our guide was obviously upset when she heard that I might not complete the itinerary . She was upset that she might not be able to complete the entire itinerary.
 I was deeply moved when she showed me the diary of Tanya, a twelve-year-old girl buried in the cemetery . She showed me how she was moved by her diary of a girl who was buried there .
 Moscow’s only Baptist church is the All-Union Council of Evangelical Christian Baptists . We flew back to Moscow, and on the next day, we went to services at the church .
 The unaffected singing of the congregation made me think of the early Christians . It was the same as the singing of early Christians, the congregation sang in the church .
 I was surprised to see such a large number of young people in the congregation at the service . The congregation was filled with young people, many of whom were in attendance .
 I was told later that many of the older men and women had either been frightened away or displaced by KGB agents . I was later told that many older men, women, had either fled or been displaced .
 I spent the rest of the day preparing my television broadcast to the people of the Soviet Union . I spent that day preparing myself for the broadcast, I said .
 As in 1959, I felt that this would be a very important Opportunity for me to present the American viewpoint on international issues to the Russian people without any editing or control by the Soviet government . As in . 1959, "This would be an important opportunity for me ... to present . the
 In the speech I discussed the dangers of an unchecked arms race, and I underlined America’s sincere desire for peace,” he said .
 Let us think of Tanya and of the other Tanyas and their brothers and sisters everywhere . As we work toward a more peaceful world, let us think about Tanya .
 Let us do all that we can to ensure that no other children will have to endure what Tanya did and that your children and ours, all the children of the world, can live their full lives together in peace .
 Brezhnev told me after the broadcast that my conclusion had brought tears to his eyes . Brezhnnev said he had tears in his eyes as he read about the events in Moscow .
 The greatest surprise of the summit came during my next to last meeting with Brezhnev. "The greatest surprise" came during his next-last meeting with the Soviet leader .
 "I went to his office for what was supposed to be a half-hour courtesy call, and we ended up spending two hours talking about Vietnam," he says . "We ended up having two hours to talk about Vietnam"
 I replied that such a visit might make a major contribution to ending the war, and I said that I would suspend bombing during the period the Soviet official was in Hanoi. I replied . I replied: Such a visit would make a big contribution to end the war . I said
 "You have my commitment that privately or publicly I will take no steps directed against the interests of the Soviet Union," he said . "As I was leaving, we paused by the door, and I said, “You have ... my commitment," he added .
 "You should rely on what I say in the private channel, not on what anyone else tells you," he says . But you should rely upon what he says in the privacy channel, he adds .
 The major achievement of Summit I was the agreement covering the limitation of strategic arms . The agreement was reached in 1994 . The summit was the first of its kind .
 The ABM treaty stopped what inevitably would have become a defensive arms race . The treaty stopped the arms race, with untold billions of dollars being spent on each side .
 Each side had an interest in preventing a war that could only be mutually destructive . Each side therefore had an ultimate interest in stopping a war .
 The Interim Agreement on strategic missiles marked the first step toward arms control in the thermonuclear age . Together with the ABM treaty, the treaty was first step to arms control . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 The Interim Agreement froze the levels of strategic missiles to those then actually existing or under construction . The agreement also froze levels of missile levels to those actually existing .
 Under this agreement, the United States gave up nothing, because we had no programs that were affected by the freeze . The United States did not give up anything, the White House says .
 The Soviets, however, had a substantial missile deployment program under way . The Soviets had a large missile deployment project under way.
 It is not possible to state how extensive that deployment might have been in the absence of the agreement .
 Had it continued, it would have put us at a disadvantage in numbers of missiles . It would have forced us into a costly building program just to maintain the then-current ratios .
 By maintaining those ratios the agreement would allow the two sides to begin negotiations for a permanent agreement on offensive weapons free from the pressures of an arms race .
 Summit I saw major achievements in the area of arms control . Summit I also saw agreements on pollution control and medicine and public health .
 In addition to the establishment of a joint commission to expand cooperation in several areas of science and technology, there was an agreement on a joint orbital mission in space, which came to fruition in 1975 with the Apollo-Soyuz space docking .
 U.S.-U.S.R. signed a document containing twelve “basic principles of mutual relations between the U.K. and the U.,” which set forth a code of behavior both sides agreed to follow .
 The code dealt not only with bilateral relations and measures to reduce the risk of nuclear war but also with the reduction of tension and conflict . The code was designed to reduce tensions and conflict between major powers and other countries .
 These summit agreements began the establishment of a pattern of interrelationships and cooperation in a number of different areas .
 There was no thought that such commercial, technical, and scientific relationships could by themselves prevent confrontations or wars . But at least they would have to be counted in a balance sheet of gains and losses whenever the Soviets were tempted to indulge in international adventurism .
 Because of the pervasive bugging I did not dictate any diary entries while we were in the Soviet Union . Because of bugging, I didn't dictate any entries while I was in Russia .
 A member of my staff reported having casually told his secretary that he would like an apple, and ten minutes later a maid came in and put a bowl of apples on the table .
 I did, however, keep extensive notes during the trip, and I made several long dictations from them the weekend after we returned . I kept extensive notes of the trip .
 Diary: I emphasized to Henry my evaluation of the Soviet leaders in which I said that Robert Conquest’s comment to the effect that they were intellectually third-rate was simply off the mark . Diary Diary Diary: "I said that . Robert Conquest's comment that they . were intellectually
 We constantly misjudge the Russians because we judge them by their manners, etc., and we do not look beyond to see what kind of character and strength they really have, says Putin . Putin: "I said that we constantly . misjudged the Russians. We do not .
 "Anybody who gets to the top in the Communist hierarchy and stays at the top has to have a great deal of political ability and toughness," says the Communist Party leader .
 All three of the Soviet leaders have this in spades, and Brezhnev, in particular . All three leaders have a common sense of humor .
 Russian may not be as elegant, and his manners not as fine, as that of some of his sophisticated European and Asian colleagues . But like an American labor leader, he has what it takes, and we can make no greater mistake than to rate him either as a fool or simply an
 Chou En-lai had the combination of elegance and toughness, a very unusual one in the world today . He was a very unique one of the world's toughest men .
 There is no question that the Russian leaders do not have as much of an inferiority complex as was the case in Khrushchev’s period .
 Russia does not have to brag about everything in Russia being better than anything anywhere else in the world . Russia is not the only country in the Middle East to boast about its quality of life .
 I think we made a good impression. But they still crave to be respected as equals, and this is not the first time they have done so .
 It was interesting to note that all the Soviet leaders like good clothes . It's interesting to see that all of them have good clothes.
 I recalled how subtle the change had been from the days of Khrushchev, when he insisted on dressing more plainly than the rest of us . The change was subtle, but it was subtle enough to be subtle .
 Kosygin is really all business, with very little outward warmth . He says he's a cool customer with no outward warmth. He's a very cool customer .
 He is by Communist terms an aristocrat; while Podgorny is more like a Midwestern senator; and Brezhnev like a big Irish labor boss . Perhaps an analogy to Mayor Daley would be more in order with no affront intended to either .
 They seemed to get along well and to have a good personal relationship with each other . The couple seemed to be getting along well .
 Kissinger pointed out to Kissinger in a note when Kosygin, Brezhnev, and Podgorny were having one of their colloquies, that it sounded like the scrambler we had in our room which we turned on whenever we wanted to knock out the listening device
 As we were riding in the car out to the dacha, he put his hand on my knee and said he hoped we had developed a good personal relationship . He said: "As we were . riding in . the car, he . put his . hand on me . knee and
 Brezhnev and Johnson would have been quite a pair if they had met at Glassboro, instead of Kosygin . I couldn’t help think that Brezhnenko and Johnson were quite a couple .
 He told me how an older party man, when he had just begun party work, emphasized the importance of personal relationships in politics and government and party work . He said: "Personal relationships are important to personal relationships"
 I rather wondered who it might have been because this sounded somewhat like Stalin . I also wondered who else might be behind the scenes .
 He has a strong, deep voice and a great deal of animal magnetism and drive which comes through whenever you meet him . Second, he has a very strong, strong voice, and a very animal magnet .
 Third, while he sometimes talks too much and is not too precise, he always comes through forcefully, and he has a very great shrewdness . Third, he sometimes talked too much, but he sometimes comes through strongly .
 He has the ability to move off of a point in the event that he is not winning it . He also has the chance to move from a point behind in the race .
 He stands up and walks around, a device he often used during the course of our meetings . He stood up and walked around, often used to walk around, during meetings .
 He must have been affected by the fact that my own conduct was, by comparison, totally controlled, he says . He must, of course, have had to be affected by that, he adds .
 Some would say this was a mistake but, on the other hand, I am inclined to think it may have impressed him more than if I had been more outwardly emotional in responding to his various charges . I'm not sure if this was the case, but I'm more likely to
 "I told him that while my reputation was for being unemotional, I was just as emotional as he was about this issue," she said . "I said that while I told him, while I'm not always very emotional, I'm very emotional," she added .
 I responded that despite poor health, he was sharp from an intellectual standpoint . He said that despite his poor health he was still sharp from a . standpoint .
 Brezhnev responded that Mao is a philosopher, not practical, a God-like figure . Mao is not a practical figure, but a philosophy, not a philosopher .
 He said it was really shocking that in the Cultural Revolution they cut off people’s heads in the public square . He said he was really shocked that in China, people were cut off .
 It's only been twenty years since the Communist leaders liquidated their opponents rather than letting them become non-persons, as had been the case with Khrushchev . Of course, it’s only been 20 years or so since .
 He made a great point of the fact that ‘some people’ do not want this meeting to succeed, obviously referring to the Chinese . He said some people in the U.S. don't want it to succeed .
 The Soviet leaders did not raise the subject of Cuba at all, and they were very mild on North Korea . It was also interesting to note that the Soviet leaders didn't raise the issue of Cuba .
 There were far more cars in the streets, and the people were better dressed . There were also more cars and people dressed up than usual in London .
 In a totalitarian state they have to put on a fetish of having some contact with people, but they really don’t do much better than the Chinese in setting these things up in a way that appears to be spontaneous .
 I am constantly amazed by the total gulf that exists between the Communist ruling classes and the people . I'm constantly amazed at the total . gulf between the . Communist ruling class and the . people, he says .
 Communist leaders acted as if they were non-persons, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he spoke to the waiters or nodded to them as we left the various dinners .
 "I pointed out one of the occasions that our meeting was not a fortuitous affair. I pointed out ... that our meetings were not fortuitous," he said. "We are not going to be friends and allies," he added .
 The world expected much from the meeting, and we justified the world’s hopes. The world expects much from this meeting, but we justified our hopes, he says . The world is expected to see much more from this week's meeting .
 "Now we must go forward to do away with the hotbeds of war that exist in the world," says President Obama .
 Yalta led to an improvement of relations, but then to a sharp deterioration thereafter . Relations between Russia and the U.S. have been at odds since the war began .
 The failure of the Soviets to keep the agreement led to all the troubles after Yalta . The Soviet Union failed to keep its agreement, which led to problems after that time . The Soviets were responsible for the collapse of the agreement .
 "We are now faced with the major task of giving implementation to the documents we have signed," says the government .
 President Richard Nixon had a heavy schedule of meetings and a congressional briefing on the SALT treaty in an effort to line up support .
 I carried with me a briefcase full of domestic reports and decision memoranda that had piled up while we were away . I carry with me full of reports and memoranda from the domestic reports while on holiday .
 He was leaving the administration and was preparing for his return to Texas . He was preparing to return to the state .
 Even McGovern’s supporters, no matter how emotionally committed to their man, would rally around Kennedy . Kennedy's supporters would have to rally around him, even if they were not emotionally committed .
 Early polls had projected a 20-point landslide, but Hubert Humphrey narrowed the difference to only 5.5 percent . With one more week of campaigning, Humphrey might have won .
 McGovern’s approach to welfare was for the federal government to give $1,000 to every man, woman, and child in America . It was funded largely by the taxstrapped middle-income group .
 HEW calculated that this program alone would cost some $50 billion a year . The cost of the program is estimated to be around $100 billion .
 By the end of the campaign, McGovern's domestic proposals would add $126 billion to the federal deficit . The deficit would be added to the U.S. national debt .
 McGovern told the Washington Post that busing was “essential” for integration . McGovern: Busing is ‘essential’ for integration in the South .
 This confusion existed largely because early in the campaign the media had played down the radical or inconsistent elements of McGovern’s programs, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the media played down these elements of the candidate's programs .
 Many reporters sympathized with McGovern’s positions; many just liked his enthusiastic and engaging collection of amateur staff members and volunteer workers . McGovern's staff includes volunteers and volunteers .
 CNN's John Sutter says he's not abdicated his critical faculties or his obligation to be objective . Fortunately, not all reporters abdicate their critical faculties . Sutter: "I don't think we're going to be able to be critical of our government. We're
 As of now, many newsmen who accompany McGovern along the campaign trail have already let their bias show through, says John Avlon . Avlon: Many of those who accompany him on the trail may be biased .
 The biggest political danger McGovern could pose, as I saw it, would be if he decided to change his positions in order to pick up the support of moderate Democrats . McGovern's biggest political risk would be changing his positions to win support of moderates .
 The McGovern strategy is becoming very clear now that he believes that he has the nomination wrapped up . McGovern's strategy is to win the Democratic nomination for president in 2016 .
 His going to the Governors Conference for the purpose of “clarifying” his stand on amnesty, marijuana, abortion, abortion and welfare is a case in point . The governor's stance on amnesty and marijuana amnesty is one example in point.
 McGovern is more clever and less principled than Goldwater and will say anything in order to win . McGovern will be more clever, less principled and will be willing to do anything to win, says Julian Zelizer .
 This points up the necessity to get Democrats and independents, not Republicans, to nail McGovern on the left side of the road which his record so clearly identifies him with .
 "By summer, when my campaign organization began moving into high gear, I almost immediately began hearing about problems connected to it," says Hillary Clinton . "I almost immediately heard about problems"
 There were rumors about slack field organizations, about unnecessary discourtesies to local people, and about the dislike local campaign workers were developing toward the size and slickness of the CRP’s Washington headquarters .
 Fred Malek, then a member of the White House staff, was sent over to the CRP to bring things under control . Haldeman and H.Haldeman decided to send Malek to help . Malek was a White House member of staff .
 Malek Malek was a tough young businessman whose specialty was organization and management . Malek's specialty is organization, management. Malek is a tough businessman.
 Mitchell's move was initially considered to be an implicit criticism of his performance . Mitchell said it was a recognition that he did not have the help he needed . We decided to hold off the move for a few more weeks .
 On June 12, Tricia and Ed’s first wedding anniversary were on a trip on the Sequoia . Tricia, Ed and Tricia celebrated Tricia's first anniversary with a trip together .
 Pat arranged for us to have the same hors d’oeuvres we had liked so much at the wedding reception . The couple were married at the end of the year .
 After the sail we watched a videotape of the wedding and reminisced about that day and about the year that had gone by so quickly . After the wedding, the family had watched a video of the day .
 President Luis Echeverria of Mexico arrived in Washington for a state visit on June 15 . He is the first Mexican president to visit the U.S. State of the Union since 1999 .
 We had a long talk about water salinity problems and ended up with a lively but friendly discussion about the treatment of American private enterprise in Latin America .
 At the end, he said that he thought my re-election was vitally important to the world . "He said he thought he thought that he was important enough to be re-elected," he said .
 Later in the day the Saudi Arabian Defense Minister, Sultan ibn ‘Abd alAziz, came in to bring greetings from his brother, King Faisal . The Saudi Arabian defense minister was also brought in to greetings by his brother .
 The long day ended with a state dinner in honor of President Echeverría . The state dinner was attended by the President of the Republic of Spain .
 Friday, June 16, began with a Cabinet meeting on the Republican platform proposals . Friday's meeting was the first of two days to discuss the Republican Party's platform proposals.
 I had an hour-long session with James Hodgson, Elliot Richardson, and members of my staff on welfare reform . Then I had a meeting with Hodgson and Elliot Richardson to discuss welfare reform, he said . Mr Hodgson said: "Then I had to talk about welfare reform
 John Paul Vann, the head of the Second Regional Assistance group in South Vietnam, was killed in a helicopter crash . The Medal of Freedom was presented at a posthumous presentation ceremony .
 I was on my own; Pat was making appearances on the West Coast, and the girls were with their husbands . "I was on her own," she says of her time with Pat .
 In his briefcase, Buchanan had a Buchanan campaign memorandum, the briefing materials on welfare reform, and a well-thumbed copy of Irving Kristol’s Oz the Democratic Idea .
 Churchill's last volume of World War II series is Triumph and Tragedy . Churchill's analysis of the Yalta conference was published at the end of the war .
 Grand Cay is a small island in the Bahamas owned by Bob Abplanalp . The island is owned by a former friend of Bob's, Bob's old friend . The water break-in took place Friday afternoon and all day Saturday .
 The weather was spotty, but I went for a swim and took a walk around the island . It was the first time I had been to the island in a month .
 The caretaker’s wife gave me two brightly colored shirts she had made for me . Her twelve-year-old daughter showed me some of the turtles she had been raising .
 On Saturday, June 17, I called the mainland only once, to check in with Haldeman . On the mainland, he was only there for a few hours .
 John Connally was on a thirty-five-day trip around the world when he was asked to find out where he could reach him . Connally is currently on a tour of the world around the globe .
 I also told him to be sure that we had a plank in the Republican platform supporting federal aid to parochial schools, he said . I also said that we also want to make a plank of the Republican Party's platform .
 "When I got to my house I could smell coffee brewing in the kitchen, and I went in to get a cup," she says . "I went in for a cup of coffee. It was the first time I had a cup in my life," she said .
 There was a Miami Hera/d on the counter, and I glanced over the front page . It was the first time I had seen the Miami-Hera/d .
 Five men, four of them from Miami, were arrested in the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate, a fashionable hotel, office, and apartment complex in Washington . Four of them were from Miami .
 The story said that one of the five men had identified himself as a former employee of the CIA; three of the others were Cuban natives . Three of the men identified themselves as former CIA employees .
 Haldeman was staying with the rest of the traveling staff at Key Biscayne Hotel . He was staying at the hotel with the other traveling staff .
 We briefly discussed whether to have a signing ceremony for the higher education bill . The bill is expected to be signed by President Obama on Thursday .
 George Meany had the potential of becoming one of the most important developments of the 1972 campaign . Then we turned to some intriguing news about Meany . Meany was a major figure in the 1972 presidential campaign .
 Meany told Shultz that if Humphrey failed to get the Democratic nomination, he would not support McGovern . Meany had told George Shultz he would back McGovern if he didn't get the nomination .
 Meany’s neutrality would breach the traditional Democratic coalition and be a boost to my campaign, he says . Meany's neutrality would be a huge boost to his campaign, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 I called Tricia and Julie, who wished me a happy Father’s Day, and Pat, who was in Los Angeles on a three-day series of appearances that had begun in Texas and was scheduled to end in South Dakota .
 Kissinger stopped over in Hawaii en route to Peking when he was in Hawaii . Haig, Haig and Kissinger were in Hawaii at the time of the trip .
 In the afternoon I called Chuck Colson to discuss the Meany development with him . The Meany deal is the latest in a long line of developments in the world .
 John Connally in Australia and received a glowing report from his trip . Connally was in Australia for the first time since leaving the U.S. in 1972 .
 I called Colson again for a short talk about his concern that most of the media would be sympathetic to McGovern . Colson: "I was worried about the media's reaction to the election"
 Jack Nicklaus won the United States Open in Pebble Beach . Afterward, Nicklaus called Nicklaus, who had just won the U.S. Open .
 "I congratulated him on his victory and commiserated about the putts that had seemed to go in the hole and out," he said . "I congratulate him on winning," he added .
 Before going to bed, I sat in my study reading the last chapters of Triumph and Tragedy . Before I went to bed I read the last chapter of Triumph in Triumph .
 I didn't bother to look at the morning paper but went straight to my study to make calls . I did not bother to read the paper but instead made calls to make sure I had the best phone calls .
 The Watergate break-in was still the furthest thing from my mind as I talked with Julie, Tricia, Rose Woods, Al Haig, and Billy Graham . Billy Graham was still at the center of the conversation .
 I also talked with Chuck Colson; the only note that I dictated in my diary about our conversation recounted our analysis of a new set of poll figures . We discussed everything from confidence in presidential leadership to the economy .
 Haldeman: "I made two short calls to Haldemen concerning the day’s schedule, then he came over and we met for an hour. I made a short call to him about the schedule," he says .
 We discussed the possibility that George Wallace would become a third-party candidate . We also discussed the increase in food prices and the appointment of a new Chief of Protocol .
 Late that night, back at the White House, I brought my diary up to date with the events of that day . Late that evening, back in Washington, he brought his diary up .
 Buried amid observations on the weekend’s weather and reflections on the general benefits of relaxation was my first entry dealing with Watergate . Buried in the column was the first entry on Watergate .
 A hurricane passed nearby, and winds were so strong that we thought it would be a rather miserable ride . I almost decided to go back Sunday night .
 The following day the winds had passed on, and it was the best of all the days. It was the most beautiful day of the day .
 The best of the six days, including the three immediately after returning from Moscow two weeks ago, and these three days, were the best of all six days .
 The extra day, with good long swims in the morning and the afternoon, gave me, it seemed to me, a much bigger lift than I had realized was possible . It seemed to be to me that it was possible to have an extra day .
 I must make it a point to try to get three full days in the future, and, of course, always try and get the situation developed where I can have peace of mind and good weather .
 I think one of the reasons that I feel tonight more rested is because I have had rest, and also have had fresh air and the exercise . I think that is one reason I feel more sharp and more eager to get work done is because of rest and fresh air, and exercise .
 I am going to try a routine of bowling for a half hour at the end of each day before coming over to the Residence. I'm going to be bowling for half an hour each day . I'm not sure how long it will be, but I'm sure bowling will be
 The break-in of the Democratic National Committee involved someone who is on the payroll of the Committee to Reelect the President . Bob Haldeman reported that the DNC was broken into .
 Mitchell had told Bob on the phone enigmatically not to get involved in it . Mitchell: "I told Bob that I simply hoped that none of our people were involved for two reasons—one, because it was stupid in the way it was handled"
 Bob pointed out that one of Chotiner’s operatives had said that a McGovern aide had told him that they had our committee rooms bugged . Bob pointed one of . Chotiners operatives had . said he had been told by McGovern aides that the committee rooms were
 The problem here, of course, is to get somebody on the PR side who will get out some of the negatives on the other side like this, so that this story just doesn't appear to be a clumsy attempt on our part to get information illegally from the Democrats .
 I also urged Bob to keep Colson and Ehrlichman from getting obsessed with the thing so that they were unable to spend their time on other jobs .
 Looking back, the fact that Colson got so deeply involved in the ITT was a mistake . It kept him from doing other things that in retrospect were more important to do, he says .
 ITT was 'letting ITT run its course without having our whole staff in constant uproar about it' ITT chief executive says . ITT has been in the news of a series of high-profile resignations from the company .
 Pat was in a very good mood tonight, and had felt that her visit to South Dakota was a success . Pat said she felt that she had done well in South Dakota .
 She said the governor had expressed concern that I had always done so well in South Dakota, that he had to run this year as a Democrat and was worried about it . She said she was worried that she would have to run for a Democrat .
 Of course, with McGovern on the ticket he may have a much better chance . McGovern is running for president .
 CRP employee who had been arrested at the Watergate was James McCord . The CRP worker was arrested in the Watergate raid .
 McCord was employed by both the Committee to Re-elect the President and the Republican National Committee as a consultant on security for buildings, documents, and personnel .
 One of his responsibilities was to protect the Republicans from exactly the kind of thing he had been caught doing to the Democrats . One of the Republicans' responsibilities is to protect Republicans from the Democrats' actions .
 Because of McCord’s connection to the CRP, his arrest had turned the Watergate break-in into a hot news story . Because of his connection, McCord's arrest turned Watergate into a top-story .
 John Mitchell, chairman of the Committee to Re-elect, had issued a statement that the arrested men were not acting on behalf of or with the consent of the CRP . Mitchell said he himself was surprised and dismayed at the reports of McCord’s involvement .
 "I had been in politics too long, and seen everything from dirty tricks to vote fraud," she said . "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to do it," she added .
 Larry O’Brien might affect astonishment and horror, but he knew as well as I did that political bugging had been around nearly since the invention of the wiretap . Larry O'Brien knew as much as he did, he knew it had been used for political purposes .
 As recently as 1970 a former member of Adlai Stevenson's campaign staff had publicly stated that he had tapped the Kennedy organization’s phone lines at the 1960 Democratic convention . The Kennedy organization's phone lines were tapped during the 1960 convention .
 Lyndon Johnson felt that the Kennedys had had him tapped; Barry Goldwater said that his 1964 campaign had been bugged . Edgar Hoover told me that in 1968 Johnson had ordered my campaign plane bugged; in 1968 he had ordered me to have it bugged.
 NBC producer was fined and given a suspended sentence for planting a concealed microphone at a closed meeting of the 1968 Democratic platform committee . NBC producer planted the microphone in a closed-door meeting of a Democrat platform committee in 1968 .
 In fact, his confidence in the CRP was undermined more by the stupidity of the DNC bugging attempt than by its illegality, he says .
 National Committee headquarters is useless place to go for inside information on a presidential campaign . Anyone who knew anything about politics would know that a national committee headquarters was a useless place for insider information .
 "The whole thing was so senseless and bungled that it almost looked like some kind of a setup," says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . "It almost looks like a setup. The whole thing is so senseless"
 On Sunday morning the idea of Cubans in surgical gloves bugging the DNC had seemed totally ridiculous . The idea of using surgical gloves to bugged the DNC seemed ridiculous .
 By Monday night it had become a potential issue in the presidential campaign . It has become an issue of national importance .
 On Tuesday morning, June 20, was the first day back in Washington, D.C., for CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There was a new twist. This is the first time I've been back in the U.S.
 The name of Howard Hunt had been found in the address books of two of the men caught inside the DNC headquarters . The name Hunt was found in two men's address books, federal sources say .
 Hunt, a former CIA agent, had worked at the White House as a consultant to Chuck Colson . Hunt was a CIA agent until March 29, 1972, according to the report .
 It was one thing if the CRP was involved, or even a former lower-level White House staff member like Hunt . Hunt is a former White House staffer . Hunt was a White House aide .
 Colson was a member of my inner circle of aides and advisers, and if he was drawn in it was a whole new situation . But Colson has been a key figure in the world's most powerful politician .
 DNC filed a $1 million suit against the CRP for invasion of privacy and violation of civil rights . The DNC filed the suit against CRP . The CRP is accused of violating civil rights and invading privacy .
 This suit would enable their lawyers to call as witnesses and depose under oath almost the entire CRP and White House staff . The suit would allow them to depose almost all of the CRP staff .
 In this way, while ostensibly probing the DNC bugging, they could ask questions about any aspect of our campaign . "In this way they could question any of every aspect of their campaign," he said .
 Publicly the Democrats were full of righteous indignation at the Watergate break-in . Publicly, the Democrats had been outraged by the break-ins . But now, they have been vindicated .
 Privately they were rejoicing at this unexpected election-year dividend . Privately, they are rejoicing that they have won the election .
 Ken Clawson, our Deputy Director of Communications, had lunch with Dick Harwood, an editor at the Washington Post . The Washington Post is a major newspaper in the United States .
 Before coming to the White House, Clawson had been a Post reporter . Clawson visited with some of his former colleagues after the lunch .
 He was told that Katharine Graham, the paper’s publisher, was personally going to direct an army of reporters assigned to delve into the Watergate story . He says he was told he was going to be personally directed by the publisher .
 We spent several minutes discussing the way the newspapers were stretching his connection with Hunt in order to draw him into the scandal . We also discussed the question of who might be the source of the news leaks .
 Colson said that Haldeman was “pulling it all together,” and that, in Colson’s own opinion, so far we had handled it the right way . Colson: So far, we've handled it right way.
 I thought that one problem we would have to deal with soon was what the arrested men were going to say, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I thought that . one of them would be arrested men," he says .
 I thought we would be vulnerable to any charges or accusations, true or false, they might make, he says . "I thought we'd be vulnerable," he says. "We would be ... vulnerable"
 "I told Colson that, as I understood it, we were going to have “this funny guy” take credit for the whole thing," he says . "This funny guy" will take credit, he says, for the project .
 I meant McCord, but Colson evidently thought I meant Howard Hunt . Colson thought he meant his friend Howard Hunt. Hunt was his friend .
 He insisted Hunt was just too smart and too sophisticated to have been involved in something as amateurish as the Watergate break-in . Hunt was 'too smart and sophisticated' to have taken part in something amateurish .
 If we didn't know better we would have thought that the whole thing had been deliberately botched up. I agreed that if we didn’t know better, it would have been deliberate botched up, but we did know better .
 Colson said he figured it might have been something the Cubans had organized on their own . Colson: The break-in may have been organized by Cubans . He said he didn't think it was a Cuban organized on his own .
 Cuban émigré community feared that McGovern would decide to resume diplomatic relations with Castro . McGovern's decision to re-establish diplomatic relations was made in Cuba .
 Anti-Castro Cubans would want to bug the Democrats to obtain information about such intentions . Feelings ran sufficiently high that it was by no means impossible that it would be difficult to get such information .
 I told Colson that my understanding was that we were just going to leave the Watergate matter where it was, with the Cubans . "We were going to just go to leave it no matter what it was," he said .
 Hunt’s name was in the address books of the arrested men, he said . Hunt's name was found in the addresses of the men, police said . He said it was the most logical thing in the world .
 The morning paper had pointed out that Hunt had been a CIA agent for more than twenty years, and that all the arrested men had CIA ties . Hunt had worked for the CIA for over 20 years .
 Colson said that the biggest hazard Watergate represented for us was the risk of our becoming preoccupied with it simply because of the media and the Democrats were sure to be . Colson: The biggest risk Watergate represented was that we should not be preoccupied .
 He said that the whole thing was “something which normally wouldn’t amount to that much’s that much.” He added that the incident was a "normal" thing .
 During my Soviet Summit trip the paper had run an ad calling for my impeachment because of my policy on the Vietnam war . The paper had called for me to be impeached because of his policy on Vietnam .
 A formal complaint had been filed against the paper, charging that it had failed to require the necessary identifications from the people who paid for the ad and therefore violated the campaign fund disclosure law .
 "I was pessimistic about our ability to get any political mileage out of that. I was pessimistic," he said .
 The main problem was that the Democrats would be able to keep the Watergate issue alive with their depositions . The Democrats would have to keep it alive with the depositions, he says .
 "We were going to try to delay them until after the election, but there was no guarantee we could do so," says David Cameron . "There were no guarantees we could delay them," says Cameron .
 What was said during the morning meeting will never be known completely because the tape of that conversation is the one with the 181/2-minute gap . The tape of the conversation will never reveal what was said .
 Some of what we talked about during those 181/2 minutes can be reconstructed from the notes taken by Haldeman .
 The Watergate break-in was one of the first reactions to Watergate, according to sources . 'I instructed that my EOB office be checked regularly to make sure that J was not being bugged by anyone. According to them, one of my first reactions was to instruct that my office
 They also indicate a concern about the political ramifications of the Watergate incident and a desire to divert its impact by mounting its own counterattack .
 The best indication of anything else that may have been said about Watergate break-in in that morning conversation is our discussion of the same subject just a few hours later that afternoon .
 It has always been my habit to discuss problems a number of times, often in almost the same terms and usually with the same people, I say . It's always been a habit of talking about problems with people who ask for answers in the same way, I do so . I'm
 This is the way I try to elicit every possible piece of information and advice and examine every possible angle of a situation before making a decision . This is a way of trying to get the best information from all angles before deciding .
 In the afternoon meeting Haldeman said he thought that John Mitchell had not known about the break-in plan beforehand .
 Mitchell was just too smart to be involved in any such thing, Mitchell says . Mitchell was a smart and smart person, he says. Mitchell was too smart for this kind of thing .
 Haldeman: The men who were caught were supposed to be a pretty competent bunch of people . He said they had been doing other campaign-related things before . He added that it was true, however, that the men who had been caught were actually competent .
 Haldeman told me what he had heard about the possible reasons for the break-in . He said it was not the first time he'd heard the news of the break in .
 The arrested men had gone in to repair some electronic equipment that had already been installed but was not working properly, and to take pictures of whatever they found inside .
 Later he mentioned they had expected to find some financial information about the Democrats . Later he said they were looking for financial information .
 In our conversation that afternoon Haldeman ran through some of the other information he had picked up during the day . In the afternoon he spoke to reporters about the day's events .
 Haldeman said McCord was going to say he was working with the Cubans, who had been putting in the bug for their own political reasons . He said that as he understood it, McCord planned to say that he worked with Cubans .
 Haldeman told me that Howard Hunt had either disappeared or was in the process of doing so, but he would come back if wanted . Hunt would either disappear or come back to the scene of his murder, he said .
 Haldeman indicated that Hunt’s name in the address books would be explained on the basis of his ties to the Cubans . Hunt was involved in the Bay of Pigs operation while he was in the CIA .
 Haldeman said that our people were making an effort to keep the incident tied to the motive of Cuban nationalism . He said that the Cuban government is trying to keep it from being linked to the country .
 Hunt's ties to Colson and to the White House were being uncovered . The problem, of course, was that now, through Hunt, was being uncovered. Hunt was being investigated for his role in the scandal . Hunt is now being investigated by the FBI .
 The newspapers had reported that Hunt worked at the White House on projects involving international narcotics intelligence and declassification of documents .
 Haldeman said he was not sure exactly what else Hunt had done . He said he knew only that it had been based on his prior experience in intelligence . Hunt was not the only person involved in the assassination .
 Later in the conversation, he mentioned that Hunt had been involved in the “Diem thing”—our effort to unearth the facts on President Kennedy’s involvement in the coup against President Diem in 1963, a coup that resulted in Diem’�s
 Haldeman: "All of us, including Colson, had known that some were going on" Colson: "We knew that some of the intelligence activities for the CRP were happening"
 Haldeman said he did not think Colson had known specifically that the Watergate bugging project was under way . But despite the Hunt connection, he said that he did think that Colson knew specifically about the project .
 "I said I thought he had, but then I said that that was just second-guessing him," he said . "That was just a question of whether he had done it," he added .
 Haldeman reported that his offices in the White House and the EOB had been swept for bugs . None of the bugs were found, and none had been found .
 Haldeman said he felt like the whole thing was a nightmare . Something like this just doesn’t happen, he said . Haldman said he feels like the entire ordeal was a dream .
 Mitchell had been several steps removed from the scene of the shooting, police chief says . He says Mitchell was not so far removed that it probably would never have happened .
 There was always the problem of circumstantial evidence, however, and there was clearly still going to be an effort to try to tie Mitchell in . There was also the issue of evidence of Mitchell's involvement .
 Howard Hunt was involved in the Watergate incident, says Haldeman . Hunt was not involved in Watergate, but was involved with it, he says . Hunt's role in Watergate was a key role in the investigation, he adds . Hunt died in a house fire explosion in 1972 .
 He said Hunt had been waiting across the street from the Watergate in the motel room from which the bugs were going to be monitored . Hunt said that on the night of the break-in Hunt was waiting in the hotel room across the road from the hotel .
 Haldeman was not sure about Hunt's relationship to McCord or McCord's to the Cubans . He said Hunt’s relationship with McCord is unclear .
 I was still confused about just how Hunt’s name had come up, and Haldeman again ran through the story of the address books .
 One of the Cubans had a check from Hunt for about $6.90, payable to Hunt’s country club . He also told me that one of the Cubanans had . a check for about . $6,000 .
 I said that in a sense the involvement of the Cubans, McCord, and Hunt made it appear that it was in fact some kind of Cuban operation . The involvement of McCord and Hunt appeared to make it look like a Cuban operation, the author said .
 He then returned to the problem of the Democrats’ depositions, which, he said, were clearly the toughest thing for us . He said the depositions were the "toughest thing"
 "I expressed my continuing bafflement over the origins of the whole thing," he said . I expressed my continued bafflement .
 "I had had an hour session with Ehrlichman on busing and other domestic issues," he says . "I've had several phone calls to members of Congress and the staff," he adds .
 "As far as Watergate was concerned, as I walked back to the Residence that night I felt confident," says Nixon . "I felt confident. As far . as far . from Watergate, as . Watergate was . concerned, Nixon said, "As . far . far from Watergate
 My primary concern had been whether anyone at the White House was involved, he says . Haldeman and Colson had reassured me on that score, he adds .
 Mitchell had had nothing to do with it, Haldeman said . Mitchell was not responsible for the incident . Haldemen said Mitchell was 'not to blame' for it .
 Mitchell was so embarrassed by the whole thing that it had come as a complete surprise to him, says Mitchell . Mitchell said he was 'embarrassed' by the incident . Mitchell has been described as 'a complete surprise'
 President Nixon had a new idea for handling the public relations aspect of the Watergate incident . Nixon had been talking about the Bay of Pigs when he spoke to the CIA .
 I suggested that if the Cuban explanation for the break-in actually caught on, I would call Rebozo and have him get the anti-McGovern Cubans in Miami to start a public bail fund for their arrested countrymen and make a big media issue .
 If they used it to revive the Democrats’ inept handling of the Bay of Pigs and to attack McGovern’s foreign policy ideas, we might even make Watergate work in our favor . We might even use Watergate to revive Democrats' bungling of the bay of Pigs .
 Watergate was an annoying problem, but it was still just a minor one among many . Watergate was just one of many problems among many, but Watergate was still a problem among many.
 Liddy was the counsel for the finance committee at CRP, Haldeman said . Liddy is the man responsible for the break-in, he said . We didn't know what McCord's position was, but everyone seemed to think he would hang tight .
 Haldeman said people would appeal for compassion on the basis that Liddy was a poor misguided kid who read too many spy stories . Then, he said, our people would make a plea for compassion for Liddy . Liddy died in a plane crash in September 2011 .
 Lawyers all felt that if Liddy and the arrested men entered a guilty plea they would get only fines and suspended sentences since apparently they were all first offenders . Haldeman said the lawyers all thought that if they entered guilty pleas they would only get a fine and suspended sentence .
 If Liddy was the man responsible, he should step up and shoulder the blame . We had to assume the truth would come out sooner or later, so if he was responsible, it should be him .
 My only reservation, I said, would be if this would involve John Mitchell, in that case I didn't think we could do it . My only complaint would be that it would involve Mitchell, he said . In that case, Mitchell would have to be involved, he added .
 Mitchell said Mitchell was concerned about how far the FBI’s investigation was going and thought that someone should go directly to the FBI and get it turned off . He had already told me that Mitchell was worried that Mitchell had already said he was concerned .
 Ehrlichman was afraid Mitchell might be involved, Haldeman says . Mitchell was a key figure in the Nixon administration . Mitchell is a former CIA director .
 Haldeman had all but put the question directly to Mitchell when they had talked earlier that morning, he had received no answer . So he could not be sure whether Mitchell was involved or not .
 Mitchell seemed apprehensive about Ehrlichman's plan because of Liddy’s instability, Mitchell said . Mitchell indicated that Mitchell seemed a little apprehensive . Mitchell said Liddy was unstable and what might happen when he was put under pressure .
 Ehrlichman had just developed the plan that morning, and everyone was going to think about it before anything was done . In any case, he said, he was just thinking about the plan .
 I still believed that Mitchell was innocent; I believed that he would never have ordered anything like this . I was sure he would not have ordered such a thing like this, he said .
 He was just too smart and, besides, he had always disdained campaign intelligence-gathering . He was always too smart . He disdied campaign intelligence gathering .
 I might be wrong and Mitchell might have had some involvement; and even if he had not actually been involved, if we weren’t careful he might become so circumstantially entangled that neither he nor we would ever be able to explain the truth . Even if he wasn't actually
 Haldeman said that we could take care of Liddy and I agreed to help him . I was willing to help with money for someone who had thought he was helping me win the election. Liddy thought he had helped me win, he said . Liddy said he was willing
 "I never personally confronted Mitchell with the direct question of whether he had been involved in or had known about the planning of the Watergate breakin," he says . "I'm not sure if Mitchell knew about the breakin or if he knew about it," Mitchell says .
 I would never challenge what he had said; I felt that if there were something he thought I should know, he would have told me . I felt if there was something he wanted to tell me, I would have challenged him, he said .
 I said that I was concerned about what I thought was a bad rap the White House was getting because of the fact that Hunt had worked for Colson . I said I thought that I thought . I thought ... I thought I thought a bad . rap . The White House is getting because
 Haldeman says he was convinced Colson was not involved in the crime . He says as nearly as anyone could be convinced of anything, he was sure Colson wasn't .
 Haldeman said the real problem for the White House had nothing to do with the Watergate break-in itself . He said an investigative fishing expedition could uncover and exploit politically . The White House aide said the problem was not Watergate itself, but other involvements .
 Democrats' civil suit was the biggest problem for the White House . That was what made the Democrats’ civil suit a big problem for Obama .
 Hunt had done a lot of unrelated things for Colson that could be uncovered in the kind of freewheeling legal depositions the Democrats clearly had in mind . Hunt had been a big part of the Colson scandal .
 Haldeman identified Hunt as the man who had gone to Denver and talked to Dita Beard during the ITT investigation . Hunt was identified as Hunt . Hunt had been in Denver talking to Beard .
 Hunt said there were apparently other ‘fringe bits and pieces’ that would come out if Hunt was called . He said there are apparently other 'fringe pieces and pieces' that would be revealed .
 Haldeman said Hunt’s political connection was the reason it was felt he should disappear . Hunt was the prime minister of Scotland at the time .
 "At the end of our discussion I came back to the frustrating situation concerning the break-in," says the police chief . "It's a frustrating situation," he says of the situation .
 Democrats had been doing this kind of thing to us for years and never got caught, Haldeman says . He says they've been doing the same thing for years, but they're never caught .
 He said the press just never went after them the way they went after us. He said they were never attacked by the press . The press never attacked them, he said, but the press did go after them .
 When I saw Colson that afternoon, we talked about the morning’s press coverage of the break-in, and about the McGovern campaign . Colson: “I’m not sure what happened, but I’ve got a lot of respect for the
 The White House broke into the White House in a break-in in Washington, D.C. last week . President Barack Obama is expected to speak at a White House press conference the next day .
 The conversation ranged over several other topics and then came back to Watergate . It was the first time Watergate had been discussed by President Richard Nixon .
 I asked Colson what he thought about the plan to have Liddy take the rap and then just cut our losses . Colson: "I'm not sure what I think about it, but I think it's a good idea"
 He said that he would be for anything that would cut our losses and get us out of it . He said he was for anything to get us from it .
 He said he was deliberately staying out of the whole thing so that he could make an honest affidavit that he knew nothing about it . But, he added, he said, he did not know anything about the case .
 He just could not believe that Hunt had engineered the Watergate break-in . He just couldn't believe it was Hunt .
 On the morning of Thursday, June 22, I reviewed the briefing material for my press conference that afternoon . "I reviewed the briefings material for that afternoon," he said. "I'm looking forward to that afternoon's press conference"
 Nixon Concerned or Nixon Calls for Investigation was the kind of headline they were after . Nixon called for investigation or Nixon calls for investigation was the headline they wanted .
 It would be important for me to strike the right balance in what I said about the break-in . Showing too little concern would cause as bad a news story as showing too much .
 Mitchell had already said that such activities could not be condoned and that he was surprised by them . Ziegler had already issued a statement on Colson's behalf denying Colson’s involvement . Mitchell said he was shocked by the revelations .
 When I saw Haldeman, I predicted that the main Watergate question at the press conference would be whether there was any White House involvement . "When I saw him, he said, 'I predicted that Watergate question would be about whether the White House was involved"
 I knew that reporters would pounce on any qualifiers or qualifiers in my answer, so I thought I should just state unequivocally that there was no involvement whatever . I thought that I would just say there were no involvement whatsoever .
 Haldeman said he thought he thought that on the direct basis of White House involvement, we were absolutely clean . Haldman: "We were absolutely clear. We are absolutely clean"
 The Democratic judge who would have heard the case had been replaced by a Republican judge . The case will be heard by a Democratic judge .
 The judge had said he would meet with him after the weekend to make decisions about the timing of depositions . When the lawyer for the Democrats, Edward Bennett Williams, had insistently demanded immediate depositions, the judge said that .
 The FBI still had no case on Howard Hunt . Hunt was the subject of a major investigation into the murder of Howard Hunt. Hunt was found dead at the scene of the shooting . Hunt is believed to be the prime suspect in the case .
 Haldeman said the FBI had no warrant out for him and therefore did not care whether he had disappeared . Haldman said that the FBI did not want him to disappear .
 The FBI could not trace the hundred-dollar bills that the break-in crew had been carrying the night they were arrested . The FBI was not able to trace the bills they were carrying .
 The FBI had got only as far as a Miami bank, and Haldeman said that they would evidently have to go through a South American country in order to trace it finally .
 As of June 22, the situation provided at least some grounds for hope . The situation remains uncertain .
 The Cuban explanation for the break-in was still holding, and the issue was thoroughly confused . The Cuban government is still holding on to its explanation .
 Haldeman said there would continue to be an effort to crank up the Cuban story . He said there will be a continued effort to turn up the story .
 He observed that because of what we knew we tended to read too much into what we saw . He said that because we know we tend to think too much about what we see, we often see .
 The Cubans were not much of a story, but the networks, I said, would “play it to beat hell” if they thought they had something on us, he said . The networks, he added, would play it to "beat hell" if they think they
 Haldeman said it was being arranged that some members of the Cuban community would start to say how scared they were of McGovern . The Cuban community is expected to speak out against McGovern, he said .
 Two of the arrested men were registered Democrats . They were also getting out the fact that two of them were Democrats .
 He said that there was even some thought of having Liddy leave the country . He said there was some thought that Liddy might have to go .
 The FBI was not after him now, and he could come back if something on him surfaced, he says . The FBI is not pursuing him now . He says he could return to the U.S. if something is found .
 McCord would stay in jail and keep an eye on the others, Haldeman said . In the meantime, he said, McCord will keep a watchful eye on others .
 Later that afternoon I called Ron Ziegler into my office and asked him what he thought I should say about the bugging incident . "I asked him to tell me what he had to say," he said .
 Mr O’Brien has said that the people who bugged his headquarters had a direct link to the White House .
 Mr Ziegler and also Mr Mitchell, speaking for the campaign committee, have responded to questions on this in great detail . Mr Mitchell's campaign committee has also responded to the questions .
 "They have stated my position and have also stated the facts accurately," he said . "I have stated that they have stated their position," he added .
 This kind of activity has no place whatever in our electoral process or in our governmental process," says Ziegler . Zieglers said. "This sort of activity ... has no ... place whatever" in the electoral process, he said .
 The White House has had no involvement whatever in this particular incident, says Mr Ziegler . The incident occurred in the wake of Hurricane Katrina .
 "I will not comment on those matters, particularly since possible criminal charges are involved," says President Obama .
 Jerry Ford and Hale Boggs were leaving on a trip to the People’s Republic of China in June 1972 . Bob Greene recalls the trip to China in 1972 .
 After breakfast I went to the Oval Office and Alex Butterfield, one of Haldeman’s assistants, brought in several routine papers and documents . After breakfast, Butterfield said: “After breakfast we went to see several routine documents and documents.
 Haldeman came in as he did every morning, unhurried, ready to begin the day . Then he came back to his job as a secretary of state in Washington .
 Kissinger's return from China that afternoon is scheduled for the next day . Kissinger and Rogers are scheduled to meet with Rogers . Kissinger is returning from China on Thursday .
 The FBI, he says, is not under control because Acting Director Pat Gray did not know how to control it . The investigation was leading into some productive areas, he said .
 The FBI was apparently going to be able to trace the money after all . In particular, the money was going to go to the FBI .
 As I understood it, unless we could find some way to limit the investigation, the trail would lead directly to the CRP, and our political containment would go by the boards . The board of directors is supposed to be responsible for the investigation .
 Mitchell and John Dean came up with an idea on how to deal with this problem . Haldeman said Mitchell and Dean had come up with a solution to the problem .
 Dean succeeded Ehrlichman as White House Counsel in 1970 . Dean was a bright young man who had worked at the Justice Department until 1970, when he succeeded .
 Dean had the responsibility for keeping track of and attending to any legal problems affecting the President or the White House . In this capacity Dean kept track of any legal issues affecting the president or White House.
 General Vernon Walters, the Deputy Director of the CIA, was to call Pat Gray and tell him to “stay the hell out of this... business here.” As Haldeman explained it, General Walters was to tell Gray to stay out of it .
 FBI and CIA had a longstanding agreement not to interfere in each other’s secret operations . The FBI and the CIA had not interfered with each other's secret operations before .
 Pat Gray wanted to limit the investigation but simply didn’t have a basis on which to do so, this would give him his basis . Pat Gray said that Pat Gray . He said that he wanted to . limit the . investigation but . simply didn't have a . basis on
 FBI agents on the case had already come to the conclusion that the CIA was involved in some way . Haldeman said that this would work well because the FBI agents had already concluded that the agency was involved .
 The contributors would have to say they had been approached by the Cubans, CNN.com's John Sutter says . They would then say they did not cooperate with the investigation, he says . Sutter: "I asked what the contributors would say if they didn't cooperate, they
 All it would take to set the plan in motion would be an instruction from the White House . Haldeman said it was if they would go along; but that would mean relying on more and more people all the time .
 CIA Director Richard Helms was protected from a lot of things, says Haldeman . Helms had been protected by the CIA from many things, he says . He says the CIA has been protected from the public by the way he handled it .
 Helms had rarely approached me personally for any kind of assistance or intervention, but I remembered the visible concern on his face less than a year earlier over the possible publication of a book by two disaffected CIA agents . Helms was rarely approached personally for assistance .
 I mentioned Hunt; he had been involved in a lot of earlier CIA operations, including the Bay of Pigs . Hunt was involved in many of the CIA's most successful operations . Hunt had been a CIA operative in the 1960s and '70s .
 I said I was sure that he could not have known how it was going to be handled—that had to have been Liddy . Liddy was sure he could have known that he would have handled the situation .
 Haldeman speculated that the pressure on Liddy to get intelligence might have come from Mitchell . Mitchell may have been behind Liddy's decision to buy intelligence from Liddy .
 Haldeman reassured me that the FBI, after interviewing Colson, had concluded that the White House had had no role in Watergate . They were convinced it was a CIA operation, he says . The FBI was convinced Watergate was an CIA operation .
 I said that I was not going to get involved in their analysis, but I said I would not get involved . "I said that he was not sure of their analysis," he said of the analysis . "It was not clear whether they were going to be wrong," he added .
 “Good deal. Good deal,” I said as we brought our discussion of the subject to a close . “I’m not sure what I’ve done,’ I said .
 President Obama spoke to the British press conference . He spoke about the resignation of the Chief of Protocol, the devaluation of the British pound, and busing .
 Howard Hunt clearly provided the best justification for approaching Helms . Howard Hunt was not the only person who approached Helms, but he was the right man to approach .
 Hunt's CIA background would give Helms and Walters a plausible reason for going to the FBI . Hunt’s involvement in the planning of the Bay of Pigs would add incentive to the investigation .
 Ehrlichman asked Helms for the CIA's files on the Bay of Pigs, and the Diem assassination .
 Even after I had personally requested that he do so, the Bay of Pigs report he turned over to us was not complete . The report was not completed, and the report he handed over was incomplete .
 Howard Hunt would give us a chance to turn Helms’s extreme sensitivity about the Bay of Pigs to good advantage, says Howard Hunt . Hunt would be a good asset for the CIA, Hunt says .
 Howard Hunt would provide a good way of suggesting that they do so . But, in any case, it would be good to suggest that they should .
 CIA wanted to deflect FBI from Hunt's political activities for Colson . Hunt was the only White House vulnerability involving Watergate that I was worried about exposing, not the break-in .
 I did not want him to strong-arm Helms and Walters, nor did he lie and say there was no involvement . "I didn't want him strong-armed Helms or Walters," she says .
 "I wanted him to set out the situation in such a way that Helms and Walters would take the initiative and go to the FBI on their own," she says . She says she hopes Helms, Walters and Walters will go to FBI .
 "I told Haldeman to say that I believed this thing would open up the whole Bay of Pigs matter," he says . "For the sake of the country they should go no further into this case," he adds .
 After this half-hour meeting with Haldeman I held a ninety-minute session on the economy and then conducted several brief ceremonial meetings . After this meeting, I met with President Obama for the first time in six months .
 I said that he should level with Helms and Walters and tell them that we knew Hunt had been involved in Watergate . "I wanted him to understand that I was not interested in concealing Hunt’s involvement in Watergate," he said .
 The whole thing might reopen the Bay of Pigs controversy, and that would be bad for the CIA, for the country, and for American foreign policy . But then he should point out that the whole Cuban involvement in Watergate would make the CIA look bad .
 "I also did not want Helms and Walters to get the idea that our concern was political," she says . "I didn't want people to think it was political. I also did want them to think that it was a matter of concern," she adds .
 Haldeman said he did not want to misrepresent to them that our concern was not political . However, he also did want to make it clear that it was not a political issue .
 When Haldeman came back from the meeting with Helms and Walters that afternoon, he said that he had not mentioned Hunt at the outset .
 He had raised the possibility that the FBI was exploring leads that would be harmful to the CIA and to the government . He said he was simply raising the possibility .
 Helms had volunteered the information that he had already received a call from Pat Gray expressing fear that the FBI investigation had run into a CIA operation . Helms said he had in fact already received the information from Gray .
 Helms said he had told Gray that there was nothing that the CIA knew of at that point . Gray had asserted that that was what it looked like to him, Helms says . Helms: "There was no CIA knowledge of what happened"
 Haldeman said he had gone on to point out that this matter would track back to the Bay of Pigs and to people who had no involvement in the Watergate matter except by contacts or connections .
 Haldeman said Helms got the picture and said he would be happy to be helpful but would like to know the reason . Helms said he was happy to help but wanted to know why . At this point, Haldman said that Helms agreed to help .
 Haldeman said he made it clear to Helms that he was not going to get specifics but rather generalities . He said he told Helms he would not get specifics from Helms . Helms has been charged with a federal crime charge .
 Walters will go to see Gray and take care of the matter . It had been left that Walters would go to meet Gray . Walters was left to take the matter to Gray .
 "As far as I was concerned, this was the end of our worries about Watergate," says Sen. Richard Nixon . Nixon's White House was embroiled in Watergate scandal in 1972 .
 Watergate break-in broke out in June, but nothing was happening to settle the case and remove it from the public eye . Bob Greene says he was annoyed that nothing seemed to be happening to remove the case from public eye in June .
 Until that was done the media and the Democrats would continue to batter us with it. Until that is done, the media would be relentless in its attacks on President Obama .
 On June 26 I asked Haldeman if there was any way to get the people involved to plead guilty so that the White House could forget about the case and not have it hanging over us . On June 25, Haldman asked if anyone involved in the case could plead guilty .
 He told me that John Dean, John Mitchell, and others were being watched by John Dean and John Mitchell . He said John Dean was watching the event .
 Haldeman said guilty pleas would have to await the indictments . Indictments are being delayed because the FBI keeps investigating and uncovering new things .
 Later in the day Haldeman said that one of the problems was that the CRP had used the men involved in the Watergate bugging on other standard intelligence and political projects .
 "Otherwise, we could cut them loose and sink them without a trace," he said . Otherwise, he said, they could sink them "without a trace" and sink themselves .
 Mitchell was still basically convinced of his innocence, despite doubts by others about the extent of his involvement in the case .
 I assumed that he had known about the campaign intelligence operations in general, but not about the bugging in particular . I assume that he knew about the . campaign intelligence . operations in . general, he said .
 Mitchell had not known specifically about the bugging, Haldeman said on June 28 . On June 28, he said that Mitchell did not know he had been bugged .
 The next day I said I said my hunch was that one of the lower-level people at the CRP had said to Mitchell that they were trying to get information . "The next day said he said he had a hunch that someone had told Mitchell that he was trying to
 Howard Hunt’s safe at the White House had been opened and among the contents turned over to the FBI were the architectural plans of the DNC offices, wiretapping equipment, and a gun . A newspaper story attributed to unidentified sources said that Howard Hunt's safe was opened .
 Ziegler immediately checked the story and found that there had been an unloaded gun . The gun had been unloaded .
 There were no such plans, and the so-called wiretap equipment was a walkie-talkie . But there were no plans to use such equipment, and there was no such equipment .
 Haldeman said that some other things in the safe had been handled at a high, discreet level in the Bureau . Some other things had been dealt with at a low level, he said .
 I asked why Hunt had a safe at the White House if, as I had been told, he had not actually worked as a consultant for several months . Hunt had been working as consultant for months, according to a source .
 At one point Haldeman said that the whole thing was so ludicrous that Dean had not discounted the possibility that we were dealing with a double agent who purposely blew the operation . Dean had said that he was not discounting the possibility of a . double agent .
 I was surprised because this story indicated that the FBI was still going after Hunt . Hunt was the subject of an FBI investigation into the death of Hunt, a former FBI agent .
 I had thought that they were going to keep away from him as a result of Haldeman’s meeting with Helms and Walters . I had hoped that they would be keeping him away from the media .
 Haldeman said apparently Pat Gray did not know how to follow through . Gray was charged with a felony charge of theft of property .
 The U.S. Attorney’s office at the Justice Department was pushing hard, making it difficult for them to limit the investigation . The United States Attorney's office is pushing hard for the investigation.
 I said that Walters should go see Justice Department officials, too . Walters should also go to the Justice Department, too, too. Walters should visit Walters' home .
 The story about Hunt’s safe raised my concern that Colson might have had something to do with Hunt on the bugging project . Hunt's safe was found in the safe .
 Haldeman said Colson had told the FBI "the straight truth" Colson said he had worked with Hunt only on matters unrelated to the bugging . But he said that Colson worked only on unrelated matters .
 Liddy was fired from the CRP after he refused to talk to the FBI investigators . Haldeman had informed me the day before that Liddy had been fired . Liddy understood that this would happen and agreed to it .
 Haldeman asked whether Mitchell knew in advance of Liddy’s bugging plans . Haldman: Mitchell knew about Liddy's bugging plan .
 Haldeman said he did not think Mitchell had known specifically but that Liddy had worked on general intelligence and counterintelligence activity for Mitchell . Liddy worked for Mitchell in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Gordon Liddy once worked at the White House on narcotics problems for Bud Krogh on Ehrlichman’s Domestic Council . Then Haldeman told me that Liddy had once worked for Krogh . Liddy worked on narcotics issues with Krogh, who was on E
 "I said that these were perfectly legitimate projects, and we went on to other things," he said . "These were completely legitimate projects," he added .
 Later in the day Haldeman told me about the latest ideas for dealing with the Watergate matter . Later that day, he told me that the Watergate scandal was still a mystery .
 He would explain that he had obtained it by cashing a check that he was supposed to have returned to the campaign contributor who wrote it .
 Liddy was supposed to have converted the check into cash in Mexico, but then used it for his own covert operation . Haldeman said that apparently Liddy had converted it into cash, exactly as he had done, in Mexico .
 Haldeman said that they had not yet worked out how to handle the issue of Hunt’s role . Hunt was the subject of a lawsuit against the government .
 I told Haldeman that I really believed that Mitchell was telling the truth— that he had not known. I told him that I believed Mitchell had not told the truth . Mitchell's story is not the first time Mitchell has been questioned .
 Haldeman agreed that he had probably ordered an information-gathering operation, not knowing that bugs were going to be planted . He said he probably ordered the information gathering operation not knowing bugs were planted .
 I expressed hope that some Cuban motive could be retained in our explanations of the origins of the break-in . I expressed my hope that . some Cuban motives could be kept in our . explanations of our explanations .
 I was particularly concerned that Colson not get dragged in, which was almost bound to happen if the investigation continued as an endless fishing expedition . I was concerned that he would not be dragged into the investigation .
 Haldeman says the problem went beyond Colson because Hunt and Liddy were tied to Krogh . All three of them tied to Ehrlichman and his aide David Young, he says .
 Haldeman said that it was the investigation itself—“the process,” he called it, that was the problem .
 "I did not pursue the question, but I repeated emphatically that in my view, it was perfectly all right," he said . "I repeated emphatically" that in his view, he said, "It was perfectly right"
 Haldeman said that whatever needs they had, we would take care of them . Earlier, he had asked about his family, and said they would be taken care .
 Haldeman: If Liddy were saddled with a very long sentence, we could wait a discreet interval and then parole or pardon him after the election . He says we could then pardon him if he gets a very short sentence and then release him .
 As the meeting was ending, I came back to the matter of Liddy’s confession and urged that we get it over with. Liddy confessed to the crime . Liddy: “I’m glad that we’ve had a good time to get it
 The Bobby Baker scandal had not hurt Johnson’s margin. But it wouldn’t cripple us in the campaign, he said . The scandal would not cripple the campaign .
 News coverage of the break-in was exaggerated, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says Colson and Colson talked again about the exaggerated news coverage given to the break in .
 In sheer exasperation, I said it would help if someone broke into our headquarters and did a lot of damage, then we could launch a counterattack, he said . "I said that would help," he said. "Then we could have a counteroffensive," he added .
 Colson agreed and pointed out that several of our campaign files actually had been missing . Colson said several of his campaign files were missing . He said the files were actually missing .
 "I re-emphasized my desire to get the break-in off our backs because of the impression it would leave, if it lingered, that the White House had ordered bugging and snooping," he said .
 Bobby Kennedy had actually done it; but we could not afford even the zmpression of having done it . I observed that Bobby Kennedy actually did it, but we couldn't afford even to even have done it. I observed .
 My extensive diary notes from June 21 to June 30 are predominantly about foreign policy, domestic issues, campaign planning, and personal and family observations .
 The major problem on Watergate is simply to clean the thing up by having whoever was responsible admit what happened . The problem is simply having whoever is responsible admit it .
 "Nobody in the White House had any knowledge or approved any such activity," White House says . White House spokesman says .
 It was in these days at the end of June and the beginning of July 1972 that I took the first steps down the road that eventually led to my presidency . The first steps were taken in June and July 1972 .
 I did nothing to discourage the various stories that were being considered to explain the break-in, he says . I approved efforts to encourage the CIA to intervene and limit the FBI investigation, he adds .
 My actions and inactions during this period would appear to many as part of a widespread and conscious cover-up. Later my actions and . inactions . during this . period would . appear to have been part of an attempt to cover up, he said . Later his actions would appear
 I was handling in a pragmatic way what I perceived as an annoying and strictly political problem. I was dealing with it in a way that I perceived it as a political problem, he said .
 "I was looking for a way to deal with Watergate that would minimize the damage to me, my friends, and my campaign," says Nixon . "I'm looking for the least advantage to my political opposition," Nixon says .
 I never doubted that that was exactly how the other side would have played it. I never doubt that that would have been exactly how it was played . I'm not surprised that that's exactly how I think it would have happened, I'm sure it was the other way .
 Watergate discussions of thirty and forty minutes interspersed among hours of deliberations, deliberations, and decision-making on the whole range of interesting, boring, important, and insignificant matters . I would have preferred to tell the story of these days as they really happened .
 Instead perspective has been sacrificed to clarity, and several complex dimensions have been reduced to a single comprehensible one . Instead perspective was sacrificed to clear perspective .
 Watergate discussions during the week after the break-in totaled no more than a small fraction of the more than seventy-five hours I spent in the office and working at home . Yet all the discussions about Watergate that took place during that week amounted to just a few hours of work .
 I have sometimes wondered whether, if we had only spent more time on the problem at the outset, we might have handled it less stupidly . I have also wondered whether we should have spent a lot more time working on the issue .
 Martha Mitchell was vivacious and pretty in a flamboyant, self-amused way . She was a self-confessed self-admitted star of her own life .
 She was flirtatious, determined to be outrageous, and bound to dominate any room she entered . She was bound for dominance, bound for domination, she said .
 When I first met her I thought that she might indeed be ‘the only fun that poor man has,” as she later described herself . When I met her, I thought she might actually be the only fun man has .
 The man was her husband, who kept a watchful eye to protect her, smiled at her antics, and never seemed to let anything ruffle his calm exterior .
 Mitchell resisted his request that he come to Washington as Attorney General . Mitchell was sure that concern about Martha was behind his reticence, he says .
 The limelight and attention surrounding his position would give her confidence and do her good, she said . She said .
 She cultivated a reputation for saying what she thought by saying exactly what it thought . She was excellent news copy, and she cultivated a . reputation for being excellent news .
 Her lively originality made her much sought after for television shows and party fund-raisers . Her originality was her originality and originality led her to fame .
 At one point, she had a phenomenally high 76 percent national recognition factor in the Gallup poll . She had a phenomenal 76 percent of the nation's approval rating .
 Her constituency consisted of those who actually liked her opinions, those who liked the fact that she spoke out, and those who enjoyed the fact she must be causing embarrassment to Mitchell and me . She said: "Her constituency consisted ... of those actually like her opinions"
 "I knew she was not always in complete control of herself, and sometimes that worried me," she said . "Sometimes she was always in control of her," she later said .
 'I kept such worries to myself because I did not ever want Mitchell to feel uncomfortable with me because of her,' she said . But she said she did not want him to be uncomfortable with her .
 Martha enjoyed great popularity and success in Washington, but her troubles remained . She was frustrated and tormented by emotional problems she could neither understand nor control . Martha was tormented with emotional problems .
 As early as March 1971 Bebe Rebozo had confidentially raised with me the fact that Mitchell was having increasing difficulty with Martha Mitchell . Bebe had confidenceially raised the matter with me in March 1971 . Martha Mitchell was reportedly having increasing difficulties with Martha .
 President Nixon was trying to run a presidential campaign amidst the worries and distractions of the Watergate publicity . Now he was running for president in a presidential race .
 Billy Graham called Rose Woods to see if there was anything he could do to help . Billy Graham calls Rose Woods and asks if there is anything he can do with her .
 Mitchell would have resented it. But we did nothing because we knew that Mitchell would be resented . We did nothing. We knew that he resented, but we did not. Mitchell would've resented that .
 He would say that it was his problem, and he must deal with it himself . He would have said that it is his problem .
 I felt that some members of the press deliberately exploited Martha Mitchell during this period . Martha Mitchell felt she was being exploited by the press during her time at the White House .
 Her wild claims that she had a manual containing procedures for the Watergate break-in and that she herself knew all the details were simply ploys to get attention . Months later it would become clear to all that her wild claims were simply a publicity stunt .
 Even at the time it was obvious to those who came into contact with her that she had very serious emotional problems . She had a history of 'emotional problems' and 'very serious problems'
 Many reporters encouraged her to further excesses, primarily, I felt, because they thought that by doing so they were tightening the screws on Mitchell, Mitchell . Nonetheless, she said, "Many reporters encouraged" her to continue her excesses . She said: "By doing so, they
 By the end of June I was reluctantly beginning to think that Mitchell would have to leave the campaign . I was starting to think he would be forced to quit the campaign.
 I believed that I owed my election as President in 1968 largely to his strength as a counselor and his skill as a manager . He believed that he owed his election as . President in . 1968 to President in '68 largely to . his strength .
 I had referred to him as one of the few indispensable men, and that was how I felt about him . I had called him 'the indispensable man', he said . He said: 'That's how I feel about him'
 "The thought of his having to resign under pressure amid a barrage of controversy and negative publicity was very hard for me to accept," she said .
 Watergate publicity and having to take care of Martha would inevitably distract him too much from important campaign tasks . But the combination of having to fend off Watergate publicity .
 I had no illusions that Mitchell’s departure would put an end to our Watergate problems . I was not optimistic Mitchell would end Watergate problems, he says .
 On June 26, Haldeman said the only way to put an end to Watergate would be to hang the blame directly on Mitchell . He ventured that the Watergate scandal would be solved by hanging the blame on Mitchell himself .
 Even as I had begun to think that Mitchell would have to resign, Mitchell was coming to the same conclusion himself, Mitchell himself . Mitchell was resigning himself himself .
 Mitchell saw that there was no other choice, and in typical Mitchell style, he came to us with a solution, he said . In personal terms, he saw that . He saw that, in typical style, instead of bringing us a . problem to solve, Mitchell came up with a
 Martha’s condition is very serious, Haldeman says . Martha's condition has been described as very serious by her family and friends .
 She could not cope with the criticism he was getting on Watergate, and he was afraid she would harm herself . He feared she would kill herself if he was criticized for his comments .
 Haldeman said Martha was aware of the real Watergate problem . Martha was not aware of Watergate, he said no. Later, when asked if Martha knew of Watergate problem, he denied it .
 Mitchell had commented, however, that Martha was smart, and she recognized that her public complaints would give him a reason to ease out of the front line of the controversy by resigning . Mitchell said she was smart .
 He looked worn out and his hand shook so much that he had to put his soup spoon down after the first taste . He looked tired out and shook so badly that he put his spoon down .
 Former Minnesota Congressman Clark MacGregor agreed to take over the campaign . Former Minnesota congressman says he would take over if Hillary Clinton wins .
 "He had a rare ability to charge people up, and he would do an effective job of reorganization," he says . "He would do a very effective job" of reorganizing, he says.
 Fred Malek has been sent to shake things up at the White House . Malek will be the first person to be brought in to replace Tom Cruise . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Mitchell’s resignation was announced on July 1 . MacGregotr was appointed to replace Mitchell . Mitchell resigned as a result of Mitchell's resignation .
 Several weeks later on two different occasions I dictated about John Mitchell and the Watergate break-in. Several weeks after, I dictated to the White House about Mitchell's role in Watergate .
 Diary Here I think we have had a slip-up due to the fact that Mitchell was so obsessed with the problems he had with Martha . Mitchell was obsessed with his problems with Martha, according to Diary Here .
 The organization at 1701 [Pennsylvania Avenue, the CRP headquarters] honed down, or whether it was watching over things like this . "We just didn’t have the discipline we should have had," CRP says .
 I am continually amazed whenever I am with John Mitchell about his vast knowledge of people over the country and also in all kinds of fields . I'm continually amazed by John Mitchell's vast knowledge, he says . John Mitchell: "He is a great man who has a lot of respect for
 Mitchell has a reputation for knowing more about more political figures in both parties than perhaps any man in the United States . Mitchell has particular knowledge about all kinds of fishing, how the tides operate in various parts of the East Coast .
 Without Martha, I am sure that Watergate thing would never have happened. Martha, Martha, is sure that the Watergate thing . Martha was Martha's partner in Watergate scandal . Martha is Martha's daughter, a former White House staffer .
 When I arrived in California on July 1 for an eighteen-day stay, I faced an unusually busy period . When I landed in California, I was greeted by a flurry of calls from the media .
 Al Haig and Sir Robert Thompson returned from Vietnam with a firsthand assessment of the situation there . Kissinger and Kissinger were working on the strategy for his upcoming meeting with the North Vietnamese, the first since the bombing .
 There was also a great deal of campaign planning to be done following Mitchell’s departure .
 On July 6 I had a long meeting with MacGregor and Malek to discuss campaign organization and management . "On July 6, we met for a long time to discuss managing our campaign," he says .
 Today we got some of the disturbing news with regard to the developments in the Watergate case . Almost by accident, almost by accident .
 Two hijackers killed two hijackers and unfortunately a passenger as well, on Pacific Southwest Airlines . When I saw the account in the Times of the FBI’s action on the hijacking case, I called the new Director and told him to congratulate the men .
 He said that he and Walters both felt that some people either at the White House or at the committee were trying to cover up things which would be a mortal blow to me . He and Walters said they felt some people at the House or Senate committee were .
 When Ehrlichman came in he was astounded to find out that I had had this conversation with him, he said . "He came in to be astounded that he had had such a conversation with me," he said.
 He said the unraveling of the case would not be particularly embarrassing as far as this instant matter was concerned . He said it would involve activities which were perfectly legitimate but which would be hard to explain in investigating the Ellsberg case, the Bay of Pigs, and other matters where we
 Gray wanted help from Walters in controlling an investigation that he agreed was getting out of hand . Haldeman: Gray wanted Walters' help controlling the investigation . Gray agreed that the investigation was out of control .
 Gray wanted to limit the investigation but was under pressure from the U.S. Attorney’s office, Haldeman said . Gray wanted the investigation to be limited, but the United States Attorney's office pressured him, he said .
 Gray was upset about what he saw as attempts on the part of the White House to frustrate the FBI’s inquiry . But now Gray was telling me, and in the most vivid language, that he was upset .
 Diary Diary Diary: 'The best thing to do is to have the investigation pursued to its normal conclusion'
 In any event, we have to live with this one and hope to bring it to a conclusion without rubbing off on the presidency before the election .
 It is one of those cases where subordinates in a campaign, with the very best of motives, go off on some kick which inevitably embarrasses the top man .
 In this instance, however, how we handle it may make the difference as to how we come out . How we handle the situation may make a difference .
 "We must do nothing to indicate to Pat Gray or to the CIA that the White House is trying to suppress the investigation," White House aide says .
 "We must cooperate with the investigation all the way along the line. On the other hand, we must cooperate," he says .
 I told Ehrlichman to be sure that both Helms at the CIA and Gray at the FBI knew that I wanted a full investigation and that we were not attempting to suppress anything . I told him to make sure that Helms, Helms and Gray knew that he wanted a
 I said we should also be sure to level with Clark MacGregor so he did not make statements he would have to retract later . I said that we should be careful to level up with Clark . Clark said he would also be careful not to make comments he would later retract . Clark
 The first mention of Jeb Magruder’s possible involvement in the Watergate break-in came while I was in California, when Ehrlichman told me he was going to be questioned in the investigation . “The first mention I recall of Jeb's possible involvement came while
 Magruder had been brought into the White House by Haldeman in 1969 and was considered one of his protégés . It would be a personal blow to the former president if he were drawn into the Watergate web .
 I dictated in my diary that night, “Haldeman is naturally very ‘tender,’ as Ehrlichman pointed out, with regard to Magruder.” Haldeman was “tender’s naturally very tender,”
 Magruder had left the White House staff in May 1971 to help set up the CRP . He was assigned to handle the managerial details for Mitchell .
 Magruder had been Liddy’s immediate superior and had been responsible for authorizing money for him . Liddy was Liddy's immediate superior at the time of his death .
 Ehrlichman thought Magruder might have to take the Fifth Amendment . He thought that even if prosecutors could not establish any direct involvement in the planning and execution of the bugging, his relationship to Liddy was such that they might be able to draw him in as part of
 Ehrlichman and I went for a walk on the beach on Saturday afternoon, July 8 . On July 8, the author and his friend went to the beach .
 It was a beautiful California day, and we could see the surfers bobbing on their boards in the water far down the coast . It was the perfect day for surfers .
 Diary tells John Ehrlichman whether Magruder will be better off in event he anticipates what will happen and voluntarily indicates what his role was and takes responsibility .
 Ehrlichman suggested that Gray and Walters might have failed to cooperate in limiting the FBI investigation because they felt that someone on the White House staff—perhaps Colson—was responsible for Watergate and was trying to put me on the spot to protect himself .
 Ehrlichman: Gray and Walters probably thought they were serving my interests by insisting on a wide-ranging investigation . Not knowing that in fact there was no White House involvement, he said, Ehrichman said .
 Watergate was a political shenanigan, and Magruder, Hunt, Liddy, and the five defendants were apparently first offenders . Liddy: Watergate was political. Watergate was not a political. It was a crime .
 NBC producer caught illegally bugging the Democrats had been let off with a light fine and a suspended sentence . Three years earlier the NBC television producer had been caught bugging Democrats . The NBC producer was let off by a lighter fine and suspended sentence in 2010 .
 The political climate that was being built up around Watergate made it unlikely that there would be such even-handed treatment for anyone involved in the DNC bugging . The political atmosphere that was built around Watergate was unlikely to be such an exception .
 Ehrlichman and I agreed that there should be no commitments of any kind on clemency at this time, he says .
 In a conversation with Ehrlichman I suggested that if felonies were committed by demonstrators in this campaign, as they had been in the past, and the participants were booked and charged, I might grant a general political pardon after the election that would encompass both Watergate bugging and the
 This would not, however, include felonies that involved the use of violence, bombing, or physical injury . This would be the first felony to be convicted of using violence or injury in a crime .
 "I did not consider those to be in the same minor league with Watergate bugging," he says . "I didn't think those were in the similar minor league" with Watergate .
 Harry Truman became President after dozens of his fellow Democratic workers in the Kansas City Pendergast machine were convicted of vote fraud in the 1936 elections . Harry Truman was elected President of the United States .
 By the end of his first year in the White House, he had pardoned 15 people and restored them to full participation in future political activity .
 "My discussions with Ehrlichman were in no sense an authorization or a promise of clemency or pardons," she says . "I was not in a position to grant pardons. I was in a political position," she adds .
 Everyone agrees that this incident was so clumsily handled that it probably doesn’t deserve the criminal penalty that such incidents would ordinarily bring . But in any event, with the political implications involved, we have to be prepared to deal with it firmly before the election .
 After the election, of course, it will be very difficult to handle it in any other way than an even-handed way . "I hope that such an opportunity presents itself," he says .
 The 1972 Democratic convention in Miami was a political shambles . The 1972 convention was held in Miami, Florida, for the first time .
 After Humphrey’s defeat in 1968, the party machinery had been taken over by radical reformers . Reformers sought to cleanse it of the “old politics” of the traditional organizations and power blocs .
 1972 convention was unlike anything that had been seen before . As a result the 1972 convention in New York City was unlike any other convention .
 George McGovern had been one of the principal sponsors of the delegate reforms . McGovern's nomination for President on July 12 was an indication of how well they had succeeded .
 Eagleton was young, attractive, Catholic, Catholic and a favorite with organized labor . Eagleton died at the age of 92 in June 2013 .
 John Connally invited to San Clemente on the last night of the Democratic convention . Connally was a national hero for the Texas governor .
 After dinner we settled into the living room to watch the acceptance speeches . After dinner, we settled down to watch them .
 Then thirty-nine other vice presidential candidates were nominated, including Mao Tse-tung and Martha Mitchell . The candidates were then nominated for national office in China .
 The scene had the air of a college skit that had gotten carried away with itself and didn’t know how to stop . The scene was reminiscent of a school skit .
 At 2:48 A.M. in Miami, as some wit observed —McGovern himself appeared . Pat and I continued to watch as first Teddy Kennedy took the microphone, then Hubert Humphrey .
 He said that he wanted to be of assistance to us in foreign policy . He seemed to be disappointed at what happened at the convention, not just from a personal standpoint, but generally .
 He has a magnetic smile, a lot of style, and a brilliantly written speech . "He has a magnetism, a great smile and a great style," he says .
 "As they had done on every other convention night in every other campaign, my family gave me their assessments of the opposition," says Hillary Clinton . "They had done . As they had . done . Every other night, they had given me their assessment of the . opposition," she says
 Pat thought McGovern’s best assets were a rather dignified bearing and an apparent sincerity . Pat said McGovern's best asset was his 'dignified bearing'
 Julie had pneumonia and had not been able to stay up, but she thought Eagleton was too glib . Julie had been suffering from pneumonia and was unable to keep up .
 Hubert Humphrey's face as he watched McGovern’s acceptance speech, he said . McGovern won the presidency in 1972 .
 "I knew that he would never make it. However close he might come to getting the nomination if he tried again in 1976, I knew that . However, he would not make it," he said .
 Time had now passed him by—just as it would have passed me by if I had lost to him in 1968 . Time has now passed by, and I would have lost it to him if I'd lost in 1968.
 The next day I sat in my study near the windows facing the ocean and wrote a letter to him . "I sat there and wrote him a letter," she says of her husband .
 "I thought it was critically important to the future of the country that his radical ideas not prevail in November," he said .
 I feared he would now ease off his radical positions, something, I observed, a far-right candidate would never do . I also feared that he would ease off some of his radical stances .
 The extremists on the right of the Goldwater type would rather lose fighting for principle than winning by compromising principle .
 The extremists on the left, on the other hand, have usually shown that when the chips are down they will compromise principle in order to get power . The extremists are usually willing to compromise principle and compromise with the left .
 The communists are willing to compromise principle until they get into power and then crush out opposition . This is why the communists usually beat the right-wingers, because they are always fighting for principle . The left-wing is always trying to fight for principle, and the communists always win,
 They will compromise on issues in order to get power, recognizing that when they get power they can do what they want on the issues . "They will compromise" on issues, he says .
 They don't believe as deeply in principle as they pretend, and not nearly as deeply as do the radicals on the right . They don’t believe as much in principle, but not as much as do those radicals .
 In the first three days following his nomination George McGovern irretrievably lost the support of his own party . McGovern was nominated for the presidency in 1972 .
 Indications of his unreliability had appeared during the convention, when he had ignored or reneged on embarrassing or inconvenient commitments . The president has been accused of being unreliable in the past .
 For example, he had said that he would support a feminist challenge to the South Carolina delegation, but backed out when the challenge was made .
 Both before and after the nomination he asked Larry O’Brien to remain as Democratic National Chairman, and then backed down when his own staff raised objections . He backed down after his staff objected to the decision .
 He introduced Pierre Salinger to a public meeting as his personal candidate for vice-chairman of the DNC . He then abandoned him when opposition arose . He introduced Salinger as a candidate for Vice-Chairman, but abandoned him .
 In March 1973 the new DNC Chairman, Robert Strauss, told Haldeman after the Gridiron Dinner, “You fellows just don’t know McGovern—you think he’s an evil man.” The DNC Chairman said in March 1973 that McGovern was
 In San Clemente the reaction to McGovern’s nomination and conduct was little short of exuberant . McGovern was nominated for president of the U.S. House of Representatives in California .
 He had consciously abandoned conservative and moderate Democrats . Ethnic groups, traditionally a Democratic blue chip, could find in him nothing of patriotism and pride .
 With defections we had a chance not just to win the election but to create the New Majority we had only dreamed of in 1970 . With these defections, we had hoped to create a New Majority in 1970s, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 There were rumors that George Wallace was disgusted with the turn of events in Miami . Wallace was once again considering making a bid for the presidency as the nominee of a third party .
 Harry Dent, a former Republican State Chairman of South Carolina, served as a political aide on the White House staff . Dent and several other White House political contacts were on the phone to Montgomery daily, keeping abreast of the situation .
 Connally called me the next day to report that Wallace would announce that he was definitely not going to run for President on a third-party ticket . Wallace would not run for a third party ticket, he said .
 I called Wallace Wallace and told him I knew it had been a terribly hard decision for him to make. I called him to tell him he had been terribly hard to make, he said . Wallace: "I know it's been a very hard decision to make"
 I told him that Connally was my closest political adviser, and if there was anything he wanted to discuss with regard to political matters, Connally would be available to him at any time, he said .
 I also told him that Haig would give him foreign policy briefings, because I knew Wallace supported me on national defense issues . Haig also told Wallace that he would get briefings from Haig on foreign policy issues .
 Haldeman will have Sunrise at Campobello taken to Wallace so he can see it . Sunrise will be taken to campobello to be seen by Wallace .
 I am also going to look into the possibility of a salt-water swimming pool for him, since I told him this would enable him to swim with his feet afloat . This would greatly reduce the effort he would have to make swimming only with his arms .
 On July 17, the executive board of the teamsters’ union voted 16 to 1 to endorse me for reelection . "I received word that after a three-hour meeting, I received word ... that after three hours of deliberating, I was endorsed," he says .
 "I invited their president, Frank Fitzsimmons, and his board to come to San Clemente. I invited them to come," he said . "I invite their president and their board ... to come and join us," he added .
 Diary Diary: Meeting could have been one of the most important watershed meetings in American politics in this century . Diary diary of a meeting at the centre of American politics .
 I told them that when I had a tough decision to make sometimes Cabinet, members of the administration, most of the media, and even most businessmen were reluctant to stand with me . I found that representatives of labor were really tough and strong in the crunch when the interests of the country were
 This, of course, is the gospel truth, and they all knew that I meant it very sincerely when I said it. This is the Gospel truth, I said . This is a very sincerely .
 I did not consider that Democrats this year would be deserting their party, because of the issues, particularly of national defense and foreign policy, transcended party lines, he says . I also pointed out that as far as they were concerned that most of them were registered Democrats .
 I asked him what he thought George Meany’s reaction would be to the teamsters’ decision to endorse me, he said . Meany said Meany's reaction to the endorsement would be a surprise surprise .
 On July 19, my first full day back in Washington, I spent most of the morning going over domestic and legislative items . The president's first day in Washington was July 19 .
 Dean said Dean was meeting with Mitchell that very morning to discuss it . Dean said Mitchell and Dean were meeting to discuss the matter . Mitchell said Dean and Dean had a meeting on the morning of the meeting .
 He said he did not think that Magruder's defense that had been worked up for him was going to work . He said that he didn't think that the defense he had been working up for his client would work . The jury was expected to reach a verdict of guilty verdict of
 Ehrlichman said that Magruder would just have to take the lumps whatever they were . He said he would have to . take the responsibility for the loss of his life .
 Ehrlichman said he did not think a story could be contrived that indicated that Magruder had not known what was going on . He said he didn't think it could be a contrived story that indicated he knew what was happening .
 "I said I would like to see the thing worked out, but I knew that the two worst actions in this kind of situation were to lie and to cover up," says former president . "I knew that . I said that I would want to see it worked out. But I
 If you covered up you would inevitably get caught, and if you lied you would be guilty of perjury . If you lied, you would have to answer questions about the truth, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It was a tragic thing for Magruder, I said, and I hated to see it happen, but that was the way it was. It was tragic, he said, but it was that it was .
 Dean Ehrlichman: We would have a better feel for everything after Dean had talked with Mitchell . That would do it, he agreed, but we would have to wait for Mitchell to talk with him . That's what he says: "We have a good idea of what we
 Hunt and Liddy were about to be drawn into the grand jury proceedings through the testimony of a lawyer Hunt had contacted on the night of the break-in and asked to represent the arrested men . He told me that Hunt and . Liddy are about to . be drawn . into the
 Still thinking about Magruder, he asked if he could invoke the Fifth Amendment . Still thinking, he asks if he can invoke the right to remain silent .
 Ehrlichman did not think so and speculated that if he did he would still be convicted by someone else’s testimony . He speculated that even if he had been convicted, someone else would testify .
 He felt that Magruder should simply go in and say that it was a bad thing, but that he had got carried away and now he felt terrible about it . He felt he should simply say that he was sorry for what he did .
 I wondered if he could not accept only the ultimate responsibility by saying that he had simply given an instruction to get all the information possible but had not expected it to be carried out this way . He said: "I wondered if I could not say that I had given the instruction but had
 I said I thought it would be unfortunate if he should say that he had actually ordered wiretapping. I said he should not have said he had ordered wiretap. I thought he should be careful not to say he had wiretapped .
 Ehrlichman agreed that it should be kept at the Liddy level if possible . He repeated that he had too little information at that point to say more .
 "I said that the problem was a tough one, but the important thing was just to get it over and done with. I said that it was just getting it over with. The important thing is just to have it over, done with," he said .
 Ehrlichman said he had told Dean that things must move as quickly as possible . Dean said he told him that things had to move quickly as quickly possible .
 He said that both of them had been talking with Dean more or less together right along . He said both of the two men were talking right along right along.
 Ehrlichman said Magruder was saying that he had wanted to get a lot of information for a number of different reasons . Magruders said he had given Liddy the responsibility for getting the information, Ehrichman said .
 Ehrlichman: Once Magruder started talking, no one could tell what the scope of the examination might be and where it might end up . He says the problem was that once he started talking it would be impossible to tell where the investigation might go .
 I supposed the main question was whether it would stop with Magruder or if it would go on to Mitchell or Haldeman . I said that I supposed . I supposed that I . supposed the . main question is whether it . would continue to be the case for Mitchell and H
 Ehrlichman agreed and said that he and Haldeman had raised that question with Dean Dean . Dean said he and Dean had raised the question with Ehrichman . Dean: "I'm not sure what I think of the future of the world"
 Dean was unsure whether Magruder was tough and stable enough to hold the line if pressed by interrogators . Dean unsure whether he would be tough enough to be able to withstand interrogation .
 Ehrlichman said transcripts had been made of the tapped DNC calls . He had a feeling that Mitchell might have seen them, he said .
 Ehrlichman said he could not find anyone in the White House who ever saw them or who ever knew about Watergate bugging operation . He said he found no White House officials who knew about the bugging .
 Haldeman and Dean had a meeting with Mitchell, Magruder, and some others on an earlier and different intelligence plan that had been proposed but had been disapproved .
 As a result of their decision in that earlier meeting Haldeman and Dean had a right to feel that nothing like the Watergate operation was going on . As a . result of that meeting, they had a . right to . feel that . nothing like Watergate . operation was . going on
 Watergate bugging operation went ahead without there ever having been another meeting involving White House people, Ehrlichman said . After this earlier plan had been disapproved, others in the CRP went ahead with the operation .
 Ehrlichman said it was still a tough question whether Magruder would assume responsibility and say Mitchell had not known anything . He said it's still a big question whether Mitchell would take responsibility .
 He observed that sometimes tough questioning can lead a man into saying things he does not intend to say . He said sometimes tough questions can lead to a man saying things they don't intend to .
 I thought surely Magruder would be able to hold up when so much stood or fell on whether Mitchell became implicated . Mitchell's lawyers say he is not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Ehrlichman said that a good lawyer could keep at him until he broke him down . But a good attorney could break him down, he said . He said a lawyer could also break him up .
 He said if we had our way, it would be to let Liddy and Hunt go and to hold it there . He said that if we wanted to let them go, we would be holding them there .
 Magruder could rationalize a story that would not lead to his conviction, he says . But if he was going to be involved through third-party testimony, he said, he would rationalize the story .
 I tried to estimate the public relations effect on the charges of a “cover-up” if the five men arrested at the Watergate and Hunt and Liddy were actually convicted . I thought it would be a huge public relations disaster if the men were convicted of covering up .
 I said that even though Hunt had worked at the White House, I was not really bothered by the negative publicity that would ensue from his conviction . Hunt was convicted of sexual assault on a White House staffer .
 Ehrlichman observed that Liddy had also worked in the White House, and there would be some of that in the news stories as well . Liddy was also a White House staffer, Ehrichman said .
 Ehrlichman said he was still hopeful that Dean and Mitchell would conclude that what he called the “Magruder scenario” would work . He said he still hopes that Mitchell and Dean would work together .
 But, he said, there was no sense in starting it if it was going to be disproved . That would only be doubly damaging, he added .
 Then we would have both a cover-up and a conviction, which is what had happened to Truman in the Hiss case . The case would have been a case for Truman, who was convicted of the crime .
 Ehrlichman said that Dean had been admonished not to contrive a story that might not succeed . Dean was admonished to not contrive an attempt to get a story to succeed .
 "I was still worried about Magruder when I saw Colson later that afternoon," he said . "It was still a mystery to me," he added . "I'm worried about my son," he wrote .
 "I told him, as I had Ehrlichman, that we simply had to get the thing done and cut our losses," he says . "We simply had a job to get it done," he adds .
 Howard Hunt was about to go before a grand jury, Colson says . Colson: "Howard Hunt is a man who has a reputation for his actions in Washington, D.C. and beyond."
 He replied that in the first place he did not think that Hunt would feel he had done anything wrong .
 Hunt, he said, was such an ideologue and committed to the country that he would take the heat rather than talk . Hunt was such a committed ideologue that, if he had a good lawyer and were properly coached, he would have taken the heat, not talk .
 He said only place he would worry about Hunt was that he might say that he had tried to ‘psychoanalyze’ Ellsberg because the SOB was an enemy . He said that he would only worry if Hunt said he tried to "psycho analyze" Ell
 We discussed Magruder’s situation and his concern whether he would hold up under questioning . We discussed the possibility of him being questioned by police in the future .
 If it weren’t for the political notoriety the whole bugging episode would mean nothing more than a suspended sentence for those involved, as happened in cases of industrial espionage . Colson said if it weren't for political notoriety, the case would have been nothing more .
 "We agreed that it would be a terrible thing for Magruder to go through and have on his record. We agreed that he would be terrible," he said. "It would be the worst thing for him to do."
 I mentioned to Colson the idea I had discussed with Ehrlichman of a general pardon after the election covering both Democrats and Republicans who were guilty of political offenses . Colson: I mentioned the idea of granting a pardon to both Republicans and Democrats who were found guilty of a political
 Magruder is charged with assaulting a woman in a home invasion . He was charged with the crime, but prosecutors say he is innocent . The case is expected to go before a grand jury .
 He said that there would be testimony implicating Magruder and that the only thing to do now was to try to cut it off before it hit Mitchell . He said he would be trying to cut the testimony off before Mitchell was hit .
 Haldeman said Magruder said he would, but there was some question whether he could . Magruders said he'd do it, but it's not clear whether he would .
 Haldeman reported that Ehrlichman felt that we should just get it over with quickly . Haldman reported that he felt that the end of the war should be over quickly .
 Haldeman agreed that it was probably better to take whatever losses there were there . He said it was 'probably better than taking whatever loses there were'
 I said it was just a damn shame about Magruder and repeated my feeling about the possibility of an eventual pardon . I also said it's a shame about the possible pardon .
 I told Haldeman that I hoped Magruder would leave the campaign before he was indicted . He said he hoped he would leave before he had to be indicted .
 Mitchell has come out clean, says Haldeman . Mitchell is the only person to come clean, he says . Mitchell has been accused of sexual misconduct in the past .
 Magruder simply had to draw the line on anything that might involve Mitchell . Whatever the actual case, he told Haldeman, he said he had to do so .
 Grand jury apparently talking about calling Ehrlichman . Grand jury was apparently talking to call him, he told CNN .
 Dean tried to find out from the Justice Department but apparently they were not saying . Haldeman said Dean had tried to get out from Justice Department . Ehrlichman is a former CIA director .
 The next afternoon Haldeman told me that it looked as if Magruder was not going to be indicted for the Watergate break-in . The next day, he said, "Haldeman said that it was not looking as good" as it was possible he would not be
 Evidently there was a distinction that could be drawn about whether the decision was knowledgeable— and therefore indictable . Evidently a distinction could be made between the decision and the fact that it was knowledgeable .
 Magruder's line would be that he had not known of this specific action—‘“which apparently is true,” Haldeman added . Haldman said that Magruders would say he had never known of the action .
 Magruder would say that he had authorized sums of money for Liddy without knowing the uses to which they would be put . Liddy would say he was not aware of the uses of the money .
 He would admit to being guilty of stupidity but not of criminal conduct . He would say he would admit he was guilty of being stupid but not criminal conduct.
 He had been part of the campaign’s intelligence-gathering operation, but he had not been specifically aware of the Watergate break-in . He was not aware of Watergate .
 I was skeptical, as I think we all were, but I nonetheless thought that it was now up to the Justice Department to make its case against him if they could . The Justice Department has yet to charge him, but it's not clear whether it will .
 There would be advance warning if he was going to be indicted, he could leave then . If he was, he would be able to leave then, he said .
 Mitchell was of the “stonewall-it-to-hell-with-every-body” school, while Ehrlichman was of “complete-panic-cut-everything-off-and-sink-it’simmediately”
 In the late afternoon of July 25 Haldeman brought me a wire service bulletin from McGovern’s post-convention vacation headquarters in South Dakota . In the summer of 2012, McGovern was vacationing at the end of his convention .
 McGovern and Eagleton had just disclosed that on three separate occasions between 1960 and 1966 he had admitted himself to treatment of mental depression . On two separate occasions his treatment had included electroshock therapy .
 Eagleton is fully qualified to be Vice President of the United States, says McGovern . McGovern had said that Eagleton could take over the presidency on a moment’s notice . Eagleton's statement was a response to McGovern's call for Eagleton to be VP .
 The next day, McGovern said he was “1000 percent” behind Eagleton and that he had no intention of dropping him from the ticket . McGovern made the same statement the next day .
 It is my view that if Eagleton is not dropped from the ticket this weekend that they have a very serious problem in letting the thing ride along . Diary Diary: If Eagleton isn't dropped, it will be a serious problem .
 It will appear that they have a finger in the air, waiting for public opinion and the polls to tell them what to do . They will appear to be waiting for the polls and the public to tell what they want to do.
 The main test of a man is whether he has the character to make tough decisions and then to lead his associates to follow him on those decisions . The test is whether the man has the ability to make a tough decision and then lead others to follow it .
 Eagleton denied the charges and gamely defended himself . McGovern repeated that he was 1000 percent behind his running mate . Eagleton denies the charges .
 His gutsy and unassailable belief in himself won sympathy, if not real political support . His uninsistent belief won sympathy .
 He apologized for the drunk-driving charges but refused to retract them, claiming he was still checking them . He said he is still checking the charges against him .
 Anderson’s mentor, Drew Pearson, had done a similar thing to him . Anderson: "I thought back to the fund crisis in 1952 and about how Drew Pearson had done it"
 I could empathize with Eagleton’s frustration, and I admired his aplomb . Eagleton: "I don’t think I’m going to have a lot of patience" Eagleton says, "I’ve got a lot to do with
 "At one point the program took a turn that bordered, I thought, on the incredible," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I thought it was incredible," he says .
 The reporter pointed out that others on the show were not sweating that much and then commented on Eagleton’s nervous fidgeting with his hands . The reporter persisted .
 In the meantime McGovern had started to seed the ground for a reversal of his support for Eagleton . McGovern was in the process of backing Eagleton in the 1980s .
 The way the McGovern-Eagleton thing adds up now, it seems to me, is that McGovern probably will be forced to put him off the ticket because of the opposition of McGovern media and the party's professionals .
 In the event he is able to replace him with Kennedy, this will make it a whole new ball game . Kennedy will be the first player to be replaced by a new star in the sport .
 If he is unable to get Kennedy, it’s difficult to see how he could improve the ticket .
 I knew that their agony must have been like that we had suffered during the fund crisis, except that our suffering had been redeemed by a happy ending . I knew their agony was like that of us, except for our suffering .
 I remembered that Eagleton had brought his young son to the Oval Office the year before, and I wrote a letter to the boy . Eagleton's son was also brought to the White House .
 The 1972 presidential election, with its landslide result, should have been the most gratifying and fulfilling of all my campaigns, says President Nixon . Nixon .
 It was one of the most frustrating and, in many ways, the least satisfying of all . Instead it was a frustrating and frustrating experience for the U.S.
 During most of his first term I had assumed that my opponent in 1972 would be Kennedy, Muskie, or Humphrey . "I thought that Kennedy would be a candidate for the first time," he says .
 I thought I could probably beat Muskie or Humphrey, but a campaign against Teddy Kennedy would be much more difficult to predict because it would involve so many emotional elements . I thought that I could . probably beat . Muskie . Humphrey or Kennedy would probably be a tough race for
 Any one of these men would have been a formidable opponent, he says . 'I fully expected to have to fight hard for re-election,' he adds . 'For three and a half years I fully expected I would fight hard,' he said .
 Even after McGovern emerged from the primaries as the frontrunner, I still could not believe that he would actually be nominated . McGovern won't be nominated for president .
 I thought, as did many political observers, that at the last minute, the convention would turn to Kennedy . "I thought ... Kennedy would be a candidate for the Democratic nomination for the first time," she says .
 Only after McGovern was nominated did I accept the fact that I was virtually assured of re-election without having to wage much of a campaign . Only after he was nominated, I accepted the fact of McGovern's nomination, he said .
 'I would have had to fight a close-in, one-on-one battle. Against Kennedy or Muskie or Humphrey I would have fought a closein' One of the greatest moments of my life was in a close battle with Kennedy, Muskie and Humphrey .
 The less I did, the better I would do against McGovern, it was clear that the less he did, he would do, he said . McGovern was a candidate for president in 1972 .
 This was a totally unaccustomed situation for me, and it was not one in which I felt particularly comfortable or even knew instinctively what was best to do . This was the first time I had been asked to give up my job, and I was not particularly comfortable .
 Obama says he planned to spend the month and a half following the Republican convention in the White House doing his job . He says he plans to spend that time doing what he says .
 The choice between the candidates was so sharp and the issues spoke so clearly for themselves that there was no need for me to hammer them home. The candidates were so sharp that the choice between them was so clear for themselves .
 Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas, the Chairman of the Republican National Committee, and various members of the Cabinet and the administration would travel throughout the country as presidential “surrogates” Sen. Dole says .
 I arees vy Feud hirtkep— vrarolds ger Wand-orittes Vetters . From tne Mecid eot. I ames vie Feudh . I aree arees .
 I ar n a Democrat, ZX ~*wisk BOu vnus* we a wonderful WAAR ¥O take we me to wte to EOE Udivngortany PETSOB LiKe me . Altougn I ar . a Democrat. Altou
 Third, I wanted to develop the most efficient and effective campaign committee organization humanly possible . Precident very, WAY SPECA TGS, verry Eag eton . Precinct very, very, way SPECA .
 Fourth, I planned to use the last weeks of the campaign to broadcast 13 radio speeches covering my philosophy of government as well as my positions on the major campaign issues . Fourth, he planned to broadcast thirteen radio speeches .
 Obama planned to campaign in states where the presidential vote might be close, or where his presence might pull in a Republican candidate in a tight local race . He planned to emerge from the White House and campaign personally during the last two weeks before the election .
 This was a dramatic reversal of roles for one who had been the party wheelhorse in so many other national campaigns . This was the first time he had been in charge of the Labour Party in the UK .
 I knew there would be resentment on the part of some of the party workers and particularly by some Republican candidates who were hoping that my landslide could pull them in . Some Republican candidates hoped that his landslide could draw them in.
 In view of my plans for highly limited personal campaigning, I decided to try to help Republican candidates with money, he decided .
 Nearly a million dollars went from our campaign funds into various Senate and House races . Nearly a quarter of that money was spent on campaigns in the U.S. House and Senate .
 I posed for pictures and sent tape-recorded endorsements to every Republican candidate except the two running for the Senate in Mississippi and Arkansas . I also sent tape recorded endorsements to all Republican candidates except two candidates .
 The Republicans in those races had no chance against Democratic incumbents James Eastland and John McClellan, who had stood with me in every international crisis in the first term, first term . The Republicans did not have a chance against those Democrats .
 After McGovern had been nominated I knew that the most difficult thing for us about the 1972 campaign would be the tendency to relax . The most difficult part of the campaign for McGovern would be to relax, she says .
 Even if complacency did not cost us the election, it might cost us a renewed energy that comes with the completion of a campaign . Even if it didn't cost us election, we might not have renewed energy .
 The most exciting aspect of the 1972 election for me was that McGovern’s perverse treatment of the traditional Democratic power blocs that had been the basis of every Democratic presidential victory for the last forty years had made possible the creation of a New Republican Majority as an electoral force .
 "I was confident that if we could only make a first inroad, we could follow through with these New Majority groups," says Obama . "I'm confident we can follow through, and I'm not afraid to," she says .
 The American leader class has really had it in terms of their ability to lead . The U.S. leader class is having it in a tough time .
 It's really sickening to have to receive them at the White House as I often do and to hear them whine and whimper . "It’s one of the reasons why I enjoy very much more receiving labor leaders and people from middle America," he said .
 Obama and Hillary Clinton were friendly, all out, and I hope we can find a way to see that this alliance is not broken immediately after the election . They were friendly and all out .
 "I have more in common with them from a personal standpoint than does McGovern or the intellectuals generally," he says . "Frankly, I have more common with [McGoverns] than McGoverns," he adds .
 The same thing can't be said of all other groups or classes, including young, black, Mexicans, etc. Young, black and Mexicans . It can be the same thing to say of any other group or class .
 I do not believe that any administration in history has gone into a reelection campaign with a more impressive record than ours in August 1972 . President Richard Nixon was re-elected to the Senate in 1972 .
 "There was no major area of American life in which we had not made progress or proposed dramatic new alternatives," says President Obama . "There were no major areas of U.S. life that hadn't made progress," he says .
 Inflation averaged 6. percent in 1969; after only one year our New Economic Policy had cut it to 2. percent . Inflation was 6.0 percent; inflation was only 2.5 percent in 1970s .
 The GNP had increased at an annual rate of only 3. percent in the first quarter of 1969 . By the third quarter of 1972 it was rising at 6. percent, the fastest gain since 1965 .
 The stock market was moving toward the 1000-point record that it achieved in November 1972 . All during the campaign the stock market is moving toward a 1000 point record .
 Real earnings of Americans had not increased at all from 1965 to 1970; now they were moving up at an annual rate of 4 percent . Real earnings were up at 4 percent in 1970s, but now they are up at a 4 percent rate .
 Each year of the Nixon administration had set a new record in gross farm income . Each year each year had set new records for gross farm incomes .
 Average income per farm was 40 percent higher than the average from 1961 to 1968 . Farm income was higher than average income from 1961-1968 .
 We had reduced federal income taxes by 66 percent for a family of four making $5,000, and by 20 percent for $15,000 . The tax rate was 66 percent, 66 percent and 20 percent less for families making $15.000 .
 "We had proposed the first major welfare reform since the program’s inception," says President Obama . "I had proposed a major reform," says Obama .
 It was our proposal for a new national health insurance program that shared the cost between those who could afford to pay for health insurance, employers, and government . The proposal survived several socialized medicine schemes proposed by others .
 We had nearly doubled the funding for the fight against cancer and increased by ten times the funding to the attack against drug abuse . We also increased ten times as much as we did for the drug abuse campaign .
 We had proposed and won congressional approval for the nation’s first formal research institute for learning and education . The institute would be a formal research center for learning .
 We passed a landmark mass transit bill which meant that funding which had been no more than $175 million per year rose to $400 million in 1971 and to $1 billion in 1973 . Funding for mass transit in the 1970s rose to more than a billion dollars .
 We presented a revolutionary proposal for federal revenue-sharing with the states and hardpressed cities . The proposal was presented to the states, cities and states .
 We offered the first comprehensive program for the environment in history, aimed at striking a balance between the dreams of the environmentalists and the realities of job-producing industry . The program was designed to strike a balance of environmental goals and economic realities .
 Draft calls were 299,000 in 1968; they were 50,000 for 1972 . The draft was eliminated in 1972, and we were on our way to the elimination of the draft .
 "We had a superb record, but we had to make it known to the voters," he says . "I had to remind them of our achievements. We had to ... remind them"
 "As I see it now the gut issues are cost of living, busing, drug abuse, and possibly tax reform as it relates to the property tax," says LZ Granderson .
 Great ideas that are conceived and not sold are like babies that are stillborn . Great ideas are conceived, not sold, like babies stillborn, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "We need some deliveries within the next few months even if they have to be Caesarean," says mother-of-one .
 I will approve any programs you have to bring about those deliveries, provided of course you recognize my total opposition to any abortions . "I'm very proud of my son, my daughter, my son and my daughter," she says .
 My relationship with George Meany during the first three and a half years of my first term as President could be described as tempestuous . President George W. Bush's relationship with Meany was described as 'tempestuous' President Bush .
 Sen. Ted Cruz: "I had known him for twenty-five years, from the days I served on the House Labor Committee" Sen. Cruz says he had known Sen. Rubio for more than 25 years .
 Philosophically, he was liberal on economic issues and conservative on social issues . Politically, however, was a partisan Democrat . He was a liberal Democrat .
 When it came to foreign policy and national defense, he was a patriot first and partisan second . But he was also a patriot when he was in charge of national security, not partisan .
 In June Meany told George Shultz that he would not support McGovern if he won the nomination . Meany said in June that in June he had told Shultz he wouldn't back McGovern .
 Pierre Salinger was McGovern’s man, so McGovern should have stood by him, he says . McGovern dumped Salinger, not because of any particular affection for Salinger . Salinger is McGovern's man, but because McGovern was his man, he should
 AFL-CIO executive council adjourned without voting any presidential endorsement . For the first time in its history, this is a first time the council has adjourned with no endorsement of the president .
 On July 28, Meany, Rogers, and Shultz played golf at Burning Tree, just outside Washington, D.C. Meany and Rogers played golf with Meany .
 It was about 6:30 when we got back to the clubhouse and sat on the porch to have a drink . "It was about six:30," says the author of the book, "but it's not a book"
 Rogers and Shultz joined me ordering cigars so I could keep Meany company . Rogers, Shultz ordered cigars for Meany to keep him company .
 We sat for almost an hour in the twilight, all of us smoking cigars and three of us listening to Meany talk .
 In the circumstances, he said, though labor disagreed with some of my policies, it was in labor’s interest to remain neutral in the presidential race .
 Pouring money into McGovern’s campaign would be tantamount to throwing it away, says Julian Zelizer . McGovern says McGovern's campaign is a waste of time and money .
 Meany cleared his throat and said, "I want you to know now that I am not going to vote for you" Meany said he would not vote for McGovern or vote for him . Meany: "I am not voting for you, and I will never vote for
 During the first days of August McGovern sought a new vice presidential running mate . McGovern had been looking for a running mate in August .
 He tried Teddy Kennedy, Edmund Muskie, Abraham Ribicoff, Larry O’Brien, Hubert Humphrey, and Governor Reubin Askew of Florida .
 I spent the weekend of August 4 at the vacation home of Tom McCabe, a good friend from Eisenhower days, on Assateague Island off Maryland’s Eastern Shore . McCabe is a friend from the Eisenhower days .
 The television set at the house did not work so we listened to the radio to hear McGovern announce that Teddy Kennedy’s brother-in-law Sargent Shriver would be his new running mate . Shriver was Teddy Kennedy's brother in-law .
 As early as June I had heard from visitors to the LBJ Ranch that Johnson was not going to support McGovern if he was nominated for president . Johnson was also said to be against McGovern .
 After the Democratic convention I called Johnson and put the question to him directly, he said yes . After the convention he called Johnson to ask if he would run for president .
 A number of people have been contacted who are close to you, and they have indicated a desire to join the group, but only if it wouldn’t embarrass you . They have indicated they want to join them, but if it’s not embarrassing you, they’
 It says that because of the honor I have been given by my party over forty years, I am going to support the Democratic ticket at all levels . It says "Because of the . honor I . have given by . my party, I will support the . Democratic ticket . at all
 I have always taken the position that what an individual does in a presidential campaign is a matter of conscience, and I’m not going to interfere with that decision . However, I go on to say—and no one will fail to catch this—that I have . I have
 President Richard Nixon had to decide whether to change the ticket by choosing a new running mate in 1972 . "I had to choose whether to choose a running mate," he says .
 By the middle of 1971 Ted Agnew had become increasingly disenchanted with his role as Vice President . Agnew became increasingly disenjoyed by his role in the White House .
 Vice President felt that White House staff did not treat him with proper respect . He felt that I had not given him major substantive responsibilities, he said .
 Agnew, on his own, would withdraw from the ticket early in 1972 to take advantage of attractive offers outside government . Bryce Harlow said there was a very good chance that Agnew would withdraw .
 During the first term Agnew had become an articulate and effective spokesman for conservative positions and issues . Agnew became an articulate spokesman for conservatives .
 In this role he was wrongly underrated by the press as well as by his partisan critics . He was wrongly underestimated by the media and his critics .
 As I began preparing for the 1972 election, I also had to look ahead to 1976 . But as I began . preparing for . 1972 election I also . had to . look ahead . to 1976, he says .
 I believed that John Connally was the only man in either party who clearly had the potential to be a great President . I believed he was a great man either way, but he was not .
 He had the necessary political “fire in the belly,” the energy to win, and the vision to lead, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "He had the . necessary political . “Fire in the . belly"
 I talked with Haldeman about the possibility of Agnew’s resigning before the convention and my nominating Connally to replace him, although I knew that such a move was a remote possibility at best . I even talked with him about a possible move to replace Agnew,
 The only serious option would be to replace Agnew with Connally as the nominee for Vice President at the convention . Connally would be the Vice President nominee for President .
 He sensed that he did not think the second spot would be the best route to the White House for him, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 He said none of us could calculate the depth of Republican opposition to him as a Johnny-comelately. He said that none of . us could . calculate the . depth of the Republican opposition . to him .
 I told him bluntly that I thought Connally should be President in 1976 and that I was weighing the possibility of giving him a head start, if he wanted it, by making him my running mate, he said .
 Mitchell agreed Connally was the man to run in 1976, but he argued strongly against making any changes in the ticket in 1972 . Mitchell agreed that Connally should run in the 1976 election, but said he would not change the ticket .
 Mitchell thought that putting Agnew on the ticket might backfire with conservative New Majority Republicans and Democrats . Agnew had become almost a folk hero, among whom Agnew was almost folk hero in the South . Connally was still a Democrat, and Mitchell thought putting him on the .
 Connally felt that Connally would be more helpful in the campaign as the Chairman of Democrats for Nixon than he would by becoming a Republican before the election . Connally decided to become a Democrat rather than become a Republican .
 Connally told Mitchell that in no circumstances did he want to be Vice President . Connally had told Mitchell he did not want to become Vice President of the United States .
 If we waited too long, he warned, Agnew might want to get a deal in exchange . Agnew may want a pledge to support him for the nomination in 1976, he said .
 On June 12 I asked Mitchell to tell Agnew that I had made the decision definitely to have him on the ticket again as my running mate . "I've made a decision definitely," he said. "I'm not going to let him run again," he added .
 "I said that we would not announce it until after the Democratic convention," says Hillary Clinton . "We're going to announce it," she says .
 This would generate interest by creating suspense; it might also lead the Democrats to softpedal their attacks on him at their convention just in case I decided to choose someone else . This would also lead to Democrats softpedaling their attacks against him at the convention .
 At the beginning of August, I tried to block off time to work exclusively on my acceptance speech, but there were inevitably distractions that made concentration difficult . At the start of August I tried .
 Democratic leaders seized upon Watergate as the best way to distract public attention from their own candidate . Other Democratic leaders were equally vehement in their denunciations of Watergate .
 The Democrats had mounted a particularly strident attack based on the fact that a large number of the contributors to my campaign preferred that their contributions remain anonymous . The Democrats said they wanted to keep their contributions anonymous .
 Many Democrats thought it important to defeat McGovern but would find it awkward to name publicly . Many of them were Democrats of long standing and considerable prominence . They thought it was important for them to defeat him .
 Anonymity for contributors was legal if the contribution was made before April 7, 1972 . But the Democrats framed the issue as a case of secrecy versus openness in the political process .
 By September the Washington Post would be printing leaks from anonymous sources on partisan congressional staffs . The Washington Post was printing leaks of anonymous sources from partisan sources .
 Finance Chairman Maury Stans was charged with being tied to $700,000 in illegal campaign funds that had been laundered through Mexico . Stans is also accused of laundering illegal funds from Mexico .
 CRP finance committee accused of monitoring private bank accounts of potential contributors . Committee also accused of raising money from high-ranking Arabs and other illegal foreign sources .
 I saw no reason why McGovern and his supporters and contributors should be immune to the attacks . McGovern's supporters should also be immune from the attacks, he said .
 If there was any campaign advantage to incumbency, it had to be access to government information on one’s opponents . If incumbency had an advantage, it was access to information on opponents, he said .
 I remembered the IRS leaks of my tax returns to Drew Pearson in the 1952 campaign . I also remembered the politically motivated tax audits done on me in 1963 . The IRS leaks were also politically motivated .
 The Democrats, while in office, had made little effort to camouflage their political pressure on the key government agencies . The Democrats made little efforts to camouflage the political pressure they had on the government .
 It seemed that even when they were out of power their supporters—particularly among the bureaucrats in the IRS—continued to do the job for them . The IRS has been a thorn in the eye of the Obama administration .
 I heard numerous reports of close personal and political friends who had been subjected to constant and, in my view, vindictive, investigation by the IRS since the time I lost to Kennedy in 1960 in 1960 .
 So far our own efforts to use this power had been halfhearted and ineffective . So far, our efforts had been 'halfhearted' and 'ineffectual', says Obama .
 I prodded my staff to change this; on August 3 I reflected on the situation we faced and the problem I saw behind it . On August 3, I wrote to my staff that they should change their behavior . I do not want to see a change in the way the media
 Diary Diary: I emphasized to Haldeman and Ehrlichman the necessity of our getting information on some of our Democratic opponents that they constantly were getting out against us . Diary Diary Diary diary: "We need to get information about some of the Democratic opponents"
 It is ironic that when we were out of office they really used to crucify us—now that we are in office they still do, due to the fact that the bureaucrats at the lower level are all with them . "It's ironic that [the government] still crucifies us
 The problem we have here is that all of our people are gun-shy as a result of the Watergate incident and don’t want to look into files that involve Democrats, he said . The problem is that the problem is .
 Haldeman said after the election we really could then take the steps to get loyalists in various positions that were sensitive . Haldman said after election we could then step in to get loyaltyists in positions that are sensitive .
 The White House has not used the enormous powers of the IRS, the Justice Department files, to go after some of the hanky-panky operations of Democratic opponents, Obama says .
 I repeatedly urged Haldeman and Ehrlichman to have IRS checks made on McGovern’s key staff and contributors . McGoverns was a key figure in the Republican Party .
 In one memo on the subject I said that anything that came up that might indicate “shady dealings” should be got out early . In one of one memo, I said anything that may indicate ‘shady deals’ should be released early .
 Larry O’Brien was one Democrat who was a grand master in the art of political gamesmanship . Larry O'Brien was a master of the art . O'Brien was one of the best Democrats in the world, winning the Senate .
 O'Brien had been tutored in the Kennedy political machine and further shaped by his years with Lyndon Johnson . O’Brien had worked with Kennedy and Johnson .
 After the Kent State tragedy, he virtually accused me of killing the four students. After the . Kent State . Four students were killed in the . Ohio State .
 Whether the issue was Vietnam or Watergate, he could be counted on to hit hard, and not always above the belt . He could not always always hit hard and hit hard .
 Howard Hughes was paying O’Brien’s Washington lobbying firm a large yearly retainer, reportedly almost $200,000 . An IRS investigation of Hughes's financial empire had revealed that Hughes paid O'Brien a large retainer .
 There were rumors about whether O’Brien had reported all the money and paid taxes on it .
 The IRS had planned to interview O’Brien at some point regarding the Hughes retainer . I ordered Haldeman and Ehrlichman to have the audit expedited and completed before the election .
 Howard Hughes had been portrayed as Howard Hughes’s financial angel . He was in fact the Chairman of the Democratic National Committee was profiting from a lucrative position on the payroll .
 In the end the IRS cleared O’Brien after a routine audit, he was cleared . O'Brien was cleared by the IRS .
 On August 20, the day before the Republican National Convention opened, Pat and the girls went to Miami while I stayed at Camp David to put the finishing touches on my acceptance speech . The next day, President Barack Obama was in Miami for the convention .
 "I watched television the next night to see the documentary about Pat that was shown on a huge screen in the convention hall. I watched television . The next night I went to see it again. It was a great night for Pat," she says .
 Jimmy Stewart had already given her an unforgettably eloquent introduction, and when the lights came up after the film, Pat suddenly appeared in person at the podium, standing with her arms out wide .
 The program was running late, and, with infallible instinct, she spoke just a minute to say thank you . She spoke just one minute to thank you. "I'm so proud of you," she said .
 The cameras cut to Julie and Tricia, and I could see the loving pride in their smiles . The cameras turned to Tricia and Julie and Julie, and they were smiling .
 "That was characteristic of the whole convention as far as the appearance of Pat, the girls, David and Ed are concerned. I noted, “That was characterized by the appearance ... of Pat and the girls," David, Ed, Pat and David .
 That night I made an unscheduled appearance at the open-air youth rally, and the reception I received overwhelmed me . The reception was overwhelming, and I was overwhelmed by the reception .
 Pam Powell, daughter of Dick Powell and June Allyson, escorted me onto the stage . Pam Powell is the daughter of Powell and Allyson . She escorted her to the stage. Pam Powell escorted her on stage .
 The picture that is probably most remembered from the 1972 convention is of Sammy Davis, Jr., impulsively hugging me on the stage at the youth rally . " Sammy Davis Jr. impulsively hugged me," he says .
 President Obama met with President Obama at a White House reception last month . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in his administration .
 We had both talked about our backgrounds and about how we both came from rather poor families . We had talked about their backgrounds, we had both come from poor families, she said .
 "I want to make it to everybody here, whether you happen to be black or white, or young or old, and all of those who are listening," she says . She says she wants to make the message to everyone .
 For many, the youth rally was the highlight of the convention. For me, I think, for many others . For many others, it was a highlight of this year's convention .
 "That night at the convention hall I was renominated for a second term by a vote of 1,347 to 1," he says . "I was rennominated for a 2nd term. That night at a convention hall, I was . renominated"
 The next night outside the hall the frustrated demonstrators attempted to set fire to buses filled with delegates . Protesters attempted to burn the buses to prevent delegates from leaving the hall .
 Protesters slashed tires, pelted delegates with rocks and eggs . They marched on the hall wearing gas masks and brandishing night sticks . They slashed tires and pelted them with rocks, brandished night sticks.
 The Republican convention is the fifth and last nomination by a Republican convention . Sen. Ted Cruz is the Republican Party nominee for 2016 .
 Inside the hall neither the predictability of a well-organized program nor the absence of a hard-fought nomination battle could mute the enthusiasm of the crowd .
 The day after the convention I addressed the American Legion in Chicago and then spoke at the dedication of Dwight D Eisenhower High School in Utica, Michigan . The day before the convention, he spoke at a high school dedication .
 CNN traveled to San Clemente, San Diego and San Diego, California, for a photo shoot . It was then a helicopter ride up the coast for a helicopter helicopter ride .
 The enthusiasm of all these crowds was exciting and contagious and deeply satisfying . The enthusiasm was "exciting and contagious," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 There was an emotional quality to their receptions and reactions that neither the staff nor I had been able to sense in Washington, where many of the columns and news stories attributed my support to the widespread disappointment with McGovern .
 No one could say that we didn’t have the jumpers and the squealers in Michigan and San Diego and San Clemente, although it will be difficult to get the press to write it .
 McGovern's people will be far more the jumpers and squealers than the McGovern people, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "I am inclined to think that our people are going to be far . more the . jumpers" than the . McGoverns,
 "By this time I was having some fatigue and I just wasn’t able to put that much into it," he said . "I just wasn't able to do that much," he added .
 It was a beautiful flight over the coast, and when we got here the staff, of course, had prepared me for a surprise . The staff, the staff and the media staff, were prepared to be surprised by the surprise .
 They had said that it was simply going to be the four mayors and a few friends from the area . The mayor and mayor of the area had said they would only be present at the event .
 Pat had dinner with me in the study—she had a second helping of chicken but I was not really in a condition to eat much . I was glad that King came in to finish off my steak, but was glad to finish it off with King .
 "I finished the day sitting out at the pool and smoking a cigar from Iran," says the Iranian president . "I was sitting in the pool sitting out there and smoking from Iran"
 It was the largest postconvention point spread in favor of a Republican candidate in Gallup’s history . Gallup: It was also the largest point spread for a Republican in Gallup's history .
 John Dean, the Justice Department, and the FBI all confirmed that there had been no White House involvement in the investigation . John Dean: The White House has been involved in this investigation .
 In a press conference I was asked whether I thought that there should be a Special Prosecutor appointed for Watergate. In the press conference, I said that there was no need for a special prosecutor to be appointed . In the interview, Mr. Nixon said that Watergate should be investigated.
 The FBI, the Justice Department, the Senate Banking and Currency Committee, and the General Accounting Office are all conducting investigations . A Special Prosecutor was hardly necessary, says Sen. John McCain .
 Attorney General Kleindienst said indictments on Watergate break-in and bugging would be handed down in three days . No one at a high level in the CRP or anyone in the White House would be named, he said .
 He had anticipated the predictable Democratic charges of a whitewash and had therefore totted up some impressive statistics . The president's administration is expected to be the subject of charges against him .
 The indictments named only Hunt, Liddy, and the five men arrested in the Democratic headquarters . Hunt and Liddy were indicted on September 15 .
 My lengthy diary entry for that day indicates the relative unimportance I continued to attribute to Watergate at that time . Watergate was the subject of the day's coverage of the White House scandal .
 In it I described a meeting with Nelson Rockefeller and a two-hour session on taxes with Connally, Burns, Shultz, Stein, and Ehrlichman . I also noted a conversation with Julie in which she was concerned about the way she handled a reporter’s question
 At Haldeman’s suggestion, I saw John Dean later that day and thanked him for his work . “I saw John dean later that afternoon and thanked John Dean for his service," he said .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I had known ever since the week after the break-in that Dean, as White House Counsel, was keeping track of all the different Watergate problems for us" He says the FBI investigation, the grand jury, the Democratic civil suit, the libel suit
 Dean: “Three months ago I would have had trouble predicting where we’d be today.” He said he would have been surprised by where he’s now .
 The GAO report charging that the CRP had violated campaign finance rules had been referred to the Justice Department . There were reports of hundreds of other alleged violations, Dean said . McGovern, Humphrey, and Jackson as well have been charged with violations .
 GAO was also planning to audit the use of funds by the White House staff . GAO also planned to audit use of money by White House staffers .
 Patman’s unabashed partisan attempt to hold hearings on CRP finances was the next pre-election assault we faced . Patman: “I’m not afraid to be honest about the CRP's finances. I’ll be glad to see the end
 Dean Obeidallah: "I told Dean that the whole thing was simply ‘public relations,” and he agreed . He said that he agreed that the entire thing was just "public relations"
 President Obama has pledged to restructure the bureaucracy in Washington . He says even if it were not favorable to us, at least it would no longer be serving Democrats .
 Diary Diary Diary: I had a good talk with John Dean and was enormously impressed with him . Diary diary: 'I'm enormously impressed by John Dean' Diary Diary diary .
 President Obama said he brought Haldeman into the White House because he had "steel and really mean instinct" that needed to clean house after the election .
 There simply has to be a line drawn at times with those who are against us, and then we have to take the action to deal with them effectively . We have to be able to deal effectively with the problem of people against us .
 "Otherwise, they will be around to deal with us when their opportunity comes to them. Otherwise, they won't be here again," says Daley .
 As the polls continued to indicate a Nixon landslide, McGovern and Shriver became desperate . Shriver and McGovern became desperate to win the election .
 McGovern said that my policy on Vietnam sought a “new level of barbarism” in order to save my own face . McGovern: “I was trying to save myself face.” McGovern’s Vietnam policy sought “a new . level of
 President Johnson should be pleased that Shriver called him the number-one bomber, Connally says . Connally: "I told George Christian, President Johnson’s former Press Secretary who was working with Connally in Democrats for Nixon, that Johnson would be pleased"
 While these increasingly shrill and acrimonious charges were being hurled against me, I continued to stay on the job in the White House, aloof from the rising emotional tides .
 Diary notes from Camp David show contrast between McGovern and Shriver campaigns . Diary notes show stark contrast between the campaign as I experienced it and as Shriver waged it .
 Around noon, since it was such a beautiful day, I went into the pool for a while . I went to the pool to swim .
 "It was one of those days when I was able to lie on my back and look up at the leaves," she says . "I'm glad to see the leaves again," she adds .
 The leaves in the spring and the fall were really so very much alike . The leaves turned over in the wind in the fall, and the leaves in spring and fall were so similar .
 One portrays the beginning of summer, the other a beginning of winter . The two depict the start of life and the end of death . One portrays summer, one of winter, one the beginning .
 It is very clear that McGovern had finally learned that what he has to do is simply to attack and he is doing so in a very vicious and irresponsible way . McGovern finally learned he had to attack, and he's doing it in a vicious way .
 Our people, of course, as I pointed out to Colson, are reacting in their usual honest and stupid way, by defending rather than attacking . Our people are reacting by defending themselves, says Mr Colson .
 McGovern’s going to all the big cities at this time for street rallies is an indication of their desperation . Eight weeks before the election is much too soon to hit the big city, McGovern says .
 Ted Agnew, Clark MacGregor, Bob Dole, and their teams were doing a magnificent job . Bob Doles, Bob Agnew and Clark MacGillan were doing the best in the world .
 McGovern on the defensive with sharp thrusts against his far-left views . They were effective spokesmen for the administration but kept McGovern .
 In September I began adding some political appearances to my schedule, but it was still the most restrained campaign of my career . I remember it primarily as a series of episodes. In September, I began .
 Nixon supporters gathered for Nixon barbecue at the Connally ranch in Texas on September 22 . Nixon was a presidential candidate in the late 1980s .
 Diary Diary: I told Connally it was vitally important that Teddy Kennedy not pick up the pieces after this election . Diary: "It's vitally vital that Kennedy not picked up the . pieces after the election"
 The country simply can't afford to have the likes of Kennedy and McGovern as even possible Presidents in the years ahead . It is important that people like John Connally pick them up because of the country's future .
 McGovern said that the Nixons were from the fifties and the McGoverns from the seventies . McGovern: "The Nixon and the N.G.Nixons are from the 1950s to the 1970s. McGovern says that the Mc
 I just hope the press continues to think this way because in the end they’re going to take a hell of a beating. I just let it go, but I’m not giving it to the press,’s going to be a lot of a lot more
 "I woke up twice in the night, once at 2, and once at 4," she says . "I was terribly tired when I went to bed. I woke up ... even though I was terribly fatigued," she writes .
 Instead of sending in some of their country sausage, they sent in some country sausage . "It was totally and perfectly delicious," he says .
 I am going to have to mix up the breakfasts and lunches just a bit in order to get away from such a drab and uninteresting diet . I'm going to need to mix it up a bit, and I'm not afraid of it .
 The Washington Post withheld a formal endorsement but made clear its preference for McGovern . McGovern has been endorsed by the Washington Post since 2008 .
 Stewart, apparently, is still critically ill and had been out to dinner with Kay Graham . Stewart apparently had dinner with Graham, who was also critically ill .
 He had been arguing emphatically with regard to the necessity to support RN because of what he had accomplished in foreign policy, and also the danger of having McGovern in the presidency, he said .
 A relatively young man said to me that he'd lost his son in Vietnam in 1970 and he was still for me and for my foreign policy . "I would imagine he was forty, he could have been forty-five," he said .
 When I think of such men as this and the mothers of the boys as well as their wives, I realize how very important it is to see not only that we end the war, but that it end it in a way that will make their sacrifices not be in vain .
 The crowd that turned out to greet Pat and me in Atlanta on October 12 was estimated at between 500,000 and 700,000 . The crowd was estimated to be as large as 500,500 .
 During a long motorcade in Ohio I was warned that there were some unfriendly demonstrators waiting for us a short way ahead . CNN's John Sutter was in a motorcade at the end of the day in Ohio .
 Secret Service wanted to close the top of my car and increase the speed during this particular part of the route . Since there had also been a bomb threat, the Secret Service closed the top and increased speed .
 The Secret Service wanted to speed up, but I told them to slow down, she said . She said: 'I told them not to speed down'
 I said we must not run from these people, so we slowed down to a snail’s pace . I waved out the window, as did Pat on the other side, at all the nutheads in the nasty crowd . I said, 'I said I waved . out the
 When I saw some of the antiwar people and the rest, I’d simply hold up the “V” or the one thumb up; this really knocks them for a loop, because they think this is their sign . This really knocks [antiwar] people for
 "Some of these people are going to be lost souls. I think as the war recedes as a issue, some of these are lost souls," he says .
 They basically are haters, frustrated, they are alienated, they say . They don’t know what to do with their lives. They are basically haters .
 "Perhaps the saddest group will be those who are the professors and particularly the younger professors and the associate professors on the college campuses and even in the high schools," she says . "I think perhaps the sadest group of those who will be the professors," she said .
 They wanted to blame somebody else for their own failures to inspire the students . The students wanted to be inspired to inspire them to inspire themselves .
 I can think of those Ivy League presidents who came to see me after Kent State, and who were saying, please don’t leave the problem to us—I mean, let the government do something. Let's not leave it to us, I said . The president says he
 Now the responsibility is theirs, although I imagine they will find another issue . Now they have the responsibility to take responsibility for their actions .
 It will be difficult to find one that emotionally will turn the kids on like the war issue . I suppose it will be big business or corruption, corruption or what have you .
 It will be good that college administrators and professors will have to look within themselves, look in the mirror . It is they who have the responsibility, they are at fault if the young people are not inspired .
 Although my direct involvement in the campaign was limited, it was intense. Although I was involved, I was able to get involved with the campaign . I hope to see more of the world's first female president .
 "By the end of the campaign I had made dozens of speeches and informal remarks," says Hillary Clinton . "I'm not going to be afraid of the press," she says .
 I had a curious dream of speaking at some sort of a rally and going a bit too long and standing up in the middle and taking over the microphone on an applause line . I dreamed of Rockefeller standing up to the middle of the applause line and taking the microphone .
 Of course, this is always something that worries a person when he is making speeches, as to whether he is going too long . This is one of the things he worries about when he makes speeches .
 "My strategy was to minimize my own campaigning, my family took over the burden of crisscrossing the country making appearances," says Hillary Clinton . "I don't want to be seen as a politician, but I'm not afraid to be a politician," she says .
 All together, Pat, Julie, and Tricia covered seventy-seven cities in thirty-seven states in nine weeks from the end of August to Election Day . The team covered sixty cities in seven states .
 David was in the Navy and had to stay on the sidelines, but Ed Cox plunged right in and went onto college campuses to face some of the toughest audiences of all .
 His easy manner and quick, organized mind enabled him to hold his own and make a strong impression everywhere he went, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 In all their speeches and in all their press conferences, there was never a misspoken word . In all the speeches and press conferences there were never missespoken words, says CNN.com .
 They were heckled, shoved, hissed, and subjected to obscene shouts from demonstrators . But they pressed on like professionals, with poise and grace . They pressed on with poisiness and grace, despite being heckled .
 Even when Pat was being cursed by angry young men and women in Boston, she was serene and natural . "I am sure they had no idea how much they hurt her," she said . "Even when angry men in Boston were angry young women, they were serene"
 Julie, who was steely enough to mean it when she said that she would give her life for South Vietnam’s freedom, was soft enough to leave the dinner table in tears when she thought about how David, who loved politics so much, would miss the election because his ship
 Diary Julie called me after the Gromyko dinner, very thoughtfully waiting until then, to ask me about whether she could go to see David since he could not return for the election . Julie called him after the dinner to ask him if she could visit him .
 To hell with the election if it interferes with a few days that they may have together at this time when it means so much to them, she says . The election is too important for the couple to spend the rest of their lives together .
 Julie was the one who at least as far as her open feelings were concerned really never gave up . I recall that in 1960, after the defeat, she was one of the ones who never gave it up . Julie was one who really didn't give up after the loss .
 In 1960 during the first debate she had been worried about whether Daddy had won or not . In 1960 she had worried about if Daddy had actually won or whether he had won .
 Julie had said congratulations on taking on the press after the election, whereas Tricia seemed more reserved and more worried about it . Julie had congratulated Tricia on her decision to take on press after election .
 They had really hated the school in California because of the number of Birchers that were always giving them hell . The school had always hated the Bircher school because of its size .
 For almost twenty years of public life, she had been wife, mother, and full-time campaigner . For almost 20 years, she was wife and mother-of-two .
 She had done it all not because she loved the attention or reveled in the publicity—she didn’t . She had not done it because of the attention she received, she said. She said .
 As we anticipated, the summer of 1972 produced another series of propaganda maneuvers by Hanoi in an attempt to exploit American domestic opinion . The summer of the 1972 summer was a series of attempts to exploit U.S. domestic opinion.
 This time they used the ploy of claiming that American bombers were deliberately hitting the crucial system of dikes and dams in North Vietnam in order to kill large civilian populations in the resulting floods . This time the ploy was used by the U.S. government .
 Despite propaganda claims, no major junctures were hit and there were no massive floods . Despite all the claims, there was no massive flooding in the UK .
 He made a broadcast over Radio Hanoi stating that our bombing should be stopped immediately . He made the broadcast over radio Hanoa stating that . He also said that . Our bombing should stop immediately .
 On Clark’s return, Teddy Kennedy had him come to Capitol Hill to testify on the good treatment the POWs were receiving . Clark testified on Capitol Hill on POWs' treatment .
 While Clark was in Hanoi, Shriver waded in, “revealing” that the Nixon administration “blew” a historic opportunity for peace in 1969 . Clark: "I failed to follow up on progress that had been made in the Paris peace talks
 Shriver also claimed that he had resigned as ambassador to France in protest of my war policy . Shriver said he resigned in response to the war .
 He publicly denounced Shriver’s claims as ‘bunk’ and ‘political fantasy” and political fantasy . Shriver's claims were rejected by President Obama .
 Rogers’s statement was particularly effective, it was characteristic of the forceful and articulate way he defended my foreign policy in public forums during the campaign . Rogers's statement was . characteristic of his . forceful and . articulate way of defending foreign policy, he said .
 The next day, the State Department released Shriver’s letter of resignation as ambassador . Shriver resigned from her post as ambassador to France .
 Connally called Connally to say that President Johnson was “mad as hell” about Shriver’s charge . Connally told me that President Kennedy was ‘mad’ as hell, about the charge .
 Johnson indicated that his already minimal support for McGovern would be even less because of this incident . Johnson had indicated that he already had already indicated he would not support McGovern .
 Johnson called Haldeman to tell him that he had never informed Shriver of what was going on in the Paris negotiations . Johnson called the White House to say that he never told Shriver .
 Pierre Salinger, on George McGovern’s instructions, had directly approached the North Vietnamese delegation in Paris . A few days after Ramsey Clark returned from Hanoi, a UPI report revealed that Salinger had approached the delegation .
 His purpose was to see if the Communists would release some American POWs . He was hoping to get some of the POWs out of the Soviet Union .
 The goal was laudable, but the contact had all the earmarks of a political ploy . The contact with the players was a political stunt, but it wasn't a mistake .
 Logan Act prohibits a private citizen from unauthorized contacts with foreign governments with the intent to influence disputes between our government and theirs . The Logan Act also prohibits private citizens from contacting foreign governments . A private citizen may not be allowed to contact foreign governments in the U.S.
 McGovern, therefore, had some serious questions to answer about the Salinger mission . McGovern had to answer questions about Salinger .
 Salinger was stupefied by this statement, because McGovern had not only sent him on the mission but had made the arrangements through a prominent antiwar leader . Salinger apparently thought McGovern was sending him on a mission through an anti-war leader, he said .
 At the end of August we received word that public support of my conduct of the war had actually risen . Public support of me in the war has actually risen, he says . I was in charge of the U.S. during the war in Afghanistan .
 A Harris poll found 55 percent supported continued heavy bombing of North Vietnam . 64 percent supported the mining of Haiphong Harbor, and 74 percent thought it was important that South Vietnam not fall into the hands of the Communists .
 McGovern and his followers were out of touch with the majority of the U.S. people, says George W. McGovern . McGovern's followers were 'out of touch' with most of the American people .
 The North Vietnamese, who were avid observers of American public opinion, apparently got the message . But the North Vietnamese got it, apparently .
 North Vietnamese private channel suddenly became active in August 1972 . After three years of disappointing and unproductive stalemate the U.S. and North Vietnamese channels became active again .
 For the first time the Communists actually seemed to be interested in reaching a settlement . The Communists appeared to be looking to reach a settlement with the West .
 Kissinger and I assumed that they had come to the conclusion that McGovern did not stand a chance of becoming President and had therefore decided to explore the possibility that they could get better terms from me before the election than after it . Kissinger: "Kissinger and I assume that they .
 The May 8 mining and bombing had taken a heavy military toll . The Vietnamese were concerned by their contacts with Moscow and Peking and with the success of Vietnamization .
 The North Vietnamese presented a new ten-point program at a two-day session on September 26 and 27 . The program was presented at a meeting in Hanoi, Vietnam's capital .
 On key political and military issues it was still unacceptable, it is still unacceptable . Although it was more forthcoming than anything in the past, it's still unacceptable. It is still not clear what happened to the United States.
 The next meeting, scheduled for October 8, would clearly be the decisive one for determining whether the new momentum could carry through to a settlement before the November 7 election .
 "I was not optimistic in this regard, but I decided to orchestrate as much pressure on the meeting as possible," says President Obama . "I'm not optimistic about the outcome of the meeting," says Obama .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko arrived in Washington for the signing of the SALT agreement on October 3, 1973 . President Obama invited him to Camp David to sign the agreement at Camp David .
 Kissinger told Kissinger that when he returned to Paris the next week, he would lay on the last offer we were going to make . When he repeated the familiar refrain that U.S.-Soviet relations could improve if the problem of Vietnam were removed, Kissinger said .
 If the North Vietnamese said no, then the negotiating track would be closed and we would have to turn to some other methods after the elections . If North Vietnamese say no, if the talks are closed, the negotiations will be closed, he says .
 It seemed unlikely that, even if the North Vietnamese wanted to, we would be able to negotiate an acceptable agreement in just five weeks . The North Vietnamese are unlikely to negotiate a deal even if they wanted to .
 "We should prepare Thieu for the outside possibility that the Communists really were determined to conclude a settlement before our election," he said . "I felt that we should prepare ... for Thieu," he added .
 Haig flew to Saigon and assured Thieu that we would not rush headlong into an agreement . Haig then flew to Vietnam to meet with Thieu and promised not to rush into war .
 He also described the difficult domestic situation we would face if the Communists made a reasonable offer and we refused to act upon it . But he also said he would face a similar domestic situation if the Communist Party offered to the UK .
 He was suspicious of the motives behind the North Vietnamese proposals . He was unsettled by our willingness to accept them as a basis for negotiations .
 He railed against Kissinger, who, he said, did not ‘deign’ to consider Saigon’s views in his negotiations . Saigon: Kissinger did not "deign" to consider the views of Saigon's .
 Almost the entire North Vietnamese Army—an estimated 120,000 troops that had poured across the DMZ during the spring invasion— were still in South Vietnam . President Nixon was skeptical of any plan that would lead to an American withdrawal without requiring a corresponding North Vietnamese withdrawal .
 I knew, as he did, that they would observe the agreement only so long and so far as South Vietnam's strength and America’s readiness to retaliate forced them to do so . I knew I knew this only so far, and I knew it would only happen so far .
 I felt that if we could negotiate an agreement on our terms, those conditions could be met . But I felt it was possible that we could meet those conditions, and that they would be met, he said .
 I reminded him of the dangers inherent in stirring up his domestic situation as well as our own . Knowing his penchant for headstrong action, however, I . reminded him that he should not stir up domestic situations .
 North Vietnamese Premier Pham Van Dong of North Vietnam and French Delegate General in Hanoi spoke October 5 . North and North Vietnam have been engaged in a long-running conflict in Vietnam .
 For the first time Dong had sounded optimistic regarding the likelihood of peace . Dong sounded optimistic about the possibility of peace with the South Korean government .
 He admitted that his experts had paid too much attention to American antiwar leaders . He added that I would probably have a freer hand after the election .
 In his press conference that same day the questions focused on the prospects for a peace settlement before the election . In my press conference I said the questions were about the prospects of a peace deal . In the same day I was asked about the prospect for peace in Syria .
 In the meantime, the prospects of my reelection by a landslide were increasing every day, he says . "I'm going to be in the process of re-election by the end of the year," he adds .
 Kissinger and Haig arrived in Paris on Sunday, October 8, for the crucial meeting with the North Vietnamese . Kissinger, Haig met in Paris for the first time since the Vietnam War .
 George McGovern made a much-heralded nationally televised campaign speech on Vietnam that night . McGovern's Vietnam speech was a nationally televised speech on the Vietnam war .
 He said that on the day he was inaugurated President, he would stop all bombing and begin the immediate withdrawal of all American troops and military equipment from South Vietnam .
 He also committed himself to stop all military and economic aid to Saigon . Saigon was ruled out of Vietnam in 1968 .
 He had no plan for ensuring the return of POWs but said that he expected Hanoi to respond favorably to his policies . He said he had no plans to return POWs .
 Kissinger reported only that both sides had decided to stay another day in the anticipation that they were sufficiently close to a major breakthrough . Kissinger: "Both sides were determined to stay in the hope that they would be able to reach a breakthrough"
 On that day, we established a ten-mile bombing-free circle around Hanoi . The Vietnamese capital was declared a 'safe zone' around the country .
 Kissinger and Haig arrived back at the White House on the evening of October 12 . They came immediately to the EOB office to report to me . Kissinger: Haig and Kissinger arrived back in the U.S. on October 12 and returned .
 Kissinger and Kissinger had talked about the “Big Three” in foreign policy . China, the Soviet Union, and Vietnam were the "Big Three" of foreign policy, Kissinger says .
 Only the third goal, a settlement of the war in Vietnam, had continued to elude us . Only a settlement in Vietnam had eluded us. Only the peace in Vietnam was a settlement .
 Kissinger smiled as Kissinger began His report of the Paris negotiations . Kissinger was smiling the broadest smile I had ever seen. Kissinger smiled at the beginning of his report .
 The North Vietnamese would not specifically agree to withdraw their troops from the South because they maintained the fiction that they had no troops in South Vietnam at all . The North Vietnam would not directly agree to withdrawal their troops .
 Communists had finally dropped their demands for a coalition government . They agreed to a substitute of a National Council of Reconciliation and Concord to be composed of representatives of the government, the Vietcong, and neutral members .
 Unanimity would be required in its votes; thus Thieu would be protected from being outvoted by the Communists and their supporters . The vote would be needed in order to ensure Thieu's approval of the Vietnamese government .
 North Vietnam's economic aid to North Vietnam was 'potentially the most significant part of the entire agreement' 'I considered it potentially the most important part of this agreement,' he said .
 The Communists tried to claim that this money would be reparations for the war they charged we had unleashed upon them . However they tried to justify it, taking money from the United States represented a collapse of communist principle, he says .
 North Vietnamese people began to taste the fruits of peace for the first time in twenty-five years . More important, our aid would inevitably give us increasing leverage with Hanoi, says the UK .
 Several unresolved issues remained to be negotiated at a final session in Paris on October 17 . The final session will take place in Paris next week .
 North Vietnamese would be accused of betraying their Vietcong allies unless they tried to secure their release as part of the agreement . The North Vietnamese are accused of betrayal by the North Vietnamese .
 The second involved the provision for replacement of war matériel by both sides . Both sides agreed to replace their own war materériel .
 Neither we nor the South Vietnamese could ever accept this, however, because it would immediately reduce the arms advantage that South Vietnam held over the Vietcong, which we saw as essential for maintaining the peace . Neither we or the . South Vietnamese would ever accept such an arms advantage .
 Our position was that worn-out existing armaments should be replaced on a one-to-one basis . We are happy to clarify that this is not the case of replacing armaments .
 Kissinger had agreed that after the final session in Paris on October 17, he would go to Saigon for three days in order to present the agreement to Thieu and obtain his approval of it . Kissinger said he would have to review the agreement and approve it .
 Kissinger would then go to Hanoi on October 22, where he would initial the agreement with the North Vietnamese leaders . Kissinger then would meet with the leaders of the North Vietnam on October 23 .
 He would return to Washington, and a joint announcement would be made on October 26, he said . He would be back in Washington .
 The cease-fire would begin on October 30, when the agreement would be signed in Paris by the Foreign Minister of each party . It would be the first time the two sides have agreed to an agreement .
 Kissinger asked Manolo to bring a bottle of Chateau Lafite-Rothschild to toast Kissinger’s success . Kissinger asked that steaks be brought over on trays from the White House mess .
 "I noticed that Haig seemed rather subdued, but I assumed that he was just tired after the exertions of the last few days," Haig says . Haig: "Haig seemed quite subdued. I noticed that he seemed quite tired."
 Thieu says he's not sure how he feels about these terms from Thieu’s point of view .
 Kissinger promised to let the North Vietnamese know his reaction within forty-eight hours after his return to Washington. Kissinger had promised to tell the North Vietnam know my reaction within . Kissinger was returning to Washington, D.C. for the first time .
 One of the changes I asked for was the deletion of a paragraph that tied various military obligations of the two South Vietnamese parties to political sections of the agreement . The South Vietnamese government and the Vietcong were supposed to be responsible for the Vietnam War .
 We wanted political matters to be covered solely in the political chapter . We wanted to focus on the political matters .
 The North Vietnamese replied with an official note saying that they felt we were demanding changes in points that had already been agreed upon . The North Vietnam replied with a note saying they felt that they had already agreed upon.
 They said that only minor technical changes could now be considered and demanded that we not make changes like the ones I had listed . They said they would only consider 'minor technical changes' like that .
 I told Kissinger that in no circumstances should we consider any terms that we felt were less than acceptable, Kissinger said . Therefore when I read this message I said, 'No' Kissinger said, "No" Kissinger said. Kissinger said that no terms should be considered in any way less than
 Diary Diary I said that as far as the election was concerned, a settlement would not particularly help us, that there were risks insofar if Thieu blew it or the North Vietnamese blew it which could hurt us . Diary Diary Diary: "There are risks insofar as the . risks if Th
 Nothing that happened could be fatal—it could probably just narrow the gap between the two sides . But nothing that happened was fatal, but it could probably be fatal, says CNN.com .
 As I pointed out to him, if it was the right time to settle the war, we should not delay it until after the election, when the pressures upon the enemy might be less than now, he said . As he pointed out, he also said: "If this was the
 If the opportunity is missed then the war will drag on for months, and even years, before it comes again . If the chance is missed, it will be months, or years before the war comes again, experts say .
 We would never forgive ourselves if we miss this opportunity and then had the election go by and found that the thing would drag on and on. It is an opportunity we must play out to the hilt,’s David Cameron says . It is a chance to play it out to
 "We will do what is right without any regard for what effect it will have on the election," he said . "That will probably turn out best for the election as well," he added . "We'll do what we will do without regard to what effect the election will have,"
 Kissinger raised the possibility of a bombing halt as a demonstration of good will on our part . Kissinger said it was a 'show of goodwill' for the U.S. to stop bombing .
 I told him, however, that I was absolutely opposed to one before the election, but I said I was against it . I said he was opposed to a single-party rule change, but that he was not .
 If everything worked out satisfactorily in Paris and Saigon and he was able to go on to Hanoi, then I would consider a bombing pause for the few days he was there, says historian .
 I was not going to be taken in by the mere prospect of an agreement as Johnson had been in 1968 . I would not be taken into account as Johnson was in 1968, he said . I was going to stand by his side, he added .
 Kissinger gave Kissinger a letter he'd written the night before he left for Paris . Kissinger had written a letter to Kissinger before he went to Paris, Kissinger said .
 In it I told him to do what he was right for an honorable peace, without regard to the election . "In it I said he would do what is right for a honorable peace," he said .
 Kissinger’s meeting with Xuan Thuy on October 17 was tense and pressured . Kissinger's meeting with Thuy was tense, pressured and pressured, Kissinger says .
 Kissinger rejected as unacceptable the Communist position that we free all Vietcong civilians held by Saigon . Some of these prisoners were terrorist murderers, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "Some of these prisoner prisoners were terrorists murderers"
 Kissinger told Xuan Thuy that the South Vietnamese would never accept this and there was no point in his writing down something that could not be implemented . Kissinger said there was 'no point' in writing down what he wrote down .
 The Communists also opposed our strict interpretation of the provisions for the replacement of war matériel . The Communists failed to give us satisfactory language regarding American POWs being held in Laos and Cambodia .
 It was obvious that there would have to be some slippage in the schedule for completion of the project . The project is still under construction . It is expected to be completed in 2018 .
 Kissinger replied that he could not go to Hanoi until we had a completed agreement . Kissinger said that he would not go there until there was a completed deal agreed .
 Kissinger departed for Saigon in 1973 . Kissinger left Saigon for Vietnam . Kissinger was the last president to leave Vietnam .
 He had already cautioned the Communists that Thieu had to be consulted before we would sign any agreement . He said he had already warned Thieu that he would not be consulted .
 Kissinger had only been able to schedule three days in Saigon to go over the agreement . Kissinger knew Thieu would be skeptical about its terms and unhappy that it had been suddenly and unexpectedly concluded without him .
 There was no question that the North Vietnamese were trying to use the pressure of the election deadline to strain our relations with Thieu . North Vietnam was trying to create domestic political problems for him by making it appear that the agreement was imposed on him from Washington .
 Kissinger gambled that Thieu would overlook such problems and seize the tremendous advantages the agreement would give him if he approached it positively and treated it like a victory it was . Kissinger had gambled he would overlook these problems and seized the advantages .
 The next day I sent a note to the North Vietnamese informing them that, in my opinion, another meeting would be needed before Kissinger could go to Hanoi and before we could stop the bombing . I sent the next day, telling them that I thought another meeting was needed .
 I reiterated that the questions relating to civilian prisoners and replacement of matériel still had to be settled, as well as understandings relating to the withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces from Laos and Cambodia .
 Kissinger offered a new schedule that would extend the original one for three or four days to allow another meeting between Kissinger and Le Duc Tho . Kissinger offered to meet again, but the original schedule would be extended . Kissinger: "I offered to extend this schedule for a few days"
 I would maintain the current restrictions on bombing sorties and B-52 raids while the negotiations were in progress . I added that as a sign of good will, I would keep restrictions on sorties .
 The North Vietnamese were now clearly determined to get a pre-election agreement . North Vietnamese are determined to secure pre-elections agreement with the North Vietnamese .
 'They sent a reply completely accepting our position on the questions of arms replacement and unconditional release of our POWs in North Vietnam. They sent the reply completely accepted our position . They sent an answer to our request for arms replacement .
 I sent a cable to Pham Van Dong saying that the agreement could now be considered complete . I sent it to say that the deal with the Vietnamese government is now considered complete.
 Only the matter of the unilateral declarations, which included the arrangements for a cease-fire and the return of POWs in Laos and Cambodia, still had to be clarified . I therefore suggested a further twenty-four-hour delay so that these questions could be considered and settled .
 I said that once these problems had been taken care of, we could be counted on to proceed with the schedule as amended, leading to the signing on October 31 . The signing of the agreement is expected to take place on October 30 .
 On October 21 the North Vietnamese replied by accepting our position on the unilateral declarations . The North Vietnamese responded by accepting the position on October 21 .
 Kissinger arrived in Saigon on October 18, he carried with him a letter he'd written to Thieu . Kissinger arrived with him in Vietnam carrying a letter of support . Kissinger's visit to Vietnam was the first time Kissinger had visited Vietnam .
 "I assured Thieu that I would view any breach of faith by the Communists with the utmost gravity," he said . "I would view [Thieu] as a leader of the Communist Party," he added .
 During one tense session with the entire South Vietnamese National Security Council and the ambassadors to the Paris talks, he was bombarded with skeptical questions . During that session, he met with the South Vietnamese national security council and ambassadors to Paris talks .
 Kissinger: South Vietnamese leaders exhibited a surprising awe of Communist cunning . Kissinger: They exhibited a disquieting lack of confidence in themselves . Kissinger said that the South Vietnamese had exhibited an awe of communist cunning . He said that it was a surprising shock to Kissinger's report .
 It was clear that they were having great psychological difficulty with the prospect of cutting the American umbilical cord . "It's clear that [the U.S. citizens] have great psychological difficulties," the mother said .
 Kissinger saw a paradoxical situation in which North Vietnam, which had effectively won the war, was acting as if it had lost . North Vietnam had effectively lost the war but South Vietnam was acting like it had won, Kissinger said .
 There were undoubtedly psychological reasons for this attitude, but there were also practical personal, political, diplomatic, and military factors behind Thieu’s conduct .
 Many Americans thought of Thieu as a petty tyrant who suppressed his political opponents . Because of the way the U.S. media portrayed Thieu, many Americans didn't think of him as a tyrant .
 Political dissent was substantially curtailed in South Vietnam . Thieu still had to deal with an elected National Assembly and face a formidable range of open domestic opposition .
 It was by no means certain that he could survive in power unless he could convince his people that the peace agreement was one that would benefit South Vietnam . The peace agreement would benefit his people, but he would have to convince them otherwise .
 They knew the enemy too well to be seduced by the Communists’ professed sincerity or willingness to abide by the terms of any agreement . They had fought and sacrificed too much and they knew the enemies too well . They knew and fought too much .
 They were the ones who would have to remain in their country after the last Americans had left, and they were naturally reluctant to accept any agreement that might put them at a disadvantage . They were also reluctant to take part in any agreement .
 Thieu would have to make it clear that he was not surrendering any of South Vietnam’s vital interests . The provisions of any agreement were bound to be controversial, he says .
 The problem was that this would take time, and time was the one thing we did not have if we were to keep to the agreed signing schedule . We would not be able to keep up the pace of the signing of the new players, says manager .
 Thieu would also be concerned about the military consequences of an immediate agreement . Thieu: "I'm not worried about what happens next."
 Many military analysts believed that the North Vietnamese were so insistent on keeping October 31 as the deadline for a ceasefire agreement . The North Vietnamese had geared up to capture and control as much territory in South Vietnam as possible by that date .
 A captured COSVN directive had revealed plans to draw South Vietnamese forces into northern regions . The provinces in the Mekong Delta and around Saigon would be vulnerable to a last-minute offensive .
 Diary Haig believes the real problem is the fact that the North Vietnamese are moving very, very strongly around Saigon at this time to get as much territory as they can . Haig: The North Vietnamese want to get more territory as much as possible .
 Intelligence indicates that they instructed their cadres the moment a cease-fire is announced to kill all of the opponents in the areas that they control . Some of the intelligence indicates that the intelligence indicated that they . instructed their . cadres to kill their . enemies in the . areas they control
 This would be a murderous bloodbath, and it’s something that we have to consider as we press Thieu to accept what is without question a reasonable political settlement but which must also be justified on security grounds .
 Operation Enhance Plus is a massive airlift of military equipment and supplies to South Vietnam . The U.S. began the airlift on October 20, 1969 .
 If the agreement was signed on schedule on October 31, it would have to adhere immediately to its provisions for limited matériel replacement . The agreement would also apply to the agreement's provisions .
 It is important to complete as much of the envisaged Vietnamization as possible before the cutoff deadline . Therefore it was important to finish as much as possible . Vietnamization will be completed before the deadline .
 "Nothing that is done should be influenced by the U.S. election deadline," he says . "I wish to re-emphasize again that nothing that is . done should not be influenced," he adds .
 "We must have Thieu as a willing partner in making any agreement," he said . "As I outlined yesterday, we must have him as willing partner," he added .
 On October 21 Dobrynin delivered what he described as an urgent message from Brezhnev . On that day he delivered the message to the Soviet leader . Dobrynins: "I want to know what I need to know about the situation in Russia"
 The North Vietnamese had complained to him that we were reneging on our agreement and he wanted to let us know that the Soviet government expected us to adhere to the proposed schedule . He wanted to tell us that he wanted us to comply .
 Pham Van Dong had given an exclusive two-hour interview to Arnaud de Borchgrave of Newsweek .
 Dong had given the opposite impression of what the North Vietnamese had agreed to in Paris . When asked whether Thieu could be part of a tripartite coalition government after the cease-fire, Dong said . Dong said Thieu would not be a member of a coalition government .
 He replied that the National Council of Reconciliation and Concord might actually be or become a coalition government .
 This was bound to infuriate Thieu and make it even more difficult for him to accept the agreement . Thieu is expected to be the first president of Vietnam to accept it .
 By agreeing to every point we raised they were building a perfect record in the event they decided to publicize the story of the negotiations . "By agreeing to all the points we raised, we were building the perfect record," she says .
 By positioning the agreement as a Communist victory they were not only saving face domestically and internationally but initiating a psychological battle against Thieu . Dong had done with de Borchgrave, he had also positioned the deal as a victory .
 U.S. tried to create friction and suspicion between Saigon and Washington, says U.N. diplomat . They deliberately changed words in translation of the text of the agreement into Vietnamese .
 Even as they were reeling from the effects of our bombing and mining, the North Vietnamese were trying to achieve the stunning irony of accomplishing from a position of weakness what they had not been able to attain from a point of strength .
 They were trying to drive a wedge between us and Thieu; if they succeeded, they might yet use our public opinion to force us to withdraw and give them the chance they wanted to destroy Thieu’s government and conquer South Vietnam .
 I had Haig send Kissinger another cable on October 21, urging him to push Thieu as far as possible, short of actually making him break with us . Haig: "I had to send Haig another cable to Kissinger urging him ... to push ... Thieu"
 Kissinger should inform Kissinger that if there appeared to be no chance of obtaining Thieu’s agreement, Kissinger should tell him that we would have to consider making a separate agreement with the enemy . Kissinger should also tell Kissinger that there would be no way of obtaining the agreement, he said
 At this point this was not something I considered doing or that I thought would be necessary, but I wanted to impress Thieu with the seriousness of my determination to complete a settlement .
 Kissinger: Thieu would stall without giving any answer and thus force us past the signing deadline . Kissinger: The problem was not so much that he would reject the agreement outright and provoke us into breaking with him as he would stall . Kissinger's judgment: "In Kissinger’s judgment
 In the absence of any indication of Thieu’s reaction to the agreement, or even in the event that he refused to go along with it, he should go on to Hanoi as scheduled, he said .
 In recent weeks we have played a tough, ruthless game of using our election deadline as blackmail against the other side . We have used the election deadline to blackmail against each other in recent weeks . The election deadline has been used as a 'blackmail' for the Labour Party .
 We are dealing with fanatics who have been fighting for twenty-five years and have recently lost the cream of their manhood in the war . We're dealing with fans who have fought for over 25 years and lost their manliness in this war .
 "They have taken very painful decisions to make the major concessions they have. They have been very difficult to deal with," the president says . The government has taken 'painful decisions' to make concessions, he says .
 "We cannot be sure how long they will be willing to settle on the terms that are now within our grasp," says David Cameron .
 Kissinger felt the North Vietnamese would exploit Kissinger’s presence in Hanoi as a propaganda victory and use it to turn U.S. public opinion against Thieu . Kissinger refused to consider the final leg as an option unless and until the settlement had been agreed to by all parties
 On October 21 Kissinger met with a South Vietnamese working group headed by the Foreign Minister . Kissinger presented twenty-three proposed changes in the draft agreement . Kissinger opened the session with a prayer .
 Kissinger accepted 16 of the 16 minor problems as minor and probably manageable . Kissinger immediately accepted 16 as minor but probably manageable, Kissinger said . Kissinger accepted that the problems were probably minor .
 The remaining seven raised impossible demands, including withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam and elimination of the National Council of Reconciliation and Concord . The other seven demanded withdrawal of troops from the South Vietnam .
 He explained that the Communist forces, already weakened by battle and deprived of reinforcements, would eventually wither away . He also pointed out that with the unanimity required for any vote, the Council would end up being a protection rather than handicap for Saigon .
 Kissinger felt that he had been able to present his arguments persuasively . The meeting was cordial, and Kissinger said he had presented his arguments . Kissinger said that he felt that the meeting was a good example of diplomacy .
 I have requested an appointment with Thieu this evening to determine his intentions . I have asked him to meet with him to discuss his intentions, he said .
 Clearly we cannot wait much longer to make our choice since we are rapidly becoming prisoner of events . Clearly we can't wait longer to decide whether to take a stand against the government .
 In retrospect, it is now clear that I made a mistake in agreeing to a fixed date for the final leg of the World Cup final leg . The final leg will take place in the first leg of this year's final leg on Tuesday night .
 "It's clearly making us pay at this end. Doing so got us more concessions than any of us thought possible, but it's clearly paying us pay"
 I think when you read the records of our talks here you will find that we have been extremely patient with Thieu, says French President Francois Hollande . "We have to be extremely patient," says Hollande .
 The North Vietnamese accepted our formulation of the unilateral declarations regarding Laos and Cambodia . In the meantime the North Vietnam accepted our . formulation of . the . unilateral declarations .
 I immediately sent a letter to Kissinger for him to give to Thieu when they met . Kissinger sent it to Kissinger, which he later gave to the Vietnamese leader .
 "Your decision would have the most serious effects upon my ability to continue to provide support for you and for the government of South Vietnam," he writes . "It is my judgment that your decision would ... have ... serious effects"
 As the presidential campaign moved through the summer and fall of 1972, the conventional political wisdom was that I might try to turn the war to my political advantage by producing a settlement right before the election, he says . "The conventional wisdom" was that he might produce a settlement in time for
 It was ironic that, primarily because of McGovern’s extremism, but also because of his inept campaign, the political pressure turned out to be exactly the opposite . McGovern's extremism and inept campaign led to the end of his campaign .
 The opinion polls confirmed my own intuition that, in terms of voter support, my handling of the war was generally viewed as a positive issue for me . McGovern was perceived as weak and favoring surrender, he says .
 Any settlement that was hastily completed in time for the election would look suspicious and suspicious . Therefore any settlement that is hastily completed would look cynical and suspicious, he says .
 The hawks would charge that I had given away too much in order to meet a self-serving deadline, and the doves would claim, however erroneously, that I could have obtained the same terms in 1969, in 1969 .
 Kissinger pointed out that the risk in waiting until after the election was that the Communists might decide to keep fighting . Kissinger: Waiting until after election was the risk of waiting for the election .
 I was prepared to step up the bombing after the election, but there was no way of knowing whether that would make them adopt a more reasonable position before the American public’s patience ran out, before the bombing began to create serious problems with the Chinese and Soviets .
 We just don't know whether the enemy has a breaking point or, if it has, when it will come . The problem, of course, is that we just don’t know whether it has .
 "We don’t know, too, whether that situation may become too difficult for us from a political standpoint in the U.S. after the election," he says .
 I'm inclined to think that the better bargaining time for us would be immediately after the election rather than before. I'm not sure if the best bargaining time would be before the election itself .
 Before the election the enemy can still figure there is an outside chance their man can win or at least that he could come closer . Therefore, therefore, would be under pressure to have a settlement, he says .
 We hope to have an enormous mandate for bringing the war to a successful conclusion, we hope . The enemy then either has to settle or face the consequences of what we could do to them .
 My advisers differed about whether it would be easier to get a peace settlement before the election or after it, they said . My advisers differ about whether the election would be an easier time for a peace deal, they added .
 Kissinger felt strongly that the North Vietnamese would be under much mote pressure to negotiate before the election because they would expect to get better terms from me while the war was still an issue in the campaign . Kissinger: "They would expect better terms" from me .
 He was concerned that once the election had passed, they might revert to their earlier intransigence and let the war drag on at a reduced level in the hope that U.S. public opinion would force us to withdraw .
 Others felt that the North Vietnamese would be more likely to make concessions after the election when I would be armed with a landslide mandate . Others, Haig among them, felt that he would be less constrained than he had been during his first term .
 I was prepared to conclude an agreement before the election if the North Vietnamese would agree to the terms we required and if Thieu could be persuaded to come along. Personally, I leaned toward this opinion, but I was completely prepared, he says .
 Thieu's apparent determination to postpone an agreement as long as possible presented us with a difficult problem . Thieu’s apparent determination . to postpone a deal presented us a difficult task, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 The knowledge that the North Vietnamese were playing out a cleverly calculated strategy aimed at separating us from Thieu and getting us over a barrel in terms of public opinion did not make that problem any easier to handle . The North Vietnamese played a clever strategy to separate us from them and get us
 So far, it looked as if the North Vietnamese strategy had succeeded, it seemed as if it had succeeded . The North Vietnamese government's strategy has not so far succeeded .
 "If the negotiating record were made public, it would show that they had virtually capitulated and agreed to everything we required," he says . "They had virtually conceded and agreed everything we needed," he adds .
 If we decided to delay signing the agreement because of Thieu’s objections to it, or if we demanded changes in it because of him, then the North Vietnamese were likely to go public with their case and demand that we sign . If we delayed signing the deal, they would
 American public opinion would be stirred up against him by the antiwar leaders and the media, he says . "There would be tremendous pressure brought to bear to jettison him and sign the agreement on our own"
 Even in November, when Thieu’s conduct became infuriating, I still felt that if we abandoned him South Vietnam would fall to the Communists within a matter of months, and our entire effort there would have been for naught .
 Congress cut off all appropriations for the war and for aid to South Vietnam in January . I was confident that Thieu would eventually join us in signing an agreement, but Congress cut it out of our hands .
 I hoped that Thieu would accept the agreement before the November election, I was prepared to give him until the end of December to make whatever domestic preparations he felt necessary before agreeing to sign . So while I hoped for Thieu to accept the deal, I hoped he would accept it before
 "In the meantime, I felt that the most important thing was to keep the negotiations going," says the Welshman . "I felt that . I felt . that the important thing is that the negotiations continue," he says .
 On Sunday, October 22, at 8 A.M. in Saigon, Kissinger was finally summoned to Thieu’s office . Kissinger was summoned by Thieu's office at 8 a.m.
 If Thieu had decided to go along, there would still be time for Kissinger to go to Hanoi as we had agreed and for the agreement to be signed in Paris according to the schedule on October 31 .
 "I felt an enormous sense of relief and satisfaction when I received this news," she said . "I was relieved to receive this news. It was a relief," she added .
 Thieu has just rejected the entire plan or any modification of it . He refuses to discuss any further negotiations on the basis of it.
 Any settlement must contain absolute guarantees of the DMZ, total withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces, and total self-determination of South Vietnam without any reference as to how this is to be exercised .
 Kissinger sent a cable explaining how Thieu had called him back in the late afternoon and completely reversed the position he had taken in the morning . Kissinger later explained that Thieu called him later in the afternoon and reversed his position .
 Kissinger called Kissinger back to Washington for consultations, Kissinger says . De Borchgrave interview was cited as a major reason for problems with Saigon . Kissinger: "I informed them that I was calling Kissinger back"
 I reaffirmed our commitment to the substance and basic principles of the draft agreement . We are committed to achieving a negotiated settlement at the earliest opportunity, he said .
 Haig called Dobrynin in and explained that difficulties in Saigon required us to postpone the arrangements for signing a settlement . Haig explained difficulties in the Saigon had forced the postponement .
 He said it was important that the Soviets enjoin restraint on their partners, and that Hanoi not indulge in public polemics over the delay .
 In the meantime we received a sternly worded reply from the North Vietnamese, stating that they could not accept the reasons I had given for requesting a delay . They warned that unless we strictly carried out our commitments regarding the agreement and the schedule for signing it, we would bear the �
 Kissinger repeated his belief that, while Thieu’s concerns were not unjustified, the terms of the agreement were, in fact, a major victory over the Communists . Kissinger: The terms were a victory over Communists .
 He agreed to invite the North Vietnamese to Paris and present Thieu’s demands to them there . But he stressed that it was unlikely we would be able to achieve all of them .
 It is a fact that in the United States all the press, the media, and intellectuals have a vested interest in our defeat. It's a fact . In the U.S. all of the press and the media have an interest in this defeat.
 If I have seemed impatient in the last days it is because I saw opportunity slipping away. If I've seemed impatient I've been impatient, it's because I've seen opportunities slipping away, I've said .
 The next day I sent another message to Premier Dong requesting one final meeting . Mr Dong requested a final meeting with Premier Dong, who has been in China since 2007 .
 I declared that the text developed at this meeting would be considered final, and as a token of good will I offered to suspend all bombing of North Vietnam north of the 20th parallel . The text developed in the meeting was considered final . I declared the text of the text would not be
 North Vietnamese insist that the agreement is complete and no further meeting is necessary . This message crossed wires with a curt statement from the North Vietnamese insisting that the deal is complete .
 Kissinger was ready to receive Kissinger in Hanoi as scheduled; if we delayed, the war would continue . Kissinger: "They were ready to [Kissississenger] in Vietnam as scheduled" Kissinger: If we delayed it would continue, it would be a disaster .
 We stated that we shared their regret that a brief delay in signing was necessary, but we pointed out that we could not sign a document that asserted the concurrence of one of the parties when that concurrence did not exist . We said we couldn't sign a . document that . asserted
 Kissinger and Le Duc Tho agreed to a text they agreed upon would be considered final . Kissinger and Tho met in 1973 to discuss Vietnam's role in the Vietnam War .
 As soon as the text had been completed and while we were consulting with our allies, we would completely stop the bombing of North Vietnam . We went even further than I had the day before and undertook that as soon as I had been .
 It is up to the D.R. to decide whether to sacrifice all that has been achieved by a policy of public vilification and private intransigence .
 For the D.R.V. to insist on demands beyond the power of the U.S. to fulfill will permit no other conclusion than that it seeks a pretext for prolonging the conflict . The U.N. says it will not be able to fulfill any of the demands
 He railed against the major provisions of the agreement, but did not rule out his coming along at some later time . He said he did so in a way that didn't rule out a return to the political scene .
 The most important thing that came out of it was that of the two theories that Henry had laid out, the second proved to be true . The second proved that Thieu was crazy like a fox .
 President Obama is preparing himself for a cease-fire but also proving that he is participating in it, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "What happens here is that really he is preparing . He is not going to have a coalition government, etc. etc. What happens
 On the day of Thieu’s speech, I signed two veterans’ benefits bills at a ceremony in the East Room . On the same day of the speech, President Barack Obama signed two bills .
 As I spoke to the veterans I was again terribly moved when I saw the blind veterans and those in wheelchairs . Diary Diary: "I was terribly moved"
 It makes me realize what a debt we owe to these people, and how important it is to have the kind of peace that will really contribute to no more wars, rather than one that is simply a hiatus between two wars . It's important to have peace, not a hiatus that is
 There must be a lot of character in our people, that they will suffer so much and still stand up for what is right for the country . How they can still be for us is difficult to understand, but there must have been character in them, he says .
 They broadcast the general provisions of the agreement over Radio Hanoi, including the October 31 signing timetable . The agreement was broadcast over the country's national radio .
 Kissinger had already planned to hold a press conference on October 26 in order to reassure the North Vietnamese that we were serious about reaching an agreement . Thieu’s obstructionism prompted Kissinger to hold the press conference, Kissinger said .
 Kissinger said, “We believe that peace is at hand.” Kissinger said in his opening remarks . Kissinger: ‘We believe we are in the right place in the world’ Kissinger said .
 Another statement later in the briefing would also come back to haunt us, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 Kissinger briefing: "Peace is at hand" Kissinger: "I knew immediately that our bargaining position with the North Vietnamese would be seriously eroded" Ziegler: "Our problem of bringing Thieu and the South Vietnamese along would be made even more difficult"
 No less disturbing was the prospect of the premature hopes for an early settlement that would be raised at home, while the McGovern supporters would naturally claim that we were trying to manipulate the election .
 Kissinger himself realized that it was a mistake to have gone so far in order to convince the North Vietnamese of our bona fides by making a public commitment to a settlement . Kissinger himself soon realized that he had made a mistake .
 Kissinger's briefing succeeded in undercutting the enemy’s ploy and superseding their false interpretation of the proposed peace agreement . On the positive side, there was no doubt that Kissinger had succeeded in completely undercutting their ploy .
 The North Vietnamese thought they were going to surprise us by going public through the NLF with a somewhat distorted and garbled version of the peace plan . The North Vietnam thought it was going to be a surprise to us, says the Vietnamese .
 This was really going considerably further than I would have gone, and I know Henry was worried about it . Henry was really worried about going further, and he was worried that it was going too far .
 President Obama "very much did not want me to back off from what he had said," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "He very much did want me back off," says Cruz .
 The North Vietnamese ignored Kissinger’s briefing and delivered a message that they were still expecting him in Hanoi to initial the agreement . Kissinger was expected to meet with the North Vietnamese at the end of the war .
 We sent them a note repeating that we understood their disappointment at their inability to meet the October 31 signing schedule . We have proposed a final meeting on November 1 with November 20 as the new target date for initialing the agreement .
 We repeated the offer to suspend all bombing of North Vietnam as soon as the agreement had been completed, while we were consulting our allies about it . We agreed not to request any further changes after the agreement .
 I wrote to Brezhnev asking him to use his influence to urge North Vietnam to work with us to complete the agreement on a realistic schedule . At the same time, we sent a note to Peking saying that it would be greatly appreciated if the Chinese would use their considerable influence
 We are now in a position where if he doesn’t come along after the election we are going to have to put him through the wringer . If he doesn't come along, we will be putting him through a wringer, says the Labour leader .
 Henry believes he is terrified of the idea of the Americans being gone from South Vietnam . Henry believes that Henry believes, and I am inclined to think he is right, is that he is .
 Abrams: Time has come for us to cut the umbilical cord and have this baby walk by itself . Abrams, on the other hand, who is certainly no opponent of Thieu’s, feels strongly that we simply have to get out . Abrams: "The time has
 "If they can’t do it now, with all we have fed it in the way of arms and ammunition and training, etc., they will never be able to do it. If they can't do it, they won't be able,’s not,�
 Kissinger’s “peace is at hand” statement put us in a very delicate position . Kissinger: The avalanche of speculation created by Kissinger's ‘peace is in hand’ created by the statement . Kissinger's statement put the U.S. in a delicate position
 I could not allow the impression to remain that a settlement would be the guaranteed outcome of the next Paris meeting, I said . Although I did not want to dampen optimism needlessly, I couldn't let the impression of a settlement be the guarantee of a Paris meeting .
 Even if the North Vietnamese gave in to every requirement, there was no assurance that Thieu would go along . Thieu was not sure if he would agree to a deal .
 "We are going to sign the agreement when the agreement is right, not one day before," he said . "We're going to go ahead and sign the deal when the deal is right"
 Gov. McGovern responded with a charge that I had purposely misled the people about the prospects of peace . McGovern said I had deliberately misled people about peace .
 On the same day that I made this speech I authorized some relaxation of the restriction on B-52 raids over North Vietnam that had been in effect since October 13 . On that day, I authorized a relaxation of some restrictions on the raids .
 The plan now was to exert increasing pressure on Hanoi by beginning the bombing near the DMZ and then moving it slightly farther north each day . The plan was to move the bombing slightly further north of the border with Vietnam .
 The election would be over by then; the American people would have chosen their President for the next four years . Their decision would have a determining impact on the outcome of the war . The American people's decision would be a determining factor in the outcome .
 The differences between McGovern and me were fundamental in almost every area, including Vietnam war . We were diametrically Opposite in the matter of the Vietnam war, he says .
 He had pledged to end the war immediately by beginning a unilateral withdrawal without insisting on any arrangements for the return of our POWs .
 I had pledged to continue fighting until I was convinced that we had achieved a peace that was worthy of our sacrifices, that preserved the independence of South Vietnam, that had a chance of lasting after we had withdrawn our forces, he says .
 The Washington Post ran a series of news reports about alleged corruption in the Nixon campaign . It may have been completely coincidental that at the same time the Washington Post reported the reports .
 McGovern was quick to recognize that the Post's articles had far more influence in Washington and on the rest of the national media than his or Shriver’s campaign rhetoric . McGovern began to incorporate the charges made by the Post into his speeches .
 These stories reached their peak two weeks before the election, on October 25, and then ended as soon as the election was over .
 This too may have been coincidental, but that is not the way we saw it in the White House at that time . This may be the case, but it's not the same thing we saw in that time.
 Bill Timmons was named as one of the people who had received reports from the Watergate wiretaps, the Post reported on October 3 . The Post reported an allegation by “sources” that ‘sources said’ that “Bill Timmons had been named as
 It was still false when the Post repeated it three days later, this time on the front page under a big headline . The Post repeated the false story three days after, under a headline .
 On October 8 I commented in my diary on the effect this kind of story had on me . I commented on October 8, 2013, about the effect it had on my life .
 Diary Julie was worried about a story in the paper to the effect that Timmons, Odle, and one other White House aide had had access to the reports on Watergate . Diary Julie worried about the story about the White House aides .
 She said that if any of them are really guilty that we really ought to get rid of them . She said she said she would like to have them out of prison .
 'It does show how sensitive she, and probably others like her in the campaign, are about this issue,' she said .
 It is a tragedy really what happened to Adams and I must remember to have him to the White House for some occasion, says President Obama . Adams was a member of the British House of Representatives from 1964 .
 After all of his service to Eisenhower, he should not have been forced to leave under a cloud for an offense that was, at best, a question of judgment and not one of illegality or morality . He should have left the White House under no cloud .
 Adams is an impeccably honest man and left his job a relatively poor man, says Jerry Persons . Adams is a good man, he says, but he is a poor man . Adams left the job as an honest man, Persons says .
 Donald Segretti had been a college friend of Dwight Chapin and of Gordon Strachan, an aide to Haldeman . Segrettis was a college friends with Chapin, Chapin's Appointments Secretary .
 Segretti, like Tuck, was supposed to use his imagination and his sense of humor to cause minor disarray among the opposition . Segreti was also supposed to be able to cause chaos among opposition .
 He had not kept tabs on Segretti's activity, but the sinister implications of the Post’s account were nothing like what he had authorized .
 Segretti was accused of spying and sabotage for the same kind of thing that had been dubbed creative mischief when Tuck had done it . As I saw it then, by printing this story less than a month before the election, the Post was accusing Segreti of spying .
 Segretti was falsely linked to Watergate break-in, but it was unfair to link him to Watergate, he says . He says it was grossly untrue and unfair to have him linked to the Watergate break in . Segreti: "It is grossly untrue" to link Segrett
 A few days later, reporters from the Post phoned the White House to warn that they were about to run a new story that would charge Chapin and Hunt were Segretti’s contacts and directed his activities . The story was about to be run by the Post .
 This would tie Chapin by implication into the Watergate break-in stories . Chapin would have been a major figure in the Watergate scandal .
 Segretti briefed Chapin and Hunt on what the grand jury would ask about his activities, reporters said . The reporters also said that they were going to charge Chapin, Hunt and Hunt with misleading Segreti . Segrettei was indicted on charges related to his activities .
 Chapin issued a statement denying the charges, saying they were untrue . Chapin has been accused of sexual assault, sexual assault and drug possession .
 The story that was actually published on the front page of the Post on October 15 had been subtly changed from the one the reporters had described to us over the phone . The story was subtly changed to the one that was published that night .
 Chapin was denied changes to the wording of his denial . Chapin did not receive an opportunity to modify his denial of the change .
 The story as run did not accuse Chapin of briefing Segretti on the grand jury, and weakened the alleged connection with Hunt . The story did not say Chapin was involved in the alleged link to Hunt .
 There is no way of separating facts from fiction in this kind of story three weeks before a presidential election . Of course, there was no way to separate facts and fiction from fiction .
 Chapin hired Segretti to cause disarray in the Democrats’ campaigns, but it was true that Chapin had hired Segreti . The most damaging parts of the story were completely false, but the most damaging part was true .
 There are other political hazards involved in trying to set the story straight . And there are other risks involved in setting it straight .
 Segretti was paid by Chapin's lawyer and campaign aide, Herb Kalmbach . Haldeman had given Chapin approval to have Segrette paid by his lawyer and a campaign aide . Segrettesi was hired by a campaign adviser, Chapin says .
 There was the danger of focusing the story more strongly on the White House. Thus there was the risk of focusing attention on the Obama administration.
 Ziegler denied Chapin directed any campaign of spying and sabotage . He denounced the “hearsay, innuendo, and guilt by association” and then doggedly refused to comment on the specifics .
 The diary note I dictated that night conveys the way I felt about these charges against Chapin stemming from his Segretti contacts . Chapin was charged with conspiracy to cover up the charges against him in the 1990s .
 Big story on Chapin broke today and it was certainly guilt by association, hearsay, etc. etc. The big story broke today . It was certainly guilty by association and hearsay by association .
 "We could not be knocked off balance by these stories because they were going to be stepped up in tempo this week," Haldeman said .
 I said under no circumstances would we move in that direction because it was not fair since the press were simply using a double standard on all of this. It is not fair, he said. I said .
 It is rather ironical that they excused the Dick Tuck and other operations as being just good clean fun, but where we are doing it, it is grim and vicious espionage and sabotage of the worst type .
 Teddy Kennedy decided that this was the sort of thing he should investigate personally . In the meantime Teddy decided to investigate personally.
 Segretti is accused of using questionable campaign tactics in his Senate campaign . The Senate subcommittee on Administrative Practices will begin a probe of the campaign tactics .
 It claimed that the fund had been “uncovered during the FBI Watergate bugging investigation’s ‘covering’ of the fund was ‘uncovered’ by the FBI, it said .
 Haldeman was one of those who approved expenditures of hundreds of thousands of dollars for these activities . The story stated that Haldman had approved expenditures .
 There was a cash fund at the CRP set aside for intelligencegathering and other campaign projects that had to be handled discreetly . It was true that there was a . cash fund set aside .
 Haldeman, acting in my name, theoretically could approve money from any fund connected with my campaign . And Haldman could presumably approve funds from that fund .
 'It obviously disturbs him but he is a strong man and took it very, very well well,' says the former footballer .
 He says that the story was inaccurate insofar as the Hugh Sloan testimony was concerned . But in any event, the Post is going to continue to nibble away .
 Haldeman spoke rather darkly of the fact that there was a clique in the White House that were out to get him . The White House has a history of scandal .
 I called Haldeman after I got back to the Residence and tried to reassure him by saying that I was relaxed about it . I knew we were going to have to take some heat in the next two weeks, but that we would sail through and not be knocked off balance .
 Ben Bradlee of the Post says that this administration is committed to the destruction of the press .
 The Post has every right to see to it that people who would give us a fair shake get a break over others who are going to give us the knife . I think what he fears is what’s going to happen to the Washington Post news .
 George McGovern was supposed to be the peace candidate, but his supporters resorted to violent attacks against him . "Violent and destructive attacks" were directed against McGovern's supporters, he says .
 This demonstration was promoted by leaflets distributed from the McGovern headquarters in Berkeley, California . The demonstration was held in Berkeley .
 In Los Angeles, McGovern’s Southern California campaign coordinator admitted to approving the use of telephone banks at their headquarters to promote a massive demonstration against me . leaflets were handed out at approximately fifty McGovern headquarters .
 The Ervin Committee was later told that a McGovern spokesman had falsely represented to the press that this effort had not been authorized . The committee was told that McGovern had falsely told the press this was not authorized .
 In Morgantown, West Virginia, demonstrators tried to shout down a speech by Tricia.com . Protesters tried to shut down the speech by CNN's Tricia Watts .
 In Columbus, Ohio, guests attending a Republican fund raiser at which Ted Agnew spoke were spat upon and subjected to shouts and obscenities . Guests attending the fund-raiser were spat on and spat upon, according to a report .
 D.C. Democrats for Nixon headquarters was stormed by nearly a hundred people . Nearly a hundred tore down posters, destroyed campaign material, damaged office equipment, and stole office supplies .
 When the violators departed, they left McGovern campaign leaflets behind . McGovern's campaign leaflets were left behind .
 'Far more serious was the use of outright violence aimed at my campaign. Far more serious ... violence aimed towards my campaign,' he said .
 CRP headquarters in Phoenix and Austin were completely destroyed by arsonists . CRP HQs were destroyed in Phoenix, Austin and Austin, Texas, in arson attacks .
 Our headquarters in Dayton, Ohio, was broken into twice and equipment and records damaged . The second time, McGovern slogans were painted on the walls and windows of our offices .
 At the Alameda County headquarters in California, a bomb exploded, causing extensive damage . The explosion caused extensive damage to the county's headquarters .
 It became routine to find scurrilous literature handed out in advance of appearances . 'It became routine' to find material handed out before an appearance .
 After the campaign it was revealed that for all its sanctimony, the McGovern high command was not above considering organized spying .
 A paid operative was proposed to be planted aboard Ted Agnew’s campaign airplane to spy on Agnew and report his activities to the McGovern camp . At the highest levels of their campaign it was proposed that a paid operative be planted on the plane .
 According to Senate Watergate Committee records, one of those responsible for this plan claimed that the same thing had been done successfully against my campaign in 1968 . The same thing was said to have happened against Sen. Richard Nixon in 1968, according to Senate records .
 No money or drugs were taken, but my medical files were removed from a locked closet and left strewn about the floor of the office . No drugs or money were taken from the office, but the files were taken .
 Ehrlichman: "It might lead to the conclusion either that we had set it up, or it really didn’t amount to anything at all" He says it could lead to either conclusion that it was set up or that it didn't amount to nothing .
 "The most important thing, as I told Haldeman, was to conduct an investigation," he said . "There would be no indication of cover-up in the event that the people that broke in had something"
 Demonstrators and arsonists detracted heavily from the spirit of this last campaign, the mayor says . The demonstrators and arsonist's arsonists "detracted heavily", he says .
 Watergate "double standard" allowed coverage of Watergate, but ignored serious violations of law and ethics committed against us, he says . More frustrating to me, however, was the double standard that permitted massive and frequently distorted coverage, he writes .
 "In light of what I saw being done against us in this campaign, the righteous moralizing about Segretti’s activities rang hollow," says John Sutter . Sutter: In light of the campaign, "righteous moralizing" against him "rings hollow"
 The last political rally of his career as a candidate took place at Ontario, California, a few miles and twenty-six years from where the first one had taken place in Pomona .
 We arrived at night, after a two-day final campaign swing through Illinois, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, North Carolina, and New Mexico .
 "The overflow crowd at the Ontario airport seemed to sense the emotional and symbolic meaning of the moment for me," writes CNN.com's John D. Sutter . D.Sutter: The overflow crowd seemed to feel the emotional, symbolic meaning for me .
 "I told them how I had been all across the nation during the past few weeks," says President Obama . "I've been all over the nation. I told them ... I've been everywhere," he says .
 There was a time in the U.S. when the country was deeply divided . The West and the East were deeply divided, and the North and South were at odds . Now, the nation is divided again, and again, with a new generation .
 I talked about our goals and then turned back to California and talked about how good the people of California had been to us, sharing our victories and standing by us in defeats . I talked to the people in California, sharing victories and defeats, he said .
 On election eve, November 6, 1972, I dictated various recollections of my day in San Clemente . I dictated these recollections .
 Today I went down to the Red Beach, walked two miles, went in the water for about twenty minutes . I went in water for twenty minutes. I went to the beach today.
 When I went further down the beach—I decided to first go just to the half-mile mark and then went on to the peace sign [which someone had carved in the red sandstone cliff], which is about three-quarters of a mile. When I decided to go further down
 The peace sign had been worn down by the weather . Interestingly, the peace sign was worn down .
 This may be an indication that those who have held up this sign finally have had their comeuppance . They are really in for some heavy depression. This may have been a sign of depression .
 On the East Coast millions had already watched a brief election eve address that I had recorded on videotape earlier in the day . Millions of Americans were watching a brief address from the White House on election eve .
 I said that I would not insult anyone’s intelligence by rehashing the issues and making a last-minute plea for votes, he said . I wouldn't insult anyone's intelligence, he added. "I said that he would not ... insult anyone .”
 I said this election was probably the clearest choice between the candidates for President ever presented to the American people in the twentieth century . I said that this election . was probably . probably the best choice between . candidates for . President and vice president in the history of American politics .
 My diary for election eve concluded on a rather subdued and analytical note . My diary concluded on an analytical note with a subdued and subdued note .
 President Barack Obama's first four years in office ends on November 7 . If he lost the election tomorrow, the presidency would be in someone else's hands .
 We are not going to lose it, of course, lacking a miracle beyond which nothing has been seen up to this point . We are looking for a miracle, but it is not beyond that beyond which .
 "When I think of the ups and downs through the years, and particularly in this last year, I must say that someone must have been walking with us," she says . "Someone must have walked with us. When I think . of the downs, I would say that."
 The Peking trip, the Moscow trip, and then the way we have handled the campaign—must deserve some grudging respect from even our critics . Even our critics have been critical of the way the campaign has been handled, he says .
 The only sour note of the whole thing is Watergate and Segretti . The only other sour note is the fact that Watergate was brought to the fore .
 When we arrived at the White House at 6 P.M., we were greeted by a cheering staff . The White House was greeted by cheering staff at the time .
 Election Day 1972: "It seems appropriate before the votes are counted, tell you what a privilege the last four years have been"
 "To take a divided nation, mired in war, losing its confidence, wracked by intellectuals without conviction, and give it a new purpose and overcome its hesitations" "But it cannot affect the historic achievement," says President Obama. "It cannot affect a historic achievement"
 "It has been an inspiration to see your fortitude in adversity and your willingness to walk alone," says mother . "It's been an inspiring experience," she says .
 "For this, as well as for the unfailing human kindness and consideration, I shall always be grateful" For this, he says, "I shall always remember the kindness of human kindness"
 Henry and his family had dinner together while waiting for the polls to close and for the first returns to come in . Henry: "Our family was together while we waited for the election results to be announced"
 It had held firmly in place for twenty-five years, since the time it had been fitted in 1947 .
 "I was to appear on television in a few hours, so we called my dentist, Dr. Dr. Paul, to make sure we had the right dentist for the time"
 President Obama came up with a temporary cap for the president . The cap was quickly crafted by a White House official .
 "I was in considerable discomfort, and I knew that if I smiled too broadly the cap might fall off" I was in discomfort, but I was not afraid to smile .
 I returned to the Lincoln Sitting Room and continued putting down notes for the remarks I would be making later . I went back and continued to write notes for later remarks .
 'They were elated because it was already apparent that I was going to win by a landslide,' he says . 'I'm going to be in a landslide. I'm going for a landslide'
 "Even if it was not really a surprise, the moment was still exciting for all of us. Even if it wasn't a surprise," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Shortly after eight o'clock Haldeman phoned over more detailed reports from the election-monitoring teams that had been set up .
 When all the results were in, Republicans gained 12 seats in the House, but lost two seats in Senate . Republicans gained a total of 12 seats, but still lost two in the Senate .
 I was concerned about our failure to do better in Congress, but I was at least certain that no Republican candidate had lost for lack of money . "I was concerned that no Republicans had lost because of lack of funds," he said .
 "On examination I found that in many cases our candidates had been defeated by younger liberals who had labor support and labor money," he says . "I found that many of these candidates were defeated by young liberals," he adds .
 Ed thought the message was gracious, but Tricia and Julie thought it cold and arch . Julie and Tricia said it was a gracious gesture . Ed thought it was gracious . Tricia, Julie and Julie were disappointed .
 Thousands of calls and cables began pouring in to celebrate the great victory . Thousands of people celebrated the victory with calls and cable calls .
 This was the second largest percentage of the popular vote in our history of two-party politics, and the greatest ever given a Republican candidate . This was also the greatest percentage of popular vote given a GOP candidate .
 I received the largest number of popular votes ever cast for a presidential candidate, says Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton received the second largest amount of electoral votes in the history of presidential elections .
 The support was both wide and deep—it was truly a New Majority landslide of the kind I had called for in my acceptance speech in August . The support for the president's election in 2016 was "wide and deep," he said .
 Gallup: I won a majority of every key population group identified by Gallup except blacks and the Democrats . President Obama won the White House majority in 2008 . Obama's victory was a landslide victory for the president .
 Four of these groups, manual workers, Catholics, members of labor union families, and people with only grade school educations, had never before been in Republican camp .
 A few days later I described in my diary a curious feeling, perhaps a foreboding, that muted my enjoyment of this triumphal moment . A few . days later, I described a curious . feeling that muted his enjoyment of the moment, he said .
 I had determined before this election evening to make it as memorable a one as possible for everybody concerned. "I had determined to make this election night as memorable as possible," he said .
 "By the time that I had to prepare for the office telecast I was not as upbeat as I should have been. Certainly by the . time that . had to . prepare for . the office . telecast, "I'm not as happy as I expected to be," says
 The rest of the family seemed to think that they got enough of a thrill out of it . It was not the first time the family had been in contact with each other .
 "I think the very fact that the victory made up for any failure to react more enthusiastically than I did. I think the victory was so overwhelming made up . I think that the very . fact that . the victory . made . up for . any failure on my part, I did
 I'm at a loss to explain the melancholy that settled over me on that victorious night . I am at a lack to explain why I was so moved by the defeat .
 To some extent the marring effects of Watergate may have played a part, to some extent our failure to win Congress, and to a greater extent the fact that we had not yet been able to end the war in Vietnam, may have helped .
 Whatever the reasons, I allowed myself only a few minutes to reflect on the past . Whatever the reason, it was not the first time I had a chance to do so .
 "I was confident that a new era was about to begin, and I was eager to begin it," says President Obama . "I'm eager to start it. I was confident," says Obama .
 My first priority after the election was to end the war. The end of the war would be the end of this war, says David Cameron .
 I hoped that both parties would enter the negotiations with the idea that after some hard bargaining each would accept an agreement embodying less than their most extreme position . Now that the pressure has been removed, I hope that both sides would enter negotiations .
 None of the objective factors had changed, but now that there was no election deadline, it remained to be seen what the Communists’ negotiating tactics would be. It remained to see what the Communist Party’s negotiating tactics will be.
 Thieu, while urging that we put forward his demands, he was still pretending that he was prepared to go it alone . Thieu was pretending he was going it alone, he said .
 Le Duc Tho was pretending that the Communists were completely sincere in their desire to conclude an agreement on its merits and then to observe its terms, he said . And he was pretending to be sincere in saying he wanted to conclude a deal .
 From our intelligence sources, we knew that Thieu was secretly telling his military leaders to be ready for a cease-fire before Christmas . We knew that the North Vietnamese were still planning to capture as much territory as possible just before the ceasefire .
 The next meeting with the North Vietnamese is scheduled for midNovember .
 If anything was to come from it, Thieu’s cooperation was now essential, he said . Thieu's cooperation with the Vietnamese government was essential, the president said .
 "I decided that Haig, whom Thieu trusted, would once again be the best emissary," he said . Haig was a trusted confidante of Thieu, who Thieu liked .
 He left for Saigon on November 9, carrying another letter I had written to Thieu . He left with another letter he'd written to Saigon .
 In it I dealt point by point with the objections Thieu had raised to the terms of the October agreement and clarified the positions that we would present to the North Vietnamese at the next Paris meeting . In it, the Vietnamese leader raised the objections that he had raised .
 I urged Haig to remind Thieu that although I had won the White House by a landslide, he must remember that the Senate was now even more dovish than it had been before the election . I also urged him to remind Haig that although he had won, the Senate
 If it appeared that Thieu was the obstacle to achieving a settlement, the Senate would cut off the funds that South Vietnam needed to survive . There was no question that if we did not have a settlement completed before Congress returned in January, the South Vietnam would be cut off .
 Thieu handed Haig a reply that repeated his objections, particularly regarding the presence of North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam .
 "I responded by reiterating that we would not be able to obtain all the adjustments he had requested," she said . "We would not have been able to ... obtain all of the adjustments," she added .
 I pointed out that far more important than what was said in any agreement was what we would do in the event the enemy renewed its aggression . I pointed to the fact that we would be prepared to deal with the enemy if it attacked again, he said .
 There was no doubt in his mind that Thieu knew that total intransigence would be fatal . The Vietnamese leader knew that the war would be over unless he was willing to negotiate .
 In the meantime, however, he had been careful not to push Thieu too far . In the past, he has been careful to push the Vietnamese leader .
 "Thieu has firmly laid his prestige on the line with his entire government," he says . "If we take a totally unreasonable stance with him, we may force him to commit political suicide," he adds .
 I am not sure that this would serve our best interests and therefore recommend the scarier approach of trying to work this problem with Thieu right up to the wire . I am also concerned that this is not the best interests of the country .
 Haig correctly pointed out that if we broke with Thieu and then found that the North Vietnamese were still intransigent, we would have burned both our bridges . Haig: "We would have burn both bridges if we found that Thieu was intranigent"
 I told Kissinger and Haig that I felt December 8 was the final date by which we must have signed an agreement in order to make sure that everything was completely settled by the time Congress reconvened, he says .
 If Thieu could not be convinced to come along by then, I could be reluctantly prepared to reach a separate agreement . I could also be forced to reach an agreement with the Vietnamese government .
 Whether we could meet the December 8 deadline would depend upon the outcome of the November 20 meeting in Paris, Paris .
 "We're not concerned about being right on the record. As I told Henry when he began to rumble around to the effect that we have a very good record in this instance, I said, Henry, we’re not concerned . We’ve not been right on
 What we are concerned about is to save South Vietnam and that’s why we had to temporize with Thieu as much as we did . Our interest is in getting South Vietnam to survive and Thieu at present seems to be the only leader who could lead them in that direction
 It would, of course, be a disappointment in the event that Thieu does not go along, but under those circumstances we shall simply have to make our own deal, get our prisoners, have our withdrawal, try to save Cambodia and Laos, and then say that Vietnamization has been
 Tho opened by reading a lengthy speech complaining that we had reneged on the October agreement . Tho complained that the agreement had been re-negotiated .
 The charges that we had unilaterally prevented an agreement were unacceptable were unacceptable . The charges were unacceptable, he said, but they were not justified .
 Kissinger: "We want to negotiate seriously to end the war and our intention to maintain the essence of the agreement that had been achieved in October" Kissinger finished his opening remarks by reiterating his desire to negotiate .
 More than 60 requested changes to the text of the agreement were added to it . South Vietnamese requested more than 60 changes and clarifications to the agreement .
 Thieu’s insistence on pull-back of some of the North Vietnamese forces out of South Vietnam . Thieu's insistence on pulling-back some of his forces from South Vietnam was a major issue .
 There was also a proposal that the DMZ be respected by each party . North Vietnamese troops in the South would be a violation of this provision .
 Le Duc Tho took note of the list and indicated that he might have some changes of his own to propose .
 Kissinger had made no distinction between the changes we wanted and those we were presenting on behalf of the South Vietnamese . Kissinger had no distinction from the changes he wanted to make in Vietnam .
 His approach, however, made it clear that we were prepared to negotiate on all of them . His approach to negotiations was clear that he wanted to negotiate, but that was not the case .
 At the close of the meeting he was asked whether this was actually our final proposal . At the end of this week, he said: 'This is not our final plan'
 Kissinger suggested that the technical experts meet that night to study the proposed changes . Kissinger suggests that the experts meet later that evening to discuss the proposal .
 As the session adjourned on a friendly note, it seemed possible that the Communists would treat the proposals as a basis for negotiation . An agreement might be reached during this round of negotiations .
 The North Vietnamese countered our proposed changes and hardened their position on the remaining unresolved issues . At the meeting the next day, however, the North Vietnamese hardened their positions . In some areas they even pulled back to their position before October 8 .
 It seemed that Kissinger’s fears had been realized and that the North Vietnamese, relieved of the pressure of our election deadline, were prepared to stall the negotiations in an attempt to exploit our differences with Thieu .
 Kissinger reported that there had been another unproductive meeting on November 22 . Kissinger sent him a message, which he could use if and when he saw fit, or not, in an effort to get the talks moving .
 The message was in the form of a directive stating that unless the other side showed the same willingness to be reasonable that we were showing, he should discontinue the talks and we would have to resume military activity until they were ready to negotiate .
 They must be disabused of the idea they seem to have that we have no other choice but to settle on their terms . The British government must not think we have to settle with them on terms, it says . We need to be disused of their idea that we must settle
 President will take whatever action he considers necessary to protect the U.S. interest, says CNN's John Sutter . "We do have another choice," he says .
 Kissinger reported that although he had made limited progress in specific areas, we were still far apart on some of the provisions that Thieu considered most important . After the next session in Paris on November 23 Kissinger reported . Kissinger: "Although we had made some progress in some areas, ... we
 "We had to face the fact that barring a sudden change by the North Vietnamese, we were not going to have an acceptable deal," says the British PM .
 He felt that Saigon held out for so many substantial alterations, not only would no agreement be reached but the North Vietnamese would continue to retract concessions they had already granted . The North Vietnamese felt that as long as Saigon continued to hold out, no agreement was reached .
 Option One would be to break off the talks at the next meeting and dramatically step up our bombing while we reviewed our negotiating strategy . We would be prepared to accept with and without the South Vietnamese, he says .
 Option Two would be to decide upon fall-back positions on each of Thieu’s major objections and present them as our final offer . Option Two is to decide on fall back positions for Thieu's major objections .
 If the North Vietnamese agreed to them, we could still claim to have improved on the October terms . The North Vietnamese could still have agreed to the terms, which they agreed to .
 Kissinger: This proposal would be "substantially better optically, and marginally better substantively" than the agreement we concluded in October . Kissinger: It would be “substantive’s" better than the deal reached in October, Kissinger says .
 The corollary of Option Tw o would be a complete break with Thieu if he refused to accept the agreement it produced . If he did, he would have to accept it, it would be "a complete break"
 I knew that this would be a serious step to take, but I strongly opposed breaking off the talks and resuming the bombing unless it was absolutely necessary to compel the enemy to negotiate . I know that this is a serious move, but it was a very difficult decision to take .
 I was also becoming irritated by some of Thieu’s tactics, and I felt that we could no longer be in the position of forestalling an agreement solely to buy him time . I was becoming irritated with some of his tactics, he said .
 If Kissinger could reach a satisfactory agreement, I wanted him to do so, Kissinger said . Therefore, if Kissinger could find a satisfactory deal, he should do so . Kissinger said: "I wanted to see if Kissinger was able to reach an agreement with me"
 Then Thieu could make his own decision about joining us or going it alone . Then he could decide whether he wants to join forces or go it alone, he could join forces .
 In my view the October 8 agreement was one which certainly would have been in our interest . In his view, he said it was a good idea to have an agreement with the UK government .
 You should try to improve it to take account of Saigon’s conditions as much as possible . Saigon's conditions should be taken into account as much of possible .
 We have no choice but to reach agreement along the lines of the October 8 principles . We must recognize the fundamental reality that we must reach agreement with the principles .
 I became concerned that, in my attempt to encourage Kissinger to pursue Option Two, I might have overstated my reluctance to resume bombing if there was no other choice left to us to make the enemy negotiate seriously . Almost immediately I became . concerned that . in his attempt to . encourage Kissinger
 I sent him a cable the next morning, November 24, saying that if the Communists remained intransigent, he could suspend the talks for a week . I felt it was essential that he not be denied this bargaining chip, and consequently I sent it to him . The next day I
 I recognize that this is a high-risk option, but it is one I am prepared to take if the only alternative is an agreement which is worse than that of the October 8 draft . The draft agreement does not clear up any of the ambiguities which we and Saigon are
 We must take our lumps and see it through. And if because of the pursuit of our strategy and the accident of the timing of the election, we are now in a public relations corner, we must take their lumps .
 In giving this direction, we all must realize that there is no way whatever that we can mobilize public opinion behind us as in the case of November 3, Cambodia, and May 8. In giving .
 We owe it to the sacrifice that has been made to date by so many to do what is right . The cost in our public support will be massive. But at least with the election behind us, we owe it, to the sacrifices we made .
 Kissinger told Le Duc Tho that I was prepared to take actions as strong as the ones of May 8 . North Vietnamese immediately became more conciliatory after Kissinger's warning .
 This seemed to confirm our suspicions that their intransigence was in fact a negotiating tactic . It was a sign that the government was prepared to negotiate with the EU .
 They did not want the talks to end any more than we did, they said . They were prepared to engage once again to engage in serious negotiations, they added . They said .
 Kissinger: "There was no possibility that we could come near anything that would satisfy all of Thieu’s requirements" Kissinger: The problem was that while we had now considerably improved the agreement over the October 8 terms, there was no chance that it would satisfy Thieu's requirements
 We knew from cable intercepts that Thieu was in a deliberate stalling pattern . This meant that no improvements in the agreement would have any effect on him until he decided that he had sufficiently prepared his people to accept it .
 A major break with Thieu seemed inevitable if we were going to complete the agreement right away . So despite our intensive efforts and the improvements we had been able to make in the agreement, a major break seemed inevitable .
 Kissinger recommends a week’s recess during which we could force a reckoning with Thieu . Kissinger therefore once again recommended a week-long recess . Kissinger said we should then formulate our own final position .
 "I still believed, however, that it was important to keep the negotiating channels open and working," says Obama . Obama said: "It was important that it's important that the negotiations were kept open"
 I considered Thieu’s position to be ill-advised, and I felt more strongly than ever that if we could get a good agreement, we should do so . We should let Thieu make his choice accordingly, he said .
 Kissinger said it was preferable for him to stay in Paris and continue talking as long as there was a remote chance of reaching an agreement . Kissinger: "I immediately replied to Kissinger that I thought it would be preferable to him to remain in Paris"
 Kissinger and Le Duc Tho agreed on the desirability of recessing the talks for several days . The North Vietnamese were still stonewalling the talks, however, so after another inconclusive session on November 25, they agreed to postpone the talks .
 He arrived back around 10:30 and we spent an hour on it at that time . Diary Diary Diary: "He arrived back about 10,30" Diary Diary .
 I had to back him off the position that we really had a viable option to break off the talks with the North and resume the bombing for a period of time, he said . I had backed him off .
 We must play the card out with the North Vietnamese as if it would work that way, we must have no illusions that we now have no option except to settle . We have no illusion that we must play a card with North Vietnam as if this would work .
 We sent a message to the North Vietnamese that we would return to the talks with the idea of making one last effort. We sent the message to North Vietnam that . The North Vietnamese government has been in talks with North Korea since April .
 I ordered a reduction of the bombing of North Vietnam, President Nixon said . In order to demonstrate our good faith and desire to reach a settlement, I ordered the bombing, he said .
 On November 29 Kissinger ushered Nguyen Phu Duc, President Thieu’s personal representative at the Paris talks, into the Oval Office . Kissinger ushered the Vietnamese president's personal representative into the White House . The Vietnamese president is expected to make a speech at the end of the month .
 "We thought that if I made a brutally tough presentation to Duc, that would succeed in bringing home to Thieu the precariousness of his position and the danger of being left on his own," says the French minister .
 I said that it was not a question of lacking sympathy for Saigon’s predicament; but we had to face the reality of the situation . I said: “We had to be realistic about the situation in Saigon. We had to confront the reality,” says
 If we did not end the war by concluding a settlement at the next Paris session, then when Congress returned in January it would cut off the appropriations, he says . The war would end in January by cutting off appropriations .
 I had already informed Thieu that I had canvassed the staunchest congressional supporters of my Vietnam policy regarding the October terms, and they had unanimously avowed that if Thieu alone were standing in the way of accepting such terms, they would personally lead the fight against him .
 On November 30 I met with Kissinger, Haig, Laird, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to discuss our military plans in the event that the talks were broken off or that the agreement reached was subsequently violated by the Communists .
 In the former case there were contingency plans for three-day and six-day bombing strikes against North Vietnam . In the past, the U.S. bombed North Vietnam during the Vietnam War .
 In the latter case I was adamant that our response be swift and strong. In the aftermath of the incident, we were adamant that we had a swift response to the situation .
 Kissinger’s next meeting with the North Vietnamese was scheduled for Monday, December 4 . Kissinger's next meeting is scheduled for December 4, 2015 . Kissinger is scheduled to meet with North Vietnamese officials .
 If no settlement emerged from this meeting, it would be very difficult to predict how or when the war would end . The U.S. has been at odds with Israel and Syria over the years .
 Kissinger would need all his formidable skills to convince the North Vietnamese that we would stay in and continue fighting unless they agreed to a settlement . Kissinger would also need to convince South Vietnamese that they would stop fighting and get out unless a settlement was reached, he says .
 He blamed his ‘peace is at hand’ statement for having caused many of our present troubles . He talked about resigning if he was unable to conclude an agreement .
 Le Duc Tho "categorically rejected every change we had requested", says Pia Mia Mia . "He introduced several new and unacceptable demands of his own," she says of the Chinese leader .
 "Even if we decided to conclude an agreement without Thieu, the terms were no longer acceptable to us," he said . "Now, even if we . decided to . conclude an . agreement without . Thieu ... now, even . if we decide to conclude a . deal without
 "It's not impossible that Tho is playing chicken and is waiting for us to cave tomorrow," he said . "Tho is not playing chicken," he added .
 There is almost no doubt that Hanoi is prepared now to break off the negotiations and go another military round . There is also no doubt there will be another round of negotiations . The Vietnamese capital is located in the southern part of the country .
 The central issue is that Hanoi has apparently decided to mount a frontal challenge to us such as we faced last May, says the Dutchman . Hanoa has apparently chosen to mount an attack on us, he says . The government says it is not concerned about the threat posed
 If so, they are gambling on our unwillingness to do what is necessary . They are playing for a clear-cut victory through our split with Saigon or our domestic collapse rather than run the risk of a negotiated settlement .
 If they were willing to settle now, I could come up with acceptable formulas and would not need to bother you, I say . I'm not going to bother them, but I'm going to make it easier to do it .
 We are faced with the same kind of hard decisions as last spring. Assuming they are going to the other route, we are . We're faced with a similar kind of decision .
 It would leave us with no way of explaining our actions since October, and it would provide Hanoi with an enormous propaganda victory . It would provide us with a huge propaganda victory, says U.S. ambassador to Vietnam .
 The Communists would know that if we were willing to swallow this backdown, we would also lack the capability to react to any violations . Most important, agreeing to return to the October terms would deprive us of any credibility in policing the agreement, he says .
 Kissinger concluded that while the October agreement had been a good one, intervening events had made it impossible to accept now . Kissinger concludes that while it was a good deal, it was impossible now to accept it now .
 The first was to propose settling on the basis of where we had stood in the previous week’s round; that would enable us to keep the changes and improvements Le Duc Tho had agreed to . That would be the first time we had settled on a new round . The first
 Neither Hanoi nor Saigon was likely to accept it, says U.S. ambassador to Vietnam . U.N. diplomat: "Hanoi and Saigon will not accept it"
 Kissinger recommended keeping changes to which the North Vietnamese had already agreed . Kissinger: "The second tactical choice, and the one Kissinger recommended, was to insist on retaining those changes" North Vietnamese agreed .
 The Communists were unlikely to accept these requirements, but if for some reason they did, we could use the improvements they represented over the October terms as a lever to bring Thieu along . We could use these improvements as a leverage to bring him along .
 None of these points were sufficiently critical that the North Vietnamese, if they had genuinely wanted an agreement, could not have accepted them . The North Vietnamese are not likely to have accepted these points, he says .
 If the Communists refused and talks broke off, we would have no choice but to step up our bombing as a means of making them agree to a redefined negotiating position . If the Communist Party refused, the bombing would have to be stepped up as a result .
 Kissinger recommended I go on television to enlist the support of the American people for the stern measures that would be required . Kissinger recommended that Kissinger go on TV to enlist public support for stern measures . Kissinger: "Kissississian" was the best way to get around the world .
 Instead of a frantic and probably foredoomed attempt to rally public opinion, I preferred an unannounced stepping up of the bombing . Instead of trying to rally U.S. public opinion behind a major escalation of the war, I would prefer a step-up of the bombings .
 Kissinger would hold a press conference to explain where we stood in terms of the new attempts at reaching a settlement, and why the negotiations had broken down . This would be coupled with a statement by Kissinger to explain why the talks broke down .
 Diary Diary Diary diary: "Rallying the people as we did November 3 on Cambodia, and then May 8 has now reached the point of no return" Diary Diary: "What Henry does not understand is what I tried to get across to him yesterday before he left, and that
 Expectations were so high prior to the election and since the election that to go before the American people on television and say that we have been tricked again by the Communists, that we were misled by them, is simply going to be a loser, he says .
 In the event the negotiations broke off, he saw no alternative to stepping up the bombing drastically, and seizing the public relations initiative by using a speech to rally the American people .
 He suggested in another cable that he insist upon Thieu’s demand for withdrawal of all North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam as a way of causing Tho to break off the talks .
 I would set forward clear and achievable objectives that would add up to a complete American withdrawal in exchange for the return of our POWs . Then he would return to Washington, he would deliver the television address, he says .
 We would then continue bombing until the North Vietnamese agreed to return all our prisoners, he said . This would take between six and eight months, he added .
 I remained unconvinced of the wisdom and the feasibility of this course of action, I said . I remained convinced of this decision, but I was not convinced .
 It was my firm conviction that we must not be responsible—or be portrayed as being responsible—for the breakdown of the talks. It was a firm conviction, I said .
 We must cast this if we possibly can in the light that the North Vietnamese rather than we were responsible for the breakdown in negotiations . We should talk in as low-key a manner as possible, and act as strongly as possible without making a big to-do about the fact that we
 As far as the people are concerned, they assume that we have been bombing all along which, of course, is a fact, he says . The level of bombing has been lower than the high level immediately after May 8 .
 Time will tell us tomorrow as to whether or not we have a way out, but I must say that . Four weeks after the election the situation is certainly not a very happy prospect .
 There was clearly a difference of opinion between Kissinger and me regarding the best strategy to pursue. Kissinger and Kissinger had a disagreement of opinion . Kissinger was the president of the United States in the early 1960s .
 He felt that the only thing we could do was break off the talks and step up the bombing to make the North Vietnamese agree to a settlement . Once again he felt that we had reached a point where we had to break off talks .
 "Once again I believed it was important to keep the talks going for as long as there was even a remote chance" that they might yield a settlement . And once again, I believe it is important to continue the talks .
 Talks have reached an impasse at this time and each side is returning home for consultation . Instead we should treat the situation as a case where the talks have reached impasse, it should be treated as a matter of principle .
 If there is any such dramatic break-off, it should come from their side, not ours . If there were any such break-offs, it would come from the side of the opposition, not ourselves .
 In any event, our side should not appear to be taking the initiative in ending the talks . In any case, it is not the first time the two sides have taken the initiative .
 U.S. should conduct a low-key, non-dramatic briefing to explain the current situation, he says . Then when you return to the United States, he should talk briefly about the situation .
 You would indicate that we are ready to resume negotiations at any time when it will be productive to do so . You would say that we would be ready to continue negotiations .
 Hard-liners say it would be wrong for the President to go on TV to explain why talks have failed . They say he should not explain the details of why the talks failed .
 Vietnamese parties have a stalemate evident, but soon after there will be no way to keep it from making the stalemate visible .
 Kissinger sent a cable to Kissinger stating that we had reached a crossroads and must decide what we wanted to do . Kissinger sent the cable stating that the U.S. was at a "crossroads" Kissinger said that the United States had to decide what to do next .
 There was no reason to think that the North Vietnamese would respond to this approach, and there was a risk involved even if they did, because Thieu was almost certain to reject it and break with us . The risk involved is that Thieu would reject it, and even if he did
 Option Two involved provoking a break-off of the talks by making some unacceptable demand and resuming massive bombing until the North Vietnamese agreed to return our POWs in exchange for our military withdrawal from Vietnam . Option Two was to return POWs to the North Vietnam in return for our withdrawal from
 Kissinger still felt that if we could keep up the bombing for six months, the North Vietnamese would be forced to accept this straight prisoners-for-withdrawal trade as the basis of a settlement . Kissinger: "If we could . keep up bombing ... through the summer of 1973,
 It was to be presumed that Congress would not cut off funds if it could be shown that the North Vietnamese were not willing to return our POWs . Congress was to assume that Congress wouldn't cut off funding if it was shown that North Vietnamese weren't willing .
 I am again enormously impressed by the skillful and dedicated way that you're handling a terribly difficult situation. After reading all your messages, I am enormously impressed with the skill and dedication of your work .
 "Before a decision of this importance is made, it is imperative that I talk with you personally. Before a decision, I would like to speak to you personally"
 I suggest that you start tomorrow’s session by saying that the President has read all of your messages and a full transcript of the conversations to date . To accomplish this goal, he suggests that you . start tomorrow's session with saying that he has read .
 He is shocked by the total intransigence of the North Vietnamese and particularly by the fact that they have backed off of the commitments they made in October, he says .
 I want you to go down a list of specific questions on all of the proposals that are contained in your minimum position . Then, I want to ask whether they will agree to any language covering the withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces from South Vietnam. Then, you should also ask if they will
 I assume that their answers to virtually all of these questions will be negative, but the purpose is to make the record clear once and for all . The purpose of this article is to ask them to answer the questions they will answer .
 You will then tell them that you will report the answers they have given to the President directly and then you will contact them as to the time and the conditions for further meetings . You will also be able to contact them if you want to meet again .
 If the negotiations are to be broken off, it must be absolutely clear that they were responsible for breaking off the negotiations rather than me. If they were broken off they must be responsible for it, rather than for me,’s David Cameron .
 I realize that you think that if I go on television that I can rally the American people to support an indefinite continuation of the war simply for the purpose of getting our prisoners back, he says . "I realize that ... if I . go on TV that I . . I can't
 North Vietnam propaganda can wear thin within a matter of weeks, especially as propaganda organs hammer away at the fact that we had a much better deal in hand . Saigon’s intransigence, we were unable to complete it. But, that can wear very thin .
 If it does not end in a settlement, the UK will embark on a very heavy bombing in the North, says David Cameron . Cameron says he knows and agrees that there is a remote possibility of a breakthrough .
 "We are going to do it without a dramatic television announcement of it," says President Obama . "We're going to go ahead with it," he says of the announcement .
 The thing to do here is to take the heat from the Washington establishment, who know the difference, for stepping up the bombing which will occur for a few days, and simply act strongly without escalating publicity about our actions .
 Failure to make progress would result in termination of talks, Dobrynin says . "We will be presenting our rock-bottom position at the next meeting," he says .
 He reiterated that the Soviets had been working continuously on North Vietnam to get them to accept an agreement . He seemed to be very disturbed, and reiterated that he was disturbed .
 Moscow and Washington had bigger fish to fry and it was in our mutual interest to eliminate this irritant in order to enable our mutual relations to continue to improve . A few days later I stepped up the pressure by calling him and telling him that it was definitely in Moscow’s interest
 U.S. President Barack Obama has been accused of taking “grave steps” against China . The U.K. government says the situation has become critical . French President Nicolas Sarkozy says he will speak to the Chinese ambassador in Paris .
 When Kissinger and Le Duc Tho met on December 7, very little was accomplished . Kissinger: "Very little has been accomplished. This is a very small step forward"
 In fact, the North Vietnamese had already agreed to it during the November negotiations . The North Vietnamese agreed to the deal during the negotiations .
 Le Duc Tho insisted on a new and vague clause about both sides “assessing regulations” for movement across the DMZ . The clause had the effect of calling its integrity into question, he said .
 I sent a cable to the North Vietnamese, saying that I felt the inclusion of their new clause would make the conclusion of the agreement difficult and suggesting that the language they had agreed to at the November 23 session be restored .
 On December 9, with only this one remaining item to negotiate, I allowed myself to begin feeling optimistic about the possibility of having an agreement before Christmas . "I'm optimistic that we can have a deal before Christmas," she says .
 It would be painful if Thieu refused to go along, but there was no question that we had done everything possible to help him . Now we had to look to our own interests and conclude an agreement if the terms were acceptable, he said .
 Kissinger’s recommending breaking off the talks and bombing, and which seemed to be ending with a settlement in sight . I thought back over the roller-coaster events of the past week, which had begun with Kissinger's recommendation breaking off talks . Kissinger: "There is no end
 Henry went back to Paris firmly convinced that he would quickly, within a matter of two days, reach agreement with the North Vietnamese . Diary Diary Diary .
 Meetings will only last two days -- Monday and Tuesday, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "He told me that the meetings would only last Tuesday," he says .
 The North Vietnamese surprised him by slapping him in the face with a wet fish . The fish was a fish caught in the act of surprise .
 The South wants to drive the North out of South Vietnam and get us to stick with them until this goal is accomplished . The South is trying to get the North to drive out of Vietnam .
 As far as we are concerned, we must bring the war to an end on an honorable basis as quickly as possible . We must end the war on a 'honorable basis'
 Expectations have been built so high now that our failing to bring the war to an end would have a terribly depressing effect on this country . No television speech is ever going to rally the people, despite Henry’s feelings based on past performances that this could be the case .
 As I have pointed out in previous memos, and as I see it now very clearly, the country can be rallied when it’s on its back and when you ask it to get up and fight, President Obama says .
 The country is already very optimistic, to go in and tell them that things are in a hell of a shape doesn’t rally them—it simply rallies our opponents and depresses our friends . On the other hand, when the country is . optimistic, it doesn't rally them
 For better or for worse, we are on a course now where we have no choice but to make the very best settlement that we can . We have to do the best possible to see that it is enforced. We are on the course now, we must make the best settlement we can
 On December 10 the North Vietnamese replied to my cable, saying that they considered their position on the DMZ to be very reasonable . North Vietnam replied to me on December 10 saying their position is reasonable . The North Vietnamese responded by saying they consider their position very reasonable, CNN reported .
 It seemed clear that they had made a decision to stall the negotiations . It was clear that the negotiations had been made to stall .
 "That afternoon I decided to stir things up and remove any doubts about our resolution. That afternoon, I decided I wanted to stir up the conversation," he said . "I decided that we would be happy to be together again," he added .
 I said that Hanoi should abide by the language it had already agreed to, and I told him bluntly that it was definitely in Moscow’s interest to aid the negotiations and get them over with since we both had bigger fish to fry, he said . I said it was
 As it stood, Hanoi’s preoccupation with changing the DMZ arrangement could risk concluding an agreement that had now been largely achieved, I said . I said: Hanois’ preoccupations with changing DMZ arrangements could risk a deal that had been
 At the meeting on Monday, December 11, the North Vietnamese were totally inflexible on the DMZ issue . The meeting was held in Hanoi, Vietnam's capital .
 Kissinger’s report characterized their conduct as composed of equal parts of insolence, guile, and stalling . Kissinger's report: Their conduct was composed of . equal parts . parts of . insolence . and guile . Kissinger: "Their conduct was characterized as . equal
 They were somewhat more forthcoming the next day, but there was still no real progress . The next day they were more forthcoming, but they were still not forthcoming .
 Le Duc Tho was purposely trying to prevent either a settlement of the war or a break-off of the talks . The talks were meant to be aimed at ending the war and ending the peace process .
 North Vietnamese intransigence at the negotiating table may have been at least in part a result of our unsuccessful attempts to pressure Thieu into accepting an agreement . It was possible that they simply planned to exploit the increasingly obvious split between Saigon and Saigon .
 There was no doubt that the Communists had infiltrated the Saigon government . Hanoi was therefore aware of our warnings of congressional fund cutoffs in January, he says .
 Leaders in Hanoi may be divided over whether to conclude the agreement . Of course it could also be possible that leaders in Vietnam were divided and making up their minds .
 "They wish to ensure that we have no solid pretext for taking tough actions," he says . On the other hand, they want to ensure the government has no pretext to take tough action .
 They could have settled in three hours anytime anytime these past few days if they wanted to, but they have deliberately avoided this . The team have been deliberately avoiding this. They have been in the middle of a three-hour standstill .
 I do not think they will send this telegram, however, in the absence of strong pressures . I don't think the government will send it, but I do think it will, however .
 At the next meeting, on December 13, Le Duc Tho made it clear that he had no intention of reaching an agreement . The next meeting is scheduled for December 13 .
 Kissinger suggested that the talks be recessed and no more meetings be held until after Christmas . Kissinger was scheduled to return to Hanoi for consultations the next day . He was scheduled for consultations next day, so he recessed the talks .
 Kissinger and Kissinger "completely agreed on the cynicism and perfidy of the North Vietnamese" Kissinger and I completely agreed on Kissinger's view of North Vietnam, he says .
 He even thought that Le Duc Tho’s occasional fainting spells during the talks had been contrivances aimed at gaining a negotiating advantage by eliciting sympathy for him .
 Kissinger said, “They’re just a bunch of shits.” Kissinger said . Kissinger: ‘They” were ‘a bunch of shits’ and ‘just a bunch of shits'
 I had reluctantly decided that we had now reached the point where only the strongest action would have any effect in convincing Hanoi that negotiating a fair settlement with us was a better option for them than continuing the war . I had decided to take action only if it was to convince Hano
 The only question was how much bombing would be needed to force Hanoi to settle . The Vietnamese capital was ruled out of Vietnam in the 1970s .
 Kissinger recommended resuming full-scale bombing south of the 20th parallel, and intensifying bombing in southern Laos . Kissinger recommended reseeding the mines of Haiphong Harbor and resuming bombing south .
 Kissinger: “We’ll take the same heat for big blows as for little blows. When I checked and found that the area south of the 20th parallel was largely rice paddies and jungle, I told Kissinger, "We will take the . same heat" as for
 If we renew the bombing, it will have to be something new, he says . Hanoi and Haiphong should be hit with B-52s, he adds .
 Kissinger pointed out that Hanoi and Haiphong were heavily defended with Soviet surface-to-air missiles . Kissinger also said that Vietnam was heavily defended by the Soviet Union in the 1970s . Kissinger said that the U.S. did not want to invade Vietnam .
 If we attacked them, we would have to be prepared for new losses and casualties and POWs, he says . "If we attacked [the U.S. forces] we would be prepared to ... be prepared," he adds .
 On December 14 I issued an order, to become effective three days hence, for the reseeding of the mines in Haiphong Harbor, for resumed aerial reconnaissance and for B-52 strikes against military targets .
 The bombing plan included 16 major transportation, power, and Radio Hanoi transmitter targets . The bombing included six communications command and control targets in outlying area .
 There were thirteen targets in the Haiphong area, including shipyards and docks . There were 13 targets, including ships and docks, in the area .
 When the first plans came in for the bombing, I was appalled to find that the planes had to be borrowed from different commands, involving complicated logistics and large amounts of red tape . The planes were borrowed from various commands and involved complicated logistics .
 The day after the bombing began, I think I shook Admiral Moorer when I called him and said, “I don’t want any more of this crap’s crap about the fact that we couldn't hit this target or that one.” He says he
 I stressed that we must hit and hit hard or there was no point in doing it at all . I stress that we need to hit and . hit hard. or there is no point to doing it all. I stressed .
 "If the enemy detected any reticence in our actions, they would discount the whole exercise," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "We are not going to be surprised by our actions. We will not be surprised if the enemy detect our reticency."
 The order to renew bombing the week before Christmas was the most difficult decision I made during the war . At the same time, however, it was also one of the most clear-cut and necessary ones, he says .
 Diary Diary Henry talked rather emotionally about the fact that this was a very courageous decision, but I pointed out to him that there was no other choice . Diary Diary: "Even though we made a good, cheap peace now, to have it break within a matter of a year or two
 "We are going to face up to the music at this time with the hope that this will gain their attention and keep them from reacting to us later," the singer says .
 Kissinger will conduct a public briefing on the state of the negotiations, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "We decided that Kissinger would conduct a ... public ... briefing"
 It was vitally important that we lay responsibility for the current impasse on the North Vietnamese . The North Vietnamese are responsible for the impasse, writes David Frum .
 I met with him several times to review what he would say; I also dictated two long memoranda covering the points I considered it important for him to make . I also dictate two memoranda to help him make the points he would make .
 I felt that we had to get across that the North Vietnamese had agreed to a settlement, then reneged on a number of points, and now were refusing to negotiate seriously . I felt I had to . to . get across . that North Vietnamese are refusing to . negotiate seriously,
 Kissinger should criticize Thieu for insisting on total victory when what we wanted was a just peace that both sides would be able to keep and live with . I also said that Kissinger should criticise Kissinger for insisting that Thieu won't accept a peace that would be good enough .
 In the early morning hours of Sunday, December 17, our planes reseeded the mines in Haiphong Harbor . The mines were discovered in the early hours of that morning .
 The tough decision has now been made and is under way with regard to the bombing around Haiphong . The decision is now under way to decide whether to continue bombing the area .
 SAM opposition expected to be down or at least suppressed on second and third waves . Of course, there are two more waves to go, but they expect on the second, third waves to be suppressed .
 At least, we can only pray that that will be the case and hope that it is the case .
 The May 8 decision may have been the most difficult one in retrospect . Cambodia was just as difficult in its way, and November 3 was difficult, he says .
 This one was heartrending due to the fact that everything was moving along in the right direction . But this one was . The family was heartbroken by the heartbreak .
 "There is such great uncertainty as to what reaction there will be as a result of what we have done," she says .
 I have called Moorer to be sure to stiffen his back with regard to the need to follow through on these attacks . I've called him to 'stiffle his back' over the attacks .
 I suppose that we may be pressing him too hard, but I fear that the Air Force and the Navy may in carrying out orders have been too cautious at times in the past . Our political objectives have not been achieved because of too much caution on the military side, he says . I
 "We simply have to take losses if we are going to accomplish our objectives," says President Obama . President Obama: "I'm not going to be afraid to lose. I'm not afraid to take a loss."
 Churchill’s admonition in his book on World War I, that one can have a policy of audacity or one can follow a . policy of caution, but it is disastrous to try to follow a policy . at the same time, Churchill said .
 We have now gone down the audacious line and we must continue until we get some sort of a break. We must continue. We need to get a break from this. We have to continue. It is the only way we can get back to the top of the world .
 Many people could not understand why I did not “go public” with the reasons for the December bombing . “I did not "go public" with the reason for the bombing,” he says .
 I did not feel that the American people were ready to be rallied at this time as they had been on November 3 and on May 8. As I have already indicated, I didn't feel that . The American people are ready to rally, he said .
 "I was convinced that any public statements would have been counterproductive to the possibility of resumed negotiations," he says . "But more important, I was convinced [I] would not have been directly counterproductive," he adds .
 If I had announced that we were resuming bombing for the purpose of forcing the North Vietnamese to negotiate, their national pride and their ideological fanaticism would never have allowed them to accept the international loss of face involved in caving to such an ultimatum .
 "I did it with the minimum amount of rhetoric and publicity, and it succeeded exactly as I had intended," says the president . "So I did it ... with the minimal amount of ... publicity and publicity," he says .
 Our brief but massive use of force got the message through to Hanoi while still allowing them to back off their intransigent position without having to acknowledge that they were doing so because of military pressure from us .
 North Vietnam is "deliberately and frivolously delaying the talks," says French President Francois Hollande . French President Hollande says North Vietnam has been deliberately delaying talks with the North .
 We proposed returning to the text of the agreement as it had stood after the November 23 session, with the addition of one or two subsequently negotiated changes, we said . We propose returning to text as it stood after November 23 .
 "On this basis we would be prepared to meet again after December 26 to conclude an agreement," says President Obama .
 I decided to make every possible effort to convince Thieu that in the event the North Vietnamese agreed to resume negotiations, it was imperative that he join us in offering reasonable terms Hanoi would be willing to accept . I decided that we would also make .
 Haig arrived in Saigon on December 19, carrying the strongest letter I had yet written to Thieu . Haig's letter was the strongest he'd ever written to the South Korean leader .
 Haig told Thieu that I had dictated the letter personally and that no one else in our government had seen it . Haig said he had dictated it personally, and that Thieu had not been able to read it .
 After reading the letter, he looked up and said that it was obvious that he was not being asked to sign an agreement for peace but rather an agreement with continued U.S. support . Thieu had read the letter through twice, he said .
 Haig replied that as a soldier and as someone familiar with Communist treachery, he agreed with Thieu’s assessment . Haig: "As a soldier ... I agree with his assessment. As a soldier, I agree"
 U.S. would fight with knives and bayonets, being careful not to do anything sufficient to justify American retaliation . But this time they would fight this time with knives, bayonetets .
 In this way my guarantees to enforce the agreement would never be put to the test, and the Communists would have a free hand against him and his government . "In this way I guarantee to enforce this deal would never put to a test," he said .
 After this meeting Thieu leaked word to reporters that we had tried to force him to accept an ultimatum and that he had refused . The Vietnamese leader leaked word that he refused to accept the terms of the deal .
 I was shocked when I learned this, and I felt we would now be justified in breaking with him and making a separate peace with Hanoi. I felt it would be justified to break with him, and make peace with him . I was surprised when I . learned this .
 I was reluctant to allow our annoyance with him to lead us to do anything that might bring about Communist domination of South Vietnam . But I was still reluctant to let our annoyance lead to him being a Communist .
 On December 21 there were thirty sorties flown against three new targets . B-52 sorties were carried out against targets .
 My major concern during the first week of bombing was not the sharp wave of criticism, which I had expected, but the high losses of B-52s, he says . "My major concern was the high loss of the B.52s," he adds .
 I noted on December 23, “I raised holy hell about the fact that they kept going over the same targets at the same time.” I noted that the White House had not been able to keep up with their targets .
 I was, therefore, not surprised, although deeply disappointed, when we lost five planes on the second or third day . I was therefore, although . disappointed, with the loss of five planes, I was disappointed .
 The Pentagon began scheduling the strikes at different times and on different routes, thus denying the enemy the knowledge of when and where the strikes would take place and thereby reducing their ability to shoot down our planes .
 On December 22 we sent a message to the North Vietnamese requesting a meeting for January 3 . The North Vietnamese government has agreed to hold a meeting with the U.S. on January 3.
 If they accepted, we offered to stop the bombing north of the 20th parallel on December 31 and suspend it for the duration of the meeting . If they accept, we offer to stop bombing north . We also offered to suspend bombing for duration of meeting .
 In Congress, members of both parties took to Twitter to voice their displeasure at Obama's immigration policy .
 Columnists and the media broke down about the way they had during the election and on all the Vietnam decisions previously .
 The record of the liberal left media on Vietnam is perhaps one of the most disgraceful in the whole history of communications in this country. The record is disgraceful, he writes .
 Those in the media who cannot bear the thought of this administration under my leadership bringing off the peace on an honorable basis . They have so long predicted would be impossible, he says .
 The election was a terrible blow to them and this is their first opportunity to recover from the election and to strike back . This is the first opportunity for the Labour Party to recover and strike back, says David Cameron . The election is a great opportunity for them, says Cameron .
 "It was especially gratifying to receive calls of support from Nelson Rockefeller and Ronald Reagan," she says . Nelson Rockefeller, Ronald Reagan and Nelson Rockefeller were among those who called her .
 Senator James Buckley also stood behind me, as did Howard Baker, Bob Taft, and Chuck Percy . Howard Baker stood behind him, as well as Howard Baker .
 John Connally called daily to report some new and positive sampling of public opinion . One of his strongest supporters was Connally, who called daily, to report new polls .
 The pressure inside the White House became intense as the criticism outside mounted . The White House faced criticism from the outside .
 I knew how sincerely troubled many of them were because of the bombing . I understood how difficult the bombing made it for many to face their friends and even their families during what should have been a happy holiday season .
 Tricia and Ed were in Europe traveling, and Julie was also there to be with David . Julie and Tricia were also there for David .
 "We were both depressed to find how empty the house seemed without them. Pat and I naturally urged them to go, but I think we were both disappointed to find the house empty without them."
 If the bombing did not succeed in forcing the North Vietnamese back to the negotiating table, there was no way of knowing how—or whether—the Vietnam war would end . Casting a dark shadow over everything was the knowledge that if the bombing failed to succeed, the war would never end .
 The main thought that occurred to me at this early hour of the morning the day before Christmas is that I must get away from the thought of considering the office at any time a burden .
 "I actually do not consider it a burden, an agony, etc., as did Eisenhower and also to a certain extent Johnson," he says . "I'm not sure if it's a burden or agony," he adds .
 "The term glorious burden is the best description. As a matter of fact, I think the term 'gladly burden' is best description .
 On this day before Christmas it is God's great gift to me to have the opportunity to exert leadership, not only for America but on the world scene, because of the size of the mandate and also the strength of the country .
 After World War II our power was greater because of the monopoly of the bomb and the weakness of Europe and Japan as well as China and Russia . In a sense, of course, this is not true because of this, he says . But it's not true that immediately after World War
 Most of the World War II greats are gone, except for Chiang Kai-shek . Today, most of the WWII greats have been gone .
 This, on the one hand, imposes an enormous responsibility but, of course, at the same time, is the greatest opportunity an individual could have . This is an enormous opportunity, he says. This is a great opportunity for an individual, he adds .
 From this day forward I am going to look upon it that way and rise to the challenge with as much excitement, energy, enthusiasm, and, wherever possible, real joy that I can muster . I'm looking forward to the end of my career as a professional footballer .
 God’s help will be required as will the help of loyal people on the staff and the family . The family will continue to look for the best possible way to survive .
 A new group of Nixon loyalists, of course, is an urgent necessity, but this really begins a new period . The tape concludes with that thought: "A period of always reminding myself of the glorious burden of the presidency"
 Saigon time on December 24 a twenty-four-hour Christmas truce I had approved began in Vietnam . The truce began in Saigon, Vietnam, a year after President Nixon signed a peace treaty .
 On Christmas Day I made phone calls to many of our long-time friends and supporters across the country. "On Christmas Day, I made calls to [many of them] friends," he said . "I made calls with many of my long-term friends, supporters," he added
 All in all, the Christmas calls didn't produce anything important or different, except not too much talk about the bombing .
 "My guess is that they were all concerned about the media handling of it," she said . "They were concerned that the media handled it badly," she added .
 Reagan said CBS under World War II circumstances would have been perhaps charged with treason . Reagan mentioned that and said CBS would have faced treason charges .
 Martha Mitchell sounded very up when I called her, which is encouraging because John Mitchell has gone through hell with her and I am glad that she is finally recovering . Martha Mitchell sounds very up and I'm glad she's finally recovering from her ordeal .
 "Perhaps the two weeks or so down here will make a great difference in getting all of them back on the track in a way that John can continue to be effective politically because he is one of the wisest men," says President Obama .
 Henry called to wish us a Merry Christmas but obviously needed a little cheering up, which I was totally able to do because I am confident we are doing the right thing . Henry called me to say he needed a bit of cheer up, but I was able to . I'm confident we
 It is inevitable that not only the President and the First Lady become more and more lonely individuals in a sense who have to depend on fewer and fewer people who can give them a lift when they need it . Ironically there are millions more who know them and who would help if they could just
 It is a question not of too many friends but really too few -- one of the inevitable consequences of this position . It is not of 'too many friends' but of too few, it is one of many .
 As this Christmas Day ends I am thankful for Manolo and Fina, for the wonderful Filipinos and the staff, for Bebe and Julie and Tricia, for all of those who basically are our family at a time that the girls are so far away .
 According to his wishes, he lay in state at the Truman Library in Independence, Missouri . He laid in state in his honor .
 On December 27 Pat and Pat and I flew there to pay our respects to him and to call on Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . "Pat and Pat flew there and paid our respects," she said .
 There was considerable pressure from some of the staff to continue the Christmas truce for a few more days . Some staff members wanted the truce to be extended to a few days .
 North Vietnam sent the first signal that they had had enough . That afternoon the North Vietnamese sent the . first signal . that afternoon . The North Vietnamese . had enough. That afternoon .
 The bombing was not a precondition to agreeing to another meeting, which they proposed for January 8 in Paris . We received a message from them condemning what they called “extermination bombing,” but they did not require that the bombing be stopped as a pre-condition to
 We replied that we would like to begin technical talks to begin on January 2 if the Kissinger meeting was to be delayed until January 8 . Kissinger meeting should be delayed to January 8, Kissinger said .
 We offered to stop the bombing above the 20th parallel once arrangements for the meeting had been completed and had been publicly announced . The bombing was stopped once arrangements had been made public .
 On December 28 the North Vietnamese gave in and confirmed the January 2 and January 8 dates . The North Vietnam gave in on December 28 . On January 8 and January 2 dates will be January 8 .
 Washington time on December 29 bombing above the 20th parallel was suspended . Washington time was suspended on New Year's Day .
 Kissinger will meet with Le Duc Tho on January 8 to resume Paris negotiations . The next morning Kissinger announced that the Paris negotiations would be resumed . Kissinger: "The next morning we announced that we had resumed negotiations"
 The real question is whether the announcement today will be interpreted in the public mind as having been the result of a policy that worked . The announcement is not the first time a policy has been announced that it has worked .
 "Of course, it will not be so interpreted by our opponents in the media and Congress," he says . Of course, he says. Of course .
 Henry always looks at it in terms of the merits, and on the merits we know that what this is is a very stunning capitulation by the enemy to our terms . Henry always looked at the merits of the debate, and we know what this was .
 Most of the TV reporters and the next morning’s newspapers put the emphasis on the bombing halt rather than the resumption of talks . Most of them indicated that it was not clear whether the return to negotiations was the result of the bombing .
 "We’ll just have to trust to the good judgment of the people to see it," says Colson . As I said to Colson, “We'll just have . to trust the good judgement of the . people to . see it.
 Just before midnight, I looked back over the day and then ahead to the coming year . I looked ahead ahead of the 2015 New Year with a positive outlook .
 As the year 1972 ends I have much to be grateful for—China, Russia, May 8, the election victory, and, of course, the need to bomb Hanoi-Haiphong, that decision, I think, can make the next four years much more successful than
 Harry Truman said he did not know whether he would be able to attend the memorial service in Washington . Truman had experienced severe heart pains after attending a recent Texas-Alabama football game and his doctor told him not to travel .
 "We continued to play the Soviet and Chinese strategies for whatever they might turn out to be worth," says President Obama .
 Kissinger went to see Dobrynin and told him that the things the Soviets wanted would have to stay on the back burner until Vietnam was settled . Kissinger: "Mideast settlement, a European security conference, nuclear weapons agreements" were put on back burner .
 Vietnam war impeded the kind of further progress that would benefit both our countries, he says . And I wrote a letter to Chou En-lai, saying that the Vietnam war had impeded progress .
 Teddy Kennedy proposed a similar resolution to the Senate Democratic Caucus, where it passed 36 to 12 . Teddy Kennedy's proposal was similar to a similar proposal proposed by Teddy Kennedy .
 The atmosphere of the White House leadership breakfast at the next morning was tense . The atmosphere at the breakfast was tense, the president says .
 At the end I made a short speech about my reasons for the bombing and why I was sure it was the only way to get a settlement . "At the end of the speech, I gave a speech about why I had to do it," he said .
 I concluded, “Gentlemen, I will take the responsibility if these negotiations fail.” Mr. Obama said he will take responsibility if negotiations fail .
 "Ever since the election I had virtually written off any hope of receiving support or cooperation from them," he says .
 I could see that they were going to try to use the Vietnam issue to pull themselves together after the McGovern debacle . I'm sure they're going to use it to pull them together after McGovern's debacle .
 On January 6, Kissinger and Kissinger met at Camp David to discuss strategy he should follow . Kissinger: "Before he left for Paris, before he left, we discussed the negotiating strategy" Kissinger says. Kissinger: 'I'm not going to be surprised'
 He described the two options from which we had to choose in December last year . During the last round of negotiations in December he had described the options .
 Under Option One we would agree to an immediate settlement on the best terms we could negotiate . Under Option 1 we would . agree to a immediate settlement . Under option One, the settlement would be agreed to an 'immediate settlement' under the terms of the agreement .
 Under Option Two we would break with Thieu and continue the bombing until the North Vietnamese agreed to return our POWs in exchange for our complete withdrawal . Under Option 2, we would continue bombing until we received a return of POWs from the North Vietnam .
 "I was determined that this round of negotiations would produce an agreement," Kissinger says . Kissinger: "I strongly conveyed my sentiments to Kissinger" Kissinger says.
 I put it to Henry that even if we could go back to the October 8 agreement that we should take it, having in mind that there will be a lot of details that will have been ironed out so that we can claim some improvement over that agreement .
 I told him that a poor settlement on Option One would be better for us than Option Two at its best would be . I said that a bad settlement would have been better for the family than a good settlement would be, he said .
 He has finally come around to that point of view, although he believes that both from the standpoint of South Vietnam and perhaps our own standpoint in the long term, we might be better off with Option Two . He believes that from South Vietnam's standpoint, it might be best off with option
 "War-weariness has reached the point that Option Two is just too much for us to carry on. I think he overlooks the fact that as far as our situation here is concerned, the situation here has reached a point that Warweariness is reaching the point . I think
 The war continues to take too much of our attention from other international issues, such as the Mideast . It also has a detrimental effect on our international relations, not only with the Soviet and the Chinese but even with our allies .
 That night I tried to list all the pluses and minuses to see if I could find some clue to the way things would turn out . That night he tried to find out what he thought would happen next .
 As of the end of last week, there was a good chance that the enemy was coming back to negotiate a settlement . Certainly as of the last week there were a good chances that this was not the case .
 The international support they have had and the support from the Democrats in Congress may cool them off, convince them that they can hang on longer . The support of the Democratic Party in Congress and the international support for the Syrian refugees may cool the waters off .
 "I might resort to resumption of the bombing in the Hanoi area," he says . "I have told him that as far as our internal planning is concerned, we cannot consider this to be a viable option"
 He feels that another card we have is the threat to withdraw the agreement altogether . He feels the threat is that the agreement will be withdrawn altogether .
 Hanoi wants an agreement now for the reason that this gives them some standing in the South, whereas an American bug-out ironically would still leave them with the necessity of winning militarily in the south .
 Technical talks have made some progress this week on the four easier issues, with the four tougher ones left for next week . The four tougher issues are still to be discussed next week.
 The North Vietnamese have launched offensives in the South may indicate that they are trying to grab territory and villages, etc., prior to the time that a cease-fire takes place . Also, the fact that the North Vietnam have launched ... may indicate they are ... grabbing territory, villages
 The South Vietnamese seem to be coming more into line. Another plus item is that the South Vietnamese are coming more than line. South Vietnam seems to be more than willing to cooperate with the government.
 Intelligence indicates that Thieu is telling visitors that it is not a peace agreement that he is going to get, but a commitment from the United States to continue to protect South Vietnam in the event such an agreement is broken .
 This, of course, is exactly the line I gave him in my letter which Haig delivered to him . Haig's letter was delivered to the British Prime Minister .
 In the midst of the tense days of the December bombing and the furore it provoked, new Watergate problems began to surface . The bombing sparked a new Watergate scandal in the aftermath .
 Howard Hunt’s wife was killed in a plane crash on December 8 . Hunt had apparently been disconsolate and on the verge of a breakdown . Hunt's wife was also killed in the plane crash .
 Hunt was about to face a jail term, Colson began to worry about him . Colson was worried Hunt was going to be sent to prison . Hunt was jailed for a year for his part in the case of a drug charge .
 On the White House staff there were the first signs of finger-pointing, tentative and without evidence . The first signs were tentative, without evidence, of finger pointing .
 One disturbing note was Haldeman’s comment that Colson may have been aware of Watergate business .
 Haldeman: Colson was insisting on getting information with regard to attempts of the Democrats to disrupt our convention, etc. Colson’s point was that Colson wanted to get the information .
 Of course, Colson may have been insisting on such information but he may not have been aware of what means were being used .
 "I simply can’t believe, based on my conversations with Colson, that he would have been so stupid as to think we could get such information through attempting to bug the other side. I’m not sure what happened, but I'm sure it happened."
 "I made another note about this problem three days later, on Saturday, January 6. I made this note three days after I made a note about it on January 6 .
 Diary Colson says he tried to keep Hunt in line from turning state’s evidence . Colson told me Friday that he had tried to do everything he could to stop Hunt turning state evidence .
 After what happened to Hunt’s wife, etc. etc., I think we have a very good case for showing some clemency. I think it's very good for us to show some cleMency. Hunt, Hunt's wife, and Hunt's daughter are victims of
 It was Colson’s view apparently that either Haldeman or Ehrlichman or both might have been more deeply involved than has been indicated . Colson: ‘Haldeman’ and ‘Ehrlichmen’ were ‘more deeply involved
 Colson says Magruder may have mentioned the names of Haldeman and Ehrlichman in telling the Watergate people to get information . Colson’s point is that Magruders is a name-dropper .
 Some of the meetings took place in Mitchell’s office at the Justice Department, Colson says . Colson, too, says some of those meetings were held in Mitchell's office .
 This would seem hard for me to believe but then again during the campaign people are not as rational or responsible as they normally would be . This would be hard to believe, but it would seem that people would be more rational and responsible than usual .
 This, I know, must be a great burden for Haldeman and Ehrlichman during this past tough week . I could see that something was eating them without knowing what. This must have been a big burden for them, he says .
 I was concerned about these speculations, but I saw them as manifestations of the routine staff animosities that had long existed between Colson and Mitchell . Colson, Mitchell and Ehrlichman were at the center of the staff feud .
 It now seems clear that Colson was sending messages of reassurance to Hunt through his lawyer . Hunt took those signals to be signals of eventual clemency, he says . Colson says he knew Colson's lawyer was trying to reassure Hunt .
 "I cannot even rule out the possibility that I knew similar reassurance was being given to the other defendants," he says . "I can't rule out ... I cannot rule out . out of the possibility"
 "I certainly do not remember it, but where Watergate is concerned I have learned not to be categorical," he says . He says he has learned that Watergate is not about Watergate .
 Hunt and others pleaded guilty in early January . Hunt and the others were found guilty in a federal court on Friday .
 I thought this would spare us the difficulties of a noisy public trial and all the distraction that would produce at such a critical time, I thought it would spare them the difficulties . The trial will be held in a bid to find out if the trial is successful .
 Kissinger met with Le Duc Tho on Monday, January 8, for four and a half hours . Kissinger: "I'm not afraid to go to China" Kissinger: China is the world's most powerful state of power .
 Kissinger’s report to me that night he pointed out that it would probably not be realistic to expect the Communists to give in or give up on the first day back after the bombing . Nothing was accomplished, but Kissinger said it was probably not realistic for the Communists .
 I was naturally disappointed, but there was nothing to do but wait and hope . I was disappointed with the result, but I was forced to wait for the best .
 That night I recorded some reflections on the eve of my sixtieth birthday . That night, I recorded a video of myself in honour of my birthday .
 Life can seem to be at an end as it appeared to be on January 9, 1963, and then has turned completely around by January 9 , 1973 . All in all, as the day is finished, I look back over the past ten years and realize how life can seem at an
 "It all has to do with spirit, as I emphasized to Colson, who is only forty-one years of age," he said .
 "He was obviously depressed tonight, probably because of the Hunt matter, etc., but I think I lifted him a bit by what we said," he said . "I think I lift him by what I said," the coach said .
 Kissinger will give a report from Kissinger today which should tell us one way or another whether there is going to be any breakthrough in the talks . Kissinger is expected to give his report on the situation today .
 I noted in the paper this morning that they made a great point out of the fact that the protocol was icy when Henry arrived . Henry arrived at the White House in Washington, DC .
 Henry will not be able to return to the club after a warm reaction to his arrival . This does not bother me because so far, they make no progress . This is not the first time they have had a warm response to Henry’s arrival .
 About noon on January 9 Haldeman came into the Oval Office with a cable from Kissinger . Kissinger's cable was sent to the White House from Kissinger's office .
 President’s firmness and North Vietnamese belief that he will not be affected by public pressures, he said . He concluded, “What has brought us to this point is the President's firmness’
 "So it is essential that we keep our fierce posture during the coming days. So it's essential that . We keep our strong posture," she said. "We will be in a fierce posture"
 "You should continue a tough posture and, above all, not let the other side filibuster. You should continue to be tough," Obama says .
 If the other side stays on this track and doesn’t go downhill tomorrow, what you have done today is the best birthday present I have had in sixty years . The other side will be hoping to keep up their lead in the race for the title .
 Kissinger reported that at the current rate of progress the agreement should be concluded within three or four days . The momentum continued through the next session, and Kissinger said the agreement could be completed within a week or more .
 It was nine days short of four years since I had entered the White House and inherited the task of ending the Vietnam war . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 Kissinger was going to fly directly to Key Biscayne from Paris in order to report on the progress of his meetings with the North Vietnamese . There was widespread speculation that an agreement had been concluded . Kissinger was flying directly from Paris to report the progress .
 Even though he was tired from the talks and the long flight, he still displayed his characteristic thoroughness and enthusiasm .
 In the early hours of the following morning I recorded some notes about the conclusion of our meeting . The meeting was the first of its kind in a row between the two countries .
 After we met, I walked out to the car with him and told him that the country was indebted to him for what he had done . The country is indebted to the country for what it has done, he said .
 It is not really a comfortable feeling for me to praise people so openly. It's not really comfortable for me, I said, to say publicly .
 President Obama said he had the courage to make the difficult decision on Dec. 18 . President Obama responded by saying it was his "courageous decision to make a difficult decision"
 On January 15 at ten o’clock in the morning all bombing and mining of North Vietnam were stopped for an indefinite period, and we made a public announcement of our actions .
 The bombing had done its job; it had been successful, and now it could be ended . The bombing was successful and now the bombing could be stopped, says author .
 Diary Diary I had Henry call Pat and give her a rundown on affairs shortly after the announcement . Diary Diary: Henry called Pat and gave her a brief rundown of affairs . Diary diary: "Henry called Pat to tell her about affairs"
 Nixon said he had never heard her sound so elated—that she was enormously pleased . Nixon said she was "enormously pleased" with her decision .
 She was bubbly and upbeat and she and her mother, who was apparently in the room with her, were very proud of what had happened . She and her mom were apparently in a room at the time of the incident .
 "I began to answer by indicating that the stopping of the bombing I suppose was pretty popular and all that sort of thing. I began to . I suppose ... I suppose . I'm pretty popular, I suppose, but I'm not sure what I was saying .
 "She and her mother were proud of the fact that I had gone ahead and done what I had done what was right. She and her family were proud," she said .
 Mike Mansfield was telling people how restrained and responsible the Senate had been during the past week of negotiations, and I noted in my diary, “It is interesting to note that Mansfield had reacted as he had. I had heard that .
 The day the news came out stopping the bombing of North Vietnam, the Watergate Four plead guilty . It is ironic that the day the story came out stopped the bombing was the day Watergate Four pleaded guilty .
 When I saw the headlines in the Tzmes—spies plead guilty in Watergate—I realized what the press would have done if they had not had another story that would override it, he says .
 Colson told me that a confession might lead to Haldeman and even Ehrlichman . Colson said the problem in Hunt’s case and with the case generally was that a . confession might . lead to a confession, he said .
 Only an ultimatum served on the Times that if they used this they would be subject to a libel suit with malice being proved kept them from using that particular item . The Times were only served with the threat to sue the Times for libel .
 Whether Haldeman was aware of it, I simply don’t know, but I think he would be intelligent enough to have stayed a mile away from such stupid activity .
 Obviously the judge is going to throw the book at them and this will present quite a problem when it comes to a pardon . The judge will be throwing a book at the pair . This will present a problem for them when they are pardoned .
 It is interesting to note that funds for funds for providing income for them are coming from a Cuban committee here in Florida . Teddy Kennedy comes out with an article indicating that we should renew relations with Castro . Just this week Teddy Kennedy .
 We had reached agreement on terms with the North Vietnamese but we still had to persuade Thieu to join us in signing the agreement . We had already agreed terms with Thieu but had to convince him to sign the deal .
 Thieu had made good use of the time since October and was in a considerably stronger position vis-a-vis the Communists than he had been then . Thieu's government has been in a strong position since October .
 I had always believed that his common sense and patriotism would make him come along when we reached the absolute deadline for concluding an agreement before Congress intervened . Congress intervened and took the conduct of the war out of my hands, he says .
 "Now we were at that point, and my estimation of Thieu would be put to the test," he says . "I thought Thieu was a good guy," he adds .
 Haig left for Saigon soon after Kissinger returned to Washington on January 14 . Haig was the last man to go to Saigon in Vietnam .
 On the morning of January 16, he met with Thieu and handed him a letter from me, he said . "He handed it to him," he said. "He met with him and he handed him the letter," he added .
 "I said that I had irrevocably decided to initial the agreement on January 23 and sign it on January 27. In it I said I had decided to . In it, I said that . I had . irrevocally decided to. initial the . agreement on . January 23
 I shall have to explain publicly that your government obstructs peace. In that case I shall explain publicly, I shall be forced to say publicly that you obstruct peace. It is not a matter of law, it is a matter for peace, he says .
 "The result will be an inevitable and immediate termination of United States economic and military assistance," says President Obama . "Change of personnel in your government cannot be forestalled by a change of personnel," says Obama .
 "I hope, however, that after all our two countries have shared and suffered together in conflict, we will stay together to preserve peace and reap its benefits," she said .
 To this end I want to repeat to you the assurances that I have already conveyed. I want this to be the case for the future of the country. I am confident that the situation will not be affected by the circumstances surrounding us. We are happy to clarify that this is not the
 At the time of signing the agreement I will make emphatically clear that the United States recognizes your government as the only legal government of South Vietnam . We do not recognize the right of any foreign troops to be present on South Vietnamese territory; and that we will react strongly in the event the agreement
 I want to emphasize my continued commitment to the freedom and progress of the Republic of Vietnam . Finally, he wants to emphasize that he is committed to the country's freedom .
 "With this letter and this guarantee I did not feel that I could do any more. With this letter, I could not do anything more," she says . "I did not want to do anything else," she adds .
 Diary Thieu’s choice is simply whether he wants to commit suicide or go along with a settlement that could save his country as well as himself . The settlement could save the country and himself, according to diary .
 The question was whether he should be a hero now by turning down the settlement, or a statesman that would save his country later, he said . The question, as he put it to his National Security Council, was whether to turn down the deal .
 It appeared that, true to form to the end, Thieu was going to play it right down to the wire . Thieu appeared to be playing it right until the end of the game .
 In their second meeting on January 17 Haig and Thieu had a brief and emotional encounter during which Thieu gave him a sealed letter addressed to me . Haig: "I'm not going to be able to go back to Vietnam. I'm going to go to Vietnam"
 Peace fever broke out everywhere, and reporters flatly stated, with an assurance they could not know was justified, that a settlement was in the bag . Peace fever was everywhere, with reporters saying, with the assurance they couldn't know it was justified .
 Bunker cabled that he had not been able to get an appointment with Thieu because he was engaged in all-day religious ceremonies connected with his daughter’s marriage . Bunker said he was unable to get the appointment because of his daughter's wedding .
 Bunker and Haig both felt that Thieu was stalling simply to be able to say that he had done all he could . Bunker, Haig and Bunker believed Thieu wanted to say he'd done all that he could. Bunker said he felt Thieu had done what he could
 The Thai leaders and President Park had no confidence that the North Vietnamese intended to abide by the agreement . President Park Park said he was not confident that the agreement would be implemented .
 They agreed to support the settlement publicly and privately to urge Thieu to sign it . But they understood the political realities of the U.S. scene, and agreed to back it .
 "Thieu finally decided to accept the agreement. After one last stab at resistance and another series of letters between us, Thieu finally agreed to accept it."
 'Even though his conduct had been almost unbearably frustrating, I had to admire his spirit. Even though he had had a difficult day, he had a good spirit,' he said .
 The North Vietnamese locked themselves into signing the agreement by announcing it publicly in Hanoi . Now we had to wait while the final arrangements were made and until the North Vietnamese lock themselves in signing it publicly .
 On January 20 I was sworn in for my second term as the thirty-seventh President of the United States. President Obama's second term began on January 20 . President Obama was inaugurated on January 24, 2012 .
 The peace deal has been pushed back into the post-inaugural period . But the inevitable delays, added to the dangers of becoming committed publicly to any specific date, pushed the deal back into post-presidential period .
 Instead of being able to describe in his inaugural address the blessings of a peace achieved, I could only describe a peace that was near achievement and talk about the ways we could try to make it more than just an interlude between wars .
 "I fully believed that, backed by my November mandate and based on my determination to proceed despite the opposition or the political cost, we could actually succeed," Obama says .
 This would be my last inaugural address, says Obama . "I had decided to use it in order to impart a sense of the inspirational tone that I wanted to give to my second term," he says .
 I concluded, “We shall answer to God, to history, and to our conscience for the way in which we use these years.” I concluded . I concluded: ‘We shall . answer to . history, to . our conscience, for which we shall answer .
 "As I stand in this place, so hallowed by history, I think of others who have stood here before me," says President Obama . Obama: "I am proud to be able to stand on the shoulders of those who have done so far."
 I think of the dreams they had for America and how each recognized that he needed help far beyond himself in order to make those dreams come true . "I think of how each of these men recognized that they had to help others to make them come true"
 The Lincoln Sitting Room is a weekly Washington Post's weekly feature on CNN iReport . CNN.com's John Sutter takes a look at the inauguration . Sutter: "I was in the Lincoln sitting room when I got to the inauguration"
 When Mike Curb stepped up at the end of the performance and said that the President had done more to bring peace in the world than anybody else, I thought we would get a few boos .
 Eleven of Eugene Ormandy’s orchestra members requested the right not to come, and he had put his foot down and told them to come . Interestingly enough, he got a pretty good cheer for it, which allayed one of his fears .
 "It left me a little breathless, but I thought it was a good idea to be in as good shape as I could for the ceremonies to take place later in the day," says the Australian .
 Before going downstairs, I stepped into the Lincoln Bedroom in the spot where the Emancipation Proclamation was and where Lincoln’s desk was located, I bowed my head for a moment, and prayed that I might be able to give the country some lift .
 The ride down to the Capitol gave us some indication of what we could expect later in the way of demonstrators .
 Little clusters of them had gotten into strategic places along the route . "Little clusters" of them were getting in strategic places .
 Pat and the others didn’t hear them, but they were yelling “f-u-c-k,” etc., etc., and were a pretty vicious lot . Pat and others didn't hear them .
 The inauguration went on schedule—perhaps the best of any that I have seen . The inauguration was perhaps the most successful inauguration I've ever seen .
 The public address system was superb, no hecklers could be heard, although way in the background I think there were a few who let out a few obscenities as I began to speak and then subsided .
 I sometimes think these displays of affection are very much in place, as was the case election night . The public is very much more likely to get involved in the political process, as it was in the past .
 Other times, I don't think they quite fit and on this occasion I didn’t really think it quite fit,’s not quite fit. ‘On this occasion, I’m not quite sure what happened. Other times I think they fit. I didn
 I was thinking how much worse it would have been if we hadn’t had the recent developments this week with regard to the possible settlement in Paris, says Simon Tisdall . The former French president says the situation in Paris is 'much worse' than it was before .
 It came not far ahead of the sheriff, and not far enough, Iam sure, to avoid some jolt in the polls . The sheriff's office came far ahead, but it came far enough to avoid a jolt .
 "I don’t give one damn what the polls say insofar as affecting my decisions," he said . "I’m not giving a damn what polls say," he added. "I'm going to make a decision in the next few weeks."
 "I only care about them because they may affect my ability to lead, since politicians do pay attention to them," she says . "Politicians do pay . They pay attention, and politicians pay attention," she adds. "They pay attention."
 Pat got up about a third of the way down and when the demonstrators began to throw eggs and debris, the Secret Service asked her to sit down, and she refused . The Secret Service then asked Pat and the protesters to leave . Pat refused .
 There was one incident where a demonstrator broke out and started to charge the car . There was also a demonstration where the car was charged .
 The Secret Service agents were on top of him like lightning and brought him down with a tackle . The tackle was part of a tackle by the Secret Service .
 "I just can’t imagine that people pay all that money to stand in that huge mob. I just can't imagine that," she said . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next."
 The girl was dressed in a rather plain gown, one that perhaps she had made herself, and it had probably cost her a great deal to come . Pat, who notices those things a little more than I do, said that the girl had probably made herself . Pat said that she was
 "People who came in afterward said the girls and even some of the boys were crying because we had mixed with them so much," says one of the girls .
 The staff just hasn’t been able to get it across and so I am going to have to do all of these things publicly which demonstrates that . The staff will have to be more vocal about the situation, says the manager .
 Time passed slowly waiting for January 23 and the announcement of the Vietnam settlement . The settlement was announced on January 23 .
 In the early evening of January 22, while our waiting had yet to be rewarded, Lyndon Johnson died . Johnson died on January 22 .
 With his death there will be, I trust, the same reappraisal of his place in history as was the case of Truman on his death . But, of course, it will not be nearly as fulsome because not enough years have passed and because there are too many current
 The sadness in Johnson’s case is that he did not live to see his position in history established by reason of our winning a peace with honor in Vietnam . The sadness is that Johnson did not .
 His family will see it and that is, of course, extremely important, and he will know it I am sure . On the other hand, his family will be able to see it, and that's important .
 I also had an interesting reaction as I was thinking about the reason LBJ went down in the polls and so forth in early 1968 . I also thought about LBJ's rise in polls as a result .
 President Obama isolated himself, but did not generate public support for his policies, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "What happened was that he did isolate himself ... he quit fighting for the policies"
 "It was when my November 3 speech came along that we really ginned up some public support for winning a peace with honor," he says . "We really ginged up some . support," he adds. "It's when my . November . 3 speech was when I really gin
 LBJ gave away this ground, and that was why he really failed in the end and was driven out of public office . LBJ was driven from public office by LBJ's failure, he says .
 I think that Lyndon Johnson died of a broken heart, physically and emotionally . I think he died of an emotional breakdown . He says he died "physically and emotionally and emotionally"
 After I won the election in 1968, and through the remaining years of Johnson’s life, I saw what some have described as the “better side” of his character . I saw the "better side" of Johnson's character after winning the White House in 1968 .
 He was not the pushing, prodding politician or the consummate partisan of his earlier career . He is not pushing or prodding politicians, but he was not a pushing politician .
 Above all Johnson wanted to be loved, he wanted to earn not only approval but also the affection of every American .
 Much of his overblown rhetoric and many of his domestic policies were rooted in this compulsive quest for approbation . Much of Obama's domestic policies and rhetoric was rooted in his quest for approval .
 Johnson should have allowed himself to be guided by his moderately conservative instincts, which would have led him to avoid huge spending programs at a time when America was involved in a costly war .
 Seeking both guns and butter is a policy that works only in the very short term, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Seeking both gun and butter isn't a long-term solution to the problem .
 I think that Johnson belatedly came to understand this, because through the four years of my first term I cannot recall an instance when he urged me to go forward with any of his Great Society programs . Johnson's Great Society program was a success story for Johnson .
 President Obama found that where the liberals in the media and the left wing of his own party were concerned, it was either all the way with them or none of the way .
 They applauded his liberal domestic programs, and praised the Great Society . They also praised the liberal domestic program .
 The consensus he worked so hard to develop disintegrated when he would not follow their demands for a U.S. bug-out in Vietnam, he says . But the consensus disintegrated, and they turned on him with a bitterness and ferocity that depressed him deeply .
 He had catered and almost pandered to them, but he could no longer win them . He had been pandering and pandering to them .
 "First it frustrated him, then it disillusioned him, and finally it destroyed him," he says . "It was the first thing he did not want to do, but it was the last thing he wanted to do," he adds . "I want to go back to the first
 Like Herbert Hoover, he had the misfortune of being President at the wrong time . President Hoover was President of the United States at the time .
 He might have been a great peacetime President, but the combination of war abroad and at home proved too much for him . He died at the age of 92 at the hands of his wife .
 I kept frequent touch with Johnson while he was President, either directly or through mutual friends . I kept in frequent touch . I was President of the U.S. from 1961-1989 .
 When he returned to Texas he was busy with the preparation of his memoirs and the plans for his presidential library . He was also busy preparing his presidential memoirs, a project from which he derived no enjoyment .
 He had his wife and family, including his grandchildren, and his beloved Texas land . He also had his beloved land, including a beloved wife and grandchildren .
 He still longed for the popular approval and affection that continued to elude him . But he still long for the approval of the public .
 He was uniquely able to understand some of the things I was experiencing, particularly with Congress and the media over Vietnam, and we became quite close . He was able to help me understand my feelings toward Congress, the media and Vietnam, he says .
 I thought it was sad that his party treated him so badly. Although I was glad that he did not support McGovern, I thought that he supported McGovern . He said he was sad to see his party treat him badly .
 I made a diary note at the beginning of October 1972 that captured something of my feelings and something of our relationship . I made the diary note in 1972 .
 LBJ had told Bobby Baker that he felt he only had a couple of months to live . LBJ told Baker he had only a few weeks to live, according to his diary .
 He was afraid that the operation for removing some of his lower intestines —he has suffered from diverticulosis for years—might be fatal as far as his heart was concerned .
 He apparently finally got a haircut after getting some criticism about the length of his hair .
 "He is terribly sensitive to how people criticize him on a personal basis," says President Obama . Obama is "tensely sensitive" to criticism of his critics .
 Bobby Baker said President Nixon was probably the best President in history . Baker said Nixon was the best president in history. Baker said that Nixon was a good President .
 "He is in one of those rather emotional states which often come over him," he said . He said: "He was in one state which often comes over him"
 'He must be terribly depressed because he is such a proud man and now being left alone by his party. He must have been terribly depressed,' he said .
 He doesn't want McGovern under any circumstances but, of course, feels that he can't leave his party . He doesn’t want him to run for president but feels he can’'t leave party .
 A few weeks earlier I had made a note of a message from Johnson that Rogers Morton passed on to me . Rogers Morton had passed on a message to Johnson .
 He said Johnson seemed to be in one of those moods when he was concerned about going into the hospital again for a rather serious operation, and was looking toward the end of the road .
 Johnson has his violent ups and downs, but is a man strongly motivated by the heart rather than the head . This, of course, is typical of Johnson who has his ups and down .
 A week after Johnson’s funeral I learned the answer to a question that had bothered me ever since his death, I asked: ‘What do you think of Johnson?”
 Kissinger asked whether LBJ really knew that LBJ knew that we had an agreement . Kissinger: "I asked Kissinger about whether he really knew [LBJ] knew that [Kissinger] had a deal" Kissinger says .
 In addition to the call I had made on the 2nd, Haldeman called him on the 15th and told him that we had stopped the bombing . "In addition to that call, I had also made a call to the White House," he said .
 Kissinger had sent Kissinger some papers with regard to the peace settlement the same day . Kissinger sent him some papers on the day after the war, Kissinger said .
 At 10 PM. on January 23, I made a brief statement announcing that a . settlement had been reached in Paris and that a Vietnam cease-fire would begin on January 27 . At 10 p.m. on Jan. 23, a . statement was made by President Barack Obama .
 After I finished the broadcast in the Oval Office, I went back to the Residence. I went home to the White House Residence, where I was in the residence .
 Julie and Tricia and Ed were also there, and we sat talking about how my announcement had made it official that America was finally at peace for the first time in twelve years .
 "I went to the Lincoln Sitting Room and had a light dinner there by myself," says President Obama . "I'm not afraid to go there," says Obama .
 Lady Bird: "I only wish Lyndon could have lived to hear my announcement of the Vietnam peace settlement tonight" "Lady Bird" will announce the peace settlement .
 I know what abuse he took, particularly from members of his own party, in standing firm for peace with honor . "I know what I took," he says of his time in prison .
 We shall do everything we can to make it last so that he and other brave men who sacrificed their lives for this cause will not have died in vain . Now that we have such a settlement, we shall do .
 I had a good talk with Kissinger, sitting over by the fireplace in the Oval Room, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to the world's first lady"
 He told me about his daughter, who had been approached in Cambridge to sign a resolution against the bombing . He said his daughter was approached with a resolution to sign in Cambridge .
 He said that to try to involve a 13-year-old was a terribly vicious thing . He said to have been involved in the incident was a 'vicious thing'
 He seems at the moment convinced that he should talk to our friends and not try to pander to our enemies . He seems to be convinced that . He should be talking to our . friends, not trying to . pander .
 I told him that I didn’t want us to have any hatred or anything of that sort toward our enemies . "I told him I didn't want any hatred," he said .
 President Obama says the U.S. has been exposed for what it really is . He says it was a "terribly difficult decision in December" to pull troops from Syria .
 "Now we have to start to play to those who are willing to give us somewhat of a break in writing the history of these times," he says . They are disturbed, distressed, and really discouraged because we succeeded, he adds .
 At midnight on January 27, the cease-fire went into effect and the killing stopped . At midnight, the fighting stopped for a time .
 I had always expected that I would feel an immense sense of relief and satisfaction when the war was finally ended. I had also expected that he would feel a sense of satisfaction and relief when it was finally over .
 "I also felt a surprising sense of sadness, apprehension, and impatience," she says . "But I also felt the sadness and apprehension," she writes . "I felt a surprise sense of excitement and excitement," she adds .
 Lyndon Johnson had not lived a few extra days to share the moment with me and receive the tribute I would have paid him . Sadness, because Lyndon Johnson died a few days earlier than he would have been able to give him a tribute .
 Apprehension, because I had no illusions about the fragile nature of the agreement or about the Communists’ true motives in signing it, was the reason for signing it .
 I was acutely aware of all the things we had postponed or put off because of the war . And impatience, because I was aware of the things I had to do because of it . I felt impatience and impatience as a result .
 Commenting on Johnson’s death, I remarked that this was the first time in years that we did not have a living former President . I talked a little about the ages of various Presidents when they died .
 The important thing is that each of us has to approach each day as if it might be our last day here. "Each day, each day, is that we have a chance to be here," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Haldeman made leather binders that he had asked to have made . The binders were made of leather bounders .
 Inside each desk calendar was a large desk calendar covering the four years from January 20, 1973, to Jan. 20, 1977 . Inside each was a calendar covering four years between 1973 and 1977 .
 Next to each of the dates was printed the number of days left in my administration . Next to the dates were printed the date of my administration, the date was printed with the date .
 Presidential term which begins today consists of 1461 days --no more and nő less . I had written a special message for the front of each calendar. ekte pot” teg .
 The 1461 days which lie ahead are but a short interval in the lowing stream of history . Each can be a day of strengthening and renewal for America, says President Obama .
 In an interview just before the 1972 election I said that over the next four years my administration would become known as having advocated the most significant reforms of any administration since that of Franklin Roosevelt in 1932 . January’ 20, 1973 .
 The reforms I had in mind would be very different from those of the New Deal . But the reforms would have been very different, he says . The reforms would not be the same as those of New Deal, he adds .
 Roosevelt’s reforms led to bigger and bigger power in Washington, author says . Roosevelt's reforms were the result of his reforms, he says . He says, “Roosevelt” reforms were “bigger and bigger in Washington.”
 The reforms "will diffuse the power throughout the country," he says . The reforms will "make government leaner but in a sense will make it stronger," he adds .
 At the beginning of his second term, Congress, the bureaucracy, and the media were still working in concert to maintain the ideas and ideology of the traditional Eastern liberal establishment that had come down to 1973 .
 "I planned to give expression to the more conservative values and beliefs of the New Majority throughout the country," she said . "Now I planned to use my power to put some teeth into my New American Revolution"
 President Obama says his first term was "reorganizing or reforming the federal government along more efficient and effective lines" He says his attempts to reform the government have been resisted by Congress and bureaucracy .
 Plans and programs I submitted threatened the entrenched powers and prerogatives that they had built up over many decades through several administrations . But it was also because of the plans and programs that threatened them, he said .
 No major reorganization reform or voluntary fiscal restraint would come from Congress during my first term . For various reasons, I had had to acquiesce in this situation and accept .
 President Barack Obama won a landslide landslide in 2012 . He said he planned to force Congress and the federal bureaucracy to defend their obstructionism in the open arena of public opinion .
 In his first press conference of the second term, on January 31, 1973, President Richard Nixon minced no words . In his inaugural press conference, he said: "In my first press . conference, I minced . no words. In my first . press conference in 1973, he minced
 Congress "has not been responsible on money," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "If you are going to have responsibility, you have to be responsible," he says .
 I had also had to contend with the increasing hostility of the media. During the first term I had . also had . had also faced . increasing hostility from the media, he said . He said .
 Agnew had told some home truths about their power and their bias, but I had had to observe the official fiction that the President and the media do not have a fundamentally adversary relationship . Agnew: Agnew told us that the media had power and bias, and that they were biased
 I planned to let them know that I would no longer uncomplainingly accept their barbs or allow their unaccountable power to go unchallenged . Now in the second term, however, he planned to tell them that he would not .
 "I took off the gloves in the January 31 press conference when I announced the peace settlement in Vietnam," says President Obama . "The gloves were off in the first press conference," says Obama .
 I said that we had done the best we could against great obstacles and had finally achieved a peace with honor . I said: "I said that I said I did the best I could ... I said we had . done the . best best possible"
 By the time a new President was elected in the bicentennial year of 1976, I hoped to have given America the beginning of a new leadership class whose values and aspirations were more reflective of the rest of the country . I hoped that the new President would be more reflective .
 "My fears about the American leadership classes had been confirmed and deepened by what I had seen and experienced during my first four years as President. My fears about American leadership were confirmed," said President Obama .
 In politics, academics, and the arts, and even in the business community and the churches, there was a successful and fashionable negativism which, in my judgment, reflected an underlying loss of will, an estrangement from traditional American outlooks .
 The Vietnam war had completed the alienation for this group by undermining the traditional concept of patriotism . The Vietnam War had completed this group's alienation for them .
 "I had watched this malaise continue to grow and spread during my first term," says President Barack Obama . "We are not going to be able to stop it," says Obama .
 I saw it in the way the media made heroes out of student rebels while ignoring those who held to traditional values or presenting them as uninformed or unenlightened . I saw the media make hero out of rebels out of students, but ignore those who hold traditional values .
 "I also saw it in the more subtle attitudes that permeated the liberaldominated cultural milieu," says the author . "It was also in the subtle ways of showing it to me," she says .
 "The fact that they seemed to be less significant did not, in my opinion, make them any less disturbing," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The fact that the attacks were less significant made them any more disturbing .
 During the campaign, for example, I had been annoyed by something I saw in a film we watched one night at Camp David . I was annoyed at something I had seen during the campaign. I had a lot of things to do with my campaign, I said .
 An American flag was placed in the lapel of the Secretary of State in a movie called The Man . The film was about a bad character depicted as a very bad character .
 Haldeman told me that he had seen the picture The Candidate and that in that case too they put an American flag on the Republican candidate . The candidate was put in the picture with a flag .
 I told Haldeman that I was going to wear the flag, come hell or high water, from now on, he said . MacGregor was now letting people know that since the President wore a flag many of them might want to do so also to show their support of the
 Of course, this must be carefully done so that there is no indication of throwing doubts on the patriotism of people who are on the other side, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It’s really curious how people have come to run down the country the way they do. "It's really curious," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com correspondent .
 History taught that when all the leadership institutions of a nation become paralyzed by self-doubt and second thoughts, that nation cannot long survive unless those institutions are either reformed, replaced, or circumvented . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 In his second term I was prepared to adopt whichever of these three methods—or whichever combination of them —was necessary . In my second term, I was . prepared to . adopt whichever . of these methods— or whichever combination — was necessary .
 I thought that America needed a new sense and spirit of positive pride, and now that the Vietnam war was over I felt that I could be instrumental in creating it. I thought it needed to be created, and I wanted to be able to create it, he says .
 I felt that the Silent Majority of Americans, with its roots mainly in the Midwest, and the West, had never been encouraged to give the Eastern liberal elite a run for its money for control of the nation's key institutions .
 President Richard Nixon hoped to provide an inspirational example of leadership that would be a background and impetus for a new rebirth of optimism and decisiveness and national pride .
 I wanted to reform the budget and terminate wasteful and ineffective programs, he says . I planned a massive reorganization and reduction of the federal bureaucracy and White House staff .
 I had no illusions about the reaction such reforms would provoke from the bureaucracy and Congress or the kind of coverage they would receive from the media . I was not optimistic about how the reforms would be received by the bureaucracy or Congress .
 I was ready, willing, and, I felt, able to do battle for them because I believed in them and because I thought they were the right thing for America . But I was not ready to fight for them, and I felt I was able to . It was not the first
 I summarized all my hopes and plans in some notes I made on January 11 on my large desk blotter in my study at Key Biscayne . I summarized my hopes, plans and hopes in these notes .
 Before the election I asked Caspar Weinberger, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and John Ehrlichman to make a review of the federal grant programs .
 The federal farm subsidy program was making 42 percent of its payments to the richest 7 percent of the farmers . For example, the program paid 42 percent to the rich 7 percent . The program is now being funded by the government .
 Another federal program was promoting student enrollment in teaching programs, even though we now had a national surplus of 70,000 teachers that was causing serious unemployment problems . Another program was still promoting student enrolling in teaching .
 Despite a surplus of hospital beds, we were still subsidizing hospital construction . The government subsidizes construction of hospitals in the U.S.
 Budget cutbacks I proposed in the first federal budget of my second term would have saved $6 billion in 1973 and $16. billion in 1974 . All told, the budget cutbacks he proposed in his second term, which he sent to Congress on January 29, would have cut $
 It was a bold suggestion to cut programs that were receiving millions of dollars a year and represented thousands of jobs and government contracts, but I was prepared to take that heat . It was the bold suggestion that cutting programs received millions a year .
 Of the $2.2 billion it took to run the Office of Economic Opportunity, 85 percent was filtered out in salaries and overhead before it ever reached the poor . 85 percent of the money was spent on salaries, overhead and overhead .
 It disserved the poor to keep funding programs that didn't work, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says he was prepared for the inevitable accusations from the poverty lobby and the media .
 A year earlier, on January 24, 1972, I had sent Congress a request for placing a ceiling on federal spending . A year later, on Jan. 24, 1973, I wrote to ask Congress to limit federal spending on the budget .
 Congress had never established a method for staying within an overall budget as it voted on individual appropriations . Congressmen and senators had never before been forced to accept responsibility for the fact that passage of some worthwhile projects might have the ultimate effect of forcing the government into deficit spending .
 There was not much congressional enthusiasm for blowing this comfortable cover, but they did establish a committee to recommend new procedures for budgetary control .
 President Richard Nixon challenged Congress to limit spending to $250 billion in 1973 . Congress agreed to set spending limits through 1975, he says .
 Many congressmen had sincere and serious questions concerning who would establish the spending priorities and what criteria would be used . Many lawmakers were concerned about who would set spending priorities for the budget .
 Others fear that budgetary restraints might inhibit their ability to campaign for re-election on a platform of how much federal money they had obtained for their districts . Others were simply frightened by the prospect of budgetary restraints .
 President Obama's proposed spending ceiling was sending shock waves through Congress . His plan for government reorganization was sending seismic tremors through bureaucracy, he says .
 Congress had smothered my attempt in 1971 to streamline the government, so I asked Ehrlichman and Roy Ash to set up task forces and consult with constitutional lawyers to determine how much reorganizing I could legally do on my own .
 I could create by executive authority a system closely resembling the one I had requested in the 1971 reform proposal . They advised that I could in fact create by . executive authority . The system would be similar to that proposed in 1971, the president said .
 Human Resources, Natural Resources, Community Development, and Economic Affairs . The Human Resources team is responsible for human resources, natural resources, and economic development .
 George Shultz would head Economic Affairs and one of the current Cabinet secretaries would be named Counsellor to the President for each of the remaining three areas . Shultz, Shultz and a current Cabinet secretary would be Counsellors to the president .
 These men would then be directly responsible to me for all the programs under their supervision . These would be responsible for all of those programs under supervision .
 In 1972 it took seventy-one different signatures to buy one piece of construction equipment for certain federally funded urban renewal projects . Five agencies and fifty-six signatures could be required in order to get one person to buy a piece of equipment .
 Nine federal departments and twenty agencies all had responsibilities for educational programs . The education programs were overseen by federal agencies .
 Local water and sewer projects alone involved seven different agencies . Local water, sewer projects involved seven separate agencies . The projects included water and sewage projects .
 Under my reorganization plan, the Counsellor in charge would be responsible for eliminating duplication and inefficiency . Counsellors would have to eliminate duplication, inefficiency, according to the proposal .
 I also announced my renewed determination to break the hammerlock the federal government had on the nation’s taxes and return some of the revenue to local levels . ‘I’m also determined to break this hammerlock. I’ve announced a renewed determination .
 From 1960 to 1970 the number of categorical grant programs had multiplied from 44 to more than 500 . The programs were programs that gave local and state governments federal money for projects .
 In 1969 a poll found that a majority said big government was a bigger threat to the country than either big business or big labor . In 1969, a majority of Americans said government was bigger threat than either business or labor .
 In 1969, 1970, and 1971 I had introduced proposals embodying the principle of revenue-sharing . Money would be returned from the federal government to state and local governments to spend according to their own needs and priorities .
 General Revenue-Sharing was passed by Congress in 1972 . It provided for a simple return of money without program or project restrictions . It was passed in 1972 by Congress .
 During its first year of operation, over $5 billion was designated for return to state and local governments . Over $5 million was spent on return to local governments in the first year alone .
 On a practical level, revenue-sharing was a way of revitalizing local government and local responsibility . Revenue-sharing is a way for local government to revitalize local responsibility, says John Defterios .
 On a philosophical level, it was the first change in the direction of federal growth in forty years . "No less than the New American Revolution we called it," says President Obama . "It was the change of direction in 40 years"
 On a political level, revenue-sharing exacerbated the hostilities in Washington . Revenue-sharing threatened sections of the bureaucracy with obsolescence, and no one was eager to relinquish any amount of power or control .
 "I moved immediately after the election to pare down radically the size of the executive branch," says President Obama . The White House has been criticized for overreaching its executive branch .
 When I took office in 1969, the executive office of the President numbered more than 4,700 employees, says President Richard Nixon . When he took office, there were 4,800 employees, he says .
 We announced in 1973 that by the end of 1973 we intended to cut that figure by 60 percent . We announced that by . end of . 1973, we wanted to cut the figure by . 60 percent, but that figure was still 60 percent of the population .
 Without this kind of leadership in the appointive positions, there is no way for a President to make any major impact on the bureaucracy, says President John McCain .
 A study in the American Political Science Review found that a Republican President was more likely to be a Republican than a Democrat .
 Only 5 percent of foreign service officers considered themselves Republicans, a study found .
 I was determined that we would not fail in this area again, and on the morning after my re-election I called for the resignation of every non-career employee in the executive branch . "I was determined to ... not fail again," says Sen. Mitch McConnell .
 Eisenhower's second term would not suffer the same malady that had characterized Eisenhower's first term . Eisenhower was determined that we would not settle into a lethargy . Eisenhower's re-election victory in 1956 would not be a repeat of his first term in office .
 I also wanted Cabinet members, especially the new ones, to feel that they had complete freedom to choose their staffs for the second term . I wanted the Cabinet members ... to feel they could choose staffs .
 In some cases I planned to transfer White House staff members into Cabinet departments to see to it that our policies would be followed, says Obama .
 "I was determined during the second term to break the Eastern stranglehold on the executive branch and the federal government," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "As much as it was within my power, I was determined," he says .
 I told Haldeman and Ehrlichman that I wanted an administration infused with the spirit of the 1972 New Majority . I told them I wanted to create a government infused with that spirit, he said .
 I wanted to appoint labor leaders, women, and members of ethnic groups, such as Poles, Italians, and Mexican Americans, that had not been adequately represented in the government in the past . I was appointed by President Obama to lead the White House in 2009 .
 The call for resignations included the entire White House staff and all Cabinet members . The White House called for resignation from the White House .
 "I did not take into account the chilling effect this action would have on the morale of people who had worked so hard during the election," she says . She says she didn't take account of the effect on morale of those who were expecting to savor the victory .
 The situation was compounded by my isolation at Camp David, where I spent eighteen days in the four weeks after the election, holding more than forty meetings with old and new appointees and making plans for the second term .
 Democrats hold all four aces in Washington: Congress, the bureaucracy, the majority of the media, and the formidable group of lawyers and power-brokers who operate behind the scenes in the city .
 It was another thing to give them the fifth ace of a timid opposition party . It's not the first time they've been given an ace of the timid opposition .
 There was no question that the party had ability—it had some of the most able and principled men and women in public life . The party's ability was its ability, but it was not its own .
 It seemed to me that what we most lacked was the ability to think like a majority party, to take risks, to exhibit the kind of confidence the Democrats had because of their sheer numbers . "It seemed to be the most lacked a sense of confidence," she said .
 During the campaign I made a note about this after I had addressed the Democrats for Nixon rally at John Connally’s ranch . During the . Nixon campaign, Nixon spoke at Connally's ranch . He says he's proud of his record in Texas .
 We simply need more people on our side who have the love of politics that many of our Democratic friends seem to have in such abundance . We need more Democrats who love politics .
 As I have told Connally, the Republicans are more inhibited, more restrained, more proper . Republicans are inhibited, restrained and more proper, he said . The GOP is more inhibited and restrained, Connally said .
 The Democrats, even when they are not having fun, like to appear to be having fun . The Democrats seem to have fun, even though they're not having it .
 I talked with Bob Dole, George Bush, Clark MacGregor, Barry Goldwater, and Jerry Ford about ways we could get the best candidates in every nationwide race in 1974 and 1976 . I also talked with George W. Bush, George H.W. Bush and Clark Mac
 Republican Congress in 1974 might have laid the foundations for the first GOP Congress in twenty years . I felt there was a sense of excitement growing about our Opportunities .
 Connally reported to me that the mood on Capitol Hill was “the most vicious thing I have ever seen.” Connally: “I have never seen. The mood was vicious. It was vicious,” he said . Connally later said the mood was �
 In the past there had been similar instances of attempts by Congress to reassert its power and re-establish its prerogatives after a war .
 "With this precedent, I prepared myself for a long and hard fight to get my programs passed and working. With this precedent in mind, I was prepared to prepare myself for the long fight," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Congressional frustration was exacerbated by the Gallup poll in January, which showed President Obama's approval rating at 68 percent .
 Respect for Congress, as measured at the end of 1971, had fallen to an all-time low of 26 percent . respect for Congress fell to a 26 percent in 1971 . Respect for the U.S. Congress has fallen since then .
 Walter Lippmann said he did not believe that Congress had the wisdom to decide what programs should be proposed or how the country should be led . He said Congress should not be able to decide how to lead the country .
 By 1973 I had concluded that Congress had become cumbersome, undisciplined, isolationist, fiscally irresponsible, overly vulnerable to pressures from organized minorities, and too dominated by the media . But by 1973 I concluded that by 1973, Congress had . concluded that . Congress . had become
 I knew that part of my disenchantment was the simple result of seeing things from the perspective of the White House end of Pennsylvania Avenue rather than from Capitol Hill . I knew part of that was a result of the . part of . seeing things . from the . perspective of seeing
 Sen. Ted Cruz: 'Dramatic changes had taken place in Congress in the twenty-six years since I first came to Washington. Nevertheless, I thought that dramatic changes had changed in Congress'
 In 1947 it was still possible for a congressman to run his office, do his homework, keep in touch with his constituents, and have his eye on his political fortunes . In 1947, a congressman was still able to run a congressman .
 The federal government had become so big that even the most conscientious congressman had to delegate a large part of his responsibilities to the personal and committee staffs that had correspondingly swelled in size and influence . But the federal government became so big and the business of government was so extensive that even
 Radio and television had demonstrated their power to make a politician a national figure overnight, putting a premium on color and controversiality rather than steady industriousness .
 This situation had a fundamental impact not only on the relationship between Congress and the White House, but on the traditional relationships within Congress itself . The White House has been criticized for its handling of the budget crisis .
 "More and more members refused to accept party discipline and, in effect, went into business for themselves," party says . More and more party members refuse to accept discipline and go into business themselves, he says .
 The long years of war and the national confusion over Vietnam had eroded this concept and further divided Congress against the President, and the two houses against themselves . Congress divided itself against itself .
 In early 1973, Congress was looking everywhere except to itself for solutions to its problems of inefficiency and ineffectiveness . Congress seemed to be looking everywhere for solutions, including itself .
 I thought it was absurd for members of Congress to complain that the executive branch had stolen their power from them . "I thought it would be absurd," says Sen. Tom Coburn .
 Modern Presidents have merely moved into the vacuum created when Congress failed to discipline itself sufficiently to play a strong policy-making role, says President Obama .
 The ‘Imperial President’ was a straw man created by defensive congressmen and by disillusioned liberals . In the days of FDR and Kennedy, FDR and John Kennedy had idolized the ideal of a strong presidency .
 Richard Nixon was a strong President who was a Republican, and Richard Nixon at that . Now that they had second thoughts, they were having second thoughts and prescribing re-establishment of congressional power as the tonic that was needed to revitalize the Republic .
 The Democratic leadership decided to take a piece out of the executive branch’s hide . The best way to assert their party's majority power and to recover Congress's former prestige would be to take out a piece of the hide .
 After I proposed my budget ceiling and my government reorganization programs, Washington columnists Evans and Novak consulted their inside sources . They reported that a “venomous’s” congressional counterattack was being planned .
 Hubert Humphrey announced that a ‘constitutional crisis’ was fast approaching . Hubert H. Humphrey was president of the United States in the 1960s .
 The first battle lines were drawn in the ostensibly peripheral areas of procedural prerogatives . The battle lines have been drawn in ostensibly peripheral parts of the law .
 In early January the Senate Democratic Caucus voted 35 to 1 to narrow the President’s traditional authority to invoke executive privilege . Senate Democrats voted 35-1 to narrow that authority .
 The same day a bipartisan bloc of fifty-eight senators introduced legislation that would for the first time in our history limit the President’s war powers .
 On February 5 the Senate voted to require confirmation of the Budget Director, a position that had been filled by presidential appointment without confirmation for the fifty-two years since it had been created .
 The major public battles in the executive-legislative conflict were also being fought on the issue of the impoundment of funds .
 Presidents since Thomas Jefferson had considered it their prerogative, and indeed their responsibility, to withhold funds for projects that were not yet ready to begin or if inflation was especially severe and putting more money into the economy would make it worse .
 As of January 29, 1973, I had 3. percent of the total budget impounded . Kennedy impounded 7. percent in 1961, 6.% in 1962, and 3% in 1963 . Johnson impounded 3.% of the budget in 1964 but increased steadily to 6.
 The Democratic Congress had not challenged my Democratic predecessors for their heavier use of the practice, so I saw the 1973 impoundment battle as a clear-cut partisan attack on me . The Republican Congress did not challenge its Democratic predecessors .
 By March Congress had already prepared fifteen major spending bills that would have exceeded the 1974 budget by $9 billion . Despite my plea for fiscal restraint and my requests for a budget spending ceiling, by March Congress already had 15 major budget bills .
 Despite “pious statements” about the need for economy, I continued to get resistance on spending cuts . As a Washington Post article on March 28 pointed out, despite ‘pious . statements’ about the . need for . economy, he said . Despite ‘
 Sen. Ted Cruz: "Very few Senate Republicans regularly stood with me on opposing budget-busting spending bills" Sen. Cruz says he's disappointed by how little Republicans have stood with him in the past .
 "I told Hugh Scott that I was going to give up on the Senate unless we got some solidarity in our ranks," says Sen. John McCain . "We need solidarity," he says .
 Senate Democratic Caucus calls for a full-scale investigation of 1972 campaign practices . Senate Democrats call for investigation into 1972 election practices .
 What they meant, of course, was an investigation of Republican campaign practices and of Watergate in particular . The Watergate probe was meant to look at Republican practices .
 Mike Mansfield chose Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina to head the probe . Senator Ervin is a former Senator from North Carolina . The probe will be conducted by a North Carolina senator .
 Some of my staff and advisers felt that Ervin was a lucky choice for us. Some of our staff and . advisers felt it was a good choice for them .
 They thought that the media would be hard pressed to make much of a hero out of someone whose voting record many liberals viewed as downright segregationist . The media thought that they would have been hard-pressed to make a hero .
 Ervin, for all his affected distraction and homely manner, was a sharp, resourceful, and intensely partisan political animal . But I knew that Ervin was for all . Ervin's .
 Mansfield is going to be deeply and bitterly partisan without question without question . Mansfield will be a "deeply and bitter partisan" Mansfield. Mansfield has a long history of being a deeply partisan.
 At the time of his re-election I had known that for almost five months we had done everything we could to minimize the impact of the Watergate breakin . At the . time of the . Watergate break-in, he said, "We had done . everything we possible to minimize
 John Dean, who had ended up with the day-to-day responsibility in this area, had parried problems of the Democrats’ civil suit depositions, the Patman hearings, the GAO investigations, and the various exposés by the press .
 He had followed the grand jury and the progress of the FBI investigations in order to keep us from being surprised by anything that emerged from them . He had urged officials of the Justice Department to be sensitive to the political ramifications of the case and not to veer off into unrelated areas .
 "I thought that he had acted like a smart political lawyer handling a volatile political case," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He acted like he was acting like he did in a very volatile case"
 As certain as I was that we had done everything we could . to contain the scandal, I was equally as confident that . we had not tried to cover it up, I said . I was also confident that we did not try to cover up the scandal. I was certain that we
 The FBI's investigation had been extensive, including the FBI's handling of the case . For one thing, there was no question that the FBI had been involved in the investigation .
 Mitchell and Colson had both been questioned; even Magruder, about whom we all had suspicions, had testified before the grand jury three times . Even Magruders, however narrowly, had pulled through .
 Despite the tremendous political sensitivity of the whole case, I had not put personal pressure on the Justice Department, as I was sure other administrations would have done . Despite the enormous political sensitivity, I did not pressure myself personally, I said .
 There was no evidence that anyone in the White House had been involved in the Watergate break-in . After all this, there were no evidence of involvement in Watergate .
 I could sense that a cloud of suspicion still hung over the White House, but I attributed that to all the election-eve publicity about Segretti and McGovern’s charges of corruption . The White House has been accused of corruption in the wake of the election .
 I felt sure that it was just a public relations problem that only needed a . public relations solution . I thought it was a public . relations problem, but I was sure it wasn't .
 I decided after the election that both Chuck Colson and Dwight Chapin should leave the White House. I decided to do so after I decided that both of them should leave . I decided not to run for president again, but to keep them in office .
 Colson was a lightning rod for criticism for political reasons quite apart from Watergate . Ehrlichman in particular urged that he leave as soon as possible .
 I thought that his departure would help reduce our political vulnerability, give us a fresh start. I thought it would reduce our vulnerability and help us to a new start. But I'm not sure if that will happen again .
 Colson was concerned that if he left the White House it would look as if he were guilty of something, he would look guilty . The solution was to announce that he would be leaving but to postpone his actual departure until March .
 Diary Diary: There are risks involved as we know because of the attacks to which Colson will be exposed . Diary: "There are risks . As we know, the risks involved are the risks of Colson .
 I do not want to leave the impression that he is leaving under fire because it is an unfair rap for him and also would be an inaccurate way to interpret my actions for getting in a new team as we start the hew administration .
 Mr. Colson is probably right on the issue, but in the minds of most people he has become the issue . He is actually clean on Watergate and Segretti .
 It is a sad commentary that an individual can be bruised and battered and maligned and libeled and then becomes expendable . "It is a very sad commentary," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's sad that an individuals can be battered and battered, maligned
 We would have lost half the staff by this time had he had his way, he said . He is a stickler for getting rid of anybody who has even the appearance of wrongdoing, he added . He said .
 "I believe that where it is the appearance of evil, that an individual should be given a chance to clean the record, to defend himself," says the former president . "An individual should have a chance ... to clean up the record," he says .
 The consequences of backing off of people when they come under attack could simply encourage the piranha fish to go to work with a vengeance and leave a skeleton .
 He had been with me since the beginning of my bid for the presidency in 1967 . He was with me when I ran for president in 1967, but he died of a heart attack last year .
 President Obama's association with Segretti had made it impossible for him to stay in the White House . But his association with the Italian businessman had made him impossible to stay there .
 Haldeman: 'I was finally in a position to have someone doing to the opposition what they had done to us'
 "They knew that this time I wanted the leading Democrats annoyed, harassed, and embarrassed," he says . "They know that this . time I want the leading . Democrats annoyed and embarrassed"
 In mid-November, after we had Dean interview Segretti so that we would know exactly what he had done and what Chapin’s vulnerability might be, we had learned then that all his activities had not been so innocent as we had originally thought .
 On April Fool's Day he printed flyers inviting people to an open house with free lunch and drinks at Humphrey’s headquarters in Milwaukee . Humphrey's free lunch, drinks were free at the Milwaukee headquarters .
 He paid people to carry ‘Kennedy for President’ signs outside Muskie meetings . He paid for signs to carry outside meetings to promote his campaign .
 He sent phony letters on stationery from different Democratic campaign offices claiming that two of the Democratic candidates had records of sexual impropriety and that another had a history of mental instability . But he crossed the boundaries of pranks .
 I felt that an element of double standard was at work in the media’s treatment of Chapin and Segretti . Chapin was a journalist and author of the book, "Chapin" and "Segretti"
 Anti-Catholic mailers were sent to heavily Catholic precincts in Wisconsin during the 1960 primary between Humphrey and Kennedy .
 The letters, postmarked from Minnesota, were designed to look as if they came from Humphrey supporters . They were postmarked in Minnesota . The letters are designed to make it look like they were from supporters .
 A magazine investigation traced the letters to a friend of Bobby Kennedy’s . The letters were found in a magazine investigation later traced to Bobby Kennedy's friend .
 I felt too that the Post's stories about Segretti were exaggerated and unfair . The Post's coverage of the former mayor's death was unfair, he said .
 Segretti’s phone bills and credit information were obtained by reporters who used private sources to obtain access to his bills and confidential credit information . The reporters were not above dirty tricks of their own .
 Segretti was hired by John Dean, who would say he was "nothing evil, nothing vicious, nothing bad, nothing nothing" The intent of the hiring was to do nothing evil, Dean says .
 I believed that it was in his own interest that he leave rather than endure the press assault that was sure to come if he remained in the White House. I believed he was in the interest of himself, he said .
 He was able to get a good job in private industry, but the experience was still sad and painful . He says the experience is still painful and painful.
 As I indicated in my diary, “Chapin took it like a man, and is going to be well placed and will do a superb job.” “He took it on his own,’s going to do it,” he said in his
 On the Segretti thing, the decision to let it all hang out is, of course, right . The decision was right, but it's not right .
 I think also the decision to have Chapin leave is the right thing to do, he says . The decision to leave is also the right decision, he adds .
 "In mid-November I was still looking for some kind of positive action that would put us out in front and leave Watergate, at last, behind us," says Bob Greene .
 On November 22 I read Haldeman and Ehrlichman a letter from one of our supporters who had written to the White House urging me to clean things up . "On November 22, I read [Haldeman's] letter from a supporter of the party," he said
 Conservative columnists had begun to criticize us because of our failure to dispel the residue of suspicion . At the same time a number of conservative columnists began to criticize them .
 I was also ready to go with a detailed accounting of the Segretti episode, regardless of the embarrassment that would cause us . I was ready to give a detailed account of the incident, but I was embarrassed .
 I heard that Dean thought we should just leave well enough alone . Dean Obeidallah: "I'm not sure what's going on for us. I'm sure we're not going to get into trouble."
 The news stories had died down, so there was no immediate need to respond to new charges, police say . Police say they will not respond to any new charges .
 There was a danger that anything we did would only create new publicity that would focus new pressure on Magruder or even Mitchell . There was, in fact, the danger that . anything we . did not . create a new publicity .
 Watergate trial was about to begin and anything said by the White House would prejudice the jury about the evidence . Finally, there was a legal argument that the Watergate trial would prejudge the evidence, according to the legal argument . The White House argued that the trial would be prejudicial to the
 These were all good arguments, but I still wasn’t satisfied with inaction. These are good arguments for inaction, but they’re still not satisfied .
 "I pushed for a public statement of some kind that we could issue. On December 10 and again, again, I pushed for that," she says . "On December 10," she pushes for a statement of any kind that could be issued, she adds .
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman and I were all working long hours on reorganization, a far more gratifying and, in our view, more important task than Watergate problem .
 In the weeks before Christmas, my own time was almost completely absorbed by the unfolding events concerning Vietnam . And then, of course, I was also absorbed by events in the country's Vietnam War .
 The Watergate situation became considerably more complicated in the early '70s . The Watergate scandal was a major event in the United States' history of Watergate .
 In the last weeks of December and the beginning of January, the ground began to shift, however subtly, however . The ground began shifting in the last few months of December .
 Watergate trial was about to begin and the pressure was mounting on the defendants . The trial was just weeks before the Watergate trial began in New York City .
 Howard Hunt's despair following the death of his wife had been communicated to Colson . The vibrations were felt in the White House, particularly in the case of Howard Hunt, whose despair following his wife's death was communicated .
 Colson cared deeply about Hunt personally; they had been friends for many years . Colson and Hunt were friends for years, Colson said . Hunt was a longtime friend of Colson .
 It is also true that implicit in Hunt’s growing despair was a threat to start talking, although I was never sure exactly about what . It was never clear what Hunt was really going on to say .
 In this period, just as had been the case in the days immediately following the Watergate break-in, we began to act on unspoken assumptions, presumptions, and unverified fears . In the days following the break-ins, we acted based on assumptions and presumptions .
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman said that they thought Colson might be more involved than he was acknowledging . Colson said the same about both of them .
 This was the period when Colson went to see Hunt’s lawyer to reassure Hunt . Colson then went back to see the lawyer of Hunt to reassure him . Hunt was charged with fraudulently defrauding Mr Colson .
 We were on the verge of a Vietnam settlement, engaged in a wrestling match with Congress over the budget, and about to face some highly publicized Watergate hearings . We were in the midst of Watergate hearings and Vietnam settlement . We are now in the middle of a national crisis .
 Diary Colson made the interesting point that those that engaged in this activity did so with the thought that in the event they were apprehended that we would move on whoever was the prosecutor and see that nothing happened . The suspect was arrested in the early hours of October 1 .
 Johnson used all the powers of his office to protect himself and others at the time of the Bobby Baker investigation . Of course, this is very hard for me to believe that they could have had such ideas .
 By February I was still concerned about the widespread impression of a cover-up that had set in, yet there was little we could do . By February we were still concerned that the impression had already been set in .
 "I was not going to force someone to change his testimony just to solve a public relations problem for me," he says . Whatever our suspicions, we did not actually know who was responsible, he said .
 A diary note I dictated on February 14 summed up the situation as I saw it during those first weeks of the new year . It was a diary note from February 14 that summed up what I saw as the situation .
 The real concern seems to be the possibility that Hunt may blow . Colson’s real concern here on Colson's part is that Hunt could blow .
 He seems to have the obsession that he killed his wife by sending her to Chicago with the money or whatever it was that she was doing at that particular time . He seemed to have an obsession with killing his wife .
 He doesn't want to take the $250,000 insurance because of the fact that he takes the blame for killing his wife . He doesn’t want the insurance .
 Judge threatens to jail him with thirty-five years in jail . He says he is very likely to be tempted to take immunity and talk about everything he knows .
 Ehrlichman and Haldeman claim they don’t know, and of course, the same is true of Colson . Colson was a prominent figure in the Democratic Party, but he has been accused of covering up .
 I think all of them may know a little more than they indicate, but how much I simply can’t say. I think they may know more than that they indicate . How much I can't say.
 I don't know what the situation is, but in any event we are going to have to take our lumps and get the thing over as quickly as possible . I don’t know what is the situation, but it is going to be a tough time for the club .
 The strategy may be to delay as long as we can and let it drag on and on . I say as quickly as we . can, although it may not be the best strategy for the government .
 I am inclined to think that perhaps . perhaps the latter is the better thing . But it seems to draw blood little by little all the way along . I'm not sure if it is the best thing .
 Gray had earned a reputation in Washington as one of the most efficient, sound, and genial administrators in the city . Gray was one of D.C.'s most efficient and sound administrators .
 As Acting Director during the summer and fall of 1972 Gray had overseen the Bureau’s Watergate investigation . Gray also oversaw the Watergate investigation in 1972 .
 He was proud of the extent and intensity of that investigation, and eager to defend it in any forum . "He was proud ... he was proud," he said .
 I decided to nominate Gray to be the FBI’s permanent Director, and I met with him on February 14 to discuss the post . Gray is the current Director of the FBI .
 President Obama is expected to face a partisan assault in the hearings . His only concern was the condition he would be in after the partisan battering he could expect to receive .
 Even Larry O’Brien had said that he was very happy with the job the FBI was doing, he said . He said that the week after the break-in even Larry O'Brien said he was pleased with the FBI .
 Gray was sure that he could convince even nonbelievers that the FBI had proceeded without showing favor in the Watergate investigation . Gray: "I'm sure that I could convince people that the investigation was not tainted"
 At least getting Gray before the committee he can tell a pretty good story . The committee will hear his testimony from the committee .
 It is a true story of a thorough investigation and this of course knocks down the cover-up. It's a true true story, it is the story of an investigation into the case, it's said .
 It is the cover-up, not the deed, that is really bad here. As I emphasized to Ehrlichman and Haldeman and Colson, but I am not sure that they all buy it, it is not all that . As I emphasize, I'm not
 Of course, the deed may prove to be pretty bad if it involves Mitchell and to a lesser extent if it involved Magruder . Mitchell is the subject of a new book, "American Horror Horror Horror"
 The White House has yet to decide whether to invoke executive privilege and refuse to let any White House aides testify . Ervin hearings began in February .
 Haldeman's, Ehrlichman's, and Dean’s efforts to come up with a strategy always seemed to get sidetracked by other things . Dean: "I’m not sure what I’ve got to do with the White House."
 Some Republicans in Congress were beginning to grow anxious; some were even insisting publicly that I do something about Watergate . "Some of the most important things in the world were Watergate," he says .
 Ehrlichman and Dean decided to work directly with John Dean instead of working through him and Haldeman . John Dean is now the president of the United States .
 For months I had deliberately left Watergate strategy and planning to others . For months, Watergate strategy had been left to others, but Watergate strategy was left out of focus .
 But not only had the problem not solved or contained, now it was starting to snowball . "Now it's not only that had not been solved, but now it's starting to snow," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Dean Obeidallah reported to me on September 15, the day the Watergate indictments were handed down . He was the first time he had talked with him since that day . Obeydallah met with Dean on February 27 to discuss Watergate .
 "I made another note after I had met with him again the next day, February 28," she said . "I'm not sure what happened to me," she wrote .
 "He has shown enormous strength, great intelligence, and great subtlety," says President Obama . Obama has shown great strength, intelligence, says Obama .
 Truman administration had put up a stone wall when we tried to conduct an investigation, he says . "He went back and read not only Six Crises but particularly the speech I made in the Congress," he adds .
 They wouldn’t allow the FBI or the Justice Department or any agency of government to cooperate with us, he says . They were supported totally by the press at that time, he adds .
 I'm glad that I am talking to Dean now rather than going through Haldeman or Ehrlichman. I am glad that we are now able to talk to Dean . I am not sure if I will be able to do so again, but I would rather be talking to
 I think I have made a mistake in going through others, when there is a man with the capability of Dean I can talk to directly. I think it was a mistake, when I went through others . I think he has made a decision to go through others rather than speak to Dean
 The Ervin Committee would like nothing better than to interrogate Haldeman, Colson or Ehrlichman .
 I was quick to reassure him, “In your case I think they realize you are the lawyer and they know you didn’t have a goddamned thing to do with . . the campaign,” I said emphatically .
 We discussed Ervin Committee strategy and the statement that we issued on March 12, asserting our right to claim executive privilege on all present and former White House aides . We discussed strategy, including the statement we issued in March 12 .
 We also discussed the information he was gathering on Democratic political abuses .
 On March 13 we went over the questions he thought I was likely to be asked about Watergate in my press conference in two days . And on March 13 he went over those questions . "On March 13, he thought he would be asked: 'What I'm likely to ask about Watergate
 This press conference on March 15 was bound to be an even more heated one than usual . It was bound for a heated one .
 With equal measures of naiveté and stubbornness, Gray had allowed his hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee to become a disaster . Gray's hearing before the Judiciary Committee was a disaster.
 In each successive appearance he had brought John Dean’s name further and further into the controversy . In one point he even implied that Dean might have illegally shown FBI reports to Donald Segretti .
 Democratic members of the Judiciary Committee saw that they were on to a live issue and began to insist that Dean had to testify before he could be confirmed . Dean had the White House press office deny that he had mishandled FBI reports .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I was fully prepared to defend Dean" He says he would respond to questions under oath in a letter if he was asked about the demands that he appear as a witness . He says Dean would say that he would say he would under oath .
 I said I would finesse other Watergate questions by reasserting our intention to cooperate with the Ervin Committee’s investigation . I said, “I said I . . reasserted [the] intention to . cooperate with [the committee's] investigation. I said
 Dean said he would cooperate with a proper investigation by the Senate committee . Dean added that he had cooperated with the FBI in the past with the government .
 Dean Obeidallah: "Then Dean and I began a review of the facts, first from the standpoint of my press conference and then from the . standpoint of our potential vulnerabilities before the Ervin Committee," he says .
 On Watergate I thought that our principal worries were Magruder and Mitchell, although I was sure the Ervin Committee would try to draw in Haldeman as well . On Watergate, "I thought that . our principal concern was Magruders and Mitchell," says historian .
 I was prepared to assert unequivocally and to defend unreservedly that there was no White House involvement in the Watergate break-in . I was still prepared to . assert unequivocally . that there were no . White House . involvement in Watergate . The White House was not involved in the break-
 Haldeman had given Chapin and Gordon Strachan the approval to start the Segretti operation . The press was continually trying to link Segreti to Watergate .
 Dean reassured me that Chapin had not known anything about Watergate . Chapin was not aware of Watergate, but Dean assured me that he knew nothing .
 If he had known about the break-in, that would be bad enough in itself . But I immediately saw the even deeper problem it would pose, he said .
 It would not seem likely Strachan would have known about anything as important as Watergate break-in plan without having informed Haldeman of it . It was well known that HALDeman’s staff acted as an extension of Haldem . Strachans' staff acted
 Strachan had been such a peripheral figure in all our thinking about Watergate during the past few months that it was difficult to believe that he was suddenly a major problem . Strachans had been a peripheral and minor figure in our thinking of Watergate .
 Strachan had known about the Watergate bugging, according to Dean Dean, Strachans said . The Scotsman said he had 'difficult to accept' the revelations . The former Scotland boss said he was 'disappointed' by the revelations, which he said was 'un
 If this is true, then nine months of denials of White House involvement were undermined . White House denials have been undermined by the allegations .
 Later in the meeting Dean seemed to modify the problem presented by Strachan . The Scotsman appeared to modify his stance on the matter .
 He said we could still truthfully say that there had been no White House involvement in that no one had known about the DNC break-in . He said that we could . truthfully . say that no . one had been involved in the break-ins .
 Strachan had evidently known about the existence of the bug after the fact, but he had not been part of any criminal conspiracy . Strachans knew about the fact of the fact but not part of a criminal conspiracy, it was revealed .
 In any case, my first instinct was not to accuse or even criticize, but to consolidate . "I'm not accusing or even criticizing, but I'm trying to consolidate," he says . "My first instinct is to consolidate, not to criticize," he adds .
 Running down the list of other potential vulnerabilities, Dean gave me his conclusions about each of them . Dean says each of the vulnerabilities is a potential vulnerability .
 Magruder had known even more than Strachan; Colson had not known specifically about Watergate; and Mitchell had known about the overall intelligence-gathering but not about the actual details of the break-in .
 It was true, he said, but he had done so only because they had asked for a lawyer, and he had been told that Liddy was a good one . He said he had only asked for the help of a lawyer and he'd been told he was good .
 He had passed on that information to Magruder and Liddy had been hired . Liddy was hired by Liddy after he was found guilty of murder .
 We were on the eve of a partisan Senate inquisition, suddenly facing serious new and undefined vulnerabilities . We are on the verge of a congressional inquisition . We were suddenly facing new and unknown vulnerabilities .
 Dean said he thought he had convinced Ehrlichman that he would not really want to ‘hang out” either . Dean said that he thought that he had . convinced him that he wouldn’t really . want to hang out with him .
 I raised again the possibility of issuing some kind of White House statement . The White House has not responded to any of the allegations .
 Dean argued that the partisan Democrats and the media would never believe any statement we issued . Dean said there had been no White House involvement in the Watergate break-in . But Dean said that regardless of the truth of our assertion, the media wouldn't believe .
 The Segretti case is the subject of a new documentary, "The Life of the Segrettis" The documentary was released in October 2013 . The film was shot and aired in New York City .
 At my press conference on March 15, the first question was on Watergate and on John Dean’s role in the investigation. John Dean, who was part of the Watergate investigation, was the subject of a press conference in March .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I defended Dean and said that it was unprecedented and unthinkable that the Counsel to the President would accept a summons to appear before a congressional committee. I defended Dean," he said .
 Dean was covered not only by executive privilege but also by the time-honored confidentiality of the lawyer-client relationship . Dean was also covered by the confidentiality of his client's confidentiality .
 I said that I was prepared to allow him to furnish information; this in itself was more cooperation than was required by the Constitution or by precedent . This in itself, this cooperation was more than required by Constitution, by precedent, he says .
 I reminded reporters that other administrations had been less cooperative than we . I reminded them that I was cooperating in a way that Truman had refused to during the Hiss case . Truman refused to cooperate in the way that he did in the case .
 The questioning kept returning to Watergate with a relentlessness, almost a passion, that I had seen before only in the most emotional days of the Vietnam war . The questioning was almost as intense as the Vietnam War, but it was never as much intense .
 I knew immediately, even while I was answering the questions in the way that Dean and I had discussed and agreed upon, that our current approach to Watergate was not going to work . I also knew immediately—even while I . knew immediately — even while . answering the . questions, I
 I had been told that Strachan had known about the bugging after the fact . But he had not been part of the decision to do it, he said . I had previously been told he had been part-of-the-decision-making .
 "Even if that was all we could say, we should be finding persuasive new ways in which to say it," he said .
 Dean Obeidallah suggested that he go to Camp David and concentrate on preparing a statement . When I saw Dean again on March 16, he said, "I suggested that . He should concentrate exclusively on preparing this statement"
 Dean says he was present at meetings in John Mitchell’s office at the Justice Department at which Gordon Liddy's intelligence-gathering plans had been discussed . Dean: "I was pushing Dean for a statement again the next day, when he told me that he, Dean himself
 Dean hastened to add that he had said that such things should not be talked about in front of the Attorney General . Dean hastens to say that he did not want to talk about such things in the attorney general .
 Liddy had said at the meeting that they ought to do some bugging, he said . He explained that Liddy told them they should do bugging . Liddy said they should have bugged, he added .
 Mitchell had not agreed to it but had simply sat puffing on his pipe, saying nothing . Mitchell was not at the end of the meeting but simply said nothing . He said: "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm sure we're going to
 Mitchell’s inscrutability was the manner he always adopted when having to tolerate amateurs, he says . Mitchell was a master of the art of the game, not just the art .
 Dean Obeidallah: I told Dean that he would not have to mention the talk about bugging when he described this meeting in the statement he was going to prepare for the meeting . He said he told Dean not to mention it when he describes the meeting in his statement .
 "I rationalized that, after all, he had tried to stop it, and Mitchell had not approved it," she says . "He rationalized ... that after all of us had tried, we had to look at it again," she adds .
 Dean said it would be an embarrassment that the White House knew about the existence of an intelligence operation, even though we thought it was to be a legal one . Dean: It would be embarrassing to know that the operation was not legal .
 I was not bothered by that and said that if we had to justify it we could, it could, on the basis of all the violence and demonstrations against us, he said . "I said that we could justify it if we were forced to, and that we would," he said
 Dean's view was that Mitchell, Colson, Haldeman and Colson indirectly and possibly directly; and, on the second level, Chapin. I said that, as I understood it, in Dean’s view, in . Dean, I said, as . I
 I said I knew that, but his activities had taken place after the bugging and I did not see the problem . I said he knew that . But he said he did not know that, and I didn't see it .
 Dean appeared to be altering what he had told me four days earlier when he said that Strachan had not known about the break-in . When we came back, Dean seemed to be changing what he'd told me .
 Strachan said Liddy had told him that he was not really sure how much he knew . Liddy said he had not really known how much of the information had been given to Scotland .
 Dean told me that Liddy had named Magruder as the man who had pressured him to go ahead with the break-in . Dean said Liddy told him Liddy's story had been made public by the press .
 Dean theorized that Strachan had probably urged people to get moving on gathering intelligence . Strachans had urged people in general terms that people should get moving .
 There was a rumor that Magruder was saying in private that Colson and Haldeman had known about the break-in . There was also a rumor he was telling in private about Colson .
 I did not believe the accusation, but I thought that, as Dean observed, if Magruder ever saw himself sinking he would reach out to grab anyone he could get hold of him . I thought if he ever felt himself sinking, he'd reach out and grab anyone who could get
 "Now there are all these other circumstantial associations and involvements," she said . "Now we have all these circumstantially associations and involvesments," the woman said .
 I told Dean I could see no alternative to trying to “cut her off at the pass” by saying simply that Liddy and his bunch had done the break-in as a part of their job . I said I could not see no other to try to cut her off
 I ventured, thinking that some kind of circumstantial mud might be slung because of that. I ventured . I ventured to think that some of the mud might have been slung by that. It was not that .
 Hunt and Liddy, laden with CIA equipment, had broken into the office of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist . Dean then told me that Hunt and . Liddy had broken in to the psychiatrist's office . Dean says Hunt and. Liddy broke in .
 Dean added that it was possible that Ehrlichman had not known beforehand that this break-in was going to take place . Dean said that it is possible that it could have been possible that he knew beforehand .
 He mentioned the vulnerability that would be involved with Ehrlichman apparently with something that had to do with an investigation in the Ellsberg case . "It seemed to me to be somewhat ridiculous," he said .
 Just four days earlier Dean told me that Strachan had had knowledge of the Watergate bug . Just four years earlier Dean had told me he'd had known of the bug .
 Still, I was convinced that nothing to do with Ellsberg would ever come up during the Ervin hearings, and that meant that . That meant that we had more important problems than Ellsenberg now . Still, he was convinced nothing . ever came up .
 The old pattern of delay and inactivity continued to plague our handling of Watergate. Watergate was a pattern of inactivity that plagued the administration of President Richard Nixon's administration. The White House has been criticized for its handling of the scandal .
 We were faced with the possibility of having to resume bombing in Laos as retaliation for the failure of the North Vietnamese to abide by the cease-fire provision of the Paris peace agreement .
 George Shultz was about to concede that the relaxation of controls in Phase III of the economic policy had been premature . The domestic economy was disturbingly volatile, says Shultz . Shultz: Relaxing of controls was premature .
 I was also thinking about the need to set new foreign policy goals for the second term . I was thinking about setting new foreign policies for the next term, he said .
 The danger of a great-power nuclear confrontation was far greater than in Southeast Asia, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: Vietnam war ended, we could turn our attention to the other area of the world where war was always imminent .
 Israel's prime minister wants to push it past the Israeli elections in October . Israeli elections are due to be held in October, but he wants it pushed past the elections .
 The Egyptian [Hafez Ismail, adviser to President Sadat] is coming over . The Egyptian president is also coming over to meet Sadat's adviser .
 Some way we have got to get the Israelis moved off of their intransigent position. What he works out I don’t know, but I feel that some way is needed,’s not sure .
 We can’t move to the all-out Egyptian or Arab position either, but there is some place in between there where we can move . Needless to say, we can't move to Egypt or Arab positions either . But there is somewhere in between that .
 The interim settlement is, of course, the only thing we can talk about -- that’s the thing the Israelis will ever go for . The Egyptians are just simply going to have to take a settlement of that sort—or the Arabs are— or the Arabs .
 I am pressing him hard here because I don’t want him to get off the hook with regard to the need to make a settlement this year because we won't be able to make it next year and, of course, not thereafter with 76 coming up . I'm pressing him
 He brought that up himself, so apparently the message is getting through . He brought it up himself .
 This is the point that I had made to Heath—that we couldn’t go to the summit here and fail and, of course, the British understand this totally . The British understand it totally, says Heath .
 Henry has constantly put off moving on it each time, suggesting that the political problems were too difficult . On the other hand, Henry has put off putting off moving it on again .
 He agreed that the problem with the Israelis in Israel was not nearly as difficult as the Jewish community here . But he said he is determined to bite this bullet and do it now .
 I think actually the radicals are our greater danger because the Soviets will have their people be somewhat responsible . The radicals are likely to act in totally unmanageable ways, he says .
 As I told Bob Bob, I thought that Henry was having a letdown now because he realized that he had participated in the three great events perhaps of the postwar era—the Soviet, the China, the Vietnam—and that everything else would pale by significance .
 The Mideast he just doesn’t want to bite, he says . "I am sure because of the enormous pressures he’s going to get from the Jewish groups in this country," he adds .
 I kept hammering, however, with Haig's necessity to do something about the Mideast . Haig: "I'm not sure what I'm going to do, but I'm sure we need to do it"
 In the two months since the second term had begun, I made ten major speeches, held three press conferences, submitted the 1974 budget with the proposed spending ceiling, and sent up new legislative proposals on the environment, health, education, and law enforcement .
 Golda Meir, King Hussein of Jordan, and British Prime Minister Edward Heath visited Washington . Golda . Meir visited Washington in 1964 .
 So far there had been little opportunity to make the public appearances that would be necessary to build support for my policies . I needed to begin getting out into the country. So far, I had little opportunities to make public appearances .
 In fact, I had planned to make a national tour after the end of the war to express my gratitude to the people for their steadfastness during that long ordeal . I had hoped to make the national tour of the country to thank them for their service .
 Haldeman shared his frustration that the White House was doing and saying nothing on Watergate . The White House did not do anything on Watergate, he said . The president's White House said nothing was said about Watergate .
 He was eager to go public on Segretti, tell exactly what had happened, and clear up the mystery . He was especially eager to clear up what happened . He said he was happy to share his story with the public .
 I said the problem was that the people who seemed to have Watergate vulnerabilities were our friends . I said Watergate vulnerabilities seemed to be our friends, but that was not the case . The Watergate vulnerability was a problem, he said .
 I had questioned, too, whether Magruder would have done such a thing on his own . I had also questioned whether he would have carried out the attack .
 Dean seemed to think it was possible that Mitchell had not approved the break-in . Haldeman pointed out that whatever our own conjectures about Mitchell’s involvement might be, it could be possible that he did not .
 Magruder had claimed under oath that he himself had not . Liddy was acting under a broad authority, which was possible if you accepted the premise that Liddy had been acting under broad authority . And he had said he had not done it himself .
 There was always the question of whether Liddy would take the heat or start throwing it off onto others . But there was always an issue of whether she would take it on herself .
 Dean seemed to think that there was a chance Mitchell would not be drawn in, Haldeman said . If no new factors were introduced, Dean said, there was no new factor in the decision .
 At the end of the meeting Haldeman and I again discussed the idea of putting out a public statement of a general kind . The meeting was adjourned after a meeting in London on Monday .
 Haldeman said we should just make the statement and see . Dean Dean said it would open too many doors, but it would be a good idea .
 "We agreed that the statement should not purport to be complete lest something come up later and undermine it," said CNN.com.com .
 It should indicate a willingness to answer further questions as they arose, rather than just say 'yes' rather than say 'no' .
 Haldeman brought up one other problem that Dean had raised with him, Dean . Dean was not happy with Dean's comments . Dean said, "I don't want Dean to be in the middle of the conversation"
 $350,000 in cash had been transferred out of campaign funds in 1972 and brought to the White House to help pay for such political projects as private polling .
 I asked what the problem was with that and he said that it would establish the existence of a ‘secret fund” which the papers would exploit, he said . The papers would then exploit the fund's existence .
 President Obama asked for a general statement from the White House, but it was not released . The White House has not responded to the request .
 He repeated his suggestion that before issuing any kind of a statement he should meet personally with me . He said he wants to know more about the situation before issuing a statement .
 Watergate-Segretti business was at the bottom of the Watergate scandal . Diary Diary: "It was a rather hard day here because we began to get more and more involved"
 "It isn’t getting at the facts but it’s really getting out our side of the story," she says . "We’re really getting our story out," she adds .
 Ehrlichman says he had been "a little bit discouraged today" with the news . He says he has been spending a lot of time with him and apparently it bucked him up considerably . He said he was "bruised up considerably"
 President Obama had been trying to keep all of these loose ends from coming apart, he said . He said he would like to have a half hour with me at some point where he could just lay it all out . "I would know everything that he knew and would know all the hazards
 Dean and Moore have come down on the side of not putting out any statement at this point, simply stonewalling the thing . All in all, though, from what Dean said tonight, it's not surprising that Moore has come down with no statement yet .
 The point that I raised with both Haldeman and Ehrlichman was that if these questions are going to come out anyway, perhaps it is best just to let them come out on our own initiative rather than having them forced out of office .
 District court judge was about to hand down sentences on Hunt, Liddy, McCord, and the other men arrested at the Watergate . Hunt had learned that the district court judge had also learned that he was due to give sentences .
 One of the major concerns is what will happen when the judge moves on Friday . The judge is expected to make a decision on Friday morning .
 "He is apparently going to be extremely tough, which does not surprise me," he says . "I'm not surprised that he's going to get tough," he adds .
 They think that McCord in this instance might crack because he doesn’t want to go to jail . They think he might say to the judge after a few days that he is willing to tell all .
 "We have many problems that are residues of the campaign. All in all, recall the fact that a few years ago this would have been inauguration day— March 20," says Obama .
 Haldeman said ironically that it was just one of those breaks where if it hadn’t been for a night watchman who saw the tape on the door or something like that the Watergate thing would never have come out .
 The cost of trying to run a campaign is part of the cost of having some well-intentioned but rather stupid people with very poor judgment working for you . But that’s one of the costs of running a campaign .
 Mitchell just didn’t keep his hand on the tiller at a time when he was having all the problems with Martha although I do not blame him for it . Mitchell’s wife says he ‘did not keep his hands on the . tiller’
 Mitchell has a better friend or supporter than Mitchell and no man who is stronger in the crunch, but at the present time we are really caught here without really knowing how to handle it . No one could have a better . friend or support than Mitchell, says Mitchell .
 John Dean came into the Oval Office just after ten o’clock on Wednesday morning, March 21, when John Dean was in . John Dean: "It was just after 10 a.m. ET on March 21 that John Dean's visit to the White House was the first time
 President Nixon said he wanted to talk because he thought he didn't know everything he knew about Watergate . He said he thought that we should talk because in our earlier conversations about Watergate he had had the impression that I did not know everything .
 He said it was "difficult for me to make judgments that only I could make" That made it difficult for him to make, he said .
 "It grows geometrically now, because it compounds itself. It’s compounding," says the author of the book .
 "We’re being blackmailed," says President Obama . "People are going to start perjuring themselves very quickly that have not had to perjure themselves to protect other people"
 “That it won’t bust,” I supplied. “And that is just —and there is no assurance—” ‘That’s no assurance —” he supplied . “It won”
 Dean said Ehrlichman, Mitchell, Mitchell and others reached a consensus that the aide he had selected was not the right person to handle the matter . They wanted a lawyer, Dean said . Dean said that the consensus was that the aides needed a lawyer .
 Liddy recommended Liddy to handle intelligence functions, he said . It was at that point, he added, that he recommended him to handle the CIA .
 He repeated his account of Haldeman’s subsequent agreement that Dean and the White House should stay away from such activities .
 He then turned to details he had learned only after the break-in, while he was trying to put together what had happened . These were extrapolations and conjectures, he said .
 Hunt and Liddy had appealed to Colson for help in getting authorization for their plans, it appeared . It appeared that after the meeting in Mitchell’s . office, Hunt and . Liddy . had appealed for help . Colson .
 Colson had thereupon called Magruder, urging him to ‘fish or cut bait” on Hunt and Liddy . Colson called the man to “fish or . cut bait,” he said. Colson later said .
 "Up to now I had been told by everyone, including Dean, that Colson was not involved. Up to now, he had told me that he had been cleared," he said .
 Haldeman’s push for intelligence-gathering had been based on the innocent assumption that nothing illegal was being planned . He also thought that Strachan had pushed through Strachans, but that he had not pushed through .
 Dean conjectured that Magruder had reported the Colson and Strachan “pushes” to Mitchell . In the face of all this pressure Mitchell had puffed on his pipe and said, “Go ahead,” without really reflecting on what it was all
 Strachan received some of the information from the report and passed it on to Haldeman . Dean said that after the bug was installed he had received some information from it .
 Haldeman might not have known where the information came from, Dean Dean said . Strachan did, but Strachans did, he said, and he did .
 Magruder, Dean said, was “totally knowledgeable” and had perjured himself . Dean said he was ‘totally . knowledgeable’ and had been ‘confident’ about the case .
 Dean said that he honestly believed that no one in the White House had known that . But he added, in apparent contradiction, that he thought Strachan had known .
 Dean said that he had followed the FBI and the grand jury’s investigations at all times . Dean said he followed FBI and grand jury's investigations into the case . Dean: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure I'm not going to let it
 Dean said arrangements were made for the payments at meetings where he and Mitchell were both present . Dean said that arrangements have been made at meetings between Mitchell and Dean . Dean: "I'm not sure what happened to the payments"
 I added that “I would certainly keep that cover for whatever it’s worth.” I said. “It would certainly be that cover,” he said .
 Dean said Haldeman let him use a $350,000 cash fund held at the White House to make payments to defendants . Dean said he used the cash fund to pay the defendants .
 Dean said that McCord had talked to someone in the White House about commutation of his sentence . Dean said McCord has talked about commutations with someone in White House . Dean: McCord talked about a commutation .
 Dean arrived at the heart of what had precipitated his current state of concern . Now Dean is looking to find out what happened to him and his family .
 Dean said that when he had received this message, he told the CRP lawyer, “I’m not involved in the money.” Dean said . Dean said he was not involved with the money when he received the message .
 Dean told me about all the other people who knew about the Ellsberg break-in, among them Cubans who had been arrested at the Watergate and their lawyers . Dean said that he didn’t either, and then he told me .
 Hunt’s threat was just the most urgent and dramatic example of the larger problem of the continuing blackmail possibilities for all the defendants . Hunt's threat is just one of the many examples of the problem of blackmail possibilities in the case .
 "If we continued to pay it, that would compound the obstruction of justice," says attorney general . "It would be very difficult to see if we continued paying it," he says .
 There was a question of how to raise the money, and even how to deliver it, without involving the White House . Beyond that, there was the question of raising the money .
 Dean estimated payments for all the defendants would require a million dollars over the next two years . Dean estimated that payments would need to be made over two years to cover the cost .
 I said that it would not be easy, but that I knew where we could get the money, he said . He said that he knew where to get the cash, and that it was not easy .
 In fact, I had no specific way in mind, but I assumed that, if it were sufficiently urgent, we could raise it from some of the people who had been large contributors in the past, he said . "I assumed that if it was sufficiently urgent we could . raise it
 Dean went back to his account of the “growing cancer” on the presidency . Dean: The president is a "growing cancer" on the president .
 He said Bud Krogh was forced to perjure himself on the Ellsberg matter . He said Krogh said he was forced into perjuring himself . Krogh has been accused of forcing Krogh to lie about the matter .
 He was one of my favorites among the younger staff members; I knew he was a principled man . He was a "principle man" who was principled man, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ellsberg had testified that he did not know the Cubans, when he did . But apparently he did, and did, from Watergate, not from Watergate . He did, not Watergate, but from Ellsinger, who leaked the documents .
 In two days he would be sentenced, and he would make good on his threat . He would be sure to make good upon his threat, he would say .
 After he had finished, he returned to what he called the growing situation . "It's growing situation," he said of the situation .
 The problem would be if the Watergate case started breaking and there was a criminal case against Haldeman, Mitchell, Ehrlichman, and himself, he says .
 He said he thought that he, Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Mitchell should talk about how to carve it away from the presidency . He said that he thought he thought they should discuss the whole thing .
 I posed the hypothesis that when he met with Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Mitchell, they might conclude that there was nothing that could be done to keep the whole matter from breaking open . I posed a hypothesis that .
 He introduced the alternative of calling another grand jury with immunity for some witnesses . Grand jury could be called with immunity from some witnesses, he said .
 I thought he had Magruder in mind, but it became clear he was thinking of himself . "It became clear that he had thought of himself. He was thinking about himself," he said .
 By his own account, he had denounced Liddy’s bugging plan; he was not involved in the handling of the money . He had not offered clemency or given any perjurious testimony, he said .
 CNN's John Sutter asked him to explain to me again his own problems on obstruction of justice . But he was obviously worried, so I asked him again to explain his problems to me .
 I told him that I couldn’t see how a legal case could be made against him. I said I couldn't see how he could be charged with anything against him, he said .
 He explained that he had been a “conduit for information” about the blackmail . He said that he was a ‘conduit’ for information .
 As he had talked I had been worrying about the blackmail and the risks of not paying it. As he'd talked I'd been worrying, I'd had been worried about not paying the blackmail . It was not the first time I'd heard from such a blackmailer .
 I wonder if that doesn’t have to be continued,” and I started to work my way through that maze. “I wonder if it doesn” have to continue,’s the author of the novel .
 At least if we had the million dollars and a way of delivering it, that would hold off everything for a while . At least $1 million would be enough to keep everything quiet for a few years .
 Dean: "I am not sure that you will ever be able to deliver on the clemency" Dean said that the others would be after clemence, too, too . Dean added that he is not sure if he will ever deliver .
 He said almost apologetically that there had been some bad—as well as some necessary—judgments made before the election . But now it had become a burden in the second term that would not go away .
 Dean said that he did not have a solution to all these problems, but he thought we should think about cutting losses rather than compounding the matter with further payments . Dean said we should consider cutting losses and not continuing payments .
 "We were already out of time on him, and if he started hurling charges at the White House there was no way of knowing what damage he could do to my closest aides," he says .
 Dean Obeidallah agreed to meet with Mitchell, Ehrlichman, and Haldeman . Dean agreed that Dean would meet right away with Mitchell .
 In our conversation Dean had told me that he and Haldeman had talked that morning about the same things he and I were discussing, and at the time I assumed that . I thought that Haldman understood all the problems Dean had described to me. In our conversations Dean had said
 Colson's phone call to Magruder may have triggered approval of Watergate plan, Haldeman says . Colson’s apparently flat promise of a Christmas pardon for Hunt for Hunt, he says .
 When Haldeman was seated I told him that we were at the point of decision. I told them that we had reached a decision, and that we would be making a decision .
 If we decided that the potential criminal liabilities for everyone were too great, we could yield nothing, fight back, and refuse to testify before the Ervin Committee . We could have a choice: If we didn't testify, we would yield nothing and fight back . If we did, we
 Dean says the consensus was not to say to defendants, "I'm sorry, it is all off,” and let them talk . Dean: "I asked Dean if there was not a consensus that it was off" Dean: The consensus was that the defendants should be allowed to
 He pointed out that he had told Dean this during previous months when Dean had said there was a money problem . Dean said he had already told Dean he had a problem .
 The Cuban committee had taken care of the defendants through the election, he says . As for the payments up to this time, he said, "I said that our cover story was going to be that the Cuban committee took care of [the defendants] through the ... election"
 Dean's recommendation is to go "the clean way, just letting it all go now," he says . Dean: "Let's go now. Let's just let it go now" Dean says .
 He again urged the desirability of having our people go before a grand jury, where, unlike the Senate Watergate Committee, there would be rules of evidence .
 A lawyer always advises his client that it is better to say he doesn’t recall and err on the side of forgetfulness than hazard a guess or try to reconstruct a memory .
 Taking the Fifth Amendment would mean automatic conviction in the eyes of the public . Yet this would not help much in committee hearings where taking the Fifth would mean automatically conviction .
 Dean reminded Haldeman that a grand jury also has its hazards—it was a high-risk perjury situation . Dean: "A grand jury is a high risk perjury situation"
 Watergate grand jury should be reconvened to hear testimony from White House staff, says Ehrlichman . Ehrichman had recommended as a solution that we request the Watergate grand . jury reconvenes, he says, to hear White House .
 We agreed that no more payments should be made to all the defendants, but Hunt was still the time bomb . Hunt was 'still a time bomb' and Hunt should not be allowed to leave the country .
 Even the grand jury approach would be too late if, in two days’ time when the sentencing of the defendants took place, Hunt lashed out . The sentencing will be two days before the sentencing takes place .
 It was Hunt who threatened to leave us with no options, not even the option to do in any orderly way what was responsible and right . Hunt was Hunt, not Hunt, who left us with 'no options' and 'no option'
 Dean reiterated that the problem was having no way to get the money, and we talked about the problems with delivering it . The problem is not having to deliver the money but having to get it .
 We had arrived once again back at the beginning, the inescapable circle now complete . We had come back to the beginning of the story .
 Even the extreme measure of paying blackmail was not a solution, it would only buy us a little time . Even paying blackmail would not be a solution; it would just buy us time .
 "That would take the pressure off as far as Hunt was concerned and give us the time we needed to get everyone before the grand jury," Hunt says . Hunt says he hopes to have everyone before a grand jury .
 President-electial candidate Hillary Clinton: "We can't have, for four years, we can’t have this thing—you're going to be eaten away" Clinton: After the election, we've got to have another plan .
 "We had to turn off any further involvement at the lowest possible cost but at whatever cost it took," he said . "It was now beginning to get near me," he added . "I was beginning to be near him. We had to stop him getting near me"
 I went directly from this meeting to greet the young Russian Olympic gymnast Olga Korbut and some of her teammates, who were visiting the United States . I went to greet Korbut, who was visiting the U.S. with her teammates .
 After that there was a session on our efforts to hold down federal spending . After that, there was also a session .
 Howard Hunt and his threats and demands for money were weighing on my mind . But all the time Howard Hunt was weighing on his mind, I was still thinking about it . Howard Hunt's threats, demands and demands of money were still weighing on me .
 As soon as these meetings were over I called in Rose Woods, asked her if we had any unused campaign funds . As soon after these meetings, she asked for any unused funds, she said .
 It turned out to be $100,000, and when Haldeman came in a little later I mentioned it to him, he said it was a lot of money . "It's a big mistake," he said .
 "Once again he flatly rejected the idea of our involvement in paying more money," he said . 'Once again, he said he would not agree to pay more money. Once again he said that he would rather rather than pay more'
 Later that afternoon Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Dean came over to the EOB office for a long talk about Watergate . EOB: "Haldeman and Dean were having a long discussion"
 Looking back at it now, I can see that we were all operating from different bases of knowledge and with different perceptions of our own personal vulnerabilities . Looking back on it now I can . see that . we all operate from different . bases of . knowledge and . with different . perceptions of
 Haldeman seemed primarily concerned about the danger that Magruder might falsely accuse him of having known about the break-in beforehand, rather than about his knowledge of the payments to the defendants, which Dean had indicated was the real danger .
 Dean was concerned about his own knowledge of payments to defendants . Haldeman mused that he and Ehrlichman had worked on that with Dean . Dean had been concerned about knowing his knowledge of defendants .
 Ehrlichman appeared unaware that Strachan may have had knowledge of the bugging . Strachans may have been aware of the bug-in-a-cheating .
 These differing perceptions, and the chasms they created, are apparent now . The differing perceptions have created a chasm in our understanding of each other .
 "At the time, however, the problem only seemed very complicated, and our strategy sessions were just frustrating and inefficient minuets around the problem," says the author .
 That night I dictated a long diary note about a day that was later to be seen as a disastrous turning point in my presidency . That night, I wrote a long diarist note about the day that later became a disaster in my life .
 Diary Diary: Day was relatively uneventful except for Dean Dean's talk with Dean . Diary diary includes a visit with Dean Dean .
 Dean really in effect let it all hang out when he said there was a cancerous growth around the President that simply was going to continue to grow and that we had probably cut it out rather than let it grow and destroy us later .
 "He obviously is very depressed and doesn’t really see anything—other course of action open, but to move to let the facts out," he said . He added: “I'm very depressed. He’s obviously not really seeing anything . He obviously doesn�
 As I examined him it seems that he feels even he would be guilty of some criminal liability, due to the fact that he participated in the actions which resulted in taking care of the defendants while they were under trial .
 Every one of the various participants is now getting his own counsel and that this is going to cause considerable problems . One will not be afraid to rat on the other .
 "The next day, March 22, Haldeman and I again reviewed the increasingly volatile situation regarding Watergate," he said . The next day he said, "Haldeman ... again reviewed" Watergate .
 Liddy and the other defendants were going to be slapped with thirty-five-year sentences, I said . I thought it had been only right to raise money for them. When our conversation turned to Liddy, he said that he had raised money for the defendants .
 Haldeman agreed, saying that there was no need for Dean to be concerned about an obstruction of justice . Dean was charged with obstructing justice in the case of an alleged corruption of $1 million .
 Dean Obeidallah: I said I couldn’t understand his concern about his own involvement in an obstruction of justice . He said by his own account he hadn't delivered the money to the defendants . He added that he couldn't understand Dean’s concern over his own
 I said I thought Hunt’s direct demand to him for money had set him off in such a way . I said that I thought that was why Hunt was angry at Hunt . Hunt's direct demand for money from Hunt was why he was angry, he said .
 But since Dean had not done it, "I could not see that he had any problem," he said . "I'm not going to have any problem. But since he had not, I could see that there was no problem," she said .
 John Dean was trying to alert me to the fact that what I had assumed for nine months was the major Watergate problem . The question of who had authorized the break-in had been overtaken by the new and more serious problem of the cover-up, Dean says .
 I left the meeting only troubled by the new dimensions of what he had described rather than galvanized into action by the urgency and peril of our situation . The meeting was held in a bid to galvanize action by President Obama's administration .
 Dean did not tell me the extent of his own active and conscious role in the cover-up, and so I treated much of what he said as conjecture and deduction, instead of as a firsthand report on an explosive situation that was already out-of-hand .
 "I responded accordingly, by openly running through every available option. I responded accordingly," he said . "I ran through every possible option"
 Dean’s insistence that the authorization of payments to the defendants was an obstruction of justice seemed to be more a reflection of his personal depression than a statement of a considered legal conclusion . Dean's insistence that he authorized payments to defendants was . was more of a reflection on his depression than
 Dean Obeidallah: "Only three weeks later, when I finally saw the whole cover-up mosaic in perspective and realized the position the payments to the defendants played in it, would I understand what Dean had really been trying to tell me"
 "I left the March 21 meeting more disturbed than shocked; more anxious than alarmed," says LZ Granderson . Granderson says he left the meeting "disgusted than shocked" Granderson: "I'm not sure what's going to happen next."
 The White House tried to change its public relations posture in response to Watergate, he says . He says the White House did not look so defensive where Watergate concerned .
 John Mitchell urged that all White House aides be allowed to testify before the Ervin Committee . Mitchell: "On the afternoon of March 22, in a meeting in the EOB with Haldeman, Ehrlichman, Dean, and me, John Mitchell"
 President Obama said it was the only way to move the White House into a new public posture . He said the move was only way of moving it forward in the public .
 We also decided that it was time to get some kind of report or statement from Dean . Dean Obeidallah .
 Everyone agreed a statement or report was needed, but everyone seemed to have a different idea about what it was needed for . Everyone agreed but disagreed on what it needed to be a statement .
 "I wanted it as proof of the truth of my public statements that there was no one in the White House involved in Watergate," he says . "There were no people involved in the Watergate. Watergate. That's what I wanted to do."
 I wanted a document that would show that I had said it because I had been told it and believed it. I wanted to be able to prove that I said it, and that I believed it .
 I did not want it to include all of Dean’s theories and conjectures, just answers to the broad charges . I didn’t want to include many theories and conjecture, but just answers .
 Dean’s report could be given to the Ervin Committee to define the degree of the involvement of different individuals and therefore help limit the number of witnesses subpoenaed . There was also talk of Dean's report as a document that could be . given to Ervin committee to help limit
 There was talk about publicizing the document in order to preempt some of Ervin’s thunder by setting out some of the new facts about Watergate in a way that would make them old news .
 The use of the document would have to be defined by what was in it . Ultimately, though, the use of it would have been defined by the content of it .
 We had always thought that one important reason for avoiding public statements on Watergate or for volunteering any testimony would be to avoid putting increased pressure on John Mitchell . We had thought that . one of the important reasons for avoiding . public statements was that they would not put pressure on . John Mitchell,
 I said I did not think Sherman Adams should have been sacked, even though he had made a mistake . I said that I did think he should be sacked, and that he should not be sacked . Adams was sacked after he made a 'mistake'
 "That had been a cruel decision, and I was not going to react cruelly in this case," she said . "That was a cruel choice," she added. "It was not the right thing to do."
 "Then I thought of the beating everyone was going to take before the Ervin Committee," she said . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do," she added. "I think it will be a very difficult time for everyone to come to terms"
 As far as I was concerned they could “plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up or anything else, if it’ll save it—save it for them.” “If it” it would save it,” he said .
 Watergate strategy so far had been a dismal and damaging failure, Mitchell said . Mitchell would understand that this was my oblique way of confronting the need to make a painful shift in our Watergate strategy, he said .
 Mitchell said it was a relief to know that Mitchell had already come to this conclusion . Mitchell: "It's a relief that Mitchell has already decided this is true"
 The next morning, March 23, Judge John Sirica called an open court session for the purpose of announcing the Watergate sentences . The Watergate sentences were announced in a court appearance .
 Shortly before the session began, he was handed a letter from James McCord . Mr McCord was handed the letter before the start of the session .
 McCord said that political pressure had been exerted to keep him silent . He said that perjury had been committed at the trial and that offers of clemency were made in return for silence .
 Ehrlichman was in Key Biscayne, Florida, when he received a call from the former secretary of state . He was in Florida for the weekend, and had gone to Florida for a weekend .
 I suppose this is something that had to be expected at some point and in my view it is just as well to get it over with now . I suppose it had to get over now. I think it's just as good to get out of the way .
 Hunt given provisional sentence of thirty-five years in jail to Hunt and forty years to each of the other four . Hunt was sentenced to 35 years jail term, 40 years for each other . The other four were sentenced to 40 years jail time .
 Murderers had received more lenient sentences in the District of Columbia . Murderers were sentenced to death in Washington, D.C. Murderers in the district had received a higher sentence than anyone in the city .
 Sirica admitted severity and justified it as a tactic aimed at getting the defendants to talk . Sirica said severity of the sentence was a tactic to get the defendants talking .
 Gordon Liddy would wryly remark that he and Sirica were men of like minds because they both believed that the end justifies the means . Liddy: "Both men believed that that the ends justify the means"
 Diary Diary Diary: I rather gather that it may go more the Mitchell-Magruder route than the White House route . Diary Diary diary: "I rather gather ... it may be more of a Mitchell- Magruder than a White House."
 We are now forced to some sort of a position on Watergate. Whatever the case may be may be, it's Watergate. We are forced to take a position .
 The main thing we have to get off our backs, of course, is the whole problem of political pressure, says David Cameron . "The main thing is the main thing I have to do is get off my back," he says .
 "Let’s prick the boil early and get it over with. As I told Ehrlichman, since the thing is going to come out, let’t let it come out," he said . "Let's prick the boiling boil early," he added .
 President should lead the lead in calling for a grand jury and offer that everybody in the White House should be called upon to testify, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He said he would talk to Mitchell about that and also talk to Dean about it, but he is off to California for some church affair and will not be back until Sunday . Haldeman and Ziegler said he will get ahold of them but I am going to have to
 "I have to be with the Watergate thing going, and not knowing what’s going to come out of it," he says . "I’m with Watergate going," he adds .
 The most important thing now is to get the White House cleaned and cleaned fast on this matter, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The White House should be cleaned up, he says .
 The judge has moved, the more I lean to the idea that we should be calling for a grand jury . Now that the judge has . moved, I think the more . I lean more to the . idea that . we should call for a . grand jury, he says .
 CPI figures came out—the worst in twenty years, the market continues to go down . The CPI figures were the worst in 20 years, and the market is going down .
 It's just one of the those bad Marches which seem to be congenital as far as our administration is concerned. So it’s just a bad march, says President Obama's spokesman .
 March is usually a very bad month and then April is a month for action . April is the month of action for the world's most powerful sports stars .
 I told Haldeman to get in touch with Colson and find out what he had said to Hunt about clemency, including whether or not he had mentioned my name, he said .
 Colson says Hunt hoped to be out of prison before the end of the year . Colson said he met with William Bittman, Hunt’s lawyer, who made reference to the fact that Hunt hopes to be released before Christmas .
 In response Colson had told Bittman that he was Hunt’s friend and would try to do what he could . Colson said he was a friend of Hunt .
 Colson conceded that what Bittman inferred from his comments might be different from what was actually said . Colson concedes that what he inferred from the comments might not be what he said .
 Colson's call to Magruder may have precipitated Watergate break-in, Haldeman says . Dean says it was Colson’s call urging action on Hunt and Liddy's intelligencegathering plans . Colson asked Colson about Dean's new disclosure that it
 He said he had not realized that the fact of the call was generally known . He said it was not known that he had been called .
 He swore that he had not known what it was that Hunt and Liddy were actually proposing . Hunt swore he did not know what he was actually proposing to Liddy and Hunt .
 Haldeman contacted Mitchell about his plan to request another grand jury to look into Watergate . Mitchell says he plans to request a new grand jury into Watergate probe .
 He said that at this point it would just give credibility to everything McCord had said and damage the rights of others . He said it would be a mistake to try and damage others' rights .
 Diary Diary continued our soul-searching with regard to the Watergate matter .
 Dean Haldeman has a plan of possibly going up to the grand jury, asking for immunity, and then telling all . Dean's plan is to ask for immunity and then tell all, he says . Dean says he's not sure how long it will take to get immunity .
 "I am not sure that this is in our interests because we would be giving in on our strongest case where executive privilege is concerned," says White House chief executive .
 Haldeman: Everybody named by the grand jury or particularly named in the letter on Thursday by McCord would have to volunteer to go immediately before a grand jury and present everything that he knew . He said everybody named by grand jury, or named in letter, should volunteer to present everything
 Haldeman finally came down, and not reluctantly, on my side that what we had to do was to have appearances before the grand jury, he says . "Not reluctantly as a matter of fact, on his side," he adds .
 Colson is the one that is dragging his feet the most here and I can understand why, but he is perhaps the one perhaps who is the most clever in terms of being able to handle himself before the grand jury .
 "This is going to look like an administration cover-up in massive proportions or an obstruction of justice," says Sen. Ruben Navarrette .
 Colson swears that anything he said to Bittman he had made a thorough memorandum on later . Colson says he had limited it to Hunt only on the basis of old friendship . He swears he had nothing to Hunt .
 He said he would intercede for him and he had reason to think that his intercession would be listened to . He said that he would . Intercede . for him, he said .
 This, of course, is itself bad enough, and Colson overstated it somewhat . Colson says it's not the first time he's been in trouble .
 He agreed nothing could happen before the 1974 elections and whether it could happen then or right at the end remains to be seen .
 Hunt might be an exceptional case because of his longtime service, the fact that he was not involved as the others were, he says . Hunt has this serious personal problem with his wife dead and his children having no one really to care for them, he adds .
 I talked to Haldeman about the necessity of getting this whole thing cleaned up . He said he talked to him about the need to clean up the mess up .
 I said that we simply wouldn't be able to govern, we couldn’t do the job we could do for the country if we allowed it to go on . I said we simply couldn't do our job, and that we couldn't govern,’s I said .
 I said when a man was charged he probably had to take a leave of absence . I said that each man had to go up there and I said each man would have to go there .
 Haldeman immediately reacted and said, “Well, that’s exactly of course what they want.” He said. “I’m not surprised. It was exactly what they wanted," he said .
 There's no question in my mind that neither Haldeman or Ehrlichman are guilty of wrongdoing . We have to find a way to cut this thing off at the pass before it reaches that point .
 What happens there troubles me a great deal and only time will tell whether he can dig himself out of what appears to be a pretty complex and difficult situation . Only time is now telling whether he will be able to get his job back on track .
 March 23 is exactly sixty days after the Vietnam speech, March 23, our high point in the polls, that the whole Watergate thing came apart, or at least blew up into its massive proportions .
 It was also on Friday, March 23, that James McCord had a private interview with Samuel Dash, the chief counsel of the Ervin Committee . McCord was interviewed by Dash on March 23 . The interview was also private .
 Even some of the reporters present were perplexed at such a blatantly prejudicial move . Some of them speculated that Dash deliberately intended to heighten pressure on them to find leaks .
 As they soon found out, the search for leaks was not that difficult . The search for clues was not to be that difficult.
 The substance of McCord’s secret session with Dash immediately leaked . As would become typical of the Committee's ‘fairness,’ the substance of the session was leaked .
 The next morning’s Los Angeles Times was going to report that McCord had “told Senate investigators” that Magruder and Dean had had prior knowledge of Watergate break-in . The next day we learned that the next morning, March 25, that the pair had
 Dean told Ziegler that the story was libelous and that his attorney was going to inform the paper to that effect . Dean told the paper's editor that he would inform them of the story . Dean said his attorney had informed the paper of the libelous allegations .
 Dean Obeidallah volunteered to go before the grand jury, but I decided to wait, he says . Obeido says he thought about simply announcing that Dean would volunteer to go . Dean's arrest is the first time he's been charged with murder .
 Dean Magruder is the president of the University of Washington . Dean Obeidallah is the son of former President George W. Ziegler . He says he's "confident in Dean but to avoid statements on Magruders"
 This story in the Los Angeles Times marked a major new stage in Watergate issue, says Bob Greene . Greene: Watergate story marked a 'major new stage' in Watergate story .
 Rogers told us that Roger Mudd had positively gloated while reporting the McCord letter . Rogers said Mudd was 'positively gloating' about the letter .
 The other side of the coin is that most of our friends in the press, including Dick Wilson, Bill White, Roscoe Drummond, Vermont Royster, are now pointing out that what was a caper in June now appears to be like a massive cover-up . The other
 The day has been a hard one, but all in all the day must be a terribly hard one for others . The day was a very difficult one for some of the world .
 Mitchell must be concerned, Mitchell says . Haldeman and Ehrlichman, naturally, must be worried, he says .
 Magruder who knows he must have committed perjury before the court and Dean who is really the one who deserves the most consideration . Dean was acting always as a counsel, giving his best advice and always avoiding anything which would smack of illegal or improper activities .
 Dean told Haldeman that we should revive the idea of going before a grand jury to talk about everything, without invoking executive privilege . Dean: We should revive idea of talking about everything without invoking privilege .
 Dean said that out of this somehow there seemed to be a view floating around that a oneyear clemency commitment had been made . Dean said there was a view of a one-year commitment made by President Obama .
 Dean indicated concern because he himself had called Liddy Liddy to one point and reassured him not to worry . Dean also indicated concern . Liddy had called Dean Dean to reassure him that he was okay .
 There's also the question as to how much promises were made on the clemency side . There’s also a question as well as how much promise was made .
 Dean puts it on the basis that they were blackmailing us, but on the other hand, there just wouldn’t be any way to do so, he says . While there might not be any legal basis for prosecution for people paying blackmail, in terms of the President keeping such
 "I didn't put it quite so bluntly as that to him, but that is my considered judgment," she says . "That's my considered judgement," she adds. "That is considered judgment."
 Dean told Haldeman he didn't know how to answer about Mitchell’s involvement in the case . Dean said he didn’t have what he considered to be totally substantiated evidence with regard to Mitchell's role . Dean's concern in testifying before the grand jury was that
 Dean also told Haldeman that he didn’t have any knowledge beyond a certain point on Magruder because he had not confided in him . Dean also said he doesn't know anything beyond that point because he didn't confide in him about the case .
 Magruder told Haldeman that he had no involvement with him . Dean says he was asked to question him before he went to the grand jury . Dean said he was only involved in the investigation .
 Dean has raised with Haldeman the point that he did not know the full extent of Gordon Strachan’s knowledge . Dean has also raised the . point that . he didn’t know the extent of the . extent of Strachans’ knowledge .
 Dean told Haldeman that if Dean went before the grand jury that if he did, grand jury would have to call other members of the jury . Haldman said that under those circumstances they would have had to go before a grand jury too .
 Haldeman said again that Colson is very reluctant to expose himself to a grand jury . Colson has been reluctant to reveal himself to the grand jury, he said . The former secretary of state said Colson was "very reluctant" to do so .
 Dean told Haldeman that he purposely had not questioned Colson on activities other than Watergate . Colson seemed to be worried about because Dean really didn’t want to know about those things . Dean said Colson was worried about Watergate .
 I told Haldeman that I didn’t know of anything that Colson had done that was illegal unless he had the Cubans doing some damn thing in some other area . I told him that he didn't know anything he had done was illegal .
 Dean called from Camp David and told Haldeman’s assistant, Larry Higby, that while it might not be a good defense as far as the rest of the White House staff were concerned, it was a very good defense of John Dean . Dean told Higby that while
 "I still sought some actions that would put the White House out in front of the controversy," he says . "Some symbols to demonstrate that we, and not just the Ervin Committee, were on the side of right," he adds .
 For a while I considered appointing a special presidential commission . Dean Obeidallah suggested of appointing a similar commission to the Warren Commission that had investigated President Kennedy’s assassination .
 Dean said he liked the idea because it would stretch things out beyond the 1974 elections . Dean had said that he liked it because of the idea . Dean said that the idea would stretch out beyond 1974 elections beyond that .
 Bill Rogers, whom I had asked to give us advice about Watergate, was strongly opposed to the idea of such a commission . But Bill Rogers was strong opposed to such an idea, he says .
 He warned that its members would all try to make names for themselves, and in the end it would be the main thing remembered about Nixon administration .
 Judge Sirica should call a new grand jury or appoint a Special Prosecutor, CNN's John Sutter says . "I would tell him to do whatever he thought was best," he says .
 Colson was against having a Special Prosecutor in any circumstances . He said he thought nearly everybody in the White House except himself was involved in the post-June 17 activities . Colson said we should not deliberately increase our vulnerability .
 Haldeman suggested immunity for Dean and then send him to the grand jury . Dean would then be sent to a grand jury, he said . Dean's immunity would be immunity for him, but then grand jury would be required .
 Magruder says he would head off the possibility that he would unfairly implicate everyone else . That way, he said, he wanted to avoid the possibility of an unfair prosecution .
 He said he and Paul O’Brien, one of the attorneys retained by the CRP to deal with its Watergate litigation, had concluded that Mitchell had in fact approved the Watergate bugging plan .
 Dean believed Mitchell was now using the White House to protect himself . Mitchell and Magruder were mixing “apples and oranges” for their own protection, Dean said . Dean believed that Mitchell was mixing ‘apples, oranges’ for his protection .
 Magruder, for example, was apparently saying that the whole intelligence plan had first been cooked up by Dean on Haldeman’s instructions . Magruders said that the intelligence plan was first cooked up .
 I had spent the last ten months putting off a confrontation with John Mitchell . From a combination of hypersensitivity and a desire not to know the truth in case it turned out to be unpleasant, I had put off the confrontation .
 Mitchell gives his account of the bugging plan and the break-in . Mitchell: Haldeman and Ehrlichman had a plan to keep tabs on the plan . Mitchell says the plan was to keep the CIA from leaking information .
 "Before we were able even to reach any decision on this, we had to deal with another problem that had recently emerged," he said . "We had to also deal with this problem before we could even reach a decision"
 Dean was now saying that if he went before the grand jury, he would contradict Magruder’s earlier testimony . Dean says he could contradict the testimony of Mitchell, who was in the car with Dean .
 Mitchell had two meetings in Mitchell’s office at which Liddy plan was discussed, Mitchell says . Mitchell: There had been two meetings to discuss Liddy's plan . Mitchell says the plan was a success .
 Magruder had testified that there had been only one and that it had dealt with the new campaign spending laws . He testified that the new spending laws dealt with only one of them .
 Dean and Magruder indicated that Mitchell was putting pressure on them to hold to the original version that there had been only one innocuous meeting . Mitchell's original version of the meeting was only one harmless meeting, it was said .
 Haldeman said he was going to advise Magruder to go to the court and say, “I lied,” and correct the record . He said he would advise him to do so in court . The judge said he will not comment on the charges .
 Ehrlichman said he could not stick to his original story because there were too many crosscurrents . Magruder's original story was published in 1972, but he said he would stick to the original story .
 Haldeman arranged for Mitchell, Magruder, and Dean to meet and see if they could settle the conflict over the number and subject of their meetings with Liddy . On March 28 they met to try and settle the issue .
 He said that his first mistake had been not turning the thing off when Liddy first proposed it . He said he had made a mistake by not turning it off .
 Magruder told Haldeman that Liddy had been ordered to prepare a plan for campaign intelligence-gathering before he ever got to the CRP . Liddy was not sure who had ordered the plan .
 Magruder was sure it had been John Dean’s idea to lie about the number of meetings with Liddy, he said .
 We got a glimpse of how far Dean had gone to keep the Watergate situation under control . Although Magrudet’s version had to be regarded skeptically, it was a glimpse into how far he had gone .
 Magruder reported that Dean had not only suggested that there had only been one meeting but had urged him to destroy his desk diary, in which there was a note of the two meetings . Dean had suggested that Magruders say only one meeting had been one, but had also urged
 Magruder said Dean suggested that he lie about the purpose of the meetings and say that they were on the new campaign laws . Magruders also said that it was Dean who had suggested that . He said that he lied .
 In fact, Magruder said that he had testified the way he had only to protect Dean . He said he was only trying to protect his friend, Dean .
 He pointed out that he would not have hurt his own case by admitting that meetings were on intelligence . But such an admission would have hurt Dean, by drawing him into the intelligence network .
 Jeb Magruder had perjured himself to protect John Dean . John Dean was going to expose him as a perjurer by exposing him to the public .
 Haldeman said Magruder had asked about the possibility of clemency . Haldman said that he was pathetic and had asked for clemence . The judge said that the case had been 'pathetic'
 Haldeman had tried to reassure him but made it clear he could make no commitments . He said he could not make any commitments to the government .
 Mitchell and Magruder wanted Haldeman to corroborate their accounts of no prior knowledge . Dean said that he could not do that, and said he would not corroborate them . Dean: "Haldeman said he couldn't do that."
 The only way to avoid this problem would be for him not to testify at all, he says . He said the only way would be avoided this would be to avoid it all .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I debated whether we should use executive privilege to keep Dean from having to testify" Dean Haldeman: "Executive privilege" is a key part of the investigation .
 Dean told Haldeman that he had decided that we all needed the advice of a criminal lawyer . Dean said that he decided that he wanted to get the advice from a criminal .
 He said that he was going to get one himself whom we could all use to advise us . He added that he said he would get one of his advisers himself .
 The Ervin Committee continued to leak prejudicial stories, and big headlines now proclaimed that McCord had linked Mitchell to prior approval of the plan .
 Haldeman accused of having been “fully aware” of the political espionage schemes . Republican member of the committee of the House of Representatives accused him of being ‘fully aware of’s actions .
 The senior Republican on the committee, Howard Baker of Tennessee, privately expressed dismay over Weicker’s ‘histrionics’ There was nothing he or we could do as Weicker found in abundance the publicity he sought, he said .
 Conservative Republican Senators James Buckley, John Tower, and Norris Cotton publicly called on me to allow White House aides and former aides to testify before the Ervin Committee .
 George Bush, Chairman of the Republican National Committee, privately pleaded for some action that would get us off the defensive . Bush: "George Bush privately pleaded with some action to get us out of the defensive"
 Dean Obeidallah waived executive privilege for Watergate testimony and sent Dean to the grand jury . Dean made the decision to waive executive privilege and send Dean to a grand jury on March 29 .
 Ehrlichman wrote out a page of notes for the announcement, and we asked Ziegler to call a special press briefing . The announcement was made at the request of Dr. Richard Nixon .
 I agreed to Ziegler’s suggestion that we wait until the next day to make the announcement . The announcement was made in advance of the announcement, but it was delayed .
 I have sometimes wondered what would have happened if the announcement had been made immediately, as I had intended . I have also wondered if it would have been made as I intended, but I had hoped it was made immediately .
 Dean himself had recently favored this idea, it had not occurred to me that he would have changed his mind in a matter of a few days . Dean says he's not surprised that Dean would change his mind .
 He strenuously objected and said that his lawyers now told him that he should not offer to go to the grand jury . But when we talked with him about it, he strongly objected . He said his lawyers have told him he shouldn't go to a grand jury.
 "So we had to cancel this announcement and scrap this plan," she says . "Another day went by and nothing was done and nothing went by," she adds . "We had to scrap this announcement," she said .
 In his speech that night I announced a temporary price freeze on meat and warned Hanoi about its breaches of the Indochina cease-fire . In my speech, I announced that night that night .
 Scarcely anyone in the media seemed to care about Vietnam anymore . Not now that the Vietnam news was good and Watergate news was bad . The Vietnam news is good and the Watergate news is bad .
 At the end of the month there was a new volley of leaked Watergate stories . The Watergate stories have been leaked by the White House .
 McCord indicated Haldeman had to have known about the break-in scheme, sources say . The Associated Press quoted sources who said McCord said .
 Sources say McCord had not implicated Haldeman at all . Other sources tell the Washington Post that McCord has not implicated him in the case .
 Ziegler announced that members of the White House staff would cooperate fully if they were called to testify before the grand jury . Before we left for San Clemente on March 30, he said he would cooperate if he was called .
 He also revealed that negotiations were under way with the Ervin Committee for a relaxation of our stand on executive privilege .
 I asked Ehrlichman to take over Dean’s responsibility for handling the Watergate problem, he says . Dean Obeidallah: I asked him to take the Watergate responsibility . He says he asked him if he could handle the Watergate scandal .
 Dean was under too much attack and was obviously going to be coming under still more more . Dean was clearly going to come under more pressure after being criticised for his actions .
 In order to establish a lawyer-client privilege, Ehrlichman drew up a letter for me to sign, officially charging him with these responsibilities . The letter was signed by the lawyer who signed it to set up the confidentiality of client files .
 The night after our arrival in California I presented the Medal of Freedom to film director John Ford at a dinner in Los Angeles in his honor . The film director received the medal of Freedom at a Los Angeles dinner .
 He was seventy-eight years old and terminally ill, but he insisted on being helped to the microphone to acknowledge the award . He was helped to be helped to a microphone to accept the award at the ceremony .
 He told the large audience of celebrities that he had cried when he watched the POWs returning home .
 He was concerned about the blatant lack of good faith demonstrated by the Communists in their violations of the Paris peace accords . He said the Communists were violating the peace accord .
 "I fully shared his concern, and I reassured him that we would not tolerate any actions that actually threatened South Vietnam," says President Nixon . "I reassured him [Vietnam] that we wouldn't tolerate any of these actions," says Nixon .
 He was grateful for my reassurances, but I knew that he must be concerned about the effect the domestic drain of Watergate would have on my ability to act forcefully abroad . He was worried about the impact of Watergate .
 Ehrlichman moved decisively into his new role as the White House’s Watergate man . The former secretary of state at the center of Watergate scandal .
 He devised a negotiating strategy for dealing with the Ervin Committee . He began a general fact-gathering inquiry into the committee .
 On April 5 the CRP’s lawyer, Paul O’Brien, came to San Clemente to give his assessment of the case . O'Brien: The CRP's lawyer says the case should be heard in court on April 5 .
 Ehrlichman found that O’Brien had still another version of the current facts and situation . O'Brien's version of events was found to be still another one .
 Magruder was now saying that Colson had phoned him not once but twice to urge action on the Hunt-Liddy plan . According to O’Brien’s information, Colson has phoned O'Brien twice .
 O’Brien told Ehrlichman that Mitchell had not known of the break-in in advance, but that there was no question that Magruder had . Dean O'Brien had told us that O‘Brien felt Mitchell had approved the plan, but now O�
 On April 5, the same day O'Brien met with Ehrlichman, we turned back to the problem of Pat Gray’s confirmation hearings as FBI Director . O’Brien: Gray's confirmation hearing was a mistake .
 The Senate Judiciary Committee had been holding the nomination hostage until Dean appeared to testify before them . Dean's nomination had been held hostage until he appeared before them in court .
 The chances of getting Gray confirmed were slim, and even if we managed to get enough votes, he was now so damaged that I did not think he could be an effective Director . Even if he was confirmed, he would not be able to be effective Director, he said .
 I therefore asked Haldeman to call him to ask that he request to have his nomination withdrawn .
 Later that afternoon Ehrlichman met briefly with Judge Matthew Byrne, the man Attorney General Kleindienst and Henry Petersen had been enthusiastically recommending for weeks as a prospective FBI Director . Byrne is the man the two men had been enthusiastic about for weeks .
 The only drawback is that once Gray’s nomination was withdrawn, it would be important to propose someone else right away . The only downside was that once .
 If we decided to name Judge Byrne, we would have to wait until he finished presiding over Daniel Ellsberg’s trial .
 He said that he was always loyal to the President, and that the people on his staff he had already told were crushed . He said he always told the people he'd already told .
 I met Judge Byrne, briefly, walked out the office door and talked to him for a moment . Judge Byrne is a former judge in the U.S. District Court of Appeals .
 As I expected, Connally was greatly disturbed about Watergate and thought that somebody had to walk the plank . Connally thought that some of his friends had to be walked out of the country .
 Connally had raised the point with George Bush that there are too many people around the President . Connally: Too many people isolate the President from what is really going on .
 "Some of these people overlook the fact that we have some major successes and that we must be doing something right," says President Obama .
 Agnew told Agnew he would speak up on Watergate, but only at a price, he would have to see the President . Agnew's message to Agnew: "I received a rather astonishing message through Harlow from Agnew to the effect that he would ... speak up"
 I told Ehrlichman to pass the message to Harlow that I didn’t want under any circumstances to ask Agnew to do something that he was not convinced he ought to do on his own, that under the circumstances he should just chart his own course and of course
 "I only hope that Bryce delivered this message in the rather meaningful way that I tried to convey it," he said . Bryce Harper: "It's a good thing that I've done so far. I only hope he delivered it"
 I told Haldeman it was so fortunate that neither he nor I had been told about the Watergate thing before it broke. I told him it was lucky that neither of us was told about Watergate before the break-up .
 I am not sure what we would have said, although I think we would've turned it off because of its utter stupidity . I think I would have turned it on because of the utter stupidity of the programme .
 He said even if he is guilty in part they are after him because they know he is the strong man in the administration . He said, “Even if he . is guilty, they are . after him . Even if he was guilty, he said .
 We have had in four months more problems than most second term Presidents have in four years. President Obama has had more problems with his second term than most other presidents have had four years in office, says Mr Obama .
 In January, after it seemed that the war was going to be over, the charge of heartlessness, congressional relations, impoundment, and so forth in the budget was in January . The charge was brought up in January after it was thought it was over .
 In February, they began to go on the economy, and in March it’s Watergate . In March it's Watergate. In March, the White House began to focus on Watergate. Watergate.
 Each month there’s something and each of them has an eroding effect. So every month there's something that has an effect on the economy, it's eroding . So it's a good thing that the government is trying to get around the world, it says .
 Watergate would not hurt us in the event the other things held up reasonably well well . One very perceptive point was made that Watergate was not a problem .
 Watergate accentuates other failures such as the economy . But if, for example, the economy also goes to pot then Watergate will accentuate other failures, he says .
 The White House is trying to keep the focus on domestic issues, not just for the purpose of diverting attention, but so the people will not be thinking that the administration is coming apart at the seams, which is exactly what happened in the Truman years . That is why it is so
 It wasn’t just the 5 percenters, it was the fact that added to the 5 per centers, they thought the Truman administration was just no damn good . The Truman administration thought Truman was a bad president .
 Dean had advised us that his lawyers were going to meet with the U.S. Attorneys to feel out what would be involved if he went to the grand jury . Dean's lawyers are meeting with the United States Attorneys on what will be involved in the case .
 Haldeman says he was going to have an off-the-record meeting with U.S. Attorneys the next day . He says he had been in frequent contact with the United States Attorneys during the time he was there .
 He asked to meet with Haldeman and Ehrlichman as soon as they got back to Washington . In anticipation of being called before the grand jury, he asked for a meeting .
 On April 8, I made a note about the unfortunate way the whole situation seemed to be developing, but which still expressed optimism about our ability to survive it . The day of our return to D.C. I wrote that we were optimistic .
 Diary Colson has been calling to say he has evidence Mitchell may be trying to set up Haldeman as a scapegoat . Colson says Mitchell may have tried to set him up as scapegoat in bid to make Haldemas a 'scapegoat'
 "I am not going to allow any of this division business to hurt any of our people," says President Obama . "I will not allow it to hurt anyone," he says .
 Everyone is going into business for himself for understandable reasons, but we’re not going to let it go to the point that one destroys another . We’ve got to stand up against the idea that everyone is going to do it for themselves .
 In retrospect, I look back over the past months since the Congress came back into session, I think I’ve tended to become too depressed, and actually obsessed, with the problems of the moment .
 "We have three problems now, the question of prices, Watergate, and the increased disturbances in Vietnam," says President Obama . "We are going to have a very difficult time," says Obama .
 Compared to the massive problem we had with regard to the war and what we have gone through over the past four years, these problems do not appear all that difficult . But compared with the massive problems we had ... these problems seem all that easy, they do not seem difficult .
 With the war we simply didn’t know whether we were going to be able to see it through. We simply didn't know whether it was going to go through. It was a very difficult time for us to see the war through. With the end of the war, we
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman met with Dean as soon as they returned to Washington . Dean says he met with the two men soon after they returned from Washington to meet with Dean .
 Mitchell would have to decide whether he would tell Dean to lie about meetings with Liddy . When I heard this I said that Mitchell would be deciding whether to tell Dean not to lie .
 Ehrlichman: smartest thing Dean could do would be to go down to the prosecutors and appear to be cooperative . Dean's lawyer says Dean should be cooperative with prosecutors . Dean has been accused of sexual misconduct in a federal investigation .
 Ted Agnew asked Haldeman if he could come over to his office; he wanted help on a problem . Agnew wanted help with a problem; he asked for help on April 10 . Haldman: "Ted Agnew is a man of honor, not a politician of
 He told Haldeman that someone who had once worked for him in Baltimore was being questioned in a probe of kickbacks and campaign contributions . The former Baltimore mayor says he's being investigated in the probe .
 Agnew assured Haldeman that he himself was innocent of any wrongdoing . Agnew thought that there was a potential for embarrassment . The man apparently had records of efforts to solicit campaign contributions .
 Agnew asked if someone from the White House would see Maryland Senator J Glenn Beall, Jr., the brother of the Baltimore prosecutor, and alert him that we didn’t want Agnew’s name to come up in an unnecessary or embarrassing way . He wondered if someone
 I was very concerned at the prospect of Agnew’s being dragged through the mud unfairly, but in view of all the other problems and our strained relations with Capitol Hill, I did not see how we could do anything to help him . I was worried at prospect of the prospect
 Anything we did to try to help might boomerang and be made to appear that we were trying to cover up for him. In fact, the climate was such . It was such that anything we did try to . try to try . to . help might . be made . appear
 On April 13 Dean told Haldeman and Ehrlichman that the White House was still not a target in the grand jury’s Watergate investigation . Prosecutors were beginning to develop material on post-June period .
 Earlier he had sent word to Haldeman that if he went to the prosecutors his testimony would bring down John Mitchell . Earlier he'd told him he would testify against Mitchell if he testified .
 He had asked for Haldeman’s advice, and he said he should do what his lawyers told him to do, he said . He said he was advised to come forward .
 Ehrlichman met with Colson and David Shapiro, Colson’s lawyer . Colson said that after Howard Hunt testified before the grand jury on the following Monday, both Mitchell and Magruder would be indicted .
 It seemed as if our return to Washington had somehow been a catalyst, and charges and countercharges were now flying in every direction . It seemed like it was a catalyst for this week's Washington trip .
 I did my best to gather everyone in and control the finger-pointing, but a panic was setting in that was beyond anyone’s control . “I did my . best to calm everyone down, but the panic was . beyond anyone's control,” she said
 Colson said Magruder was putting out the story that Haldeman, Mitchell, Mitchell and Colson had all known about the Watergate break-in plans . Colson: "Haldeman and Mitchell, Colson, and Dean, and I had all . had known about
 Magruder, however, called one of Haldeman’s aides and said that his testimony would hurt Mitchell, Strachan, and Dean . But he said that he would only be testifying against Mitchell if he was found guilty of perjury .
 Colson was claiming that Ehrlichman and Dean had told him to promise clemency to Hunt in January, but that he had not done so . Haldeman reported that Colson said he was smarter than that and did not do so . Colson claimed that he was
 By his account he had instructed Colson not to tell Hunt anything about a pardon and not to raise the matter with me . Colson said Hunt had instructed him not to speak to Hunt about the pardon .
 We could no longer avoid facing the unpleasant fact that the whole thing was completely out of hand, and that something had to be done to get the White House out in front . The White House had to do something to get out of the way .
 The Watergate break-in was not just a question of knowledge of the Watergate break in or a subsequent cover-up, but the possibility of having to respond to accusations that I had not acted promptly on the knowledge obtained during the past few weeks . Now, it was not only a question
 Ehrlichman observed that the information Dean had been giving us over the past weeks and months had not been direct . Regarding this last point, he said, "The information Dean [Dean] was giving us was not direct"
 Dean had only presented different theories of what might have happened and who might have known about it, based on secondhand knowledge . So we had had no clear-cut legal responsibility to act on it, so we had to act .
 Magruder's phone call to Haldeman’s aide the day before, when he had said explicitly that he would bring down John Mitchell, was firsthand “action knowledge,” and we could no longer afford to stand idly by . We can no longer stand
 John Dean first told John Dean that there was a cancer close to the presidency . Three weeks had now passed since John Dean had first told him of the cancer .
 "I had tried to grapple with the facts only to find that they were not like the pieces of a puzzle that could be assembled into one true picture," says the author of the book .
 The simple shift of one conjecture could unlock them all and they would move into a completely different pattern . But the simple shift, one conjecture, could unlock all the secrets of the universe .
 Dean said Gordon Strachan knew about the bugging and implied that he had committed perjury . Dean also implied that the Scotland boss committed perjury in the interview . Strachans have been accused of perjury in a bid to keep up their innocence .
 Strachan indicated it was possible he knew about the break-in in March . The Scotland boss said it was 'possible' he knew of the incident . The incident happened in March and was linked to a raid on a Scotland home in March 2013 .
 Strachan had not known about the break-in and had not lied, Haldeman said March 20 . On March 20, however, the Scotland boss said he had "forgot" and not well questioned .
 Strachan had not perjured himself, says Haldeman . Dean said he did not know the full extent of the extent of Strachans knowledge . But he said he was not sure if he knew the extent .
 Strachan would deny to Ehrlichman any advance knowledge of the break-in . On April 14 he would deny that he knew of the incident in advance of his Scotland debut .
 Strachan failed a lie detector test concerning his advance knowledge . Magruder passed the test, but Strachans failed it . Strachran has since failed the same test .
 There was also kaleidoscopic confusion surrounding the question of Colson’s involvement .
 From the very beginning Haldeman and Ehrlichman had told me that Colson was not involved in any way with the scandal . From the start of the scandal, Colson had been told he would not be involved in it, he says .
 On March 21 Dean told me that a call from Colson may have triggered the bugging plan . Dean says he assumed Colson had had a "damn good idea" what he was urging . Dean: Colson's call from a phone call from the head of the U.
 Magruder and Mitchell were speculating that Colson's whereabouts were not known . Five days later, both Magruders and Mitchell speculated Colson may have been killed .
 An April 8 news report revealed Colson took a lie detector test on the question of prior knowledge and passed it .
 Dean and Magruder said Haldeman and Strachan had received copies of the Watergate bugging reports . They said they may have known what information in them represented and where it had come from .
 Haldeman told me that while he may have received these reports, he had not known anything about their source . He said he did not know anything about the source of the reports .
 He and Strachan assumed intelligence reports they received might have been the Watergate bugging transcripts . As it later turned out, they had neither received any of them and assumed they were innocent .
 The most basic and the most sensitive question of all involved John Mitchell’s role. John Mitchell's role. The most important question is whether he should be allowed to play a key role in Afghanistan .
 For ten months everyone had speculated about whether Mitchell knew about his impending death . Mitchell's death was a mystery for ten months before his death .
 Mitchell fad approved the break-in, he told Haldeman . But he said both he and Paul O’Brien had decided that Mitchell approved the move . Mitchell said he and O'Brien agreed to the move, but Mitchell said it was a mistake .
 On April 5, however, O’Brien told Ehrlichman he had concluded that Mitchell had not approved it . O'Brien later said Mitchell did not approve it, but he concluded it was Mitchell .
 "We kept thinking that if we could only establish all the facts, then we could construct a way out of the situation," the author says . "We wanted to minimize if not foreclose any possible criminal liability for the people involved," she says .
 "We never felt confident of the facts, and every alternative course of action ... met with objections from one or the other of my aides and friends who suddenly found himself in a vulnerable position"
 "We did nothing more than stew and worry about the shifting facts and continue to look for any way to prevent damage" Dean Obeidallah: "In the three weeks after March 21, when Dean had officially put me on notice about the implications of the cover-up, we
 "By April 14, when everything began to fall apart, all that was left to me was to try to get myself into a position to be able to claim that I had cracked the case," he says . "I'm trying to garner some credit for leadership that I failed to exert
 John Mitchell should come down to Washington to show some action, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Mitchell has been in Washington for more than a decade . Mitchell says Mitchell's visit to Washington would be the first step to show action .
 "That would also alert him to the fact that we were in a position where we had to act," he says .
 Mitchell wanted to have the chance to go in on his own, Mitchell says . Mitchell: "Rather than simply turn over the information to the prosecutors, I wanted Mitchell to go into his own"
 For the first time I was in the position of having to face and force a confrontation about Watergate with John Mitchell, says Sen. Richard Nixon . Nixon's White House was forced to confront Mitchell over Watergate scandal .
 I agreed that the evidence was not enough to convince me that Mitchell was guilty of murder . I also agreed that Mitchell should not have been convicted .
 It was almost certainly going to be enough to ensure that he would have to go before a grand jury . But it was almost certain that it would be enough for him to face grand jury charges .
 Haldeman suggested that perhaps if Mitchell went in and took the blame, the investigators and the press might not care about the cover-up anymore . Mitchell is accused of trying to cover up his involvement in the cover up .
 I said he should tell Mitchell that I simply could not bring myself to talk to him personally about it . I said: "I simply cannot bring myself ... to talk about it personally"
 President Eisenhower put John Ehrlichman in the same position as Eisenhower put me in with Adams, says Nixon . Nixon said, "Frankly, what I’m doing, John, is putting you in a position like that of President Eisenhower," Nixon said .
 Ehrlichman argued against making John Dean leave . John Dean was about to be called before the grand jury . John was called to testify before a grand jury in the late 1960s .
 Dean’s role in the post-June activities had not been at such a serious level that his departure was necessary, he said . Dean felt that Dean's role in post-July activities was not at such an important level that he felt necessary .
 Dean thought Dean would get better treatment from the grand jury if he still worked at the White House . Dean said Dean would be more respectful of grand jury . Dean thought he would get more respectful treatment if he worked at White House.
 Dean Obeidallah: Putting Dean outside the White House walls might make him turn against us. Furthermore, as we all recognized, as well as putting Dean outside of the Whitehouse walls might turn him against us .
 As far as Magruder was concerned, he asked Ehrlichman to talk to him and tell him that he was wrong if he thought that by keeping silent he was serving my interests, he said .
 I told Ehrlichman to put in personal “grace notes” that could help ease the pain of the situation . I told him to put them in his personal ‘grace note’
 "I suggested that he tell Magruder of my affection for him and for his family," he said . I suggested he tell him of his affection for his wife and family .
 In fact, I had been thinking the night before about Magruder’s young children in school, and about his wife . I'd also been thinking about his children, and his wife, in fact .
 Magruder's plea for clemency was pathetic, says Haldeman . Haldemmer: "I thought back to how pathetic" he was with his plea for mercy .
 I told Ehrlichman to tell Magruder that this was a painful message for me. I told him to tell him to do it, but he said it was painful for him to say it .
 Mitchell was an innocent man in heart and mind, but that he had not missed an opportunity to lob “mudballs” at the White House . After their meeting, he reported to me that Mitchell was innocent . He said Mitchell was not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Mitchell confirmed Magruder’s story that Dean had talked him into lying to the grand jury about the number and content of the meetings with Liddy . Mitchell confirmed that it was Dean who had talked Magruders into lying .
 I was shocked by the report that Mitchell had been present at such meetings, and second by this apparent confirmation that Dean had talked Magruder into lying . Mitchell was also present at the meetings, according to the report, but not at all .
 Ehrlichman also had a disturbing report of his most recent talk with Dean Dean . Dean was now saying that “everyone in the place” was going to be indicted .
 Dean had pointedly hinted to Ehrlichman that the prosecutors were after bigger targets than John Dean . Dean had hinted that prosecutors were aiming at targets like John E. Erlichman . Dean pointedly said prosecutors were targeting John Dean, not John Dean himself .
 Dean had asked Haldeman and Ehrlichman for money for Watergate defendants . The problem was apparently the money . Dean asked for money from the Watergate defendants, but it was apparently not enough .
 Dean’s ‘hypothesis’ was that approval of the use of Kalmbach to obtain funds had been as damaging as action . Dean: Haldeman and Ehrlichman approved of use of funds to obtain money . Dean's theory: Approval of
 Prosecutors could charge Haldeman and Ehrlichman with conspiracy simply because they had been asked whether it was OK to raise the money in the first place . I said that I still could not believe that . prosecutors could charge them with conspiracy .
 In the early evening of April 14, I dictated a long diary entry about the day . In the beginning of the day, I wrote a long entry about that day .
 White House Correspondents’ Dinner is being held in Washington DC .
 It's rather ironic that the winners of the awards are from the Washington Post . The Washington Post won the Pulitzer Prize for the most prestigious journalism awards .
 For the first time the Watergate case really broke apart and I learned the facts on it. While their stories for the most part were libelous, on the other hand it is significant that yesterday and today for the first . Today's Watergate case broke apart.
 In meeting on Friday, I mentioned to Ehrlichman for the first time the idea of Haldeman and Dean taking a leave of absence . In meeting we discussed idea of taking leave, he said .
 Dean has ways that he could implicate both Haldeman and Ehrlichman, not in a way that they couldn’t defend, he says . He came back and said it wouldn't work with Haldman and said he doesn't think it would work with Dean
 Dean not having a leave of absence would be in effect admitting his guilt before the ax fell on him . In any event, there is a solid reason for Dean not to take a leave .
 When Magruder came in to see him and say, “Goodbye, I’m going to jail,” he said he was like a man with a terrible load lifted off him, a totally different man . Haldeman said that when he saw Magr
 He has resigned himself to what is going to happen and will live with his fate, he said . He said: "I'm going to live with my fate. I'm not going to be able to do anything else."
 It seems that Colson is going to be a major target, according to Magruder, of the United States Attorney . The U.S. Attorney says Colson will be a "major target"
 Colson is probably telling the truth when he says he didn't know that Watergate was going to be bugged . Colson says he did not know that the Watergate was bugged. Colson was probably right .
 Mitchell also had talked about getting material on O’Brien . Mitchell seems to be deeply implicated in urging action on the Liddy project and so forth . On the other hand, he seems to have been deeply implicated .
 It's clear that Dean was more of an actor in this whole thing than he led us to believe . Or it may be that Magruder is shading it a bit this way too .
 Dean tells the story in a very different way, particularly with regard to the question as to whether or not he advised Magruder how to testify . Dean says he didn't advise him on testifying .
 Mitchell knocks Dean, because he indicates that Dean told Magruder how to testify in the meeting that Mitchell sat in with them . In this respect, Mitchell knocked Dean because he said he told him how to do it . Mitchell says Dean told him to testify .
 Magruder went in and talked to the United States Attorney about the shooting . The shooting took place in the early hours of Saturday morning . The suspect was arrested and charged with murder .
 "It is time to get the whole damn thing out and cleaned up. Iam glad that he did so, however, though, it is time for him to get it out and clean it up .
 They all did it with the best of intentions, with great devotion and dedication, but they just went one step too far and then compounded the whole thing through this program of trying to cover it up. They just went to it, but it was a mistake, he says. They all
 I suppose during the election campaign there was a feeling we couldn’t do anything for fear of risking the election. ‘We couldn't do anything to risk the election,’ he said . ‘I suppose during election campaign we couldn't . do anything. for fear
 "We were just postponing the day that we would have to face up to it. Yet that was a mistake, as it turned out," he said .
 Immediately after the election, of course, would have been the time to move on it frontally . Yet we did not move then for reasons that I probably will understand later, he says .
 "Nobody was really minding the store. I just wasn’t watching it that closely then," he said .
 At the end of our conversation today, Haldeman brought up the subject himself of resignation . At the same time, he brought up himself of resigning .
 He said he didn't want to do it and didn't feel he should but that he might have to come to that . He said quite bluntly he didn’t want to . do it, and said he may have to do that .
 I didn’t commit on it because I think we might have to consider it sometime, but my present inclination, as I indicated to Ehrlichman yesterday and to Kissinger this morning, is that we really had to draw the wagons up around Haldeman and protect him
 It will be difficult enough to have Mitchell and most of the campaign people implicated, with Dean possibly a candidate, but to have Haldeman go would be the extra blow . It will not be easy enough for Mitchell and other campaign people to be implicated .
 CNN's John Sutter says he wants to enlist some of the Republicans to stand with him . Sutter: "Here what we have to do of course is to enlist [Republicans] to support us"
 John Anderson, Johnny Rhodes, George Aiken, Mathias, and Saxbe popping off, this is the kind of thing that could escalate and get into a general situation as happened in the case of Sherman Adams .
 Agnew denied the story to the effect that he was appalled by the way Watergate was being handled by the President . Agnew denies the story, saying he was disgusted with the President's handling of Watergate .
 Agnew was apparently concerned about some grand jury investigation in Maryland which could involve one of his people and some very damaging memoranda apparently of conversation with Agnew with regard to contributors prior to the time they got state contracts . Agnew apparently was concerned about a grand jury probe .
 Ehrlichman called him at his direction and he had just finished playing golf . Ehrichman was just about to call him at the direction of his boss .
 Mitchell is opposed to a Special Prosecutor, which Mitchell is totally opposed to and which I think would be a great mistake . He seemed to be amazed the way the ball was bouncing, but still came out for a special prosecutor .
 Harold Lipset received only a misdemeanor after being charged with a felony, and got a suspended sentence . The revelation was an ironical note, where he had been engaged in bugging in 1966, received a misdemeanor .
 The double standard is really shocking here with the Post trying to put the very best face on it all and Dash saying that you have to have somebody as an investigator who has had some experience in doing some things that were wrong . Dash says the Post has had to have someone with some experience
 It's going to be a hell of a blow to Henry but it’s the only thing to do, he says . We cannot have anybody leave if we can possibly avoid it while we are under heat on this thing . It's not a good idea to have anyone leave,
 This is probably the last time we will see one that high for some time unless we get a couple of breaks toward the end of the next year . This is most likely to be the last of the highs for a long time .
 Gallup poll shows only 5 percent of the public were affected by the Watergate scandal . Gallup is taking another poll which will probably indicate that more were affected .
 "Everything seems to pile up here with Vietnam now a problem and the economic stuff," says CNN's John Defterios . Vietnam is now a major problem in the world, he says .
 Iam going to get at that tomorrow if I can possibly get loose from some of this stuff to do so, and I will do so . I'm not sure if I'll be able to get away from this stuff tomorrow .
 I had just made a note to suggest possibly that Ehrlichman talk to Ervin about the disclosures of the day . Ervin: "I had just suggested possibly that Ervin talk to possibly that he talk to . Erv: I'm not sure if Ervin will talk
 Events became so cheerless that I no longer had the time or the desire to dictate daily reflections. Events became too cheerless for me to have a daily reflection .
 I knew by then that money was going to the defendants through a Cuban committee, at a time we were hoping Hunt and the others would plead guilty and avoid the publicity of a trial . As my diary for January indicates, Hunt and others were hoping to avoid a trial.
 I do not believe I was ever asked to approve Kalmbach’s involvement in raising funds prior to that time, he says . I was aware of the transfer of the $350,000 from the White House to the Re-election Committee, he adds .
 The purpose of course was to see that the defendants would get adequate counsel and that their families would be taken care of during the period when they were in jail, which I suppose would be a perfectly legitimate thing to do .
 It could be said that they were being paid to shut up and not talk . But I suppose it could be . Said they were paid to . shut up .
 Whether or not this is a crime remains to be seen, but it's not clear whether it's a crime .
 By mid-April it had become clear that these payments were going to be the biggest problem of all . The government has been forced to make millions of dollars in part of the budget deficit .
 When Haldeman and Ehrlichman began trying to reconstruct their motives, they began to see how the shadow of the Watergate cover-up had fallen across everything and made it impossible to present earlier actions or decisions in their true light .
 Or were they simply intended—as I think they were -- to pay attorneys’ fees and provide family support? Or were the defendants grow bitter and begin hurling charges? The defendants' attorneys fees and family support might have been intended to pay for them .
 They were a guard against human nature and a hedge against the political problem, not an effort to suppress information based on firsthand knowledge of guilt . They were, not a defense of guilt, they were a hedge to political problems, they say .
 When it came to questions of motive, the real answer lay in each man’s mind and conscience . The real answer is to each man's mind and the conscience of each man, says CNN.com .
 I didn't know that answer, nor did I know what each participant was claiming . I didn’t know that . Neither did know why each person was claiming, nor what they were claiming .
 "I did know, however, that the best chance to survive intact would be if everyone who had been involved in the whole unfortunate episode stayed together and maintained the position that the payments had not been intended to buy silence . The payments were intended to pay silence, but they were not intended
 It would take only one person's admission that they were hush money to taint everyone else’s actions . Since the payments were open to different interpretations, it would take one person to admit it was hush-money . The payments could taint anyone else's actions,
 Dean would do if he said that the money had been raised for the protection of the guilty and that all the participants in the money-raising had known it . That was what he would do, he said .
 After I returned from speaking at the Correspondents’ Dinner, I called first Haldeman and then Ehrlichman . After he returned from . speaking at . speaking, he called first . Haldem and then . then E. E.lichman.
 "I reiterated to both my concern that the participants in the money-raising have the same explanation of the motive for it. I reiterated to the both of the two sides of the debate," says the senator .
 "I also said that I wanted Colson alerted to what was happening so that if he were called before the grand jury he would not walk into a perjury charge," she said . She added that she also said he should be alerted so he could avoid perjury charges .
 I also told both men that I had come to the view that the best way of handling the Ervin Committee was just to go ahead and send everyone up for public testimony . I also said I had also told them that I was disappointed with the outcome of the committee .
 Haldeman had come to the same view himself and even thought we should agree to agree to televised public sessions . Haldman: "I'm sure we should have a televised public session"
 I told them both what I had been thinking that evening as I prepared my remarks for the Correspondents’ Dinner . I also told them what I thought about that evening .
 What the American President did over the next four years would probably determine whether there was a chance for some kind of uneasy peace in the world for the next twenty-five years . However melodramatic it might seem, it was true that .
 It was in foreign affairs that presidential leadership could really make a difference, says President Obama . Obama's foreign policy is a big test of leadership, says Obama .
 I told Ehrlichman of my special concern for Haldeman—Haldeman was clearly the most vulnerable. I told him of his special concern, Haldman was clearly vulnerable, he said . Haldemans was the president of the United States.
 I said some people would argue that anyone against whom charges had been made should be fired . I said that some would argue anyone should have been fired . But he said that anyone who had been charged with any wrongdoing should be sacked .
 Dick Kleindienst: Haldeman and Ehrlichman are being drawn into the criminal case on Watergate . EOB: "On Sunday afternoon, April 15, after the White House worship service, Dick Kleinienst came to my office"
 He did not think the information he had to date was sufficient to bring an indictment . But he felt that, circumstantially at least, very serious questions were being raised .
 Dean had in effect acknowledged his own role in obstructing justice and was now drawing others in . Dean had been in effect . Dean has been in jail for more than 20 years since his arrest .
 I asked him if there was enough evidence to ask Haldeman to take a leave of absence from the staff. I asked if there were enough evidence that he should be asked to leave the staff .
 He said I should consider whether Haldeman and Ehrlichman should take leaves of absence now, in anticipation of what might come . He said that he thought he should consider .
 He had been up nearly the whole night, and his eyes were red with fatigue and tears . He was tired and tired and had been crying for the night .
 Dean alleged Ehrlichman told him to ‘deep-six’ materials from Hunt’s safe and get Hunt out of the country . Haldeman was accused of knowing that the $350,000 he sent back to the CRP was used to pay the defendants
 These charges, based on Dean’s accusations, did not seem to be sufficient evidence to indict either of them, says CNN.com's Dean Obeidallah .
 If I were to let them go now, I argued, it would label them as guilty before they had a chance to establish their innocence, he said . And if I were let go now I argued it would be a mistake, he added .
 I told Kleindienst that I wanted more details concerning the evidence and a concrete recommendation about what I should do . I told him he wanted to know more details about the evidence .
 The former Justice Department official had served in the Justice Department for twenty-five years . He was a Democrat who worked in the FBI and then the Criminal Division .
 Kleindienst found Petersen cleaning his boat and brought him straight to the White House . Petersen was found in a smudged T-shirt, tennis shoes, and jeans .
 Petersen told me that he thought Haldeman and Ehrlichman should resign . Petersen said he thought they should resign from the White House . Petersen also called for the resignation of both men to resign .
 The question isn’t whether or not there is a criminal case that can be made against them that will stand up in court, Mr. President. But he added, “The question isn't whether . there is . that . that can stand up against them, Mr President
 "What you have to realize is that these two men have not served you well," she says . "What I have to do is realize that you have been served well" she adds .
 Haldeman had denied any prior knowledge of the bugging and break-in . Both men claimed innocence of motive on the payments to the defendants . Both defendants denied prior knowledge .
 "In effect, I was being asked to sentence them on charges that prosecutors were not able to prove," he says . In effect, he said, "I was being . asked to . sentence them" "on charges that [prosecutors] not able . to prove"
 I was being asked to prejudice their cases, perhaps irreparably, in the public eye, in order to avoid embarrassment . I was asked to prejudge their cases in the . public eye . The case was being . asked to be in public eye and avoid embarrassment, she said .
 Petersen straightened and said, “What you have just said, Mr President, speaks very well of you as a man.” Petersen . Petersen .
 CNN's John Sutter urged him to talk to Haldeman and Ehrlichman and get their side of the story, but he said he wanted to build his case against them . Sutter: "He said that first he wanted the case against him, but that he wanted
 "I asked him if he would come back the next day and bring me the charges in writing," he said . "I told him he should come back and bring back the charges he'd brought in writing"
 Bebe Rebozo had come up from Florida that morning, and he was waiting for me outside my office when I emerged . Bebe was waiting to me outside of Florida, waiting for him outside .
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman are accused of defrauding the U.S. Treasury Department of tax dollars . They are charged with conspiring to defraud the Treasury Department .
 I said that whatever happened, they had served me loyally and selflessly and I wanted to help with their legal expenses . I said, 'whatever happened, it was a good thing for them to have served me'
 He said that he and Bob Abplanalp could raise two or three hundred thousand dollars . He said he could raise $100,000 or more .
 He would have to give it to Haldeman and Ehrlichman in cash and privately, because he wouldn't be able to do the same thing for the others who also needed help .
 As the Sequoia prepared to dock, I dreaded having to go back to the White House and face the bleak choices I knew were waiting there . I dreaded going back to Washington, D.C., to face a bleak choice .
 I forced a cheerful voice as I greeted Haldeman and Ehrlichman when they entered the EOB office at 7:50 that evening . "I forced a smile as I . greeted them as they arrived in the office," she said .
 While Rebozo and I had been on the Sequoia, they had been meeting with Bill Rogers . Bill Rogers had met with Bill . Rogers .
 Rogers, they said, felt that no one should be suspended from the staff before formal charges had been brought against him . Rogers said he felt the suspension should not be given until formal charges have been brought down .
 If an individual was indicted, Rogers thought he should then go on leave of absence . Rogers: "If an individual is indicted, it would then be a matter of concern" Rogers said he wanted to go on 'leave of absence' if indicted .
 Rogers said Dean, who had already confessed to the prosecutor his own criminal involvement, should submit his resignation now to become effective at some future date . Rogers said he thought Dean should take a leave of absence .
 Dean was offered the “good offices” of the United States Attorney in return for his cooperation . Petersen indicated that Petersen had indicated that Dean was going to be offered the "good offices" of the U.S. Attorney . Haldeman and Ehrlichman gave H
 Both Kleindienst and Petersen felt that they should leave the White House . They were stunned, as was as I had been, that both were stunned . Petersen: "They were stunned" that they felt the need to leave .
 John Dean sent me a message that said he hoped I would understand that the motivation for his action was loyalty, and that he was ready to meet with me at any time . Dean: "He hoped that he hoped he would understand the motivation" for his actions .
 "I sat in my easy chair, and he sat in a straight-backed chair facing me. I sat in his easy chair . I sat with him in an easy chair. He sat with a straight back chair facing him. He said: "He sat in the easy chair and
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman were involved in an obstruction of justice, he said . He said regardless of what their motives may have been, they were involved . He added that regardless of their motives, they should have been honest .
 Dean Obeidallah: "Whenever Dean talked about Ehrlichman, his voice would take on a vindictive edge" He says he was struck by the fact that whenever he talked about the man, he would take an angry tone . He says Dean would often talk about E
 Dean seemed almost cocky about his own position. As we went over some of the charges, Dean seemed cocky . Dean seemed to be cocky.
 It seemed clear from his comments that he was confident that his lawyers were going to succeed in plea-bargaining with prosecutors, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I took this to mean that he expected to get immunity"
 At one point I said that I could now see that I should not have discussed the question of clemency for Hunt with Colson . At another point, I said I could no longer see that he should not discuss the question with Mr. Colson.
 Dean’s verdict of “conspiracy by circumstance” was ‘conspiracy’ by circumstance, he said . I told them about Dean's verdict and ran through some of the other things he had told me .
 Dean was pleading-bargaining, but Petersen was insistent that I not fire him or even force him to leave the White House . The White House would not appear that he had condoned his crimes, Petersen said, so such a move would not adversely affect his decision to cooperate
 NonWatergate materials from Hunt’s safe had been turned over to Pat Gray right after the break-in . Petersen had asked me about the fact that nonWatergate material had been given to Gray . I told Ehrlichman that Petersen .
 Dean was claiming that Gray had been given these materials, but Petersen said he had denied even receiving them . Petersen said that Gray denied even getting the materials .
 Ehrlichman had been present when Dean had turned them over to Gray . They had been given to him instead of FBI agents in charge of the investigation in order to reduce the risk of leaks .
 Ehrlichman picked up the phone and asked the operator to call Gray at home . Gray was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Haldeman and I listened as he asked Gray about the documents from Hunt’s safe . The documents were found in Hunt's safe .
 We watched the blood drain from his face as he listened to Gray’s reply . The blood drained out of his face when he heard the answer .
 After he replaced the receiver he turned to us, his lower lip thrust forward bitterly . "I'm not going to be happy with this," he said . "It's not the first time I've seen this. It's the last time I'll see it," he added .
 In accordance with Rogers’s recommendation, I told him that I wanted him to sign both letters, although neither would be released until his departure from the staff . Neither would be publicly released until he leaves the staff, but neither will be until he is out .
 He challenged every mention of himself with questions about Haldeman and Ehrlichman . He challenged questions about himself with a question about himself .
 He said he would take draft letters I gave him and do drafts of his own . The draft letters he gave him will be used to draft his draft .
 Dean looked at me at one point late in the conversation and said, “I think there is a mythical belief. . that [Bob and John] don’t have a problem, I’m really not sure you're convinced they do.” Dean Obe
 He said it had taken place on the Wednesday before the sentencing of the Watergate defendants; that would have been March 21 . The Watergate defendants were convicted of Watergate crimes in March .
 Mitchell said Ehrlichman had asked if Hunt matter had been “straightened out,” and Mitchell had replied that he thought it was solved . Mitchell said that when Mitchell came down to Washington he thought the Hunt matter was "straightened"
 I said that I was ready to assume some culpability for knowledge of the demands at that point, but he said that he did not think I had to . He said he was prepared to assume responsibility, but that he didn't think he had to, he said .
 "I made a point of telling Dean that I thought all national security matters such as the 1969 wiretaps were privileged," he said . Dean Obeidallah said .
 He assured me that he agreed, and that he had no intention of raising them . He said he agreed to raise them, but that he didn't intend to .
 I told him that I had asked Dean for his resignation, not to announce it, but just to have it in hand, he said . "I told him I asked him to resign," he said. "Not to announce the resignation, but to have the resignation in hand"
 "I wondered how he could expect me to live with myself if I deserted my friends simply for the sake of appearances," she said . She said: "I wonder how I can live with me if I abandoned my friends just for appearances"
 Ehrlichman told Liddy through Dean that Hunt should leave the country . Hunt was the subject of the “deep-six” instruction and informing Liddy .
 Haldeman—Magtuder said that budget information on the Liddy plan had been given to Strachan, opening the possibility that it had gone to Haldman . Strachans said budget information was given to the Scottish government by Strachann .
 Dean had told Haldeman of the Liddy proposals after they were made and apparently no one had issued any instructions that the program be discontinued . Dean had been told of the proposals after Liddy made them .
 Magruder said he had summaries of the bugging transcripts delivered to Strachan . The transcripts may have been shown to Haldeman, who may have shown them to him .
 "All our decisions and all our discussions were taking place against a rising flood tide of pressure from the media and Congress," says President Obama .
 Every major newspaper had a story based on a leak about some aspect of the case . Almost daily, every major newspaper reported on leaks .
 The White House has reached an agreement with Senator Ervin to testify under oath, he says . "I felt that some kind of statement had to be made from the White House," he says. "On April 17, I walked into the press room and announced that we had reached an
 They would answer all relevant questions, unless executive privilege was warranted . The White House would also answer questions about the White House budget .
 There have been major developments in the case concerning which it would be improper to be more specific now, except to say that real progress has been made in finding the truth . The case is being investigated by the U.S. government .
 "If any person in the executive branch or in the government is indicted by the grand jury, my policy will be to immediately suspend him," says President Obama .
 I have expressed to the appropriate authorities my view that no individual holding, in the past or at the present, a position of major importance in the administration should be given immunity from prosecution .
 I condemn any attempts to cover-up in this case, no matter who is involved, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I had formulated the language of this “no immunity” passage with Petersen, Petersen . Petersen: “No immunity’s immunity is no matter matter matter .
 I indicated to him only that my concern was to avoid the appearance that would be created if high White House staff members, after acknowledging participation in crimes, were to get off without any penalty . I said I was concerned about the appearance of an appearance created by the White House .
 Ehrlichman’s and Colson argued that if immunity were dangled before Dean it would be an incentive for him to lie about others, secure in the knowledge that he was protected from the consequences of his own testimony . Dean might be less likely to turn against me in
 The Washington Post reported that Jeb Magruder was telling everything to prosecutors and that his story would bring down John Dean . Two days later, the Washington Post said that Jeb's story was going to bring down Dean .
 The story said that he had accused Mitchell and Dean of helping plan the break-in . He had accused them of helping to set up the burglary .
 I told Ziegler to respond by saying that we were not after scapegoats, but the truth . "We were not going to scapegoats," he said. "We are not going through the pain," he added .
 There was the factual truth, which involved the literal description of what had occurred . There was a factual truth in the story, which included the fact that it was true .
 The factual truth could probably never be completely reconstructed, because each of us had become involved in different ways and no one’s knowledge at any given time exactly duplicated anyone else’�s . But the facts could never be reconstructed, as each person involved in the story had
 There was the legal truth, which, as we now understood, would involve judgments about motive . The legal truth would involve judgements about motive, which would involve judgment on motive . There was no motive, but there was a legal truth .
 There was the moral truth, which would involve opinions about whether what had been done represented an indictment of the ethics of the White House . There was also a moral question: Whether what had happened represented a indictment of White House ethics .
 The political truth would be the sum of the impact that all the other truths would have on the American people and on their opinion of me and of my administration . And there was the political truth .
 I can see that long before I was willing to admit it to myself consciously, I knew instinctively that Haldeman and Ehrlichman were going to have to leave the White House. "I knew instinctively," he says. "Long before I knew, long before ... consciously,
 "I knew that the circumstantial facts were so damning that they would not be able to survive the political test. Even while I believed that they had a good chance of being vindicated on the charges of criminal conduct, I knew that they were not going to survive."
 "I recognized that if they stayed, they would damage the White House and damage me," says President Obama . "They would damage me. They would damage my life," he says .
 "I told myself that I had not been involved in the things that gave them potential criminal vulnerability. I told myself," he said . He said he had told himself that he was not involved in anything that gave him potential vulnerability .
 I was sure that I had heard nothing about the break-in in advance; I had seen none of the reports based on the phone bug . I had known nothing about Ehrlichman’s alleged instruction to Dean to “deepsix” the material from Hunt�
 I had talked with Colson about clemency; I too had suspected Magruder was not telling the truth, but I had done nothing about my suspicions . I had been aware that support funds were going to the defendants; and on March 21 I had even contemplated paying blackmail .
 The difference was that Haldeman and Ehrlichman had become trapped by their circumstantial involvement; so far, I had not . So far, he had not been trapped by circumstantially involvement . The difference is the difference between the two men and the women .
 I was faced with having to fire my friends for things that I myself was a part of, things I could not accept as morally or legally wrong, no matter how much that opened me to charges of cynicism and amorality . I'm not sure if I would have to fire friends
 We had all simply wandered into a situation unthinkingly, trying to protect ourselves from what we saw as a political problem. We had just wandered into the situation unthinkingingly,’s David Cameron says .
 I was selfish enough about my own survival to want them to leave; but I was not so ruthless as to be able to confront easily the idea of hurting people I cared about so deeply . "I was selfish but not ruthless," she says .
 "I worried about the impact on them if they were forced to leave," she says . "They didn’t want to leave, and I worried about me if they didn't," she adds .
 "I tried to persuade them to go —while I insisted that I could not offer up my friends as sacrifices," says author . "I was trying to persuade my friends to go. I tried to convince them to . I insisted they would not be sacrificed," she says .
 I said that we had to do the right thing no matter how painful it was, while I cast about for any possible way to avert the damage, even if it took us to the edge of the law . I said I had no choice but to do what I did, even though
 This put me in an increasingly difficult situation with respect to John Dean, says John Dean . "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with John," says Dean .
 Haldeman’s defense lay in discrediting Dean, as long as I kept him on the staff I would appear to be lending credence to his charges against them, he says . Dean's defense in Ehrlichman's defense was to discredit Dean .
 I felt that I could not ignore Henry Petersen’s private request not to fire Dean, but I knew the detrimental impact that would have on the public perception of Haldeman and Ehrlichman's guilt . I knew that I couldn't ignore Petersen's private request that he
 I had already alienated Dean by going along with the idea of preventing him obtaining immunity, I said . "I was already alienated from Dean," he said. "I'm not going to let Dean get immunity," he added .
 If I seemed to turn on him, he would almost certainly turn on me. Now I knew that if I seemed . to turn . on him . Now, I knew . that if . I turned on him I . knew that . if I . seemed to be turning on him he
 I also had to recognize and admit and admit a confusion and ambivalence about Dean’s role . ‘I’m confused and ambivalent about Dean,’ he says. ‘’
 Dean, however, had simply done what he thought had to be done while failing to project all the consequences . Dean had just done what had to do, but failed to project the consequences of it .
 It was too late to wonder whether someone without Dean’s vulnerabilities from having been present at the Liddy meetings would have recognized earlier the trap being set for himself and us . Dean's vulnerabilities were exposed in the way he was exposed to his vulnerabilities .
 By the spring of 1973, it mattered little anymore whether Dean had acted from a genuine belief that what he was doing was necessary to protect the White House, or primarily because he had wanted to protect himself .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I believed that he was earnestly concerned about the presidency when he came to see me on March 21" He said he believed that Dean's motives before or after were sincere .
 President Richard Nixon was charged with Watergate crimes in the 1970s . He says he was pressured by Hunt to prepare a written statement on Watergate and answer the charges against him by a letter signed under oath . Nixon: Hunt's direct demand for $122,000.
 When he walked into my office, however, I believe that he had genuinely hoped to save the presidency from an encroaching cancer . "When he walked in I believe he had . genuinely hoped that he . had hoped to . save the president from an . encroaching . cancer," says
 I am sure he hoped that I would react strongly and take charge of the situation . I'm not sure why he wanted me to react strongly, he said. I'm sure that he hoped I would take charge, he added .
 I contemplated buying time with one more payment to Hunt and calmly analyzed the political problems involved in granting clemency to the defendants after the 1974 election . Instead of buying time, I considered buying time for Hunt and analyzing the political issues involved .
 As early as April 15 I had broached the idea that Haldeman and Ehrlichman possibly take leaves of absence . I suggested that they might find themselves being worn down by press leaks and press charges .
 I assured him that I did not, and that I saw that Dean’s involvement was on a much more serious level than his own . I told him I saw it as a very serious level of his involvement, and I didn’t .
 Ehrlichman said there were indications Petersen had passed grand jury information to Dean, who was then acting as White House Counsel . Petersen was the subject of the original Watergate investigation . Petersen had been acting as the White House counsel during the original investigation .
 "I called Petersen and told him not to give me any information from the grand jury unless he specifically thought I should have it," Petersen says . Petersen: "That night I called Petersen . That night I told Petersen not to tell me any info from the . grand jury"
 Despite initially tough front, it was not easy for Haldeman and Ehrlichman to sustain their optimism . Despite their initially tough fronts, they were optimistic .
 Lawyers advised that there was a real chance that it would be a difficult case when so many fine points of motive and intention were involved . That night they reported to me that while their lawyers did not think that the evidence against them was legally sufficient, they had advised them that there had been
 'I wanted to be reassuring, but I could think of nothing encouraging to say that any of us would believe. I wanted to say nothing encouraging, but it could be nothing encouraging,' she said .
 The two of them joked mordantly about Ehrlichman’s making a living handling traffic cases . The two men joked about the two-year-old's job in the news .
 Lawyers told me they did not think the cases against their clients were indictable, but they realistically admitted that prosecutors were zealots and therefore anything could happen . They told me that they didn't think their clients' clients were indicted, but that prosecutors are zealots .
 They urged me not to force Haldeman and Ehrlichman to leave, because to do so would be taken as an admission of their guilt . To force them to leave would be seen as admitting their guilt, they said .
 "They requested instead that I make a public statement of faith and support for both of them," she said . "I made a statement of support for them," the senator said .
 They said that Henry Petersen was a man I should not trust, and they urged me to stay away from his advice . They said he was a 'man I shouldn't trust' and urged me not to trust .
 It was 7:40 on the night of April 19 that we received word of the first press leaks . Dean and his lawyers had designed the leaks as a way of bolstering his case for immunity .
 If we could not meet the deadlines, the stories would be printed without our response . We are happy to provide an accurate and accurate picture of events in order to meet deadlines .
 They said Dean would charge Haldeman with having engineered the cover-up in order to hide the involvement of presidential aides in the DNC bugging . The so-called “Dean report” attesting to ‘no White House involvement” in Watergate had been more or
 Mitchell told friends he had heard of the bugging plot but rejected it and did not know who had ordered it go ahead . Mitchell had told friends that he didn't know who ordered it to go ahead, the Times reports .
 Throughout the whole period I had tried to keep up a fully active schedule. Throughout this whole period, I had kept up a full active schedule . I was very happy to be able to get back in touch with the family and friends of the family .
 On Wednesday, April 18, for example, I spent nearly two hours in a congressional leadership meeting on energy policy . I then proceeded into another meeting with congressmen on Soviet emigration policy .
 Italy's Giulio Andreotti was in Washington for a state visit . Rainer Barzel, the chairman of West Germany’s Christian Democratic Union, came in for an informal talk .
 I met with John Volpe, our ambassador to Italy, and then attended a two-hour session on the economy . I was in Italy for a meeting with the Italian ambassador to Rome .
 On April 19 I met with American Jewish leaders on the issue of the emigration of Soviet Jews . "I met with U.S. Jews on April 19 to discuss emigration"
 On April 20 I held a Cabinet meeting for two hours on energy and the economy . I then flew to Florida for the Easter weekend. I was there for Easter weekend .
 Originally, Haldeman and Ehrlichman had planned to come with me to Key Biscayne so that there would be no interruption of their normal duties . Originally, they had been planning to go with me, but that was not the case .
 "As the weekend neared I felt that I needed time to think, and they felt the same way," she says . But as the weekend approached, she felt that she needed time for thought .
 They were juxtaposing the public statements he made earlier with what he was saying now, trying to humiliate him . They were trying to embarrass him, he said .
 I asked him to call Haldeman and tell him this, as his own personal feeling about the situation, as he said it was a personal matter of his own .
 Before I had left for Florida for the weekend, Haldeman had urged that I not get just one-sided ‘panicky’ advice about what I should do .
 If there is any chance Ehrlichman’s name is going to come up in the grand jury, he should go . He should be subpoenaed into the case .
 We've got to put out the life rafts and hope to pull the presidency through. We’ve got to pull through. President Obama’s presidency through, he says. We have to pull it through.
 Later I phoned Ziegler to find out what had been said when he had delivered his message .
 The next morning, April 21, the Miami Herald quoted ‘associates’ of Mitchell who claimed that Magruder had gone over Mitchell’s head to the White House to obtain approval of the bugging plan . The next day, April 20, a Miami Herald
 Dean says he has documentary evidence to support his claims about bugging and cover-up . The Washington Post said Dean had documentary evidence that supports his claims .
 On Easter morning there were four different Watergate stories on the front page of the Washington Post . Four Watergate stories appeared on the same page that day .
 Grand jury was investigating whether Haldeman had a fund of $350,000 from which he ordered payments to defendants to keep quiet . Grand jury also investigating whether he had ordered payments from a fund to silence defendants . Jury was also looking at whether he paid defendants to silence .
 Dean tried to stop the payments but was ordered to go ahead with them by higher-ups . Sources said that Dean had tried to . stop them but was told they must go ahead by higher .ups, sources said .
 Dean was prepared to implicate Ehrlichman in Watergate, source says . Source also said that Dean prepared to incriminate Richard Nixon in Watergate . Dean was also prepared to accuse Nixon of Watergate .
 The Washington Star said that Haldeman and Ehrlichman both were targets . The Washington Post said that both men were targets for the government .
 Mitchell was quoted as saying he had personally approved the bugging plans . The Star also quoted ‘sources’ as saying Mitchell believed it was the White House that had done so .
 Colson, in an alleged attempt to take care of himself, was reported to have given the prosecutors documentary evidence establishing a cover-up .
 Gallup poll reported that 40 percent of the people thought I had known about Watergate bugging in advance . Not a single charge of any kind had been made against me directly .
 It had been my habit for years to place phone calls to my staff on Easter Sunday . It was my habit to call my staff at the end of each Easter Sunday to check in on staff .
 He said he wanted to tell me again that the phone call he had made to Magruder that was now being alleged to have precipitated the whole Watergate episode had been innocent . He said that he had told him again that he made the call that was alleged to be innocent .
 He said that he would like to discuss with me how he should plead . He said he would want to discuss how he would plead .
 Gray’s destruction of documents and Hunt's demand led to a meeting of March 21 . We talked about the sequence of events that had led to the meeting . Hunt's request for documents from Gray led to Gray destroying documents .
 I told him I still considered it proper for us to meet about his plea because he had not yet been dismissed from the White House. "I told him that I still consider it proper to meet with him," he said .
 He wished me a good Easter, but he warned, “Don’t move too fast and start picking up Carl Rowan’s lines that this entire government is corrupt because of all of this.” He also told me that the entire government was corrupt .
 During crises they will be with me hourly, advising me on every change in mood they perceive and canvassing all the possible options . During some crises they advise me, and canvass all the . possible options, he says .
 "They tried to make it easier for me by talking about other things. In this case, however, they had decided that my problem was that I had too many pressures coming in from every direction," he says .
 When we had got the Vietnam peace agreement on January 23, I had told the family that one welcome personal benefit would be that we would no longer be harassed by sign-carrying hecklers .
 Eventually they became even uglier and more personal than the antiwar signs had ever been . Eventually they were even more personal . The signs became more personal and more ugly .
 When Pat and Pat left the church that morning, several people in the crowd held up signs . "When Pat and I left the hospital that morning that morning several people held signs," she says . "Pat and Pat went to the church, and they were there to pray," she adds
 Later in the day Ziegler told him that Dean had called him to say how much he had appreciated my call . Dean Dean called him later that day to say he appreciated his call .
 Ziegler says his "Dean Report" had never actually been written . He says the report had never been written, and that it was never made public . Zieglers says he believes the report was never written .
 Dean's office had kept detailed notes from phone calls between Dean and Jerry Warren, the Deputy Press Secretary . Warren had called Dean almost daily to ask him for guidance on responses to Watergate questions in briefings .
 He had also talked frequently about his “investigation,” which, he said, had begun on the day after the break-in .
 Dean was undercutting Ziegler, who wondered if he would be able to go before the press and brief again . Dean was completely undercutting his remarks . Dean: "Now Dean has completely undercut"
 On Monday morning, April 23, I had a three-hour session with Ziegler, Pat Buchanan, and Chappie Rose .
 Rose, a friend from Eisenhower days, is a lawyer and personal friend from the Eisenhower days . He flew down to Florida to give me some outside counsel . Rose is a fine lawyer and a personal friend of Eisenhower .
 He thought it might be prejudicial to their rights to force them to resign . He thought that it might have been prejudicial . He said it might not be prejudic to their right to resign.
 At the heart of the problem, as I had increasingly come to see it, was the White House itself . The White House is not the only problem, it's the problem itself .
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman had lost the confidence of the staff . No work was being done; everyone was tired, drained, and distracted . Everyone was tired and drained, says Haldman and his colleagues .
 For hours we debated the question, and the longer we went over the charges, the more inevitable the outcome seemed . For hours, the question of whether the charges will be dropped seemed inevitable .
 I have got to run the office of President, and I can’t when they are under constant attack. But in the meantime, I’m running for the presidency, he said . He said: ‘I can't run the job of President. I can't
 The Mideast is boiling, and the international economic situation is in a crisis, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The international economic crisis is in the region, Sutter says .
 As the session drew to an emotional end, we all agreed that Haldeman and Ehrlichman had to resign . The session ended with an emotional exchange between the two men .
 Buchanan asked Buchanan if he would call Haldeman to tell him that he had come to this conclusion . Buchanan: "I asked him to call me to tell me that I was wrong, but I am not."
 The personal ties were closer there, and maybe that would make it less painful . "The personal ties are closer there," she said .
 Haldeman had been responsible for bringing him on my staff; now he was being asked to pass on the word that Haldman must resign . Haldmen was responsible for appointing him to the post in the White House .
 Ziegler said Haldeman had been predictably stoic and fair . After making the call, he said he had made the call .
 He had said that while he disagreed with the decision, he would accept it . The decision was made by the US Supreme Court .
 Ehrlichman had resisted strongly and had persuaded Haldeman to change his mind . Evidently he had talked to his lawyers, and also to his . lawyers, also to E. E.Haldeman, had persuaded him to change course .
 Ehrlichman maintained that he was in a different situation and that even if Haldeman resigned, he should not . Even if he resigned, the decision should not be made .
 Ehrlichman thought the charges against him were much weaker and that therefore he was detachable . He thought that therefore the charges were weaker and therefore therefore that he was not detachable.
 "I sought the advice of several men I particularly trusted and respected," she says . "Even though I knew that the decision would have to be mine, I sought the help of several of them," she writes .
 Bill Rogers says Haldeman could not survive in his job and that that should be the determining consideration . Ziegler asked Rogers to call Bill Rogers, who said that it appeared to him that Haldman could not live in the job .
 John Connally’s view was that if the allegations against them were untrue, then they should not have to go . But if they could not refute the allegations in a way that would demonstrate their untruth there was no alternative .
 Leaves of absence would be wrong, he said, because they would only postpone the inevitable and in the end would be less fair to the men themselves . Leaves of absence would only be wrong to leave the men, he added .
 Kissinger, too, had come to the view that something had to be done to break what he called the “miasma of uncertainty” Kissinger said . Kissinger called the uncertainty surrounding the working of the entire administration . Kissinger: "Something had to do to break the mias
 Haldeman: Decision should be made with the same toughness and disregard for popular and easy course that had characterized the decisions on Cambodia, May 8, and Dec. 18 .
 "I always knew that if I were given a chance to present the whole case to the people they would be behind me. In those other decisions involving policy," he says .
 "In those instances I had been acting on strong and recognizable principles. In those instances, I had acted on strong, recognizable principles," she said .
 Watergate was no way to gain public support even on the principle of loyalty to one’s staff or friends . The circumstantial case against them was too strong to be ignored or easily explained away .
 Eisenhower had not saved me in the fund crisis; I was saved because I had been able to save myself . I was saving myself because I was able to take my own life, he says .
 I did not believe Haldeman and Ehrlichman were guilty of criminal motives, but I didn't know if they could ever prove their innocence . I did believe they were innocent, but did not think they could prove it .
 When Haldeman and Ehrlichman came in later that morning, they told me that they were not getting the same recommendations from Rogers and Connally as I seemed to think that Rogers and . Connally were giving . The president of the United States in Washington, D.C
 Ehrlichman seemed uneasy and restless during this conversation, and suddenly he said that he had been thinking and had decided that there ought to be a candid assessment of the threat .
 He said if Dean Dean were “totally out of control,” it was “entirely conceivable” that he might be faced with a resolution of impeachment on the ground that I had committed a crime, he said .
 He knew in general of my conversation with Dean on March 21 about the break-in and the cover-up, he said . He said he spoke to Dean about the March 21 incident .
 He said that as far as he knew, what Dean had done fell far short of any commission of a crime by me . He said he did not know anything about the incident .
 He suggested that before I took “any precipitous steps” ld better know what my “hole card” was. He suggested before he took ‘proceeding’s steps’ he should know what his ‘hole’ card’
 "I knew that what he was saying, both explicitly and implicitly, was true," she said . "He was right, and I knew that he was right," she added .
 He was saying that I should recognize how exposed I would be if he and Haldeman were forced to leave . He said that before forcing them to, I should assess the worst possible consequences of that exposure .
 "I believe he was saying that if I decided I were equally as involved as they, I should consult my own conscience before forcing them to leave," he said . Implicitly, he said, he believed that if he decided to leave, he should consult his own conscience .
 In the last two weeks of April I began seriously facing the possibility that I would be Dean’s next target . I had personally supplied him with the ammunition during our March 21 conversation, he says .
 After reading the transcripts of these discussions, it is clear that I gave a number of different versions of what I said . I gave many different versions, including that of the discussion .
 In talks with Ehrlichman, Dick Moore, and Henry Petersen, I tried to make it sound more ambiguous than it really was, or even to pass it off as having been facetious . In talks, I try to make the point of the conversation more ambiguous .
 Bob Greene contemplated paying blackmail to Hunt, not because of Watergate, but because of his threat against Ehrlichman on the break-in at Ellsberg's psychiatrist’s office and against the administration in general . Greene: "When I was honest with myself, I had
 I had also talked with Dean about the possibility of continuing payments to the other defendants, he says . I also talked about continuing payments, he adds .
 Dean made me aware of payments to defendants that he said constituted an obstruction of justice . Furthermore, in that conversation Dean had told me that he had been made aware that payments were made to defendants . Dean said those payments were part of a 'obstruction of justice'
 I told Haldeman and Ehrlichman at one point that we could not risk having Dean turn on me with this conversation, even if it meant having to give him immunity . I told them we couldn't risk giving him immunity, even though it was possible to have him turn
 Haldeman countered that I could not let Dean have the permanent handle of blackmail over me, either . Haldman countered that he could not allow Dean to blackmail over him .
 I decided that Haldeman should listen to our tape so that we would know exactly what had actually been said and decided on that fateful afternoon . I decided to listen to the tape so we could know what happened .
 "He would be able to use parts of the conversation in a very damaging way," he said . He said. "I'm sure he would use this in a damaging way"
 In the afternoon of April 25 Kleindienst called me with an urgent request for a meeting, I met with him . He said: "In the afternoon, April 25, I was asked to meet with him in a meeting"
 If they did not make their possession of the material known, Dean would undoubtedly hold it over their heads . That had been the ruling within the department; besides, besides, the material had been discovered .
 On April 18, a week earlier, at Ehrlichman’s urging, I had talked on the phone with Henry Petersen about the break-in . Petersen: "I had talked a week ago, at the . time of the break in. I had . talked on
 Dean had told me that Krogh had felt that he was acting on a national security mandate, and there was no question in my mind that the Ellsberg investigation as a whole was part of a . national security crisis of the highest order . Dean had said that Krogg had felt
 When Petersen asked if any evidence had been obtained during the break-in, anything that would have to be turned over to the court hearing Ellsberg’s trial, he said no . Petersen: "No evidence" was obtained, anything would have been turned over .
 Kleindienst was saying that the Justice Department felt that the material had to be revealed . The Justice Department is investigating whether the material was released .
 John Ehrlichman's fate was about to become even bleaker for him . As I did so, I thought how everything about to be even bleakier for John Ehlichman . The former secretary of state at the time of his death .
 At 4:40 p.M. on April 25, Haldeman came back in to report on his first couple of hours of listening to the tape of my March 21 conversation with Dean. Dean Obeidallah . He said the tape will be released to the public .
 He said that it was interesting to learn that Dean had given me a different version of events from the one he had been telling Haldeman . He said: "It was interesting that Dean gave me a completely different version, and that he had given him a different story."
 Haldeman was familiar with my habit of getting other people’s ideas by indirection, by purposely not stating my own opinion until the end of a conversation lest it inhibit others . Or alternatively, by stating an extreme position or proposition to see how others reacted .
 He also knew that in conversations I tend to think a problem through out loud, even considering totally unacceptable alternatives in the process of ruling them out . He knew that he was a typical lawyer’s typical mental exercise, and he knew he was going to be a lawyer .
 "In this case all these factors were partial—but only partial-explanations for some of the things I had said," he says . "I'm not sure what happened to me," he adds .
 I had not finally ordered any payments be made to defendants, and I had ruled out clemency . I had also ruled out Clemency, he said. "I had not ordered any ... defendants to pay back any of them," he said .
 I thought about Haldeman’s report during the afternoon and called him at home twice that night . I called him twice to check up on the report . He said, "I thought about it all day. I thought it all night"
 I said that despite the passages I would have preferred not to have said, there were also some good things on the tape that helped balance it out . I said: "Despite the passages . I would rather not have said. There were also good things . on the . tape that help
 Dean immediately began sending threatening new signals to the White House . Dean immediately sent threatening signals to President Barack Obama . Dean says he will continue to speak out against the president .
 Watergate was just the tip of the iceberg, says Len Garment . He talked with Len Garments about Watergate and Watergate .
 He said that there were things that had been done in 1970 that he could expose . He said there were 'things that had to be exposed' in 1970 . He added that he wanted to expose those things .
 The source who leaked the story placed the blame squarely on Dean and Ehrlichman, saying that they had ordered Gray to do it . The source said they ordered the leak .
 When I learned about the story, I called Kleindienst and told him that I thought Gray should resign . I called him to tell him that he should resign, and he did .
 Petersen said that Gray was going to accuse Ehrlichman and Dean of instructing him to destroy the papers . Petersen said he had done it only because he had confidence in them . Petersen: Gray was planning to accuse them of telling him to do it because he trusted them .
 I knew from the genuine panic I had watched spread across Ehrlichman’s face when he talked to Gray on the phone that he had never ordered such a thing . The panic spread across the panicked face of the man who ordered the order was genuine .
 Petersen must tell Gray that he could not solve this problem with another lie, Petersen said . Petersen said Petersen must now tell Gray not to lie again . Petersen: Petersen must not lie again. Petersen must say that he can't solve this .
 I asked that he and Kleindienst meet and give me a recommendation about what I should do in this situation . I asked for him to meet with him to discuss what he should do .
 Ehrlichman wanted the White House to put out a statement saying that the story was not true . The White House did not respond to the request .
 Ziegler said he thought Ehrlichman should put the statement out in his own name . When he told him, he said that he thought he should put it out in the name of the man .
 I said that they should prepare letters requesting leaves of absence by Saturday . I said they should be prepared by Saturday to ask for leave of absence from work .
 I said that Haldeman and Ehrlichman should go first, so that it would be clear that they were not being forced to go as Dean would be . I also said that they should be allowed to go first so that they would not be forced to .
 The story was not true, but there was no way to fight Dean’s guerrilla tactics . Dean Dean used his guerrilla tactics to win back control of the Senate .
 The stories revealing that Gray had destroyed documents also indicated that among these materials was a forged cable implicating President Kennedy in the Diem assassination . Among these materials were forged cable linking President Kennedy to the assassination .
 This had evidently come from Dean, who apparently had seen the material before giving it to Gray . Dean had apparently given the material to Gray, who had seen it .
 By the next morning, two new stories had surfaced about Ehrlichman on subjects unrelated to Watergate . By the day of April 27, two stories had emerged about the former secretary of state .
 The items were scurrilously false, and Ehrlichman tried valiantly to combat their effect on public opinion . The items he tried to defend against were untrue .
 John Stennis was honored at a naval training center being named in honor of Stennis . CNN's John Sutter attended the ceremony in Mississippi .
 "On the way down, as we sat alone in my cabin, this old friend said that he wanted to give me some advice," he said . "He wanted to talk to me about how to fly down the world," she said .
 Pat Gray called while we were in Mississippi to say that he had decided to resign . Pat Gray is a former governor of Mississippi .
 William Ruckelshaus, head of the Environmental Protection Agency, agreed to take over Gray’s post temporarily . He will take over temporarily .
 Dean Obeidallah asked Ehrlichman to make up a list of national-security-related activities he thought Dean might be able to expose, he says . He says he asked him to list the activities Dean Dean Dean might expose .
 Ellsberg, the 1969 wiretaps, and the Indo-Pakistan war, were the subject of an episode during the war . The war was the first time the U.S. was involved in the war in Pakistan .
 Ehrlichman was not sure what else there might be, because Dean’s access to the files had been almost unlimited . Dean‘s access was almost unlimited, he said .
 Ziegler came into his cabin to report that the Washington Post had a new story from “reliable sources” to the effect that “someone” had talked to the prosecutors and had implicated me directly in the cover-up, he says . "Someone”
 The Los Angeles Times would call to get a comment on the same report . Later the L.A. Times would also call for a comment from the Times .
 Petersen went out to check with his office, and came back and said that the stories were not true . Petersen went to his office to check out the stories . Petersen later said that he did not believe the stories, which he said were untrue .
 Prosecutors had thought that this was just bombast and posturing as a part of the effort to gain immunity for Dean Dean . At the time the prosecutors had thought it was just posturing . Dean's lawyers say he was trying to get immunity for him .
 "I called Ziegler in and told him that the story had to be killed immediately," he says . "I told him he had to kill immediately. I called him to kill it," he adds .
 Petersen said he would like to recommend that he move on Dean now . Petersen left Petersen's office at the end of the day .
 He thought that the added pressure from me would be better for the government’s position against him, he said . He said that he thought that added pressure would help the government's position against me .
 Haldeman's lawyers felt that he and Ehrlichman were being taken advantage of because they were loyal and Dean was not, he says . Dean was never loyal to the party, but his lawyers felt he was being taken over by the party .
 I said that our plan should be that he and Ehrlichman would take leaves of absence beginning Sunday, or even Saturday . The plan is that they would take leave of absence starting Sunday or Saturday, he said .
 I asked Ray Price to prepare a speech for me, leaving open whether I would be announcing leaves of absence or actual resignations . I asked that Ray Price begin preparing a speech . I would not say whether I was resigning or leaving office .
 HALDEMAN AND EHRLICHMAN RESIGN from Camp David .
 "I had breakfast on the porch and then went to the small library to work. I had breakfast in the morning, then went out to work."
 "I walked into the living room looking for Manolo and a cup of coffee. About ten o’clock I walked into . The living room . About ten . o'clock . I walked . into the . living room and was looking for coffee .
 "I was startled to see the fire blazing and Tricia sitting on the couch in front of it," she says . "It was a fire that was blazing," she recalls .
 She said that she had been awake all night talking with Julie and David about Watergate and the decisions that had to be made . She said she had spoken to them all night about Watergate .
 Haldeman and Ehrlichman resign from the White House . "They had talked with Pat for a long time early in the morning, and they wanted me to know that there was no choice"
 The attacks on them had destroyed their ability to serve in their high positions . The attacks had destroyed them, the minister said . He added that the attacks had also destroyed them .
 Tears brimed in Tricia's eyes; but unlike Julie, Tricia would seldom allow them to overflow .
 "I asked her if she would like to stay with me through the day, but she said she knew it would be better if she went back," she said .
 Bill Rogers arrived at 11:30 and argued that leaves of absence were no longer a viable answer . Resignation was now the only choice, Rogers said .
 I valued his opinion because I had learned over the years that he had excellent political as well as legal judgment . As a loyal friend he would tell me what I needed to hear and not just what I might want to hear, he would say to me .
 "Otherwise we were just setting ourselves up for an even messier and more painful separation later on," he says . "Otherwise, we would have to be separated from each other. Otherwise we were set up for a very messy divorce," he adds .
 He said he didn't think his relationship with them was good enough to do that . He said that he did not think he was objective enough, as mine had been .
 There had been some bitterness between them after the election during reorganization, he said . He was concerned that they might feel that he was bringing personal feelings to the task .
 "He told me that he thought I should recognize the reality of my own responsibility," she said . "He said that he told me he wanted me to recognize my responsibility for my actions"
 He said all the illegal acts ultimately derived from me, whether directly or indirectly . He said that all the . illegal acts ... derived from . me, he said . Whether directly . or indirectly, he added .
 He implied that I was the inspiration behind them and mentioned such things as the forged Diem cable . He implied he was inspired by them, but also mentioned that he was not the inspiration .
 Dean had evidence to prove that he was under the direction of Haldeman and Ehrlichman when he engaged in a cover-up, he says . Dean also had knowledge of “illegal activities” going back to 1969, he adds .
 I asked Ziegler if he would call Colson for me to find out what had happened on the Diem cable . Colson was the first person to call Zieglers for him .
 He came back a few minutes later, he said that Colson had sworn that he himself had not known about the forgery .
 Early on Sunday morning, I called Haldeman and asked if he would come up to Camp David . Early Sunday morning I called him and asked him to come up .
 He said that he would, and so would Ehrlichman—but that they would like to have separate meetings with me . He said he would be happy to meet with him, but that they'd like to meet separately . The two men agreed to meet for separate meetings .
 The fog and clouds had lifted by then, revealing layers of green spring trees covering the mountainside . The mountainside was covered in layers of spring trees .
 From his first day as President on January 20, 1969, I followed my mother’s custom of getting down on my knees every night and praying silently for those in my administration who were going through difficult times . He knew that I rarely spoke about religion, and I thought he looked
 I told him that when I went to bed last night I had hoped, and almost prayed, that I wouldn’t wake up this morning . "I told him I hoped to wake up last night," he said. "I almost prayed"
 "I knew that the responsibility, and much of the blame for what had happened, rested with me," she said . She said she knew that she was responsible for the tragedy .
 I had put Mitchell in his position, and Colson’s activities were in many cases prompted by my prodding, he says . Colson's activities were often prompted by his prodding .
 He said that he accepted this decision even though he did not agree with it, and that I must always feel I could call on him . He said: "He accepted that he accepts this decision, and said he accepted it"
 He said that he would go to another cabin and write his letter of resignation . He said he would write his resignation letter to the cabin .
 Ehrlichman arrived on the porch of the house when he left . After he left he walked out onto the porch and was standing there looking down into the valley .
 "I know what a terribly difficult day this is for you. I shook hands with him and said, “I know . I know what I know, ‘I’m sorry,” she said .
 When I told him about my feelings the night before, he put his arm around my shoulders and said, “Don’t talk that way.” When I said I was upset, he told me, ‘Don”
 I told him that I wanted to be as helpful in any way that I could, including assistance with the great financial burden I knew he would now be carrying, not only because of the need to support his family .
 His mouth tightened and he said quickly, “There is only one thing I would like for you to do,” he said . “I would like to see you in the next few days,’ he added .
 With controlled bitterness he said that the decision I had made was wrong and that I would live to regret it . He said that with controlled bitterness, he would live in regret it. He said: 'He said that he had made the decision wrong and would regret it'
 "We both knew that his situation at the Justice Department had become intolerable," she says . She says she and her husband knew his situation was intolerable .
 His close association with Mitchell now made it impossible for him to stay on . Mitchell's close relationship with Mitchell made him lose his job in the job .
 He had been the publicist of what he sincerely believed to have been the “greatest investigation since the Kennedy assassination’s assassination,” and it blew up in his face . He had hoped to have had the ‘greatest probe since Kennedy assassination .
 We agreed that he should resign and be replaced by Elliot Richardson, who was then Secretary of Defense . Elliot Richardson was replaced by President George W. Bush's successor .
 I deeply regret now that Kleindienst’s departure was timed to coincide with the others, it falsely conveyed the impression that he was somehow involved in Watergate . It falsely conveyed that he had been somehow involved with Watergate .
 After Kleindienst left I stood for a few minutes waiting for Haldeman and Ehrlichman to return with their letters, looking out the picture window and watching the day darken .
 He thought that I was referring only to the terrible events of the past few days and hours . But he said that he was referring to the events in the last few days, hours .
 When Haldeman and Ehrlichman returned, they showed their letters to me and to Bill Rogers, who had now joined us . When they returned, the letters were shown to Rogers and Rogers . The letters were shared by Rogers, Rogers, and the two men who had joined
 Ehrlichman asked me to use the specific sentence, “John Dean has been fired,” in my television speech . John Dean was asked to use that specific sentence in his TV speech .
 By allowing Dean to ‘resign’ I would be forcing Haldeman and Ehrlichman to share the same public disrepute as their accuser . Dean's resignation would be a public embarrassment for both men .
 In asking them to leave I had ensured that they would never be able to prove that their motives had been innocent . They deserved the best possible chance to save themselves, and in asking them out, I had .
 "I had done what I felt was necessary, but not what I believed was right," she said . She said: "I'm not sure what I believe was right"
 "I had always prided myself on the fact that I stood by people who were down," she said . She said she had 'always prided herself' on standing by people 'down'
 I stayed at Camp David to work with Ray Price on the final draft of the speech I was to deliver the next night, Monday, April 30 . The speech was to be delivered at the end of the night of that night .
 As I handed him the draft, I said, “Ray, you are the most honest, cool, objective man I know.” I told him Ray, "You are most honest and cool"
 He said that I should not resign, that I had a duty to complete the job I had been elected to do. He said he had to complete his job, and that he was not going to resign .
 He said he knew how heartbreaking my decision on Haldeman and Ehrlichman had been, but he tried to ease it for me by saying that I had done what I had to do . He said: "He said he knows how heartbreaking it was, but that he tried
 The amputation may have been necessary for even a chance at survival, but what I had had to do left me so anguished and saddened that from that day on the presidency lost all joy for me . From that day, President Obama 'lost all joy' for me.
 President Richard Nixon addressed the American people on Watergate on April 30, 1973 . His speech was the first time he formally addressed the U.S. specifically on Watergate .
 Former President George W. Bush was accused of involvement in Watergate cover-up . His two closest aides were being accused of participation in the Watergate cover up . One of his best friends, his former Attorney General, was being accused .
 As soon as Haldeman and Ehrlichman resigned, people assumed it was because they were, at least some extent, guilty of the charges against them . No matter how much we protested to the contrary, as soon as they resigned, they were assumed to be guilty . People
 I made the decision of how I would answer this question less on the basis of logical calculation than on political instinct . I made this decision less than the based on logical calculation, rather than political instinct, I said .
 I made it without stopping to realize that this speech would be a major turning point and that my answer, once given, would have to see me through whatever lay ahead . I made the speech without stopping, "I made it ... without stopping"
 "I believe that a totally honest answer would have been neither a simple yes or no. I believe that . I'm not sure what I would have said if I had said yes or yes," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "I would have had to say that without fully realizing the implications of my actions I had become deeply entangled in the complicated mesh of decisions, inactions, misunderstandings, and conflicting motivations that comprised the Watergate cover-up," he writes .
 I sensed that the inept way we had handled Watergate so far had put us so much on the defensive that there would have been no tolerance for such a complicated explanation from me at this late date . "There would be no tolerance" for such an explanation, he said .
 "I'm up against no ordinary opposition. And the instincts of twentyfive years in politics told me that I was up against no ordinary opposition," he said .
 In this second term I had thrown down a gauntlet to Congress, the bureaucracy, the media, and the Washington establishment . I had challenged them to engage in epic battle. In this year's second term, Mr. Obama said he had thrown .
 We had already skirmished over the limitations of prerogative and power represented in confirmation of appointments, the impoundment of funds, and the battle of the budget .
 Watergate had exposed a cavernous weakness in my ranks, says Nixon . Watergate exposed a 'credibility' in the White House, he says .
 I feared that any admissions I made would be used to keep the Watergate issue, and the issue in office, festering during the rest of my term . I feared it would keep Watergate issue—and the issue of my behavior in office—festering, he says .
 "I decided to answer no to the question whether I was also involved in Watergate. Given this situation and given this choice," he said . "Given my belief that these were the stakes," he added .
 Watergate probes could and should be brought to a quick conclusion, Nixon says . Nixon hoped that a firm statement of innocence would convince people that the probe could be concluded quickly .
 "I was counting on people to become impatient with Watergate and exert pressure on Congress and the media to move on to something else and to get back to the things that mattered . I knew I was good at being President, at the really important things, and I was counting . I was
 "I actually hoped that this speech would put Watergate behind me as a nagging national issue," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I hope this speech puts Watergate behind him once and for all"
 In April 30 speech I gave the impression that I had known nothing about the cover-up until March 21 meeting with Dean Obeidallah . In the past, he said he knew nothing about it until meeting March 21 with Dean Dean .
 I indicated that once I had learned about it I had acted with dispatch and dispassion to end it. "I indicated that . once . learned about . it I . acted with dispassionate and dispatch and dispatch," he said . "I had acted ... dispassionately," he
 "I had known some of the details of the cover-up before March 21," he says . "I embarked upon an increasingly desperate search for ways to limit the damage to my friends, to my administration, and to myself," he writes .
 "The fact that they happened to be excuses that I really believed made little difference. The fact that the fact that . happened to . happen to be an excuse made little . difference," he said . "I really believed that they were excuses that . I really . believed made . little
 Watergate bad has grown out of the end-justifies-the-means mentality of the causes of the 1960s . Watergate bad grown up from the 'end-justify-the'-means' mentality . In a sense of Watergate bad, it's a bad grown out
 It was also true that if we often made the mistake of acting like an administration under siege, it was because we were under siege . We were also under siege. It was because of the fact that we were a government under siege in the 1980s .
 If I had not been preoccupied with Vietnam and other policy issues, I might have probed until I sensed the full dimensions of the cover-up, perhaps precipitated action sooner . I would have recognized that we were marching headlong into a trap with no exits .
 President of the United States could so incompetently allow himself to get in such a situation, CNN's John Sutter says . The White House has not explained how he got into trouble .
 "That was what people really wanted to know, and that was what my April 30 speech and all the other public statements I made about Watergate while I was President failed to tell them," President Obama says .
 Restraints that had governed professional and political conduct for decades were suddenly abandoned . Restraints had been governed by decades of political conduct . The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to hold a hearing on the matter .
 FBI and Justice Department hemorrhaged with leaks of confidential testimony, grand jury materials, and prosecutorial speculation . The FBI and the Justice Department have been hemorrhaging with leaks .
 On Capitol Hill it seemed as if anything could be leaked and anything would be indulged, under the guise of righteous indignation over Watergate . And on Capitol Hill, it seemed that anything could easily be leaked . The Watergate scandal was the subject of much of the Watergate scandal .
 Members of the Washington press corps were fired by personal passion . In reporting the story, the members of the D.C. press corps are fired by passion .
 The White House has been dogged by allegations of sexual misconduct in the wake of a sexual assault scandal . CNN's John Sutter says the White House was embarrassed by its reporting of the allegations .
 In their determination to prove they were not the tools of the White House, they went to the other extreme and became the shills for faceless and nameless leakers .
 In the spring of 1973, the Post guaranteed anonymity to anyone who proffered an exclusive Watergate leak or story . The Post also guaranteed anonymity for anyone who provided an exclusive story .
 Other papers followed this lead, reacting to the combination of commercial pressure and professional competitiveness .
 There is nothing “investigative” about publicizing leaks from sources in the FBI, Justice Department, or congressional committees who have easy access to confidential material . Leaks should be publicized from the FBI or Justice Department's sources, the author says .
 This was rumor journalism, some true, some false and some false, some a mixture of truth and fiction, all prejudicial . Some of the truth is true and some of it is false . This is not the truth or the truth, it's the truth .
 A symbiotic relationship developed between the leakers on the Ervin Committee and its staff and the prosecutor’s office on the one hand, and their media publicists on the other . The leaks were made by the prosecutor's office and the publicists of the prosecutor .
 Watergate reporters gathered daily outside committee rooms or buttonholed bureaucrats in hallways to try to get a Watergate headline . Reporters gathered daily in the committee rooms to get the Watergate headline. The reporters were often buttonholing bureaucrats in the hallways .
 The emphasis was on having a story—any story—before someone else got it, before someone else did . The emphasis of the story was to have a story, not just get it, but have it .
 The competition for Watergate stories debauched ordinary journalistic standards debauch ordinary standards . The competition was debauchery for Watergate . Watergate was a cover story for the White House .
 No longer required to substantiate the truth of a charge before printing it . No longer felt required to . substantiate a charge .
 They shifted this traditional professional responsibility by saying that the person accused had the . obligation to prove that the report was mot true . And to do so before a stated deadline in order to get them to drop the story, they said .
 Many of the reporters argued that because there had been a cover-up of Watergate, the system of justice could no longer be trusted to work on its own . Many of them argued because of the cover-ups, justice could not be trusted . The case was brought to light in the
 This argument became the self-justifying rationale for a vigilante squad of anonymous “sources” and competing reporters .
 Neither the pleas of conscience-stricken colleagues nor the criticism of dismayed outsiders could stop the stampede . But neither the pleas or criticism could stop it .
 A later study showed that an average of 52 percent of the front pages of the major American newspapers were occupied by Watergate stories on days when the Ervin Committee was in session . The average was 35 percent on days that the committee did not meet .
 The network news shows were devoting a third to half of their time to Watergate . Watergate was a major scandal in the White House .
 Plumbers unit consisted of only four men who worked together for just a little over two months in 1971 . Unit consisted of just four men .
 Allegations that Senators Muskie, Percy, Proxmire, and Javits had been under surveillance by the White House were being widely reported in early April 1973 .
 Newsweek printed reports that the offices of Senators Mansfield and Fulbright had been bugged . The offices of the two senators were allegedly bugged by the government .
 Hunt and Liddy were said to have overseen a “so-called ‘vigilante squad’ ” of wiretappers . Some members of this squad would be used to wiretap the telephones of Democratic presidential candidates, the Post reported .
 In early June the Post reported the accusation of “one Senate source” who claimed to have evidence of several other White House burglaries . The Post also reported that a Senate source claimed to know who had participated in them and who had directed them .
 In 1973, thirteen years after the alleged event, John Kennedy’s doctor claimed that his offices had been broken into during the 1960 campaign . John Kennedy's doctor described it as a break-in in a style similar to the burglary of the offices of Ellsberg's .
 John Lungren, my personal physician, thereupon told of the break-in at his office during the 1972 campaign . He offered reporters copies of the police photographs that had been made at the time .
 When Bob Haldeman and John Ehrlichman left the White House, we knew their ability to make a defense before grand juries and in courtrooms would depend on their . ability to demonstrate that their motives had never been criminal or corrupt . We knew they would have to prove
 Judgments about motives depend upon delicate and often intangible impressions of personal credibility . Judgements about motives inevitably depend upon impression of credibility, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 After the treatment they received from Congress and the media in the first few days of May, they had no hope of ever receiving a fair hearing . "After the treatment we had received, we had no choice but to give them fair hearing," she said .
 NBC proclaimed them “by far” the most unpopular of the 21/2 million federal employees . NBC quoted congressional “sources” who said that there was “dancing in the halls” over their downfall .
 By the end of April the news was full of leaks of John Dean’s accusations against them and charges of “cover-up” by nameless congressional sources . The news was filled with leaks from nameless Congressional sources .
 The accusation came from anonymous ‘federal investigators’ who said they had determined that officials of the White House were regularly apprised of the information obtained through the Watergate tap . The accusation was made by anonymous “federal investigators”
 On May 27 the Times said there was evidence that Haldeman was directly linked to the Ellsberg break-in . The Times also said there is evidence that there is no direct link to the break in .
 Washington Post ran a large front-page story saying that Gordon Strachan was going to say that Haldeman had been sent the plans for the bugging operation . The Washington Post published a large-page article claiming that Gordon Stachan had been given the plans .
 Ehrlichman memo described plans to burglarize psychiatrist's psychiatrist's office . Ellsberg’s psychiatrist was a psychiatrist .
 The story directly contradicted Ehrlichman’s insistence that he had had no prior knowledge of the plans . The story contradicts his insistence he had not known of plans .
 "This past year, a new kind of journalism developed, and I found myself doing on a daily routine some things I would never have done before," says LZ Granderson . LZ: "It's a new year, and it's been a year of my own kind of
 There was a vacuum in investigation, and the press began to try men in the most effective court in the country . The press is now the only effective way to get justice in the United States .
 The Watergate men were convicted by the media, perhaps in a more meaningful way than any jail sentence they will eventually get . The men involved in the Watergate were convicted in the media's way, perhaps more meaningful .
 As the months went by and the leaks continued, some voices were raised in protest . Some voices of concern and protest were raised .
 Democratic Senator William Proxmire likened the press coverage to McCarthyism . Democratic Senator John McCain likened the coverage of the press to McCarthyistism .
 Elliot Richardson urged that reporters develop a code of fairness relating to the use of leaked information . Richardson urges reporters to develop a 'code of fairness' for journalists . Richardson: Leaked information should be treated as fair .
 Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox accused the press of considering itself a fourth branch of government . Cox also said he had misgivings about its role in Watergate .
 It is easy to understand why the Agnews and the Ehrlichmans resent all this, for they are condemned even before they can state their own cases, and obviously they have a justifiable grievance . The Agnews is condemned before it can state its own cases .
 The newspapers have not resolved or even grappled with the problem effectively . The problem has not resolved, even though it has been solved, it has not .
 It cannot insist on policing the power of the government without policing itself . It cannot be policing itself without policing its own power, it says .
 Most reporters prefer self-congratulation to self-examination where Watergate is concerned . Yet to this day exhibiting the same arrogance they are quick to denounce in other institutions, he says . Yet, most reporters still prefer self congratulating themselves on Watergate .
 Two days earlier he had been entrusted with some of the most important responsibilities in government . Just two days earlier, he was entrusted with responsibility for national security .
 He said he had been thinking about the decision I had made not to replace him but to function as my own Chief of Staff . He said: "I had made a decision to not replace him, but to . function as a chief of Staff"
 Details drain away energy even in good times; now, with Watergate, there's no way that I could handle everything myself . Details drain energy even when it's good times, says President Obama .
 Haig left Kissinger's staff in January to become Vice Chief of Staff of the Army . Haig had left Kissinger’s staff to join the Army in January . He had been Kissinger's chief of staff since January .
 He was steady, intelligent, and tough, and what he might have lacked in political experience and organizational finesse he made up for in sheer force of personality . What he might lack in experience and organization finesse, he made it up for .
 Haig said he would accept; he asked only that he think further about the public reaction to having a military man as the White House Chief of Staff . Haig: "He asked only for that he asked that I think further"
 Haldeman called Haig back and said that he was still the man I wanted . After talking with me about this, Haldman called Haugeman back and called Haigs back .
 "When I met with Haig at noon the next day I told him that I knew what a great sacrifice I was asking him to make," he says . "I knew what I was asked to make. When I met him at noon, I knew it was a huge sacrifice,"
 With his abilities he would certainly have been in a position to become Chief of Staff of the Army and possibly Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He would have been able to take over as Army's chief of staff .
 "I explained that I did not want him to become involved in the handling of Watergate. I explained that he was not involved in Watergate," he said .
 I wanted him to stick exclusively to running the White House staff and organizing the information I needed for making policy decisions . He wanted to focus on his role as a White House staffer, not his job .
 "I knew that taking this job would mean far more for him than just forfeiting military advancement and perquisites," he said . Still, he said, he knew that it would be far more important for him to take on the job .
 For Haig, it would be like volunteering to return to combat with no guarantee of the outcome and with no medals at the end . We were in for a long and bloody struggle, and for Haig it was like volunteering for combat . Haig would have been like a volunteer to
 On May 7 he agreed to come back on the White House staff as an adviser without pay . He agreed to return on May 7 to be an adviser to the president without pay.
 We decided that rather than define his duties specifically, we would tailor them to his abilities as he went along . We decided to tailor his duties to his ability as he goes along .
 President Obama appointed William Colby Director of the CIA and moved James Schlesinger from the CIA to the Pentagon as Secretary of Defense .
 I also appointed a strong new head of the FBI, Clarence Kelley, the Chief of the Kansas City Police, to head the FBI . Mr. Kelley is the new FBI chief .
 Mel Laird and Bryce Harlow agreed to return to the White House as Counsellors to the President . Haig brought in Fred Buzhardt, the General Counsel of the Defense Department, to assist Len Garment in handling Watergate .
 Much of Watergate criticism had centered on the White House press office . Much of the Watergate criticism was centered on White House Press Office .
 They felt he was a symbol of the old Haldeman order, and that his credibility with the press corps was irreparably damaged . They had nothing against him personally, but they felt that he was damaged .
 Kissinger said that we would always regret it if we hurt innocent people in an effort to palliate the press . Kissinger, who said that Kissinger, did not want to harm innocent people, also said .
 Haig looked for someone who might restore the credibility of the press office . Haig: Haig was looking to restore credibility of press office. Haig is a former CIA director of operations .
 Not surprisingly, there were few volunteers for the bloodletting that now accompanied the daily briefings in the White House press room .
 Ziegler’s deputy, Jerry Warren, began to take over the podium much of the time, and Jerry Warren became more of an adviser to me . Zieglers’ deputy, Warren, also took over in the time .
 Ziegler was tough-minded and could analyze problems with honesty and incisiveness . Despite his youth and occasional brashness, Zieglers was tough on the business world .
 We had taken some hard blows, but slowly we were gathering strength and beginning to climb back on our feet again . We had been hit by a series of hard blows but are now gathering strength . We hope to be back in form in the near future .
 Many friends and supporters at home and abroad offered their reflections and their assistance . Many friends of the family offered their thoughts and assistance .
 I feel impelled, in view of our long friendship, to send you a message of sympathy and good will . Although I now live remote from current affairs, thinking more of the past than of the present .
 I trust that these clouds may soon roll away, and that you may . take up with enthusiasm the task of promoting the Peace and Prosperity of the world, to which you have already made such a notable contribution .
 He told me that he simply cannot understand how Americans writing in the U.S. press can so brutally tear down their own country and its institutions . He told CNN's John Sutter that he can't understand how American writing in American press can tear down the country .
 He is confident, however, that you will be able to pass through this difficult period and continue your fine work for world peace .
 The Holy Father said he will offer his prayers and a mass for your intentions . Pope Francis said the Holy Father will offer prayers and mass for you .
 With profound personal sympathy, I heard you speak to the American people on the television . President Obama said he has "profound personal sympathy" for the country's people .
 As an old personal friend of yours, I have firm and quiet confidence in you that you, as a great leader of this hope, will succeed in re-establishing the greater authority and integrity of your office .
 During this period we also devised a new plan for election reform, moved to increase food production, and, in mid-June, reimposed a limited price freeze in order to steady the economy while we considered post-Phase III moves .
 Agnew: "With Agnew standing by to cast a tie-breaking vote, we pushed the vitally important Alaska pipeline bill through the Senate. We set up a new Office of Energy Policy, and with Agnew stood by to vote, pushed the bill through"
 "Every one of my vetoes of budget-busting legislation was sustained. And although the cost in terms of political abrasion was extremely high, every one of those vetoes was sustained," he said .
 The threat was invoked constantly as the media monitored our pulse and judged that Watergate had sapped my ability to lead . Watergate had been invoked constantly, as well as Watergate . The media monitored the media closely closely watching Watergate .
 "If I had no officially announced schedule for a particular day, it was reported that I was secluded, brooding, paralyzed," he says . If I had an active schedule, "I was contriving activity in order not to appear paralyzed", he writes .
 "If I talked about Watergate, I was described as struggling to free myself from the morass," says Bob Greene . "I was described by people as struggling ... to free himself from the muddiness of Watergate," he says .
 "If I did not talk about Watergate, I was accused of being out of touch with reality," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I was accused by some of the world of being 'out of touch' with reality" says Cruz .
 If I tried to summon the nation to consider economic or foreign policy problems, I was accused of trying to distract attention from Watergate . If I wanted to talk to the nation about economic and foreign policy, I would be accused of ignoring Watergate, he would say .
 Watergate had become the center of the media’s universe, and during the remaining year of my presidency the media tried to force everything else to revolve around it . The media was trying to make Watergate the focus of everything else in the world .
 The fighting in Vietnam took place far from Washington, but scarcely a day passed when the sacrifice and suffering of those who served there were not brought home to me .
 In the letters sent to the next of kin of the men who had been killed in action, I could never find words adequate to express the grief I shared with them . "I never found words adequate" to express my grief, I wrote to them," he says .
 "The posthumous presentations of Medals of Honor were always emotionally wrenching experiences for me," he says . "The families accepted the decoration for the Medal of Honor"
 From time to time I made telephone calls to the wives or mothers of men who had been killed in action . I made phone calls to wives and mothers of those who had died in service .
 During the Christmas season of 1969 Pat and I met with twenty-six wives and mothers of POWs and MIAs . Pat and Pat met with  Wives and mothers of POWs and MIAs during the Christmas .
 The women spoke respectfully but passionately of the urgent need to get their loved ones released as soon as possible . They spoke respectfully and passionately about the need for the release of loved ones .
 Tears filled Pat’s eyes, and mine as well, as we listened to them tell of the effect of the years of waiting on them and their children . The terrible uncertainty of not knowing whether their men were alive or dead .
 Each POW was an individual to me, and obtaining their release became a burning cause . From that time on, each POW was each individual to him, he said .
 President Bush's top military aide handled White House liaison with families of POWs and MIAs . "Don Hughes did a superb job of handling the families of our POWs," Bush says .
 The most dramatic, and heartbreaking, attempt at their release came in November 1970 . It was the most dramatic and heartbreaking attempt to get them out .
 Late in the summer Mel Laird and the Pentagon presented me with a proposal that we make a daring swoop-and-seize rescue raid on a POW camp inside North Vietnam .
 Sontay is the same town outside Hanoi that Pat and I had visited in 1953, when it had served as a refugee camp . They decided to make the raid on the large POW installation at the same place they had visited . The raid was made on the same POW installation
 "Clockwork precision might allow us to surprise and overpower the camp’s guards and remove as many as ninety Americans" before a counterattack could be mounted . "We might be able to remove up to ninety Americans from the camp before the camp could be attacked," he says .
 As many as twenty-eight American POWs had recently died because of torture and ill-treatment . Early in the month I had received reports that as many as 20,000 POWs recently died due to torture .
 "I said that I wanted the POWs to have Thanksgiving dinner at the White House," says President Obama . "I want them to be able to get Thanksgiving dinner," says Obama .
 After two and half months of rigorous training and rehearsal, the raid took place on November 20 . The raid was the culmination of a two-and-a-half-month period of preparation .
 The raiding party had found the cells empty; the prisoners had been moved . The raid party had been searching for the prisoners .
 All the intelligence reports used for planning the operation had been several weeks old . Apparently all the intelligence . used for . planning the . operation had to be several weeks . old .
 Even if I had known when the operation was being planned that the reports were out of date, I believe I would still have given my approval . I believe he would have given his approval .
 Although the raid did not achieve its purpose, it was a significant psychological success . The raid was a major psychological success for the U.S. military .
 North Vietnamese military and political leaders were at risk of attack, says U.S. intelligence sources . Intelligence sources say it caused serious concern among North Vietnamese leaders . They say it revealed their vulnerability to a kind of attack they had not experienced before .
 The raid had also had a positive effect on the POWs' treatment as well as their morale . Later, when POWs were home, I learned that the raid also had also benefited their treatment . The raid was also a success for POWs .
 North Vietnamese moved most of the men from scattered camps to a single prison in Hanoi . The Hanoan Hilton became known as the Hanoa Hilton after the raid .
 The men were then able to organize themselves, and obtained more consistent—if not substantially better—treatment from their captors . The men then organized themselves and obtained better treatment from captors.
 "Our POWs had been courageous in action; they were even more courageous in captivity," says President Obama . "They had been brave in action, they had been even more brave in captivity" says Obama .
 As war ended, I continued to oppose amnesty for draft dodgers and deserters . That was one of the reasons that as the war ended . I opposed amnesty, he said .
 I wanted the flag to be flying proud and high on the day the first prisoners returned to American soil . I wanted it flying proud on the first day of the first prisoner's return .
 I called Lady Bird Johnson to cut short the official thirty-day period of national mourning during which all flags were flying at half-staff for President Johnson .
 She said she would like to think about it and call me back in a few minutes . She called back to say she is thinking about it .
 When she called to give her approval, she said she was sure that this was what Lyndon would have wanted . She said she felt it was what he would have said .
 The scene at Clark Air Force Base was tremendously moving as one by one the men came down the ramp, walking or hobbling on crutches, saluting the flag . One by one, the men saluted the flag.
 I had been concerned that they might have been so scarred by what they had been through that they would be bitter and disillusioned, or broken, or unable to adjust to the conditions they would find at home . I had hoped they would have been able to adapt to life at home
 Navy Captain Jeremiah P Denton is the first man off the first plane . Denton: "We are honored to have had the opportunity to serve our country"
 "We are profoundly grateful to our Commander in Chief, and to our nation for this day," says President Barack Obama .
 I was delighted when I heard that some of them had worn the flowers to greet their husbands and sons as they arrived home . Some of the flowers were worn by some of the mothers of the children .
 Air Force Colonel James Kasler said, “We went to Vietnam to do a job that had to be done.” He said the U.S. was doing a job “had to do’t do”
 Air Force Colonel Robinson Risner is the senior officer of the first POW group to return home . Air Force Col. Risner was the first Air Force officer to return to the U.S.
 For seven and a half years he had been held captive in North Vietnam . For much of that time, he was kept in solitary confinement . He was held in isolation .
 President Barack Obama spoke to CNN's John Sutter . He said he looked forward to seeing him at the White House .
 At the end of our brief conversation he said that talking to me had been the greatest moment of his life . He said talking to him was the most memorable moment he'd ever come across .
 Diary Risner’s comment to the effect that this was the greatest moment in his life, of course, had a very sobering effect as far as I was concerned . Diary Diary's comment had a 'very sobering' effect as well as Risner's comment that this
 It made me feel extremely humble, to hear this man who had suffered so long and had taken such great risks as far as his life was concerned, to speak in this way . "I'm very proud to be able to speak to this man," she said .
 "He spoke at the very last by saying that he and the men with him would be supporting me as long as they lived," he said . He said he would support me 'as long as he lived'
 Air Force officers came to meet President Barack Obama at the White House March 6 . President Obama met with two of the officers .
 It was a very moving experience to see their wives and the two of them with enormous faith in the country, in God, and in themselves . "It was a moving experience," she said of her husband and wife .
 Apparently they had been exposed to enemy propaganda throughout and had never given in to it . Apparently they were exposed to propaganda throughout .
 They were shown still photos of the big crowds demonstrating against the President . For example, they were shown pictures of the protests .
 They, of course, heard tapes of messages from Ramsey Clark, Jane Fonda, and the other peacenik groups, but they had nothing but contempt for them . They were contempt for the peace activists, says author .
 I only hope that these men do not have a terrible letdown now that they are back . The men are back for the first time since returning to the U.S.
 I think after what they have been through they have become stronger as a result of being put through the fire of adversity . I think the players are stronger after being put under the 'fire of adversity', says coach .
 Returning men confirmed widespread use of torture in the prison camps . It was not long before returning men had confirmed the widespread use .
 Some were tortured for refusing to pose in propaganda photos with touring antiwar groups . Some refused to pose for photos with tours of the U.S. anti-war groups.
 Miss Fonda said that the POWs were “liars” for making such claims . One POW had his arm and leg broken because he refused to meet with her, she said . Miss Fondes said that one POW had to have his arm, leg broken .
 It was during her trip to North Vietnam in 1972 that she broadcast appeals over Radio Hanoi asking American pilots to quit flying bombing runs over North Vietnam . She asked the U.S. to stop bombing over Vietnam .
 Air Force Brigadier General General John P Flynn had been a POW for five and a half years . Among them was the ranking officer of the group, Air . Force . General Flynn, who had been POW for 5.5 years, was among the POWs .
 I told him how deeply sad I was that he had been away from his home and family for so many years and had had to endure such terrible conditions . When I escorted him to the door after our talk, I said I was deeply sad that he'd been away for so long .
 He smartly snapped to attention, saluted, and left the room before I could respond . "He smartly snaps to attention and saluted," he said .
 "I was so choked up with emotion that I don’t believe I could have thought of anything to say worthy of the moment. I was so overwhelmed I couldn't think of what to say,’s the moment."
 On March 12, I had long meetings with Colonel Risner and Captain Denton. "I'm glad to have had these meetings," he said. "It's been a long way since March 12."
 Diary Diary Diary I asked Risner about how he was able to take what he had been through . Risner: "I'm not sure how I'm going to be able to do this again."
 I had not realized that he had been four years in solitary confinement . "I was not surprised that he'd spent four years solitary confinement," she says . "He had not been in isolation for four years," she adds .
 "He obviously was a man who had been through the tortures of the damned," he said . "He was obviously a man ... who had had to be tortured," he added .
 He explained in detail some of the torture he had gone through but did not make a big thing out of it . He said he was tortured by the government but was not made a big fuss .
 He told me how he had gotten to the point that he was ready to break because his nerves had been shattered . He said he had become so nervous that his nerves were shattered that he had to take a break .
 He had a hot flash on the back of his neck—he felt that he was coming apart but he would exercise and then finally fall asleep for a few hours . He would exercise, sleep and then fall asleep .
 They pointed out that as far as the other fighter planes were concerned, their captors would get out and make as if they were shooting at them and all that sort of thing . They said they were taken into custody by the Japanese government .
 When the B-52s came, they came out of the blue despite the bad weather and all the rest, with shattering effect . But when the B.52s come, they come out of . the blue, it came out with a shattering effect, says author .
 He said that they all cheered and hollered and hugged each other when the bombing was going on . He said they cheered and hugged when the bomb went off .
 They answered that this was in no way what was involved, and that they knew the bombing was aimed at only military targets . They said they knew that they had been bombed .
 He, whenever I mentioned his suffering and the rest, came back to what I had been through, he said . He said: "Whenever I mentioned him, I thought he was going to die."
 He was most generous in his respect—said that he could see the same suffering in my eyes . He could see that suffering in the eyes of his fellow POWs, he said . He said that he saw the suffering in his eyes .
 I told him that after knowing what they had been through, what I had to be through was nothing . I said that after . knowing what . they had gone through, it was nothing, he said . 'I told him I had nothing to do,' he said.
 "I had been pretty much alone in the decisions that I had made. But he realized, as he said, that he realized that he had made a mistake," he said . "He realized that ... he realized he had been ... alone," he added .
 The North Vietnamese said that the trouble with Nixon is that he flipflops . He pointed out that the North Vietnamese . said that Nixon flip flops .
 He said that the North Vietnamese knew that Nixon was a very tough fellow . He said the recognition of that fact was what eventually brought them around to a settlement .
 North Vietnamese really thought that the President was off his rocker—was totally irrational . He made an interesting analogy on the point that the North Vietnamese thought that . He said the North Vietnam really thought . that was totally irrational.
 The North Vietnamese thought that they were so irrational that they could not break them, he said . He said, as a matter of fact, that that saved the POWs .
 Risner or Denton said he would be willing to stay eight, twelve, or sixteen years if necessary to see that the United States came out of Vietnam in the right way .
 He said that the settlement that Harriman would agree to in ’68 would have been a shameful thing . He said they could not possibly have felt proud if it had ended on that basis .
 Denton kept coming back to the fact that he didn’t know what was going to happen to the country after I left the office, he said . Denton said he didn't know what to do with the country .
 He feels very strongly we must use this precious time -- he said three years or so -- for the purpose of seeing that America’s foreign policy role is played as well as possible .
 I said that the history of civilization showed that the leader class rather than the common people were those that first disintegrated . The leader class was those that disintegrated, he said .
 President Obama said the problem was not the common people who stood by us, they were the silent majority . That here in our country the problem is not the . silent majority, he said . Obama said .
 As I sleep in this comfortable room with the blackout curtains, the air conditioning, a very comfortable bed, I think of how really easy we have it . I realize how we could probably do far more than we do, take more physical punishment than we have, he says .
 Sammy Davis Jr. performed at the White House on March 3 . The White House hosted a White House performance of the late singer .
 Afterward he suggested that we organize a gala entertainment honoring the POWs . Afterward, he suggested we organize an entertainment gala .
 "I discussed this with Pat, and she said that we should go all out and also give a formal dinner in honor of the men and their families," she said .
 Some staff members urged that we move the affair into one of the local hotel ballrooms that were properly equipped to deal with such a large number of people, but Pat and Pat felt that the whole point of the evening was to honor these men at the White House .
 A canopy on the South Lawn of the White House was itself larger than the whole White House . Since there was no way that we could possibly accommodate, much less seat, more than a few hundred people inside, Pat arranged for the construction of the canopy .
 She rented enough china and crystal that was sufficiently elegant for an occasion of this importance . Then she found and rented enough furniture and china for the occasion, she said .
 Hundreds of bottles of champagne chilled in ice-filled aluminum canoes . Strawberries for dessert mousse were run through blenders at the Pentagon kitchens .
 We wanted to arrange excellent entertainment for after dinner, and Pat and her staff worked with Sammy Davis and Bob Hope . Bob Hope, Bob Hope and Paul Keyes were also involved in the arrangements .
 Her only condition was that she did not want a ‘girlie’ show; she felt that would be inappropriate for the men and their families . She said that she didn't want a "girlie" show .
 The result was a beautifully produced, tasteful, and deeply moving program that everyone who saw it will always remember . The result of the program was a beautiful and tasteful program .
 On May 24, the day the POW dinner was held, the flag flying over the White House was the same one that had flown at Clark Air Force Base on February 12 when the first group of POWs returned from Vietnam .
 Mama and Julie attended a reception honoring the wives of the POWs prior to the dinner at the White House . Mama, Julie, and Mama, and Julie, also attended the dinner .
 The press attended the reception too, and while we were scattered through the reception room surrounded by the wives, the reporters surrounded us . The press also attended the event .
 Instead of asking us questions about the occasion or even showing a humane concern about the POW families, the press immediately and gleefully bombarded us with Watergate questions . The press "bleaked out Watergate questions," the author says .
 POW wives began telling reporters how fine Richard Nixon was, unasked, how fine Nixon was . POW wives could support this attack no longer and they began telling the reporters .
 While the women were having tea, I addressed the men in the State Department Auditorium . The women had tea, while the men had tea .
 My speech was interrupted many times by applause, but I was surprised at the reaction to one particular sentence . "I was surprised by the reaction," he said. "I'm surprised that the reaction was more positive"
 Only two weeks earlier Daniel Ellsberg’s trial had been dismissed, and he had gone free . Only weeks earlier the trial was dismissed and he went free .
 When I said, “And let me say, I think it is time in this country to quit making national heroes out of those who steal secrets and publish them in the newspapers,” the men leaped to their feet and shouted their agreement .
 It had rained all day and much of the evening, and the South Lawn was soggy when the first guests began arriving .
 Many of the women’s long dresses got splattered with mud, but nothing could dampen the high spirits of that night .
 Pat had decided to open the entire White House . The men and their families wandered through all the rooms, examining the decorations and taking photographs .
 Before the dinner, an invocation was offered by Navy Captain Charles Gillespie, the POW who had acted as their chaplain in Hanoi . Gillespie was the POW's chaplain .
 POW chorus of thirty-five men sang a hymn that one of them had written in prison . Then the POW chorus sang a song written by one of the men who had written it in prison.
 Everyone stood at attention as a fanfare announced an all-service honor guard for the presentation of the colors . The colors were presented by an honor guard .
 In place of the full-size American flag, there came a tiny flag held aloft on a short staff . The tiny flag is held on a tiny staff .
 Air Force Lieutenant Colonel John Dramesi secretly made the flag in a North Vietnamese prison . It was fashioned from a white handkerchief, patches of red underwear, gold trim from a blanket, blue cloth from an old jacket, and string from a Red Cross package .
 As the honor guard entered, all eyes turned toward the tiny patchwork flag . A cheer grew and grew until it filled the canvas tent, filling it with cheers .
 During most of the dinner Pat and I walked around from table to table, posing for photographs and signing autographs . Pat and Pat were at the end of the meal to meet up with fans .
 I said I wanted to propose a toast not just to Pat as First Lady but to all the brave wives and mothers of the prisoners . I said that I wanted a toast to Pat not just Pat, but to the brave mothers and wives of prisoners .
 Mr President, concerning his decision on December 18, concerning your decision on Dec. 18, I would like to assure you, sir, that we knew you were in a very lonely position. We knew you, Sir, that . We knew he was in a lonely position, Mr President
 All the stars of the show had entertained the men in South Vietnam, many of them as part of Hope’s annual Christmas shows . Many of the stars had entertained them in Vietnam .
 There were famous pop and country singers, comedians and motion picture personalities on the program . Sammy Davis, Jr. was honored at the end of the show .
 His age and failing health had made it impossible for him to participate in any other part of the evening . But as he began the first notes of his most famous song, his voice came out loud and strong .
 The show did not end until after midnight and the dancing went on until after two o'clock, but Pat and I went upstairs around 12:30 . The show ended around after midnight, but the dancing continued until after 2:30.
 As I sat before the fire, listening to the sounds of the music and laughter coming up from downstairs, I felt that this was one of the greatest nights in my life. I felt it was a great night for me, I said. As a child, I wanted to be a
 There were no words then, and there are really none now, that could describe the joy and satisfaction that I felt at the thought that I had played a role in bringing these men back home, and that they, who were so courageous and admirable, genuinely seemed to consider the decisions I
 "I reached in my pocket and pulled out a small piece of paper that the wife of one of the POWs had handed to me," he said . "It was a very difficult moment for me to remember, but I was able to do it," he added .
 When I was living in solitary confinement and conditions were especially bad, men would often send notes of encouragement to others who were under great pressure . I was sent a letter to the White House by President Richard Nixon .
 The notes were hidden in the bath areas and were a great comfort to the recipient . They were hidden by the recipient's bath areas .
 The contrast between the splendid lift of this night and the dreary daily drain of Watergate suddenly struck me with an almost physical force . Joy and Bob Jeffrey: "The contrast between Watergate and this night's lift is starkly starkly different"
 When Tricia and Julie came upstairs from the party a little later, I invited them to join me in the Lincoln Sitting Room . Tricia, Julie and Tricia were invited to join us in Lincoln sitting room .
 We went down expecting that he wanted to talk over the splendid event and what had led up to it and made it possible . We went . expecting him to talk about it and what it had led to it being made possible .
 It was obvious that his low spirit was more than the natural letdown that frequently follows the conclusion of a speech or an event where much energy has been expended .
 He began to talk quietly, without undue passion, about the press’s rather negative reception of all POW ceremonies in Washington . He said, “I’m not surprised,” but that the press was unhappy with the POW ceremonies .
 'Daddy's face looked almost painful for us to see how sad Daddy’s face looked, despite the laughter in his voice . They joked for a few minutes, but it was almost painful to see .
 It was not what he said but the way he said it that produced an internal earthquake in us . "It's not what it said but it's the way it said it," he said, "that produced internal earthquakes in us"
 He smiled at us and tried to say something to cheer us up, but it was almost more than more than I could bear to stay there and see his sadness on what should have been a night of jubilant triumph for him .
 The evening was marked by a great historical and personal achievement for Daddy . But it was also a great personal tragedy for his father .
 "I could not help but think how man lives in the hope of perfection, but in the reality of imperfection in himself and in those around him"
 John Dean’s news-making accusations against Haldeman and Ehrlichman failed to gain immunity from prosecution . Dean: “I’m not going to be prosecuted. I’ll never be prosecuted again.” Dean said in a May 22 statement
 He later claimed that he had been very careful not to try his case in the press, and he testified before the Ervin Committee that he hadn't done so .
 The only clues were the press reports noting that one of these documents was forty-three pages long and carried one of the highest security classifications in the government .
 Dean had promised he would not reveal anything involving national security matters, but now he seems to be willing to breach that promise if it would help him gain immunity from prosecution . Dean said he had promised to keep his promise, but he now seems willing to reveal anything .
 Justice Department officials who had seen the document say it involved a national security matter . They say it did not relate to Watergate . The document was seen by the Justice Department, officials say .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I was almost relieved that this was Dean’s bombshell document, because I was certain that we could completely defend and explain it in a way that people would understand" He says he was relieved that Dean's bombshell document was released .
 Several of his “memcons”’—memoranda of conversations— dating from June 1972 were about to be subpoenaed by the Senate Armed Services Committee, which was investigating the question of CIA involvement in the Watergate break-in and its aftermath .
 One of Walters’s memcons covered the conversation held among Helms, Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and himself on June 23, 1972 .
 Walters memcons covered subsequent conversations with John Dean and Pat Gray . John Dean, Pat Gray and John Dean also spoke to Walters . Walters: "I'm not sure what happened to John Dean"
 Walters brought the memcons to the White House to get a ruling on whether they were covered by executive privilege . Walters: Memcons are not covered under executive privilege. Walters brought them to White House .
 Walters’s memcon of the June 23 meeting with Haldeman and Ehrlichman noted that it was my desire that Walters go to see Pat Gray and suggest that he not push the inquiry further, particularly into the Mexican money that appeared to have financed the break-in
 "One of the things that made the memcons so troublesome was the fact that Walters was one of my old friends," she says . "He would not have contrived them to hurt me," she adds . Walters was a friend of Walters, she writes .
 His photographic memory was renowned, and he was universally respected as a scrupulous and honest man . In addition, he was also renowned for his photographic memory .
 Buzhardt, however, noticed that the June 23 memcon had not actually been written on June 23, but five days later, on June 28 . The June 23 Memcon was actually written five days after June 23 . Buzhard noticed that June 23 was actually June 28,
 John Dean asked if the CIA could help put up the bail for the Watergate defendants to get them out of jail and pay their salaries if they were convicted . During those five days John Dean had approached Walters and asked for the help of the CIA .
 He had also asked obliquely if the CIA might assume some of the responsibility for the break-in .
 Walters had reacted to Dean’s overtures with dismay and alarm; he had refused to do nothing unless he received a direct order from me . Walters had refused, insisting that he would do nothing if he received an order .
 In fact, Dean had undertaken this approach to Walters without my knowledge, and he dropped his request . "He dropped the request," Walters said .
 Buzhardt postulated that on June 28, when Walters wrote the memcon of the June 23 meeting, he had unconsciously reconstructed the conversation from the perspective of what he felt Dean was trying to do, rather than from what Haldeman and Ehrlichman had actually said .
 It had been almost a year since that conversation; so much had happened in the meantime . So much has happened since then, and so much has changed .
 But I was certain that the motive could not have been as transparently political as it looked. But I'm certain that it was not as transparent as it looks .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I had told Dean on March 21 that we could raise a million dollars but it would be wrong and it would not work" He told me again, as he had when we met on April 25, that he had told me that I had told him
 Back in April I had talked to Haldeman and Ehrlichman about the difficulty of recalling events that were many months past . The two men spoke to each other about the difficulties of remembering events .
 We confusedly reconstructed events around our recollection of our motive—we remembered what we wanted to remember . Now we ourselves rationalized the implications of Walter’s memcons, we rationalize the implications .
 He said he was positive that there had been no political concern whatever whatever .
 In addition to Watergate allegations and accusations, the 1969-70 wiretaps were now public . So was the Plumbers unit, and we knew that Dean had a copy of the Interagency Intelligence Report . Dean Obeidallah: "In addition to all the Watergate allegations, Watergate allegations
 No distinction was being made between legitimate national security concerns and exclusively Watergate problems . Watergate problems were not Watergate problems, but Watergate was a national security issue . Watergate was the subject of Watergate scandal in the early '70s .
 In April 30 speech I had dealt in a very general way with the broad concepts of responsibility and blame, Mr. Obama said in a speech he had dealt with responsibility .
 The White House had to provide a detailed response to Watergate allegations, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "Now I could see that we were going to have to provide ... a very detailed response"
 In a statement issued from the White House on May 22 I described the 1969 wiretaps and the events that had created the need for them . In the statement issued May 22, President Nixon described the wiretaps .
 I also described the 1970 Interagency Intelligence Report and the establishment of the Plumbers . The Plumbers were established in 1970 .
 I denied prior knowledge of the break-in, and I made a blanket denial of any awareness of or participation in the cover-up, he said . "I deny prior knowledge," he said, "and I made blanket denial"
 Watergate investigation did not lead to any inquiry into Special Investigations Unit . Watergate investigation was called in the CIA to make sure no secret CIA operations were uncovered by the Watergate investigation .
 I said I had not authorized any offer of executive clemency for any of these defendants . And I said that I did not authorize any . offer of pardon for any . defendants . President Obama said he did not want to give the defendants a chance to be granted a pardon .
 It was the first time that a President of the United States had publicly admitted that there had been such things as government-approved break-ins .
 At that time the activities that were later revealed by the 1975 Senate study of intelligence activity were not yet widely known outside some political and journalistic circles in Washington, D.C.
 Kennedy and Johnson generally felt that wiretapping was too damaging to employ . For example, the Washington Post reported that Kennedy and . Johnson had generally felt wiretapping . too damaging .
 Johnson’s Attorneys General Nicholas Katzen-bach and Ramsey Clark said they did not know about such things . After a press conference in which I responded to questions about the history of government-authorized break-ins, they said they didn't know .
 Sam Ervin used the Watergate hearings to pontificate erroneously that J Edgar Hoover would not have authorized any break-ins . Ervin also pontificated erroneously about J. Edgar Hoover's involvement in the Watergate break-in .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport . Send your photos of the day before you go to see the gallery for next week .
 "I decided that I wanted all the wiretaps of previous administrations revealed," President Obama says . "In the face of the sanctimony that greeted my May 22 statement, I decided to ... want all wiretaps"
 It was Robert Kennedy who authorized the first wiretaps on Martin Luther King . King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi in 1968 .
 King was subjected to five different phone taps and fifteen microphone bugs in his hotel rooms . King was subject to five phone taps, 15 microphone bugs and 15 phone taps . King's hotel rooms were also subject to bugs . King says he was a "very successful businessman"
 They had tapped a number of people instrumental in the passage of a sugar import bill they considered important . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives .
 FBI had 30 employees at the 1964 Democratic convention monitoring events and overseeing wiretaps on Martin Luther King . He had had thirty FBI employees monitoring events at the convention .
 His Attorney General authorized a tap on an author who had written a book about Marilyn Monroe and Bobby Kennedy . Attorney General had authorized tap on author who wrote about Monroe and Kennedy .
 Hoover's aide, William Sullivan, wrote, “To my memory, the two administrations which used the FBI most for political purposes were Mr Roosevelt's and Mr Johnson’s.’�s . Hoover's aides wrote that the FBI was used for political reasons .
 "My staff resisted me, and for several weeks we debated back and forth about it," says President Obama . "I'm not going to resign," he says .
 "I was afraid that I would remain portrayed as a willful deviant from past practice," she says . "If I did not, however, I would be condemned for my legal and legitimate uses of the same tactics my predecessors had used more extensively," she writes .
 If the public reaction to the May 22 statement was negative, the reaction in the White House briefing room was almost violent . The White House press briefing room is almost violent, but the reaction was almost positive .
 Len Garment helped Ziegler with the briefing, and the reporters interrupted them constantly, shouting and jeering . Len . Garment . The reporters interrupted the briefing constantly .
 Archibald Cox was the Special Prosecutor for Watergate . Cox's sole responsibility was the investigation of Watergate. Cox was also a Special Prosecutor . Cox is a former Special Prosecutor. Cox is now a Special Counsel .
 The Ervin Committee had a staff of 92; the Special Prosecutor’s office had 80 . Ervin committee had 92 staff members; Special Prosecutor's office was 80 staff .
 "We were like a high school team heading into the Super Bowl. Compared with the forces ranged against us, we were like high school teams," coach says . "Compared to the forces against us," he says .
 Dean’s effort to gain immunity from the federal prosecutors had failed . Dean's effort to get immunity from federal prosecutors failed, he says .
 He hopes testimony before Ervin Committee will renew pressure in his favor that might make the Justice Department reconsider its decision . All that was left for him was to push harder for Senate immunity .
 Dean Said to Tell of 40 Meetings with Nixon in 1973 and Alleges Nixon Knew of Cover-up Plan . Dean said to tell of 40 meetings with Nixon and alleged Nixon knew of cover-up plan . Dean alleged to have met with Nixon at least 40 times in 1973 .
 I read on in the Post and felt a sudden sense of dread as I came to another part of the story . "I felt like I was going to be in the middle of a nightmare," she said .
 Dean was said to have told me that the additional cost would be about $1 million, and I replied that there would be no problem in paying that much money . Dean was reported to have said that the extra cost of the project would be $1million .
 Dean claimed that after January I had begun calling him personally to “find out the status of the cover-up,” and on March 21 he had told me that “to save the presidency” it would be necessary for Haldeman, Ehrlichman,
 Dean charged that after that meeting I had met with Haldeman and Ehrlichman and then told Dean that I would not tolerate any division in the White House ranks . Dean said he would stand alone if he went to the prosecutors . Dean: "I told him that he would
 Former President George W. Bush was asked whether he would take time to listen to tapes of Dean meetings . His answer was a robust no, he said .
 I agreed to see what we could do in this regard, and Haig said he would make the necessary arrangements . Haig told me that he would be making necessary arrangements, and I agreed .
 A check of my daily logs showed that I had met with Dean twenty-one times and made or received thirteen phone calls from him between February 27 and April 1973 . A check-of-the-books shows that Dean met with him twenty-21 times and 13 phone calls .
 Except for the March 21 conversation I had little or no recollection of any of the rest of the conversation . Except for that conversation, I had no memory of all of the others .
 As I sat looking at this list, an uneasy feeling came over me as I wondered what we might have talked about in all those conversations . I wondered if we had talked about our conversations in the past .
 Steve Bull brought a tape machine to his EOB office and cued the first one for me . Steve Bull's tape machine was brought to his office by Steve Bull . The first tape was cued by the first tape machine he recorded .
 "Gradually, as my ears became accustomed, I could pick up more and more," she said . "I'm glad to be able to listen to the sounds of the world," she wrote .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I listened to conversation after conversation with Dean in February and March, all before March 21. I listened to conversations I had with Dean," he says .
 "I knew that there would be problems, but I was sure that they could all be explained," she said . "I'm sure that all of the problems could be explained. But I knew there were problems, and I knew that they would be explained."
 I had said that I first learned about the cover-up on March 21, and the tapes showed that in the conversations prior to that, Dean and I had talked about Watergate, the Ervin Committee, executive privilege and political retaliation against the Democrats strictly as political problems .
 Dean had told me that no one in the White House was involved in the Watergate break-in . Dean had said no one was involved, and no one had been involved .
 Watergate and Segretti were not nearly so bad as they had been made to appear in the press . He had reassured me that from the White House point of view, Watergate was not nearly as bad as it had been portrayed .
 He had agreed with me that he himself had had nothing to do with campaign activities. He said he had agreed to be part of the campaign . But he said he was not involved in any of the activities he had done .
 He had not disclosed his own role in the cover-up to me before our meeting on March 21 . And he had certainly not disclosed himself himself to me, he said .
 "For just a moment after I had read all the newspaper stories, I was worried that maybe maybe maybe Dean and I had talked about a cover-up," she says . "I was worried about a possible cover up," she adds .
 "I told Ziegler I felt enormously relieved. But now that I had reviewed the tapes, I told him, I was enormously relieved," he said .
 The day John Dean was scheduled to begin his testimony before the Watergate Committee, June 18, was also the day that Leonid Brezhnev was to arrive in Washington to begin the second U.S.-Soviet Summit . John Dean's testimony was scheduled for that day .
 At the last minute Ervin postponed Dean’s appearance for a week, until after the summit . Ervin: “with some degree of reluctance,” as he himself said, “a week later .
 By early spring of 1973, the Soviets appeared to be moving full speed in pursuit of détente . Détente seemed to be on the verge of an agreement .
 Brezhnev had conducted a quiet purge of the Politburo, apparently in order to remove antidétente recalcitrants . The move was apparently to remove recalcitrant members of the party .
 In February he wrote me a letter outlining his expectations for the summit, saying that he looked forward to the signing of a treaty on the nonuse of nuclear weapons .
 Considerable progress had already been made in building on the agreements for cooperation in economic and other non-military areas we had reached in Moscow .
 Problems were beginning to develop at home, even apart from Watergate . Watergate was the first major scandal to emerge in the White House .
 In the year between the first and second Soviet Summits, a fusion of forces from opposite ends of the political spectrum had resulted in a curious coalition . In the same year as the first Soviet Summit, the Soviet Union had formed a coalition of forces .
 Kissinger later described it as a rare convergence, like an eclipse of the sun . Kissinger later called it "a rare convergence" Kissinger later said it was a "rare convergence" like a rare eclipse of sun .
 On the one side the liberals and the American Zionists had decided that now was the time to challenge the Soviet Union’s highly restrictive emigration policies, particularly with respect to Soviet Jews . On the other side, the liberal and the Israeli Zionists were trying to take advantage of
 conservatives had traditionally opposed détente because it challenged their ideological opposition to contacts with Communist countries . On the other side were the conservatives, who had previously opposed denteente . The conservatives were opposed to the idea of a dentease .
 "I have never had any illusions about the brutally repressive nature of Soviet society," says former Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . Putin: "I'm proud of his achievements, but I'm not satisfied with his achievements"
 "I knew that the more public pressure we placed on the Soviet leaders, the more intransigent they would become," she says . But she says she knew that public pressure would be too much to bear .
 I knew it was utterly unrealistic to think that a fundamental change in the Soviet system could be brought about because we refused to extend MEN status . I also knew that it was impossible to believe that it would be impossible to change the system in Russia .
 I felt that we could accomplish a great deal more on the Jewish emigration issue when we were talking with the Soviets than when we weren't . I felt we could achieve more on emigration than we did on the Soviet-Jewish issue, he says .
 Putin: "The walls of the Kremlin are very thick. As I said to one group of American Jewish leaders, “The walls . are thick," he said .
 Kissinger and I raised the questions privately with Brezhnev, Gromyko, and Dobrynin . We did not publicly challenge the Soviet contention that these questions involved Soviet internal affairs .
 In March 1973 Dobrynin informed Kissinger that the high exit tax had been removed from the Soviet Union to Israel . The move was described as the repayment of state educational expenses by those who wanted to move abroad .
 Brezhnev sent me a personal note claiming that 95 percent of the requests for emigration visas to Israel during 1972 had been granted . He said that he was told that 95. percent of those requests were granted to Israel .
 In 1973, the last full year of my presidency, nearly 35,000 were permitted to leave; this figure is still the record high . The last year of that year, nearly 36,000 people were allowed to leave .
 On December 11, 1973, the House of Representatives passed a trade bill that in effect prohibited MFN for the Soviet Union because of its restrictive emigration policies . The bill was passed by the U.S. Congress in 1973 .
 I met with Dobrynin on December 26 and expressed my contempt for the alliance that had combined to defeat MFN . I said that we must not let temporary setbacks interfere with or poison relations between the two superpowers that still held the future of the world in their hands .
 Brezhnev’s plane landed at Andrews Air Force Base on the afternoon of June 16 . The Soviet leader's plane landed on the base in the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 The summit will begin officially on Monday morning . President Obama had gone to Florida for the weekend to prepare for it .
 President Obama arrives at Camp David for two days to adjust to the time difference between Washington and Moscow . He will spend the next two days adjusting to the two time differences .
 I had never heard him sound so friendly and completely uninhibited as he did on the phone that afternoon . "I'm glad to hear him talk again," he said to me .
 Brezhnev said “thank you three or four times in English. Even before Dobrynin, who was on an extension line to act as our interpreter, could begin the translations . Even before the translator could begin, he said "thank you"
 I told him to get as much rest as he could because I knew from experience that it would take some time to recover from jet lag . He said: "I told him he should get a lot of rest. He should get some of the best rest possible."
 He said he regretted that his wife had not been able to take the trip with him . He said that he appreciated my thoughtfulness in providing a place as private and comfortable as Camp David .
 I said that Pat and Pat and I would look forward to having her come with him during the Fourth Soviet Summit, which would take place in America in two years . Pat said she would like to have her with him in America .
 Summit II was off to the best possible start . At least as far as . far from atmosphere was concerned, it was off the best . start to Summit II .
 The Soviets were fully aware of Watergate, but they made little effort to conceal the fact that they could not completely understand it . The Soviets made no effort to hide the fact they couldn't understand Watergate .
 Dobrynin told Kissinger that he was utterly dismayed by the way Americans were acting over the whole affair . Kissinger told Kissinger he was dismayed at the Americans' reaction to the affair .
 He called it a ‘mess’ and said no other country would permit itself the luxury of tearing itself to pieces in public . He called the situation a 'mess'
 Dean's testimony before the Ervin Committee had been postponed until after Brezhnev’s departure, but the drumbeat of Watergate leaks and accusations from him and his nameless associates, and from various anonymous sources, continued . Dean testified before the committee .
 On the morning Brezhnev arrived, the Washington Post published a front-page report revealing that “sources” said I was going to abandon Ehrlichman and Haldeman in a last-ditch effort to save myself . The Washington Post later published a
 Nixon White House was a viciously cynical place where I would turn on my closest aides to save myself. The story was absolute fiction, but perhaps more than many others, it contributed to the impression that the Nixon administration was a cynical place . The White House is not the White House,
 Our denial of this front-page fabrication was relegated to page five of the next day’s edition .
 Archibald Cox also chose the day of Brezhnev’s arrival to hold a press conference, at which he stated that he was studying whether or not he could indict me before an impeachment had taken place . Cox said he was looking at whether he could impeach me
 He hastens to add that, of course, such a study was only academic . Having said this, he hastened to . add that . Such a study would only be academic .
 Just before eleven o’clock on Monday morning Brezhnev’s car came up the curving driveway to the South Portico of the White House .
 After the brief speeches we walked out onto the rain-soaked lawn to review the honor guard . The honor guard was reviewed by the president and his wife .
 As we came to the end of the front line of troops and were about to walk by the rear ranks, Brezhnev could no longer suppress his animation and joviality .
 He waved enthusiastically at the spectators, who were applauding and waving American and Soviet flags, and then strode over to them just like an American politician working the crowd at a county fair .
 He shook hands with several people and grinned broadly as they reached out to him until I reminded him that we had to complete the ceremony . The ceremony was just a few minutes long and the ceremony was complete .
 First meeting in the Oval Office was private, except for Viktor Sukhodrev, who, as in 1972, acted as translator . "Our first meeting was private," he says .
 I replied that, despite domestic differences, I spoke for the majority of Americans . "Despite domestic differences," I said, "despite domestic differences" I said: "I speak for the most of Americans"
 Several times he grabbed my arm and squeezed it to emphasize the point he was making, he said . Several times, he squeezed his arm to emphasize his point .
 The last time such tactile diplomacy had been used in that room was when Lyndon Johnson wanted to make a point, he says .
 Brezhnev became very serious when explaining his views about the relationship between our two countries . He became serious when discussing the relationship with Russia and the Soviet Union .
 The only two nations in the world that really matter are the Soviet Union and the United States, he said . He said, “We know that as far as power and influence are concerned, the only two . nations in . the world really matter,” he said. �
 The U.S.-Soviet relationship was more important than China's relationship with the Soviet Union, CNN's Peter Bergen says . Bergen: "If we had to choose between the two, our ties to the Soviet Soviet Union would prevail"
 I recognized the reality of our pre-eminence as the two nuclear superpowers, but we both had allies . I replied that while I recognized that, while I . recognized that . I recognized . that . while I recognize the reality . of our . pre-empowerence as
 At 12:30 our private session ended, and the other participants for both sides came in . At 12.30, we were able to speak to each other for the first time .
 Brezhnev quoted the Russian proverb that he would invoke several times during the visit to Moscow .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin invited me to return to Russia in 1974, he said . He then announced that he had already invited him to return in 1974 and accepted the invitation .
 I thought back to 1959, when I sat in this same office for the first meeting between Eisenhower and Khrushchev . "I thought back" when I had sat in the same office as the first .
 Khrushchev had known that he was speaking from a position of weakness . He felt that it was therefore necessary to take a very aggressive and boastful line . He knew that he had been speaking out against the West .
 Since then, the power balance had evened out, particularly as the gap in the decisive area of nuclear development and capability had been closed .
 In 1973 the United States overall still held the stronger hand, but Brezhnev could laugh and clown and vary his stern moods with warmth . The confidence that comes from holding very good cards is based on the confidence of the Russian leader .
 As Brezhnev and I greeted guests in a receiving line in the Blue Room, he was clearly impressed and somewhat surprised by the broad cross section of political, business, and labor leaders . Many of whom opposed each other politically but had gathered socially under the President’s roof
 Russians still isolated by history and geography, as well as by their communist ideology . I was reminded again of how isolated the Russians still are by history .
 He expressed his disappointment that we had not been able to grant MFN status . But he understood that the fault lay beyond his control in Congress, he said .
 The Soviets were not yet ready to have limitations imposed on their own multiple-warhead missile development, so he remained adamant against expanding the SALT agreements at this summit .
 He reluctantly agreed to set the end of 1974 instead of 1975 as the deadline for reaching a permanent SALT accord . He did, however, reluctantly acquiesce in my insistence that we set a . 1974 end .
 He obviously enjoyed the attention he was receiving, and, like a skilled actor or a born politician, he knew how to hold center stage . He was a born actor and politician .
 At one signing ceremony, he toasted so vigorously that he spilled champagne on his suit and hid his face behind a handkerchief in an exaggerated display of embarrassment .
 At another signing ceremony he initiated an elaborate pantomime of pretending to race me to see who could finish signing the various copies first . He then played a game of "race me to finish signing"
 On Tuesday night we went for a sail aboard the Sequoia and then boarded helicopters and flew to Camp David to continue our discussions there . On Tuesday evening, we went on a sail to continue discussions there.
 I presented him with a windbreaker bearing the Seal of the President with “Camp David” beneath it on one side and “Leonid I Brezhnev” on the other . The windbreaker bears the seal of the president with Camp David’s name
 'He was delighted and wore it most of the time we were there, including during our photo session with the press. He was delighted with the result, and was delighted to wear it .
 It had black velour upholstery and “Special Good Wishes —Greetings” engraved on the dashboard . The car was the first of its kind to be driven by a woman in a car .
 Brezhnev, a collector of luxury cars, did not attempt to conceal his delight . The former Soviet leader was delighted with the gesture .
 He got behind the wheel and motioned me into the passenger’s seat . He got into the car .
 The head of my Secret Service detail went pale as I climbed in and we took off down one of the narrow roads that run around the perimeter of Camp David . "The head of his Secret Service . went pale," he said .
 Brezhnev was used to unobstructed driving in the center lane in Moscow . I could only imagine what would happen if a Secret Service or Navy jeep had suddenly turned a corner onto that one-lane road .
 Even driving a golf cart down it had to use the brakes in order to avoid going off the road at the sharp turn at the bottom .
 Brezhnev was driving more than fifty miles an hour as we approached the slope . The Soviet leader was driving at more than 50 mph as he approached the summit .
 I reached over and said, “Slow down, slow down, slowed down,” but he paid no attention . “I reached over, ‘Slow down” he said, but he didn’t pay attention,’ he said .
 There was a squeal of rubber as he slammed on the brakes and made the turn . When we reached the bottom, there was a . squealing of rubber .
 NATO and Warsaw Pact countries met at Camp David for talks on SALT, European security . NATO, Warsaw Pact nations held talks on force reduction, SALT and SALT .
 The most difficult and significant subject we negotiated at Summit I related to the proposed Agreement for the Prevention of Nuclear War . The most significant subject was the proposed agreement to prevent nuclear war .
 In our contacts before the summit, Brezhnev had strongly urged that we agree to a treaty on the nonuse of nuclear weapons. In our . contacts before . summit, he said .
 Kissinger and Kissinger recognized that such a treaty would be to prevent, or at least to inhibit, us from using nuclear weapons in defense of our allies or of our own vital interests . Kissinger and I recognized that . Such a treaty could prevent or or inhibit, we would not use nuclear weapons
 Brezhnev's interest in a nonuse treaty might be his suspicion that we were about to conclude a military agreement with Peking. In fact, we felt that a major reason for the . reason for . the . interest was his suspicion of . concluding a military . agreement with
 The Soviets felt that a renunciation of the use of nuclear weapons would greatly undercut our usefulness to the Chinese in the event of a Sino-Soviet war . The Soviets thought that a . renunciation . of the . use of a . nuclear weapons . would . undercut . our usefulness
 Soviet fears were unfounded as far as our relations with Peking were concerned . The Soviet fears are unfounded as well as those of Peking .
 A treaty of the kind they wanted would have wreaked havoc among NATO allies in Europe and with countries like Israel and Japan that depended on our nuclear protection against the threat of Soviet attack . The treaty would have wrecked havoc among our NATO allies, including Israel .
 Kissinger worked out a formula that went part way in meeting the Soviet proposals without undercutting our allies and other nations that would look to us for assistance if they were subjected to a Soviet attack . Kissinger had worked out the formula in May . Kissinger: "In May Kissinger had . worked out
 Kissinger proposed that we should both renounce the use of force not only between us but between each of us and third countries . Kissinger proposed a treaty renouncing nuclear weapons in the event of war . Instead, we should agree to consult with each other when danger of use of nuclear weapons seemed
 I knew that Brezhnev would not be completely satisfied with this formula because it did not preclude the further development of our relations with Peking . I knew it would not stop us from developing relations with the Chinese, he says .
 It was better than nothing for his purposes, and he agreed to accept it . But it was not enough for him, but it was better for him to use it .
 President Obama signed the agreement on Friday, June 22, in a formal ceremony in the East Room of the White House . "We signed it on June 22," he said .
 As we passed over the Grand Canyon en route, Azr Force One made a low sweep so that Brezhnev could see the spectacular play of light and shadow on the canyon walls . Azr . Force One .
 He jumped back from the window, hunched his shoulders, put his hands to his hips, and drew imaginary six-shooters from imaginary holsters . Suddenly he jumped back and hunched shoulders, putting his hands on his hips .
 On the short helicopter ride from El Toro to San Clemente, I had Brezhnev sit by the window so that he could get a good view of the freeway network and the suburban landscape beneath us .
 I could sense that he was impressed, particularly by the number of cars on the roads and by the large number of private houses . He was impressed by the amount of cars and private houses on the road .
 Some of the beachfront houses were owned by wealthy people, but most of the others belonged to people who worked in factories and offices . The beachfront homes are typical of what he would see if he had the time to travel over other parts of the country .
 Brezhnev visited the Soviet leader in San Clemente, California, in a golf cart . He took him for a ride in his golf cart to visit the former Soviet leader .
 He insisted on staying with us at the commandant’s large house at Camp Pendleton Marine Base . We had suggested that he stay at the Commandant's large house, but he insisted .
 "I think that he wanted to do so in order to emphasize our personal relationship," she says . "He wanted to emphasize his personal relationship with me," she adds .
 Although our house in San Clemente is very beautiful, it is very small by the standards of Soviet leaders, who are used to the dachas and villas of Czarist nobles . The house is not at all equipped to accommodate state visitors, and it is not all equipped
 Tricia chose wallpaper with a large floral design in soft lavender and blue . The room is only about ten by fifteen feet, and Tricia had chosen wallpaper with floral design .
 It was amusing to picture a bear of a man like Brezhnev ensconced amid such feminine decor . It was also amusing to see the bear of the former Soviet leader in the Soviet Union .
 Brezhnev had been very restrained on the subject of China. During our talks in Washington and at Camp David, he said . Breznev was very restrained, he added .
 In a meeting in his San Clemente office on Saturday afternoon, however, he spoke about China for several minutes with only thinly veiled concern .
 He was apparently still worried that we were contemplating some secret military arrangement, possibly a mutual defense treaty, with the Chinese . He said he was concerned that we might be contemplating secret military arrangements .
 "We would never make any arrangement with either China or Japan that was inconsistent with the spirit of the Agreement for the Prevention of Nuclear War that we had just signed in Washington . I assured him that, while we would continue our policy of communication with China, we would not make any arrangements
 I knew that this was not what he had been getting at, but I could not be in the position of agreeing to establish a reporting relationship with him on our dealings with the Chinese . I knew it was not the case of him being honest, but he was not in the right place
 I told him that I really did not believe that his concern about the Chinese was justified . He said he did not think he was right to speak out against China .
 He asked me why, and I said that it was not a judgment based on any of the conversations I had had with the Chinese leaders but on the realities of military power . He said that he was not judging based on conversations he had with Chinese leaders .
 I expressed my opinion that it would be at least twenty years before the Chinese would acquire a sufficient nuclear capability to risk an aggressive action against the Soviet Union or any other major nuclear power . I think it would take at least 20 years for the Chinese to risk a nuclear strike against any major
 He held up his two hands with fingers outspread, and at first it struck me he was making some kind of gesture of surrender . But then he stiffened his fingers and said, “Ten, in ten years, they will have weapons equal to what we have now.�
 We will be further advanced by then, but we must bring home home to them that this cannot go on. We will not be able to go on, we must . We need to bring home the fact that this can't go on .
 Brezhnev gave the impression that he did not think that the Chinese policies would change, even after Mao’s death . He was certain that the entire Chinese leadership was instinctively aggressive, he said .
 I turned the conversation to Cambodia, a subject I had already raised several times during our meetings, I said . Cambodia has been a source of tension in the region for decades .
 I pointed out that renewed North Vietnamese activity there was a major threat to world peace . The renewed North Vietnam activity was a threat to the peace, he said .
 Brezhnev became highly agitated and strongly denied that any new Soviet military equipment had been sent to Indochina . The Soviet leader became agitated and became agitated over the issue .
 Brezhnev said he thought the Chinese might be responsible, not only for the weapons themselves, but for spreading stories that they were being sent by the Soviets . As far as the appearance of new weapons in the area was concerned, he said the Chinese were responsible .
 At the end of the meeting Brezhnev urged as diplomatically as his obviously strong feelings allowed that we not enter into any military agreements with China . The meeting took place in Moscow, Russia's capital .
 He said that he had refrained from raising the question in 1972, but now he was worried about the future . He said he was "worried" about his future .
 We adjourned from the ideological rigors of the Sino-Soviet split to a poolside cocktail party . The party was held at the end of the Soviet-Chinese split .
 The guest list read like a Hollywood Who's Who, and we had a receiving line so that Brezhnev would have a chance to meet everyone . "The guest list reads like a celebrity who's Who," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 A strolling mariachi band filled the twilight with gay music . Brezhnev greeted each guest warmly and in several cases showed a familiarity with old movies that indicated he had been very well briefed .
 In his remarks I noted that there were many cowboy and movie stars among the guests, but I reassured Brezhnev that they had checked their pistols and holsters at the door .
 "Our dining room seats only ten people, and we made the dinner deliberately informal so that he could feel at home," she says .
 In his toast I remarked that he had told me how he usually ate very lightly at the big state dinners, and went home afterward to have a late dinner with his wife, an excellent cook .
 I said that I considered this private dinner in our home to be even more meaningful than the formal and official dinners we were both so accustomed to attending. "I said that he considered this dinner in his home more meaningful," he said .
 Dobrynin and Gromyko were sharing the small guest cottage that David and Julie stayed in when they visited us together . I pointed out that he was the first foreign visitor who had ever stayed in our house with us .
 Our thoughts turn away from the affairs of state to our families and loved ones wherever they may be . On such an occasion our thoughts turn to our loved ones .
 I want our children to grow up in a world of peace, just as I am sure you want your children and grandchildren to live in peace . I want us to live a peaceful world, and I'm sure you do, too, as well .
 "What you and I have had last year and this year have done is contribute to that goal," he says . "What the meetings" have done this year, he says, "contribute to that . What the meetings that you have had . last year, this year has done
 I only hope that Russians and Americans in future generations may meet as we are meeting in our homes as friends because of our personal affection for each other, not just officials meeting because of differences that may exist .
 I propose this toast of course to your health, and that of our other guests, but even more to Mrs. Mrs. Gwyneth . Therefore I propose a toast of health to you and your health .
 He threw his arms around me with a real bear hug and then proposed an eloquent toast to Pat and our children and all the children in the world . He then proposed a toast to himself and his children, and the rest of the world, of course .
 President Obama said he had exchanged official gifts, but he had brought something with him to the White House . The gifts included a gift for Mrs. Obama and her husband .
 Pat gave Pat a scarf that had been hand-woven by artisans in his home village . Pat gave him a scarf made of hand-made fabric from his village . The scarf was hand-crafted by hand-drawn artisans .
 Brezhnev said that he was tired because of the three-hour time change from Washington, and he planned to go to bed early . After this rather emotional dinner, he said: "I was tired"
 "I walked with him to the door of Tricia’s room and we said good night there," she said . "I was with Tricia," she added .
 "I decided to have an early night myself, and I was reading in bed in my pajamas around 10:30 when there was a knock at my door. I decided to go to bed and go to the bathroom, but the doorbell rang at 11:30 p.
 Kissinger had just finished dressing when Kissinger came in . Kissinger had asked Manolo Manolo to light a fire in his upstairs study . Kissinger was in the middle of the fire when Kissinger arrived .
 Brezhnev, Dobrynin, and Gromyko soon joined us in the study . We went to the study, where Brezhnnev was the leader of Soviet Union .
 Brezhnev tried to browbeat me into imposing on Israel a settlement based on Arab terms . For the next three hours we had a session that in emotional intensity almost rivaled the one on Vietnam at the dacha during Summit I .
 He kept hammering at what he described as the need for the two of us to agree, even if only privately, on a set of ‘principles” to govern a Middle East settlement .
 I pointed out that there was no way that I could agree to any such “principles” without prejudicing Israel’s rights . I pointed to no way of agreeing to such a deal without prejudicating Israel's rights, he said .
 I insisted that the important thing was to get talks started between the Arabs and the Israelis, and argued that if we laid down controversial principles beforehand, both parties would refuse to talk . I argued that the principles would have defeated their purpose .
 Without an informal agreement on such principles he would be leaving this summit empty-handed, he said . He said that without at least a formal agreement he would not be able to reach the summit .
 Without an agreement on principles he could not guarantee that war would not resume . He even hinted that without such an agreement, he couldn't guarantee that it wouldn't resume .
 At one point he made a show of looking at his watch and furrowing his brow . At another point he looked at the clock and furrows his brows .
 President Obama refused to negotiate a deal with the Arab League on a deal that would heavily favor the Arabs . He said the important thing was to get talks started between the parties themselves .
 This testy midnight session was a reminder of the unchanging and unrelenting Communist motivations beneath the diplomatic veneer of détente . It was also a reminder that Communist motivations are unchanging .
 Brezhnev was aware of the progress we had been making in reopening the lines of communication between Washington and Arab capitals . He was also aware that if America was able to contribute toward a peaceful settlement of Arab-Israeli differences, we would be striking a serious blow to the Soviet
 From his point of view, therefore, his use of shock tactics at the ostensibly impromptu meeting in San Clemente was a calculated risk, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a
 Brezhnev could not seriously have expected me to rise to the meager bait he held out in return for what would amount to our abandoning Israel . "Brezhnevsnev was not seriously expected to expect me to . I would not have expected him to . He would not
 Whether he already had a commitment to the Arabs to support an attack against Israel is not clear, but I am confident that the firmness I showed that night reinforced the seriousness of the message I conveyed to the Soviets when I ordered a military alert four months later during the Yom Kipp
 In the joint communiqué Brezhnev and I signed the next morning there was no effort to conceal that we had not been able to reach any common ground for our differing views on this difficult subject .
 Brezhnev and I made our parting remarks in front of microphones in the flower garden next to the house . "Brezhnevs' parting remarks were made in the garden of the house," he said .
 It was too soon after the 1972 SALT agreements for another major breakthrough in that area, but I did make it clear at every opportunity that 1974 would be the year of decision, especially on offensive weapons .
 "I knew that the Soviets were moving much faster than we were in this area," says Soviet leader Vladimir Putin . "We knew that we were going to have to work very hard to keep up with them," says Putin .
 Unless we got some agreement soon, we might face a situation in which we would be weaker than the Soviets in the eyes of our allies, our friends, and the neutral countries, he says .
 I specified that we would be talking about reductions and not just limitations of nuclear weapons . Therefore, in addition to pinning Brezhnev down to a new agreement by the end of 1974, I . specified that . we would not be talking just about nuclear weapons, but about reductions
 These continued the process that we had begun in 1972 of building an interlocking web of relationships to increase the Soviets’ stake in stability and cooperation . These continued to be built in 1972, the Kremlin says .
 This summit also gave me an opportunity to get to know Brezhnev better and to try to take his measure as a leader and as a man . This summit was also a chance to learn more from the former Soviet leader, he says .
 "I had spent forty-two hours with him in 1972, and now thirty-five hours in 1973," he says . "He had spent 42 hours with me in 1972," he adds .
 However superficial this kind of personal contact may be, it can still provide important insights . However superficial, personal contact can provide valuable insights, say experts .
 I found Brezhnev more interesting and impressive than I had during our first meeting . I found him more interesting than I did in the first meeting, he said . He added: "I found him interesting, impressive and impressive"
 Putin was able to indulge the more human and political sides of his personality away from the Kremlin . Away from the constraints of the Kremlin he could indulge his political sides, he said .
 His conduct and humor were almost impish at many of his public appearances . He was also known for his impishness at public events .
 Whenever possible, I acted as his straight man on these occasions, but it was sometimes difficult for me to balance politeness against dignity . "It was difficult for him to balance polite against dignity," he said .
 Brezhnev showed the typically Russian combination of great discipline at times with total lack of it at others . He showed a combination of discipline and discipline at the same time .
 An amusing symbol of this inconsistency was his fancy new cigarette case with a built-in timer that automatically rationed out one cigarette per hour . The case was designed to make it easier for him to get his cigarette out per hour.
 He would reach into his jacket and take another cigarette from the ordinary pack that he also carried . Then, a few minutes later, he would reach in for another cigarette .
 At Summit I, I could not help help making mental comparisons between Brezhnev and Khrushchev . At summit I, he could help make mental comparisons . At Summit II, he said: "At Summit I I could help making comparisons between the two men."
 Summit H is the latest in a series of events held in the U.S. Summit H in New York City, New York .
 "They were alike in the sense that they were both tough, hard, and realistic leaders. They were alike," says President Obama . "They're both tough and realistic," he says .
 Khrushchev had been crass and blustering, Brezhnev was expansive and more courteous . Whereas Khrushchev was crass, he was expansive . He was a more polite and courteanist than his predecessor .
 Khrushchev more often seemed to be using his humor at the expense of others around him . Both men had a good sense of humor .
 In discussions, Brezhnev was hard-hitting, incisive, and always very deliberate . Khrushchev tended to be more explosive and more impulsive, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 I was struck by the simple look of pride on Brezhnev’s face as he told me that he was about to become a great-grandfather, and that we now had still another generation for which to guarantee peace . “We now have still another generations for
 Despite the shortness of Brezhnev’s visit, I felt that he had seen a diversity of American life for which no briefing books and studies could possibly have prepared him . The Soviet leader's visit to the U.S. was short, but he was impressed by
 "I know that he returned home with a far better understanding of America and Americans than he had before he came," says President Obama . "He returned home ... with a much better understanding" of America, he says .
 On June 25, the day Brezhnev left Washington, the House of Representatives agreed to a Senate bill cutting off funds for U.S. bombing actions in Cambodia . The bill was passed by the House that day .
 "The effect of this bill was to deny me the means to enforce the Vietnam peace agreement," he said . The bill would deny him the means of enforcing the peace agreement, he added .
 We were faced with having to abandon our support of the Cambodians who were trying to hold back the Communist Khmer Rouge, who were being supplied and supported by the North Vietnamese in violation of the peace agreement .
 The Cambodians were completely and justifiably bewildered . They could not understand why we were suddenly deserting them, especially when the military tide seemed to be turning in their favor . The Cambodian were completely bewildered by the decision .
 Congress, however, was not prepared to hear any arguments and was determined to go forward despite the consequences . Congress decided to pass the bill despite the fact that it was passed .
 Kissinger was preparing to leave for a meeting with Le Duc Tho over violations of the cease-fire agreement . Kissinger had been preparing to meet with Le Dong Tho a few weeks earlier .
 In short order, two separate Senate committees voted to cut off funds for combat activities . Two separate Senate panels voted to end funding for combat operations .
 The House of Representatives sustained my veto the same day, June 27, but it seemed clear that another cutoff bill would be proposed and that I could not win these battles forever . The bill was sustained by the House of Reps. The House sustained its veto .
 August 15, 1973, was the date for the termination of U.S. bombing in Cambodia . Congress agreed to a compromise that set the date as the end of the bombing . It required congressional approval for the funding of United States military action in Indochina .
 The invitation to aggression represented in any cutoff date remained unchanged . At least this gave us more time, but it gave us a little more time .
 I can only hope that the North Vietnamese will not draw the erroneous conclusion from this congressional action that they are free to launch a military offensive in other areas in Indochina . I hope that North Vietnam will not take the erroneous notion from this .
 North Vietnam would be making a very dangerous error if it mistook the cessation of bombing in Cambodia for an invitation to fresh aggression or further violations of the Paris agreements .
 The American people would respond to such aggression with appropriate action, the president says . The U.S. would respond with appropriate actions, he says .
 I knew that since Congress had removed the possibility of military action I had only words with which to threaten . "I knew that . since Congress . removed the . possibility of . military action, I had . only words to threaten," President Obama said .
 Kissinger held one of his regular luncheon meetings with Dobrynin . During this period Kissinger held a luncheon meeting . Kissinger was in the midst of a crisis in the world .
 When Kissinger raised the question of the Communist violations of the cease-fire, the Soviet ambassador scornfully asked what we had expected, now that we had no negotiating leverage because of the bombing cutoff imposed by Congress .
 Kissinger tried to be as menacing as he could, even though he knew that Dobrynin was right . Kissinger was trying to be menacing, but knew he knew he was wrong . Kissinger: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 For more than two years after the peace agreement the South Vietnamese had held their own against the Communists . The South Vietnamese government had been fighting the Communists for more than a decade .
 This proved the will and mettle of the South Vietnamese people and their desire to live in freedom . The South Vietnam people are still fighting for their freedom in Vietnam .
 When Congress reneged on our obligations under the agreements, the Communists rushed in to fill the gap . The Communists predictably rushed in . The Communist Party has been in touch with the U.S. for decades .
 The congressional bombing cutoff, coupled with the limitation placed on the President by the War Powers Resolution in November 1973, set off a string of events that led to the Communist takeover in Cambodia and, on April 30, 1975, the North Vietnamese conquest of Vietnam .
 Congress denied the means to enforce the Paris agreement at a time when the North Vietnamese were openly violating it . Congress denied first to me, and then to President Ford, the means of enforcing the agreement .
 In 1974 Congress cut back on military aid for South Vietnam at a time when the Soviets were increasing their aid to North Vietnam . Even more devastating and inexcusable, Congress cut military aid to South Vietnam in 1974 .
 The North Vietnamese had an advantage in arms, and the threat of American action to enforce the agreement was totally removed . As a result, when the North Vietnamese launched their all-out invasion of the South in the spring of 1975, they had a advantage . The threat of U.S
 He remarked that Thieu “was then forced to fight a poor man’s war,” with his firepower reduced by 60 percent and his mobility reduced by half because of lack of aircraft, vehicles, and fuel .
 The war and the peace in Indochina that America had won at such cost over twelve years of sacrifice and fighting were lost within a matter of months . Congress refused to fulfill our obligations. The war was won at the cost of 12 years .
 Congress must bear the responsibility for the tragic results, says Sen. Ted Cruz . It is Congress that must bear responsibility, he says, for the deaths of Cruz .
 Hundreds of thousands of anti-Communist South Vietnamese and Cambodians have been murdered or starved to death by their conquerors . The bloodbath continues, with hundreds of thousands starving or murdered .
 Congress’s tragic and irresponsible action, which fatally undermined the peace we had won in Indochina, was buried amid the media's preoccupation with John Dean's testimony before the Ervin Committee . The media was distracted by John Dean’S.E. Dean�
 On Monday, June 25, Dean took the stand, all over the country, even in the compound in San Clemente . Dean's hypnotic monotone of his voice drew people to their television sets .
 The three television networks gave these sessions all-day gavel-to-gavel coverage . The sessions were held in Washington .
 President Richard Nixon said he was a complicitor in the Watergate cover-up . Nixon's testimony was the cornerstone of his Watergate testimony .
 I did not watch the hearings, but the reports I read filled me with frustration and anger . The hearings were held in Washington, D.C.
 Dean testified that on September 15, 1972, he had expressly discussed the Watergate cover-up with me . Dean testified in 1972 that he had discussed Watergate cover up with me. Dean testified he had talked about Watergate with me on that day .
 He said that he had told me that all he had done was “assist in keeping it out of the White House” and that I had expressed appreciation for the difficult job he had performed .
 Dean said he, thinking of Magruder’s perjury, had told me that others had done more difficult things than he . Dean said that he, . thinking of the perjury, he said that others . had told him that others did more difficult . than he. had done
 President Obama was monitoring congressional, civil, and criminal investigations that had potential political impact . But he was thinking of the fact that he was monitoring so many potential political investigations .
 It was clear from the tape that however much Dean was concentrating on the criminal vulnerabilities, I was concentrating solely on the potential for political embarrassment . The tape shows that Dean was focused solely on potential political embarrassment.
 The tape shows that I said that the important thing about Watergate mess was my own isolation from it . The tape was recorded by President Richard Nixon in the early 1970s . Nixon said that Watergate was the most important thing that mattered was his isolation .
 "He was testifying that this conversation was one of the reasons he was convinced of my involvement in the cover-up. Now, four months later, he was testifying," he said . "Now he was talking to me. He was testifying ... that he was ... convinced of his involvement
 Dean testified that on March 13 he had told me about the money being paid to Watergate defendants . Dean testified he told me that Watergate defendants were paid to cover up their crimes .
 If that were true, it would have undercut my public assertion that I had first learned about the cover-up on March 21 . The White House says he learned of the cover up from March 21 to March 4 .
 Dean was wrong, and it seemed to me that he must have deliberately changed the correct date, because as recently as our conversation of April 16, 1973, he had remembered that our “cancer on the presidency” discussion had taken place “on the Wednesday before they were sentenced
 Dean made another omission that seemed too significant to be accidental . Dean's testimony concerning the meeting of March 17 . Dean made no mention of the meeting . Dean testified in his testimony .
 This was the meeting in which he had told me about the break-in at Ellsberg's psychiatrist’s office . "This was the first time I had met with him," he said .
 Dean apparently wanted to leave an impression that knowledge of the Ellsberg break-in was a motive for my role in Watergate cover-up, he says . But Dean wanted to make the impression he knew of the break-ins, he adds .
 He testified that the meeting consisted of a “rambling conversation” with only brief reference to Pat Gray’s confirmation hearings and the general problems confronting the White House .
 "Unlike others, unlike others, he had not participated in the break-in and had no criminal liability," he said . That same day he observed that, unlike other, he did not participate in the burglary .
 Dean testified that on March 21, 1973, he had finally told me everything . Dean testified in 1973 that he'd finally told him everything .
 He did not tell me, nor did he tell the Watergate Committee, that he had also destroyed evidence from Howard Hunt’s safe . Howard Hunt's safe was destroyed, but he never told Watergate Committee .
 He minimized his role in the fund-raising and said his primary problem was the fact that he had been a “conduit of information” on paying blackmail to defendants . He said he was a "conduit" of information .
 Dean implied that since the first days after the break-in everyone in the White House shared the understanding that there was White House ‘involvement” in the Watergate bugging, even if there was no direct participation in ordering the June 17 break in .
 Gordon Strachan said in March he knew about the existence of the bug, and the information that a Colson phone call may have triggered it . This was nine months after the break-in, and nine months later he was stunned by his assertion .
 Dean said he had “never at any time” asked him to write a report concerning Watergate . Dean said that I had ‘never’t at any . time’ I had asked Dean to write Watergate report, Dean said .
 President Obama suggested March 22 that he go to Camp David, away from the phone, and prepare a written report . In fact, I had pointedly suggested on March 22, that he should prepare a report, and that he did .
 Dean implied that from the beginning he had had actual knowledge of Magruder’s involvement and perjury and that everyone else did too . Dean now implied that . from the . beginning of the . investigation, he had actually knowledge of . Magruders’ involvement, perjury and
 Dean was still saying that he did not have any knowledge of whether Magruder was involved in the break-in . Dean said he could not be sure whether he had committed perjury and therefore could not know if he had .
 Dean charged that the White House effort to “cover-up” the Segretti episode was “consistent with other parts of the general White House cover-up,” which followed Watergate, he said . In the spring both Haldeman and I had repeatedly
 Dean claimed that during March and April Haldeman and Ehrlichman had tried to protect themselves at his expense . Dean said he had only been concerned that the truth be told . Dean claimed he was only concerned about the truth being told .
 In March he minimized the problem his testimony would pose to others, apparently hoping to gain White House sponsorship for immunity . In March, he said he hoped to get White House support for immunity from testifying .
 He kept up his phone calls to Haldeman, his appearance of mutual concern, and his references to “potential” problems on the cover-up, he thought possibly could be handled . After his first contacts with the prosecutors, he kept up contacts with prosecutors he kept
 Only in midApril, when his bargaining with prosecutors was under way, did he let it be known that Haldeman and Ehrlichman were in fact his bargaining chips .
 John Dean’s testimony on Watergate was an artful blend of truth and untruth . Dean's testimony was a blend of possible sincere misunderstandings and clearly conscious distortions, he says . Dean: "I saw John Dean as a master master of truth"
 "In an effort to mitigate his own role, he transplanted his own total knowledge of the cover-up and his own anxiety onto the words and actions of others," he said .
 "In an effort to seem just a subordinate actor, he took the many different levels of understanding, awareness, and concern of those around him and fused them into one," he said .
 Dean Obeidallah: "I went off on a tangent, concentrating all our attention on trying to refute Dean by pointing out his exaggerations, distortions, discrepancies" He says he's "concentrating all his attention" on pointing out discrepancies .
 "Even as we geared up to do this, the real issue had already changed," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The real issue is that the government has not been able to find a solution to the problem," he says .
 It no longer made any difference that not all of Dean’s testimony was accurate, it no longer mattered . Dean's testimony no longer makes any difference, it's not a matter of accuracy .
 Dean Obeidallah's account of the crucial March 21 meeting was more accurate than my own had been . And Dean’s account of that meeting was better accurate than mine had been, he says .
 I did not see it then, but in the end it would make less difference that I was not as involved as Dean had alleged . 'I was not uninvolved as I had claimed. I didn't see it until I saw it then,' he says of the incident .
 Dean’s testimony caught us unprepared. There was another respect in which Dean's testimony caught them unprepared. Dean's testifying caught us .
 The Ervin Committee’s Democratic members and staff had urged Dean to build up his opening statement with plenty of “atmospherics” about the White House, reports say .
 He readily obliged, and even more than what he had to say about Watergate, it was from this that we would never recover . The Watergate scandal was from Watergate, and from this would never be recovered .
 John Dean dredged up every political machination he could find, offered them as representative of everything we did . John Dean said they were representative of all things we did. John Dean was a Democrat. Dean said, "I'm not a Democrat, I'm a Republican. I'm
 He forced the Nixon White House through the prism of his own defense, which was that he was largely the victim of the environment . He produced a portrait devoid of dreams, ideals, serious work, or important goals, he says .
 He talked about my attempt to have the IRS do checks on our political opponents with no attempt to show how widespread the practice had been among the Democrats in previous years .
 The fact that we had hired a political investigator was treated as a sinister innovation, when in fact checking up on the political opposition has been part of politics since time out of mind . Checking up on political opposition is not an innovation, but it's part of the political process, says
 Dean produced an “enemies list, which even he has admitted was vastly overplayed by the media . Dean has since admitted that the media overplayed the list of his enemies .
 President Obama folded controversial national security activities into paranoia, he said . He said the Huston Plan, and the Plumbers, were among the reasons for the wiretaps .
 Dean’s testimony was a primer in the dark underside of White House politics . Dean testified in the May 22 statement to the House of Representatives .
 President Obama's administration invented original sin, Obama said . The president's administration has been accused of creating original sin in the White House . The White House has a history of scandal involving the president .
 The Ervin Committee, formally the Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, was a fascinating study in the weaknesses of human nature in Congress . It was a study of the partisanship and weaknesses of congressional human nature .
 The senators and their staffs soon made the heady discovery that whatever they said, or leaked, made news . Whatever they said—or leaked, they made news.
 The result was a steady hemorrhage of leaks aimed at undermining the defense of potential witnesses such as Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and Mitchell . The result of the leaks was to undermine the prosecution of those who were likely witnesses .
 Senator James Buckley suggested that Ervin interrogate the staff under oath to see who was doing it . Buckley suggested he interrogate Ervin under oath . Buckley said Ervin should have been more aggressive .
 Majority Counsel Samuel Dash suspended a staff member who leaked unfavorable comments about Samuel Dash . Majority Counsel suspended the staff member for leaking unfavorable comments .
 Justice Department prosecutors complained that the committee’s leaks and hearings were shattering their cases . Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox appealed to Ervin not to proceed with open hearings because of the publicity .
 Earl Warren had once called it “frontier justice” to haul prospective defendants up before public hearings . Earl Warren once said it was ‘fronter justice’ to haul people up before hearings .
 It didn’t take long to discover that they had a very special truth in mind . It didn't take long for them to discover the truth .
 Among the documents the Ervin Committee received from John Dean were two memoranda from Hoover’s assistant, William Sullivan . The committee received the documents from Dean .
 Earlier Democratic administrations outlined sensational political abuses of the FBI by earlier Democratic administrations .
 Ervin’s executive assistant announced that the committee would not go into these matters because the allegations were “far, far too personal” and unsubstantiated . Ervin's executive assistant said that the allegations are “further, far more personal’ than unsub
 Lyndon Johnson protégé and Senate aide Bobby Baker had been charged with having run a high-finance influence-peddling operation . In 1964, Baker was charged with running an operation that was alleged to have been run by LBJ .
 Many felt that the scandal touched and possibly implicated several Senators and even Johnson, who by then was President . Many felt . that scandal touched many senators and even President Johnson . Johnson was President.
 The Democratic majority in Congress voted to keep the Baker case out of public hearings . They refused to call any White House aides to testify .
 Three members of the Ervin Committee had gone on record seven times to restrict any congressional investigation of Bobby Baker case . Ervin himself and Senators Daniel Inouye and Herman Talmadge of Georgia were among those who sought to restrict the investigation .
 Maury Stans was lectured by Ervin for having used dummy committees for campaign funds . Ervin said Stans had been using dummy committees to raise funds for his election campaign .
 Senator Joseph Montoya of New Mexico later claimed that he was “shocked” by the discovery of forgeries on his own campaign finance report . He had no comment when it was reported that $100,000 had been put into dummy committees in Washington .
 The Democrats’ chief committee investigator was Carmine Bellino, whose prior political activity for the Kennedys had included tailing a former Republican Congressman during the 1960 campaign . Bellino was the party's chief investigator .
 As the first group of witnesses came before the committee, their treatment was in direct response to their willingness to grovel and to implicate others . The treatment of those who groveve was in response to them, the committee said .
 If they stood up and defended themselves, they were badgered and humiliated . "They were humiliated and humiliated. If they stand up, they would be badgered," she said. "They stood up to defend themselves"
 If they exhibited at least a modicum of self-abnegation, they were given first lectures and then commendations . If they showed self-reflection, they would have been given a lot of respect .
 Men who may have to face a criminal trial are having their cases literally prejudged, without any of the safeguards of true legal proceedings . Men's reputations are being destroyed in full view of millions; worse, men who may shortly have to . face criminal trial .
 The Democrats on the committee were able to get away with such tactics because they were the majority . The Republicans were understandably nervous about Watergate . The Democrats got away with their tactics because of their majority .
 Republicans on the committee, with the exception of Weicker, worked diligently and seriously to follow up on leads they thought would provide balance . Republicans worked diligently, seriously, to find a balance, said Weicker .
 "They had neither the money, the manpower, nor the objective press to help promote and publicize their work" But they had no money or the manpower to promote their work, they say .
 Another reporter present at the same interview had written the identical story, so clearly that was what he had said . Another reporter also wrote the same story, but clearly that's what he said .
 Ervin was confronted with the political import of his statement and the adverse effect it might have on the Democratic impeachment move then under way . Ervin: "I don't believe the president should be allowed to be impeached"
 Historians will eventually conclude that even serious issues raised and abuses revealed by Watergate did not justify such abuses of power as were committed by members of the Ervin Committee . I am convinced, however, that historians will .
 With their prejudicial leaks, their double standards, and their grandstanding behavior, they only confirmed my feeling that this was a partisan attack, and we had to fight back . With their . leaks, the leaks, and the double standards . They only confirmed that this . confirmed it was
 There was ample historical precedent for refusing to permit testimony by any White House aides before the Ervin Committee . The committee has a history of refusing to allow testimony .
 "I recognized that with the emotional climate now surrounding Watergate, there would be little public tolerance or understanding if I did so," he said . "But I recognized that ... I would be much less tolerant or understanding" of Watergate, he added .
 I waived all executive privilege and permitted members of the White House staff to submit to the Ervin panel’s questions . President Obama waived executive privilege in order to allow the panel to ask questions .
 But no one branch has the right to dominate, by demanding and receiving the internal working documents of another, it has been claimed . No one branch should be able to dominate by demanding or receiving documents from another branch, it says .
 George Washington refused to surrender executive branch documents to House of Representatives . The precedent for this point of view goes back to George Washington, who as President refused to give documents to the House . George Washington was President of the U.S.
 Ervin was one of those who argued in a friend-of-the-court brief that one branch should not be allowed to compel testimony about the internal affairs of another branch . The Supreme Court heard the case on a matter of whether one of Gravel’s aides could legally
 Ervin demonstrated the same approach to the separation of powers in an earlier case involving another of his Democratic friends . Ervin had demonstrated the . same approach in the earlier . case .
 He was not to be so genial when given a partisan advantage against a Republican President during Watergate . President Richard Nixon was not so kind when given the partisan advantage .
 On July 7 I sent a letter to Ervin anticipating a formal request for presidential papers . Ervin: "On July 7, I . sent a . letter anticipating a . formal . request for . presidential papers"
 The investigation was already extraordinary, says CNN's John Sutter . "We are already cooperating with the investigation already," he said .
 There were rumors that they were going to subpoena me personally, so I reminded them that when Harry Truman had been subpoenaed to appear before a committee of Congress in 1953, he had refused to appear . Harry Truman refused to be subpoenaed before a congressional committee in 1953 .
 "No President could function if the private papers of his office, prepared by his personal staff, were open to public scrutiny," says President Obama . No President would function if his office papers were public, he says .
 Formulation of sound public policy requires that the President and his staff be able to communicate among themselves in complete candor, and that their tentative judgments, their exploration of alternatives, and their frank comments on issues and personalities, remain confidential .
 It was typical that Ervin’s letter to me was leaked to reporters even before it had been delivered to the White House . The White House learned about it from the reports on the news wires .
 The White House tapped tapped by the White House on July 12 at 5:30 a.m. ET . The tapping was a result of a stabbing pain in the chest .
 It reminded me of the pain I experienced when I had cracked a rib playing football at Whittier . The pain was similar to the pain he experienced when he cracked his rib playing a football .
 I switched on the light and tried to read, but I was too uncomfortable to concentrate, so I turned the light out again and lay awake until morning . I tried to sleep until morning.
 Senator Ervin was on the phone and wanted to speak with me, Haig says . Haig: "I was lying restlessly in bed about midday when Haig came in and told me that Sen. Ervin wanted to talk with me"
 He said he did not know how his letter got into the papers and that while they did not want to have a confrontation, they took the view . Executive privilege did not cover criminal or political acts, he said .
 Taken literally, this would mean that his staff would have to go through the papers just to be able to know which ones they wanted to request . It would be a waste of time for his staff to have to look at all the papers .
 I settled back onto the bed and told him that no one from his staff was going to go through any White House files . "I settled back on the bed, told him he was not going to have his staff go through files," he said .
 "I said I was willing to consider a meeting—but just between him and me," she said . "He said I said I would consider a ... meeting, but just between himself and me. I said he would be willing to meet," she added .
 "He seemed a bit nonplussed and indicated that he was not optimistic about our being able to work things out," he said . He said he was "not optimistic" about the outcome of the situation .
 He said he would report to the committee and insisted again that it was not out to get anybody . The committee will be looking into the matter again .
 I looked up at Haig and Ziegler, who had been in the room during the call . "I looked up and looked at them," Haig said . "You can't wait to see what's going to happen," he said .
 I told them it must have been the fever that had kept me from giving Ervin the cool answers that undoubtedly would have been more effective for our cause, I said . The fever was keeping me from talking to Ervin, the author of the book .
 "There is a national commotion every time a President is even the slightest bit ill, so I wanted to postpone any indication that I was not feeling well until the last possible moment," he said .
 Bill Timmons came in to discuss legislative problems with West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel . Timmons met with Scheel, the West German foreign minister, and then Timmons discussed legislative problems .
 I received a report from the members of a commission I had appointed to study the question of fire prevention . After that I received . report from members of the . members of . a commission he had appointed was . appointed to . study the issue of fire .
 I was determined to show that even in the hospital I was able to carry out my duties as President. "I was determined ... to show ... that even though I was in a hospital, I could carry on my duties," he said .
 As I received inhalation therapy and underwent tests and X-rays, I continued to take calls and see Ziegler and Haig . I continued taking calls and seeing them, continuing to see them .
 I phoned Kissinger and reviewed the plans for Phase IV of our economic policy with Shultz . Shultz: "We're going to have a very difficult time in dealing with the world's economic policy. We're not going to be able to do this again," he said .
 "The worst thing about the pneumonia was the inability to sleep because the discomfort was so great," she said. "I was so uncomfortable I couldn't sleep"
 I ended up staying on the phone until late at night, checking on the day’s events . “I ended up . staying on my phone until . late night,” she said .
 For the first time since I entered the hospital I was able to eat a full meal . For the last time since entering the hospital, I was allowed to eat full meals. For the second time I have been able to enjoy a meal .
 Haig called to tell Haig's former aide Alex Butterfield had revealed the existence of the White House taping system to the Ervin Committee staff . Butterfield told Haig that it would become public knowledge of the system later that day .
 As impossible as it must seem now, I had believed that the existence of the White House taping system would never be revealed . The White House has been accused of taping President Obama .
 I thought that at least executive privilege would have been raised by any staff member before verifying its existence . "Executive privilege" was raised by staff members before verifying the existence of the document .
 Fred Buzhardt sent a letter to Ervin confirming that the system described by Butterfield did exist . He pointed out that it was similar to the one that had been employed by the previous administration . The previous administration had employed the system .
 Buzhardt’s letter provoked swift reactions laced with righteous indignation . The letter was written by a professor at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. said that it was ‘inconceivable’ that John Kennedy would have approved such a taping system . Arthur Schlepper, Jr., said it is ‘inexceptible’ to John Kennedy approve such a system .
 Kennedy’s former aide, Dave Powers, then curator of the Kennedy Library, denied that there were tapes . Kennedy's former aide said there are tapes .
 Army Signal Corps technicians who had installed the taping system gave sworn affidavits about the placement of the machines and microphones . The archivist at the Johnson Library in Austin confirmed the existence of the tapes .
 Haig and I spent several hours in my hospital room talking about what the revelation of the existence of the tapes would mean . Haig: "I'm not sure what the tapes will mean, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 A few months earlier, Haldeman had told him to get rid of all the tapes except those dealing with important national security events . He reflected ironically that just a few months before, on April 10, he had met with two of the POWs .
 "They were just as moving as the meetings I had had earlier with Risner and with Denton," she said . "It was just as real as the meeting I had with D. Risner," she added .
 Haldeman: "We would go back over the period of time that they have been taken and destroy them except for national security periods in Cambodia, May 8 and probably December 18"
 "Three weeks later he was no longer there to do it. But this discussion had taken place in the midst of our concerns about Watergate," he said . "But this discussion was taken place ... three weeks later, and three weeks after he was . there was no doubt he was there
 In the hospital I raised the idea of whether we should not destroy the tapes now. In the . hospital I . raised the . idea of . whether we . should not . destroy the . tapes now .
 "In the meantime we agreed that the taping system itself must be removed," the BBC said .
 Doctors anxiously tried to keep my meetings to a minimum, I discussed the situation with Haig, Ziegler, Buzhardt, and Garment . Over the next three days, while the doctors anxiously trying to keep his meetings from a few meetings, I met with Ha
 Legally the tapes would not actually be evidence until they were subpoenaed . Legally, they would only be used as evidence if subpoenaed by the government .
 The Ervin Committee or the Special Prosecutor would subpoena them momentarily, it would be a highly controversial move to destroy them . But since we knew that the Ervin committee or the . Special Prosecutor . would subpoena the . documents, they would be destroyed .
 Buzhardt felt that the tapes were my personal property and he favored destroying them . Nonetheless, Buzhard felt that he felt it was his personal property .
 Garment considered the tapes to be evidence, and while he did not favor releasing them, he made it clear that he would strongly oppose any move to destroy them . Garment said he would oppose any attempt to destroy the tapes .
 Haig made the point that destruction of the tapes would seal an impression of guilt in the public mind . Haig says destruction of tapes would forever seal impression of guilty in public mind.
 When Ted Agnew came to the hospital to visit, he told me I should destroy them, she says . "Ted Agnew told me to destroy them," she says. "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with him," she adds .
 His advice was to claim executive privilege and not surrender an inch of principle to the witch-hunting of Ervin and his committee staff .
 Haldeman said that the tapes were still our best defense, and he recommended that they not be destroyed .
 When I had entered the hospital on July 12, I had been looking forward to fighting our way out of the slump into which Dean’s testimony had sent us into . Dean's testimony sent us back into a slump, but we were able to overcome it, he says .
 The revelation of the tapes had changed everything since July 20 . The tapes changed everything for the first time since he was admitted to the hospital .
 'We mustn't let this continuing investigation get to us as the revelation of the tapes did to Garment and some of the members of the staff. We mustn’t let this ongoing investigation get us as it did with Garment,’s Garment says .
 It was a beautiful summer day when I returned to the White House from the hospital, says President Obama . "I was in the hospital with a broken leg," he says .
 Most of the staff had come out to the Rose Garden to greet me, and as I walked up the steps to the Oval Office I turned around and spoke to them . Most of them had come to the White House to greet him, and he turned around to speak to them.
 I feel that we have so little time in the positions that all of us hold and so much to do. I feel we have to do what we need to do to be able to do . I feel it's time for us to get back to the top of the world now,
 At the end of the next three and a half years to look back and think that, but for that day, something went undone that might have been done that would have made a difference in whether we have peace in the world or a better life here at home, that would be the
 "I turned to the predictable comments the staff would be hearing that, because of my illness and the rough assaults being directed toward me, I should consider either slowing down or resigning," he says .
 "I talked about all the things we could accomplish without war, controlling crime, drugs, providing opportunity," says President Obama . "Properity without war," he says .
 "There are these and other great causes that we were elected overwhelmingly to carry forward in November," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: "We are committed to these and these great causes"
 "Let others wallow in Watergate, we are going to do our job. And what we were elected to do we will do," says President Obama . "We are not going to allow others wallowing in Watergate," he says .
 If I had been the knowing Watergate conspirator that I was charged as being, I would have recognized in 1973 that the tapes contained conversations that would be fatally damaging, he says .
 "I would have seen that if I were to survive, they would have to be destroyed," he says . "They would have been destroyed. I would have had to survive," he adds .
 "When I listened to them for the first time on June 4, 1973, I recognized that they were a mixed bag as far as I was concerned," he says .
 Dean Obeidallah: "There was politically embarrassing talk on them, and they contained many ambiguities" Obeidenallah: They disproved Dean’s basic charge that I had conspired with him in an obstruction of justice over an eight-month period . O
 Haldeman had told me that it could be explained, and I wanted to believe that he was right . I knew it would be difficult to explain in the critical and hostile atmosphere that now exists, he had said, but I knew .
 I was persuaded by Haig’s reasoning that destruction of the tapes would create an indelible impression of guilt, and I simply did not believe that the revelation of anything I had actually done would be as bad as that impression . Haig: "I was also persuaded by
 "I decided that the tapes were my best insurance against the unforeseeable future. Finally I decided that . I decided to make the tapes as a way of keeping track of the future."
 I was prepared to believe that others, even people close to me, would turn against me just as Dean had done, and in that case the tapes would give me at least some protection . I'm prepared to think that others will turn against him just as he did, and that case
 "I had to decide whether to release them to the Ervin Committee and the Special Prosecutor or to invoke executive privilege," he says . "Once I had decided not to destroy the tapes, I had to choose between releasing them or invoking executive privilege."
 Jackson had thought that this example was a ludicrous extreme but that extreme turned out to be the most moderate position espoused by the Special Prosecutor and the Ervin Committee . Jackson said that he had thought it was a 'ludicrous extreme'
 I know that most people think that executive privilege was just a cloak that I drew around me to protect myself from the disclosure of my wrongdoing . "I know that . most people thought that executive . privilege was a cloak," she says .
 "I believed deeply and strongly in the principle and was convinced then—as I am now— that it stands at the very heart of a strong presidency," she said . "The fact that I wanted to protect myself did not alter the fact that . I believed then, as I am
 The application of the principle to this case was flawed by the nature and extent of my personal interest and involvement, I did not want to be the first President in history who acquiesced in a diminution of the principles .
 There were other, less abstract reasons for not turning over the tapes . The tapes were taped in the early 1980s .
 As far as the Democrats were concerned, fighting the battle to get the tapes could be as politically rewarding as winning it . The tapes could help Democrats win the White House .
 If even one tape is yielded, it would only heighten the desire for two more . But if even one is found, there will be more than two more tapes to be found .
 Once there is a hole below the waterline of a ship, no matter how small, the tremendous hydraulic pressure of the sea quickly broadens the gash in the ship and the ship is in danger . The ship was in danger when it was hit by a hole in the hull .
 Watergate pressures are thought to permit to tolerate even a very limited infraction of the confidentiality that every President since George Washington has enjoyed . And it will be that way, too, if the hydraulic pressures of Watergate are thought .
 If I had been confident that they were without ambiguity and would show me speaking like the romantic ideal of a President pursuing justice undeterred, I suppose that I might have found some way to overcome my inhibitions about releasing them . If I was confident that . would show them without ambiguity
 I could only fear what might be on the others that I had not heard and could not remember . But they did not—at least the few that I'd heard did not, and I feared what might happen next .
 "I decided to invoke executive privilege to prevent disclosure of the tapes," he says . The tapes were taped in the White House .
 On Monday, July 23, I sent Senator Ervin a letter informing him that I would not supply any tapes for his committee’s investigation . I would also not provide any tapes to the investigation, he said .
 I now believe that from the time of the disclosure of the existence of the tapes and my decision not to destroy them, my presidency had little chance of surviving to the end of its term, he says .
 "I did not see that while destroying the tapes might have looked like an admission of guilt, invoking executive privilege to keep them from being made public appeared hardly less so . Unfortunately, my instinct was not so clear or sure at the time, and I didn't see that . destroying the
 "In the end my refusal damaged the very principle I thought I was protecting. In the end, I thought it was protecting," she said .
 I was the first President to test the principle of executive privilege in the Supreme Court, writes President Obama . "I probably ensured the defeat of my cause," he says .
 Ervin and Cox tried to get the tapes from the White House . The tapes gained increasing public support from the public, Cox says .
 Ervin Committee recessed for a week after hearing Dean’s testimony . Dean's testimony was the first to be heard by the committee .
 When its hearings resumed in July, the media coverage had tapered off considerably, so the witnesses who appeared in rebuttal to Dean did not have so much impact . Dean's rebuttal hearing was the first of its kind .
 Dean had received complete live television coverage from all three networks on all five days of his testimony . Only Dean received complete coverage of the five days . Dean's testimony was the first to receive complete television coverage of all four days .
 The networks looked on these hearings as theatre, and as long as they were lively and controversial they would be broadcast . An unnamed news executive summed up the situation in an article in the LA Times .
 It continued to hear witnesses, but it no longer provided the entertainment television viewers had come to expect . It had simply become overexposed. It no longer provides the entertainment viewers have come to .
 Democrats set the precedents for dirty tricks in American politics, Sen. John McCain says . Sen. McCain says Democrats set precedents in dirty tricks . McCain: Democrats set American politics in the way .
 Ervin was visibly shaken and reportedly angry that staff had exposed him to such embarrassment . Ervin is reportedly angry at staff for exposing him to embarrassing embarrassment .
 Before long, most of the committee members were looking for a way to close down hearings .
 When Ervin’s gavel banged this section of the investigation to a close, there had been an average of 22 hours of television news shows, specials, and daytime programming on Watergate since the hearings began .
 This speech, with its call to turn Watergate over to the courts, hit a responsive chord . This speech was a response to President Obama's call for the Watergate scandal to be turned into a public trial .
 "The numbers of telegrams and phone calls to the White House immediately after it was over were the biggest since the days of my Vietnam speeches," says President Obama .
 The Democratic majority in Congress used Watergate scandal as an excuse for ignoring and overriding the landslide mandate that my programs and philosophy had received in the 1972 election . It was my belief then, and it is still my belief today, that Watergate scandal used .
 Three months of Watergate torpor had slowed Congress’s work on domestic and foreign affairs to a near halt . Congress is trying to get back on its footing after months of torpor .
 And so, let others spend their time dealing with the murky, small, unimportant, vicious little things . Let others deal with the little things. Let them deal with murky and unimportant little things, I say .
 We have spent our time and will spend our time in building a better world. We are committed to building a world of peace. We will spend that time building a good world.
 "I was determined not to give up on my election mandate, and in the fall of 1973 I decided to send a second State of the Union message to remind Congress and the American people of the important and unfinished domestic agenda that had gone unattended"
 We had succeeded in holding down spending in 1973 and, despite Watergate, had managed to sustain all my vetoes of budget-busting spending bills . Despite Watergate, Nixon still managed to veto all of his vetoes .
 Congress is threatening to pass increases that would exceed the budget by at least $6 billion . Congress is also threatening to raise the budget to $7 billion .
 I therefore called for an effort to keep spending within the budget in order to cut inflation and keep prices down . I also called for a effort to cut down on inflation, keep costs down .
 In terms of constant dollars, defense spending in 1973 was actually $10 billion less than it had been in 1964 before the Vietnam war began . Defense spending in 1964 was $10billion less than in 1964, before Vietnam war .
 The draft had been ended and our defense forces were numerically lower than at any time since before the Korean war . The draft was ended and the defense forces had been reduced to a low level .
 The Senate is moving to cut overseas troop strength by nearly 25 percent without any corresponding cuts by the Soviets . Yet the Senate also wants the Soviets to cut their own troop strength .
 During the past three years I had sent Congress seven proposals dealing with energy policy and legislation . I've sent seven proposals to the US Congress dealing with the issue .
 This inaction, I warned, was keeping us at the mercy of the producers of oil in the Mideast . I asked that immediate attention be paid to this vitally important area of national and international concern .
 The message described many of the more than fifty bills and programs that I had sent to Congress in 1973 alone and that had been ignored or brushed aside . The message was sent by President Nixon in 1973 .
 These included proposals for tax reform, property tax relief for the elderly, environmental bills and environmental bills . These included a new federal housing program and proposals for trade reform .
 On August 22, I announced that I would nominate Henry Kissinger to succeed Bill Rogers as Secretary of State . Kissinger would succeed Rogers as secretary of state . Kissinger has been nominated to succeed Rogers .
 Kissinger: "I insisted that we should not be hampered by preconceptions, or avoid any new departure in the effort to bring peace" Kissinger: On September 22 we held the swearing-in ceremony in the East Room . Kissinger talked about our discussion five years earlier during the transition .
 We mean a world which had not just eased tensions but overcome them, we say . A world not based on strength but on justice; a relationship among nations based on cooperation and cooperation, not equilibrium alone .
 "There is no country in the world where it is conceivable that a man of my origin could be standing here next to the President of the United States," he said . "There's no country where it's conceivable that ... a man ... of his origin could ... be standing next to
 During this period I took stock of the situation within the White House staff. During this time, I was able to get back in touch with some of the staff members. I'm not afraid to say that, but I'm very concerned about the situation .
 Despite my determination that it should not happen, Haig had become bogged down in Watergate . It was like quicksand pulling him back each time he tried to get free to work on foreign and domestic policy problems .
 Al Haig, I am sure, would be the first to acknowledge that he ran a very protective White House. "Al Haig" would have been the first person to admit he ran the White House, he says .
 Underneath Haig’s affable exterior he was a more rigid administrator than Bob Haldeman . It probably would have surprised the press corps to hear the assessments .
 Haig purposely set out to structure this kind of White House operation because he felt that during the first term we had made our big mistakes over little things, he says . In fact, Haig said he wanted to structure the White House so that it would be more efficient .
 "To prevent it, he drew more and more authority and responsibility to himself," says President Obama . "He drew himself in to prevent it. To prevent it."
 The morale of the White House staff had begun to sink seriously, Haig said . Haig had to deal with the problem immediately . The White House was in turmoil .
 There was also a growing sense that no matter how hard we worked or what we did, we did not gain any ground . But there was also growing sense of frustration that we were not gaining any ground, he said .
 Each answer to each charge simply led to another charge requiring another answer . Watergate had become a bottomless pit, with each answer leading to more questions .
 Watergate staff of 12 pitted against opposition’s two hundred, says Nixon . Watergate staff now had 12 staff pitted against the opposition's two hundred . Nixon's staff of twelve pitted against two hundred people, he says .
 We needed a well-planned overall strategy, but our lawyers were pulled from case to case with little time to think much beyond the next day’s tactics . We needed to be able to think about the next few days of the week . We need to think very carefully about the
 John Connally soon became disenchenchanted with his role at the White House . Connally was president of Texas in the late 1960s and early 1980s .
 We had planned to match his duties to his talents, but because of Watergate there was never time, and his actual duties as Counsellor to the President remained undefined . The President's actual duties remained undefined, and he was never given his duties .
 Connally told me in June that he would be leaving before long . Connally said he would soon be leaving the military .
 He said that he was still supportive but he felt that he had to move on . He said he still supports his ex-partner but that he felt he needed to move .
 I tried to talk him into staying, but my heart was not in it . I could not ask a man I liked and respected—and who I hoped would succeed me in the White House in 1976—+to tie himself to my troubles .
 Connally told reporters how he felt about their attitudes toward me . Connally said he was disappointed with the attitudes of his former colleagues .
 I was concerned about signs of dissatisfaction in Shultz, Laird, and Harlow . I was also concerned that signs of discontent were also being aired in the US .
 George W. Shultz was discouraged by the downturn in the economy and disillusioned by Watergate, he says . Shultz says he was disillusioned with his handling of Watergate . He says Shultz is "disillusioned" by the economy .
 I considered him one of the ablest members of the Cabinet and asked him to stay on. He said: "I considered him an ablest member of the cabinet and asked for him to remain on. But he said he would not have to step down."
 "I could not bring myself to urge him to continue to go through the fire that was raging around us," says the mother-of-one . She says she was unable to bring herself to urge her son to continue .
 Laird and Harlow felt I was not consulting with them enough on Watergate, he says . Laird: "I'm not consulting on Watergate enough. Laird felt I wasn't consulting enough" Laird says he was not consulted on Watergate .
 There were two reasons that I did not like to discuss the subject with them. "I didn't like to talk about it with them," he said .
 "It was simply a painful subject for me to discuss with anyone," she says . "I felt that it was important for as many people on the staff as possible to stay away from Watergate," she adds .
 "After a while it became easier and easier for me to rely solely on Haig, Ziegler, and lawyers in dealing with Watergate," he says . "I knew that this further contributed to the frustration and isolation felt by Laird, Harlow, and others"
 District Judge John Sirica ruled against us in the Special Prosecutor’s suit for nine tapes . On August 29 District Judge Sirica found us guilty of defamation .
 No court had ever before in our history compelled a President to produce documents that he had determined not to surrender . President Barack Obama was ordered to hand over the documents .
 A court can issue an order, but a President has a right not to obey that order if it infringes on his independent branch of government . Because of the principle of separation of powers, a court can order a President to obey an order . Some scholars would argue, some scholars would
 "I felt then, and I feel now, that it was fully within my power to refuse to obey Sirica’s ruling. I felt then and now, I feel . I felt . it was . fully within . my power, I said .
 "I recognized the political reality of the Watergate situation, and instead of defying Sirica’s order on constitutional principles" "I decided to observe the regular procedures of the judicial system and appeal his decision"
 Former President George W. Bush says he objected to the creation of an independent Watergate Special Prosecutor . He says the idea was first suggested to him from the first time .
 It was all but inevitable that under the warm glow of press attention and adulation by the Washington establishment, prosecutorial zeal would assume a life of its own . I thought it was a slap at the ability of the Justice Department to do the job .
 "I had, in essence, put the survival of my administration in his hands," she says . She says she had, "in essence, and as events turned out, put his survival of his hands" The White House says the president's survival was put in the hands of the
 Richardson’s confirmation hearings as Attorney General were held hostage until an independent Watergate Special Prosecutor was appointed . Richardson's nomination was held hostage by the Senate until a special prosecutor was appointed by the White House .
 Richardson felt compelled to yield to the pressure and began conducting a search for a candidate to fill the position . Richardson was forced to yield under pressure from the public to find a candidate .
 It took him two weeks and several refusals before he finally selected Professor Archibald Cox of the Harvard Law School . Cox is a Harvard law professor .
 If Richardson had searched specifically for the man whom I would have least trusted, he could hardly have done better than Archibald Cox . Cox is the man I would've least trusted to conduct so politically sensitive an investigation in an unbiased way .
 The Boston Globe reported that he had actually been recommended to Richardson by Teddy Kennedy . Teddy Kennedy recommended Richardson by the Kennedy family .
 Cox had been in charge of preparing John Kennedy’s position papers during the 1960 campaign . Cox was an alternate delegate at the Democratic National Convention in 1972; he publicly acknowledged that he had voted for McGovern . Cox had previously been an alternate delegates at the DNC in 1972 .
 Cox had caustically criticized John Mitchell as “insensitive” to the importance of civil liberties . Cox had mentioned that he had sharp ‘philosophical and ideological” differences with my administration . Cox: "He had sharp differences with the administration"
 The Special Prosecutor was supposed to supervise the investigation into Watergate and initiate prosecutions if they were justified or required . He was meant to be the Special Prosecutor .
 Cox may have subconsciously revealed his ultimate intention when he told reporters that his great-grandfather had taken part in Andrew Johnson’s defense against impeachment against impeachment . Cox told reporters shortly after his appointment in May that he had been a member of the House of Representatives .
 Richardson then approved a charter for the Special Prosecution Force that, instead of limiting its responsibility to the area of Watergate, gave it virtual carte blanche to investigate the executive branch . Richardson then compounded the mistake by approving a charter that gave it carte .
 The charter extended full authority for conducting grand jury proceedings, determining whether to grant immunity, initiating prosecutions, and framing indictments .
 The Special Prosecution Force was granted virtually unlimited funds, and there was no time limit placed on its activities . There were no time limits placed on the force's activities .
 Haig talked to Richardson, who insisted that the phrases “allegations involving the President” and “members of the White House staff or Presidential appointees” should be read only in connection with the earlier reference to the 1972 presidential campaign .
 Richardson later conceded that he had not foreseen the problems that would arise from giving the Special Prosecutor such unrestricted power . Richardson: "I didn't foresee that would be a problem"
 It did not take long for my worst fears about the Special Prosecution Force to be realized . It did take long to believe that the prosecution will not be able to prove anything wrong .
 Of the eleven senior staff members Cox chose, seven had been associated with John, Bobby, or Teddy Kennedy . Cox chose seven of the eleven staff members .
 They included a former Special Assistant to Ramsey Clark, a former Democratic congressional candidate, and a researcher and speechwriter for Sargent Shriver . They also served as head of George McGovern’s task force on crime .
 Only one of the top ten staff men was a Republican, according to the Chicago Tribune .
 The partisan attitude that permeated the top ranks of the Watergate Special Prosecution Force was exceeded by the fervor of the junior members of its staff . Most of the staff was brash young lawyers intoxicated with their first real taste of power and with the attention being paid to them by the
 Reports came back to me of arrogant young men using unsubstantiated charges to threaten and intimidate my personal friends and members of my staff . "Arrogant young men," he said, "threatened and intimidated" friends and staff .
 Immediately after Cox was appointed, he began his inquiries about White House files .
 On May 30 he asked about the status of eight files; on June 5 he added six more . On June 11 he wrote asking for the tape of the April 15 conversation with John Dean that I had mentioned to Henry Petersen . The same day he asked for an inventory of twelve files,
 He requested my daily appointment logs covering all my meetings with 15 different people; then he asked for ITT materials . Then he asked me to provide narrative testimony from me. Then he requested my . appointment logs .
 In July there was a leak caused by his staff that he was starting to look into the purchase of my house in San Clemente . He was looking into whether any union, corporate, or campaign money had been used in purchase .
 His staff asked for information on government wiretapping . His staff tried to call Secret Service agents to find out the details of their operations .
 Cox’s charter presumably restricted him to the 1972 campaign . He launched an investigation into 1970 campaign funds . Even though Cox's charter presumably limited him to 1972 campaign, he launched investigation .
 Richardson began investigating Secret Service personnel for their handling of demonstrators at rallies . Richardson pointed out that Justice Department was already defending some of the men involved in civil actions arising from these incidents .
 Cox investigated the Plumbers and then launched an investigation of Bebe Rebozo . Ranging still further afield, Cox investigated Bebe Bebozo in the 1970s and 1980s .
 By October 12, four months after the Special Prosecutor took over the case, they had brought only one indictment . That one did not even relate to Watergate . The Justice Department had said the case was already 90 percent completed .
 It did not take long to see that they interpreted their power to investigate “all offenses arising out of the 1972 Presidential Election” to mean primarily those alleged to have been committed by the Nixon camp . The Nixon camp is accused of Watergate crimes .
 In 1974 the Special Prosecution Force let the statute of limitations lapse on a campaign fund-raising violation committed by Democratic Finance Chairman Robert Strauss . For example, in 1974 the . statute . of limitations was let go on a fund-raiser violation .
 When a similar situation arose with our Finance Chairman Maury Stans, they asked the court for a waiver of the statute to prevent it from running while proceedings were pending . Mr Stans' Finance Chairman asked for the court to allow it to run while proceedings are pending .
 No White House in history could have survived the kind of operation Cox was planning . Cox planned to attack the White House . Cox: "No White House has ever survived such a major operation"
 If he were determined to get me, as I was certain that he and his staff were, then given the terms of their charter it would be only a matter of time until they had bored like termites through the whole executive branch .
 The frustrating thing was that while I saw them as partisan zealots abusing the power I had given them in order to destroy me unfairly, the media presented them as the keepers of the sacred flame of American justice against a wicked President and his corrupt administration .
 "Whenever I tried to state my point of view, I was inevitably discounted as being self-interested and self-serving," says Simon Tisdall . "I was always told that I was being unfairly treated as self-interest," he says .
 I could not imagine any other President allowing a man who derived his authority from the White House to use that power independently to conduct a partisan inquisition at the administration’s expense .
 Cox was so powerful that the outcome of the outcome was far from predictable . Thus, by fall a clash was inevitable, and, thanks to the charter Richardson had given him, Cox was powerful .
 Ted Agnew’s problems with the U.S. Attorney in Baltimore had remained a peripheral concern of mine ever since April 1973 . Agnew was afraid of being embarrassed by the investigations under way there .
 Elliot Richardson had informed Haig that serious allegations were being made about Agnew . The allegations had become a series of specific charges that Agnew while governor of Maryland had taken money in return for granting state contracts .
 There were also charges that he continued to receive money in return for these past favors while he was Vice President . He was also charged with receiving money in exchange for favors .
 Agnew was convinced that Baltimore prosecutors were out to make a name for themselves at his expense . Agnew pointed out that one of them had worked in Muskie’s 1972 campaign .
 Haig quoted Richardson as having said that he had never seen such a cut-and-dried case . Richardson said he never saw such a case like this . Haig quotes Richardson as saying that he never had such a clear-cut case .
 Agnew was potentially indictable on more than forty counts, he said . Agnew could be indicted on dozens of counts, including more than 40 counts, the attorney general said .
 Richardson sent Agnew a letter informing him that he was being investigated . Agnew is accused of conspiracy, extortion, bribery, and tax fraud . Richardson: Agnew being investigated on allegations of conspiracy and extortion .
 When Haig told me this, I felt that it was time for me to become involved. I felt it was a good time to get involved. It's time for the U.S. to have a voice in the world's most important club, the club says .
 I arranged to meet with Richardson on Monday, August 6; I asked Buzhardt and Garment to see him before this meeting because I wanted their independent analyses of the case against Agnew . Richardson: "I want their independent analysis of this case to be independent"
 I knew that we were dealing with political dynamite and that I had to be scrupulously careful about the information I was receiving and how it was assessed . "I knew that . we were . dealing with ... dynamite," she says .
 John Mitchell had already sent word to me that Agnew felt that Richardson was out to get him . Agnew had already told Mitchell that he felt Agnew was being targeted by Richardson . John Mitchell sent word of Agnew's anger to Mitchell .
 Agnew remembered Richardson had opposed his nomination in 1968 . Agnew said Richardson had disagreed repeatedly on policy matters during meetings of the Domestic Council . Richardson opposed Agnew's nomination .
 Agnew was convinced Richardson saw himself as a potential presidential candidate . Agnew also was convinced that Richardson would run for president . Richardson was a strong supporter of Agnew's administration .
 The White House press office received the first inquiry about rumors that the Vice President was under investigation . Vice President Richardson met with Richardson on August 6 .
 Richardson told me that the witnesses were believable and in some cases had irrefutable documents . Richardson said some of the allegations against Agnew are credible . Richardson: "Some of the witnesses are believable"
 He said there were accusations that the payments had continued through the vice presidential years . The payments were alleged to have continued through Vice President Obama's term .
 Agnew: Richardson's evidence is weight of evidence, but emotionally I was still on Agnew's side . Agnew says Richardson's testimony is proof that Agnew won't be indicted . Richardson: Richardson’s evidence is proof Agnew was wrong to deny the charges .
 I told Richardson that I expected him to assume full responsibility for seeing to it that Agnew was not railroaded by biased U.S. Attorneys and a predatory press corps . Richardson: "I told Richardson I expect him to take full responsibility" Richardson: I expect Richardson to
 Haig had told me that Agnew was wavering between fighting and resigning . Haig said Agnew had told Haig that he was considering resigning from the White House .
 He walked into his office with the same easy, confident stride he always had . He declared that he was totally innocent of the charges . He said he was "totally innocent"
 He said they would not hold up in court, and that if it should ever go that far he would be proved innocent . He said he would prove his innocence in court .
 He repeated to me his feeling that someday the prosecution team in Baltimore would be shown up for what it was . He said he felt that someday he would see the prosecution in Baltimore come to justice .
 "I told him that I had confidence in his integrity, that I believed him and would stand by him unless clear and final evidence was presented to me that forced me to think otherwise," she said .
 President Obama said he planned to hold a press conference the next day . He urged him to consider carefully before he said anything that might haunt him later .
 I told him that one man whose fairness I could completely vouch for was Henry Petersen. Petersen . Petersen's fairness was one of the world's fairest men, I said . Petersen is a straight-edge politician, I told Petersen .
 I said I would arrange with Richardson for Petersen to undertake his own independent investigation of the case . Petersen will prepare his own own independent recommendation, Richardson said .
 On August 8 Agnew marched indignantly into the EOB briefing room and denounced the leaks . Agnew: "On August 8, Agnew walked in to the press briefing room to denounce leaks"
 He was asked if he had ever had a political slush fund financed by Baltimore County contractors . He said he had never had any slush funds financed by contractors .
 He was asked if he had ever received money for his personal use from any company doing business with the state of Maryland or the federal government . He said he had never received money from any person doing business for personal use .
 Haig and Buzhardt came in to tell me Agnew’s press conference looked like a short-term political triumph . Agnew's press conference was a short term political triumph, Haig says . Haig: Agnew had a long-term impact on his presidency
 In view of the evidence that was bound to come out, however, they did not see how it could be anything but a long-term disaster . They said they were not surprised by the evidence .
 Buzhardt said he could not see how Agnew could have made blanket denials that would not hold up . He said he couldn't see how such denials could have been made that would hold true .
 "I knew the charges against Agnew were serious and completely persuasive to responsible people. I knew that Agnew's charges against him were serious," she says .
 The press leaks, and Agnew’s impassioned denials, had convinced many people that the charges were a vendetta against him . Agnew was charged with a federal crime against him in New York City . The charges were dropped after a series of weeks .
 "If I actively defended him, and the charges were later substantiated, I would have succeeded only in further eroding my own already dwindling credibility," he writes .
 If I took a neutral position, Agnew’s supporters would think I had let him down, he says . ‘I’m not going to take a neutral stance,’ he says. ‘If I’t take a stance on Agnew,
 In the end I chose the second course as the sounder approach and decided I would simply have to bear the brunt of the criticism that was to come . I decided to go second course and decide I would just have to accept the criticism . I chose not to criticise my decision to
 On August 21, he had issued a statement charging that some Justice Department officials had decided to indict him in the press regardless of whether the evidence supported their position .
 Elliot Richardson went on television to deny that the leaks were coming from the Justice Department . Richardson later admitted that his department was probably responsible for some of the stories . Richardson: "Justice Department was in fact probably responsible"
 The concerted press attack against Agnew caused me to reconsider my belief in the dependability of the investigation going on in Baltimore, Maryland . I'm not sure if the investigation is going to work .
 Justice Department or U.S. government employee who leaked information would be dismissed immediately upon discovery, Justice Dept. Jeff Sessions says .
 "On September 1 Agnew came in, at his request, in order to bring me up to date on the situation," she says . Agnew: On September 1 he came in to discuss the situation .
 He told me bitterly how prosecutors were pressing him for a wide range of personal financial data going back to 1962 . He said he was being pressed for a range of financial data dating back to the 1960s .
 He said that he was considering whether it would not be better for him to seek impeachment by the House than to have a trial in the federal court .
 From talking with Agnew, Agnew understood the manner in which he had come to think about his actions as governor . Agnew was governor of New Hampshire from 1978 to 1989 .
 He was sure that three-quarters of the governors in other states had done the same kind of thing . He said he accepted campaign contributions from contractors doing business with state .
 As he saw it, the whole trumped-up case simply involved campaign contributions that had been used to help meet expenses legitimately incurred by him and his family in their public roles . He saw it as part of a case involving campaign contributions .
 He argued that the contractors were all well qualified and that there had been no quid pro quo involved . He said the contractors are well qualified, and that they were well qualified .
 He said they were trying to track down everything he had ever bought, and every detail of his personal life . He said police are trying to find out everything he has ever bought and personal details of his life .
 Agnew: "I was genuinely sympathetic to Agnew, and I shared with him his painful concern about the effect this controversy would have on his family and friends" Agnew says he was "genuinely sympathetic" with Agnew's story .
 I said I could not and would not ever judge his case; but I urged that he, as a lawyer, try to analyze it as objectively as he could . I said that I could . not judge his . case; he urged that as a . lawyer, as well as a
 Only then would he be able to make decisions in his own best interests, he said . Only then he could make decisions about his own interests . The world's most important decisionmaker is to make his own own best interest .
 I could see that he was no longer as sure as he had been in our first meeting that the charges against him were not provable in court . Now he reflected on the fact that no court anywhere near Washington or Maryland could possibly treat him fairly .
 Fred Buzhardt and Al Haig brought Agnew a new assessment of the situation . Agnew says Agnew has been in charge of the U.S. government for more than a quarter of a century .
 Agnew: Justice Department officials convinced Agnew would be indicted, convicted, and sentenced to jail term . Buzhardt: Agnew is convinced that he will be indicted and convicted . Agnew says he's not guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Agnew’s lawyer, Judah Best, had made tentative overtures toward negotiations with the Justice Department . Within days, Best's lawyer had made the first tentative overture toward negotiations .
 He had come a long way since that first session six weeks earlier at which he had protested his complete innocence .
 He asked what I thought he should do and talked poignantly about the problems of going away and starting a new life . Now he asked what he would like to do, he said: 'I think he should go away and start a life'
 "Only he knew the facts and only he knew those who would be testifying against him," she says . "This was a decision only he could make," she adds .
 Richardson wanted to drive him into the ground, Richardson said . Richardson said he would fight in court before he would allow that . Richardson: "I'm not going to let that happen, I'm going to fight it"
 Richardson must not force the country into the nightmare of a trial by insisting on unreasonably tough terms . After this meeting I had Haig and Buzhardt tell Richardson to not force him to trial . Richardson is accused of trying to keep the country in the dark .
 On Friday, September 21, Buzhardt reported to me that he thought there had been a breakthrough . Buzhard reported that he had been able to reach a breakthrough with the CIA . He said he thought the breakthrough was possible .
 Richardson and Best reached agreement on language that would not commit Agnew to a “knowing’ acceptance of money for preferential treatment . Agnew would still acknowledge that others would allege it, but still acknowledge it .
 Agnew was going to think about it over the weekend, so Monday would be the day of decision . Agnew: "I'm going to make a decision" Agnew says he's not sure what he will do .
 The Washington Post carried a front-page story “from two sources” revealing that Agnew’s lawyers were bargaining on a plea . Agnew's lawyers are negotiating a plea deal, the Post reported .
 Henry Petersen had told associates, “We've got the evidence.” Then CBS reported that Henry Petersen told his associates that he had “the evidence’s got’t,” CBS reported .
 Agnew was convinced that the leaks had come from the Justice Department and were part of a deliberate strategy to weaken his position in the negotiations . Buzhardt reported that Agnew believed the leaks came from Justice Department . Agnew said he was outraged .
 Agnew would be found guilty and would have to serve a prison term, he said . Agnew said Agnew was found guilty of the crime and would serve prison term .
 Richardson said he was ready to send evidence to the grand jury . Richardson said that he was now ready to file the evidence . Richardson: The evidence is ready to be sent to a grand jury.
 I asked Richardson to have the Justice Department prepare an opinion on the question of whether it would be constitutional to indict a Vice President while he was still in office . Richardson: The Justice Department should have an opinion .
 The Constitution specifically provides that a President can be removed from office only by being impeached and convicted . Only then can he be indicted in criminal proceedings and brought to trial for his offenses .
 Although the Vice President is not specifically mentioned in this clause of the Constitution, I argued that a case could be made that he would be in the same position . Although the vice president is not mentioned in the clause, he could be in a similar position .
 He told me that he had decided to go to Speaker Carl Albert and request that the House of Representatives undertake a full impeachment inquiry .
 He still adamantly denied having received any money while Vice President and said that the charges were just part of the effort to sink him . He said that he still denies receiving any money .
 He told me that he would reconsider resigning only if he were granted complete immunity from prosecution . He said he would only consider resigning if he was granted immunity .
 In a sad and gentle voice he asked for my assurance that I would not turn my back on him if he were out of office . Then, for a moment, his manner changed, and asked for his assurance that he wouldn't turn his back on me if I were out .
 Agnew presented his formal request for an impeachment proceeding to Carl Albert’s office . That afternoon Agnew went to Albert's office and presented his request for the impeachment proceeding . Agnew was impeached that afternoon .
 I seriously doubted that it would be granted, I had the congressional relations staff talk with leading House Republicans, urging them to support the request . The request was not granted, but I had hoped it would have been .
 Justice Department study concluded that a President could not be indicted while in office, but a Vice President could . The same day, Justice Department alerted me that its study had concluded that . A Vice President can also be indicted .
 Haig’s impression was that he was going away to think things over, talk with his family, and perhaps prepare them for his resignation . Haig: “I’m going away. I’d rather than resign,” Haig said .
 Watergate stories made Watergate stories seem even worse than they already were . The news stories continued to deluge us and made the stories seem worse than already were. The Watergate stories were deluge the nation with stories of the White House scandal .
 Agnew’s staff had become embittered about our cautious position because they didn’t understand the weight of the case against him . In addition, Agnew's staff also became embitters about the cautious position, he says .
 Confidence in government was already reeling from Watergate and was now being eroded even further . Confidence was already being eroded by Watergate, but it was being eroded further .
 Agnew resigned after prolonging what seemed to be an inevitable end, he says . Agnew had to resign after his prolongation of what seemed an inevitable death, he writes .
 I was at Camp David on Saturday afternoon when Haig called with the latest development . Haig: "I'm not going to be surprised. I'm not surprised. It's a good thing that I'm here."
 Agnew had just spoken to a group of Republican women in Los Angeles . Agnew told them that during the past several months he had been living in purgatory, finding himself confronted by unattributed accusations .
 Haig called Haig after he was subpoenaed by the Special Prosecutor . Haig had just finished talking with Rose Woods, who had come up earlier in the day to start typing the conversation from the tapes . Woods had come to work on the tapes subpoenaed .
 "I had already begun to anticipate that the court of appeals would rule against us. I had already started to anticipate" that the case would be decided against us," she says .
 Rose did a quick run-through of the subpoenaed tapes to give us the gist of the conversations without taking the time to prepare complete transcripts . Rose: "I had asked Rose to do a quick-run-through"
 She is such a fast typist that I thought it would take her only a couple of days to finish the whole lot . She is so fast that it took her just a few days to complete the entire lot .
 The quality of the tapes was so bad that she had to go phrase by phrase, listening to each section several times in order to make out the words . But she found that the voices were so hard to distinguish that she went phrase-by-phrase phrase .
 After several hours she had finished only one short passage of the first tape . She had been working on the tape for several hours .
 At times the rattling of a cup or the thump of a hand on the desk would obliterate whole passages . Gradually I could make out a few words, but at times I could only barely understand some of the words .
 The tapes of conversations with John Dean that I had listened to in June had almost all been Oval Office conversations . John Dean’s flat, uninflected voice had been picked up reasonably well, he says .
 In the EOB office the different microphone placements and seating arrangements, the shape of the room, and the height of the arched ceilings apparently created entirely different acoustics . In the office, the different microphones placements, seating arrangements and the shape-of-the-room
 Ehrlichman’s modulated voice is difficult to understand . He says he had never considered the problem of understanding the voice of a man with such modulated tones .
 Steve Bull, a White House staff aide, had come to Camp David with Rose to help her locate the subpoenaed conversations on the tapes and cue them on the machine for her . The White House aide had to help Rose locate the conversations .
 At one point Bull hit upon the ambiguity in the Special Prosecutor’s subpoena . Bull: "I’m not sure what I’ve done with the subpoena," he said .
 Bull could not find such a meeting in the logs, which showed only a conversation with Ehrlichman alone, beginning at 10:25 and lasting until 11:20, followed by a separate conversation with Haldeman alone . Bull found no such meeting .
 Haig talked to Buzhardt and called back to say that only the Ehrlichman conversation was subpoenaed, not the Haldeman conversation that followed it . Haig says Buzhard says only the two conversations were subpoenaed by the government .
 By Sunday night, Rose had worked twenty-nine hours with a Sony tape recorder and a typewriter . She still had not finished even the first conversation with Ehrlichman, she says .
 On Monday morning, October 1, I met with Ziegler, Haig, Laird, Kissinger and Kissinger . I then spent an hour with the President of the commission of the European communities before going to a military promotion ceremony .
 She thought she might have caused a small gap in the Haldeman part of the June 20 tape . She said she thought she may have caused the gap .
 For a moment I thought she must have meant the Ehrlichman conversation, because I knew that that was the one she had been working on. For a minute I thought it must have been the one . I knew it was, and I knew what I was doing, when I
 When I realized it was the Haldeman conversation, I reassured her and told her that since the conversation had not been subpoenaed, there was nothing to worry about . When I told her, she reassured her that there was no subpoena .
 At Steve Bull’s request the Secret Service had given her a new tape recorder that morning . The Secret Service gave her a tape recorder .
 It was a Uher 5000 machine, a kind of a kind that she had never worked with before . It was the first time she had worked with a machine she'd worked with .
 Unlike the manually operated Sony she had used at Camp David, the Uher had a foot-pedal control that would help speed up the work considerably by allowing her to type without having continually to shift position back and forth from typewriter to tape recorder .
 She had been using this new machine only about half an hour when she finally came to what seemed to be the end of the Ehrlichman conversation .
 She ran the tape ahead to be sure that Ehrlichman had left the room . She ran it ahead to make sure that he had actually left .
 She had reached a part where she heard Haldeman talking about schedule matters . She heard him say something about Ely, Nevada, when her phone rang .
 When she finished the call, she turned back and started to listen to the tape again . She said, "I don't think it's a good thing"
 She guessed that she had been on the phone for about four or five minutes . She guessed she was talking to someone for about 4 or 5 minutes . The phone call was the last thing she'd heard from the phone .
 I called Haig in and told him what had happened, and we checked with Buzhardt to make sure that I was right, that the Haldeman conversation had not been subpoenaed . The Haldemen conversation was not subpoenaed, says Haig .
 Buzhardt confirmed this, so the peculiar incident did not seem to present any problem . Buzhard confirmed that the incident was not a problem .
 A few minutes missing from a non-subpoenaed tape hardly seemed worth a second thought . Compared to this, a few minutes of missing from the tape hardly seems worth a thought thought .
 "I again had to walk a verbal tightrope on the Agnew issue. During a press conference on October 3 I again . During a . press conference, I again had a . walk a . verbal tightroppe on . The Agnew . issue is still an issue .
 I first came to his defense, urging that he not be tried and convicted in the press, he said . He said: 'I first came . urging that . he not . be tried . in the . press. He said .
 Agnew said the charges were serious, but he said he had been briefed only on what witnesses might say . Agnew's charge that this had been just a political investigation was not true, he said .
 Agnew was ready to resume discussions about a plea, he says . That afternoon he received a call from Judah Best, who said he was ready for a plea . Best: Agnew is ready to continue discussions about the plea .
 Agnew was just a few months short of being eligible for retirement with a federal pension . Earlier Best had pointed out to Buzhardt that Agnew is just months away from being eligible .
 He wondered if there were not some way to give him a consultancy that would keep him on the government payroll and carry him over the pension deadline . He had wondered whether there were any way to keep him .
 Agnew had also asked if he could keep his Secret Service protection for a while . Agnew was concerned about what would happen to his staff . He was also concerned about how his staff would be treated .
 I promised that I would see to it that . his Secret Service protection was extended, and that we would do our best to find jobs for his staff members . I promised to see to . it that his Secret . Service protection . extended, he said .
 It was agreed that on Saturday, October 6, Buzhardt would call Richardson to arrange for the talks to begin again . The talks will continue on October 6 .
 On that same Saturday morning, we received a cable from Ken Keating, our ambassador in Tel Aviv, reporting that Golda Meir had just told him that Syria and Egypt were in a final countdown for war .
 The news of the imminent attack on Israel took us completely by surprise. We were completely surprised by the news, we said . We were shocked to hear that Israel was about to be attacked .
 As recently as the day before, the CIA had reported that war in the Middle East was unlikely, dismissing as annual maneuvers the massive and unusual troop movement that had recently been taking place in Egypt .
 They had interpreted the dramatic step-up in Syrian military activity as a precautionary move . The Israelis had recently shot down three Syrian jets . They had previously interpreted the move as precautionary .
 I was disappointed by our own intelligence shortcomings, and I was stunned by the failure of Israeli intelligence, he says . I was shocked by the failures of Israel's intelligence, the former president says .
 They were among the best in the world, and they, too, had been caught off guard . They were caught by surprise at the loss of the match .
 For the first time since 1948 the Israelis were about to go into a war without having positioned their equipment or having their reserve troops on standby . The Israeli government was not ready to prepare for a war in Israel without having its equipment or reserve troops ready .
 It was also Yom Kippur—the Day of Atonement—the holiest day in the Jewish calendar . Many Israelis, including many in the armed forces, would be spending the day at home with their families or in synagogue .
 It was the one day of the year when Israel was least prepared to defend itself . Israel was at its lowest level of preparedness in the year, the Israeli PM says .
 It was tragic enough that war was once again going to plague this troubled area . It's tragic enough for war to once again plague the troubled region .
 There was an even more disturbing question mark in the background concerning the role of the Soviet Union . But there was also a question mark about the role that the former Soviet Union played .
 It was hard for me to believe that the Egyptians and Syrians would have moved without the knowledge of the Soviets, if not without their direct encouragement . The Egyptians, Syrians and Syrians moved without knowing of the Soviet involvement .
 Kissinger contacted the Israelis, the Egyptians, and the Soviets to see if war could be prevented . Kissinger also contacted the Soviets, Israel, Egypt and the Egyptians to try to prevent war . Kissinger was the last few hours before the fighting actually began .
 At eight o’clock that morning the Syrians attacked Israel from the north and the Egyptians attacked from the south . At eight a.m. that morning, Israel attacked the Syrians . The Egyptians attacked Israel on the south.
 By the end of the first day of fighting, the Egyptians had crossed the Suez Canal and begun a thrust into the Sinai . The Egyptian army is now in control of the region .
 In north the Israelis were pushing the Syrians back in the Golan Heights, but they were unable to rout them as they had in earlier conflicts . In the north the Israeli government was pushing the Syrian government back in Golan heights, but it was unable to defeat them .
 Meir was confident that if the Israelis had three or four days in which to mount a counteroffensive, they could turn the military tide on both fronts . Meir, however, was confident if Israel had a few days to mount an offensive, Meir said .
 UN Security Council convened special meeting after fighting began in Syria . There was little interest on either side in holding cease-fire discussions, UN says .
 The Soviets objected to our having called the Security Council into session . They clearly thought that the Arabs would win the war on the battlefield if they had enough time to secure their early victories . The Soviets thought that they would win it if they were able to secure early victories, he says .
 French and British were trying to stay at arm’s length; they did not share our uniquely close ties with Israel . They knew that Arab oil was at stake in this confrontation . The French and the British did not .
 As far as the American position was concerned, I saw no point in trying to impose a diplomatic cease-fire that neither side wanted or could be expected to observe . As far . as the U.S. position was . concerned, he said . "No point in imposing a diplomatic
 It would be better to wait until the war had reached the point at which neither side had a decisive military advantage . It would also be better if the war were to reach the point where neither side has a decisive advantage .
 Despite skepticism of the Israeli hawks, I believed that only a battlefield stalemate would provide the foundation on which fruitful negotiations might begin . Despite the great skepticism, I thought only a stalemate was the foundation .
 Any equilibrium of mutual exhaustion would make it easier to reach an enforceable settlement . Any equilibrium, even if only an equilibrium of exhaustion, would make an agreement easier .
 I was convinced that we must not use our influence to bring about a cease-fire that would leave the parties in such imbalance that negotiations for a permanent settlement would never begin . Therefore, I was . convinced that . we must . not use . our influence .
 I was also concerned that if the Arabs were actually to start losing this war, the Soviet leaders would feel that they could not stand by and watch their allies suffer another humiliating defeat as they had in 1967 . In 1967, the Arab Spring was the first major Arab-Arab conflict in the
 President Obama says Egypt had a 'particularly delicate situation' with the situation in the country . He says the situation was a 'very delicate' situation for Egypt .
 "We had had a series of private contacts with them. Beginning in February 1973, with a view toward building better relations," he says .
 Israel had to keep interests of the Israelis uppermost during this conflict in which they were the victims of aggression . "I hoped that we could support them in such a way that we would not force an irreparable break with the Egyptians, the Syrians, and the other Arab nations," says
 "We also had to restrain the Soviets from intervening in any way that would require us to confront them," he says . The Soviet Union was not allowed to interfere with the U.S. during the Cold War .
 Underlying all the military complications was the danger that the Arabs would try to bring economic pressure to bear on us by declaring an oil embargo . Underlying the danger was the possibility of an economic embargo .
 The immensely volatile situation created by the unexpected outbreak of this war could not have come at a more complicated domestic juncture . The situation is described as a 'vastly volatile' situation .
 Agnew was beginning the final plea-bargaining negotiations that would lead to his resignation, and I was faced with the need to select his successor . Agnew's resignation was the beginning of the negotiations that led him to resign .
 The media were slamming us with daily Watergate charges, and we had just begun reviewing the subpoenaed tapes . We were reviewing tapes in preparation for reaching a compromise with the Special Prosecutor in the unfortunate but likely event that the court of appeals ruled against us .
 Congress was pushing to assert its authority by passing a far-reaching bill to restrict the President’s war powers . The bill was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Just as a crisis in one area seemed to be settling down, it would be overtaken by another crisis in another area, until all the crises reached a concerted crescendo as we neared the brink of nuclear war . Just as one crisis was settling down was the crisis in
 By the end of the third day of the Yom Kippur War it was clear that the Israelis were overconfident about their ability to win a quick victory .
 By Tuesday, October 9, the fourth day of the war, we could see that if the Israelis were to continue fighting, we would have to provide them with planes and ammunition to replace their early losses . We would need to provide Israel with planes, ammunition and planes to replace early losses
 I met with Kissinger and told him to let the Israelis know that we would replace all their losses, and asked him to work out the logistics for doing so . I told Kissinger to let Israel know that they would replace their losses .
 I spoke first, saying that I knew his decision had been very difficult for him . I knew he was going to be very difficult, he said, but I knew it was very difficult to him .
 I knew that he was by nature a man who would almost rather have lost everything fighting, even from his disadvantaged position, than have won the assurance that he would not go to prison at the price .
 I told him how much I had appreciated his hard campaigning in 1968, 1970, and 1972 and the dedicated way he handled all of his assignments from me . I said I appreciated his work in the 1970s, 1970s and 1972 .
 I asked about his wife and family; I knew how painful it had been for them . "I know how painful" it was for them," he said. "I asked about the pain of his family."
 He was particularly embittered by what he considered the hypocrisy of the members of Congress who had formerly served as governors .
 He said he believes most of the governors in other states had followed similar practices in Maryland . Maryland's governor said he was surprised by the practice .
 He emphasized that he had always awarded contracts on the basis of merit, and he felt that the amounts he had received had been so small that no reasonable critic could have influenced him to make a decision that contravened the public interest .
 He mentioned that after a few months he would like to have some kind of foreign assignment . He thought that he could be particularly effective in a Far Eastern country, perhaps Japan . He said that he would be especially effective in Japan .
 He said he would appreciate anything that I could do to get some corporation to put him on a retainer as a consultant . He would like to be put on retainer .
 I said that if an opportunity arose in which I could help, I would do so . I said I would help if I could, I'd do so. I said if I had a chance to help I would, it would be a good thing .
 At one point he said that he supposed the IRS would be harassing him the rest of his life . At one time he said he expected the IRS to harass him for life .
 Agnew pleads nolo contendere to one count of having knowingly failed to report income for tax purposes . Agnew resigns as Vice President in federal court on tax evasion charges .
 Ted Agnew’s resignation was a personal tragedy for him and for his family, and a national tragedy as well . Agnew resigned from the White House as a result of his resignation .
 "You have addressed the great issues of our times with courage and candor. As Vice President, you have addressed these issues with courage," Vice President Obama said .
 Your strong patriotism, and your profound dedication to the welfare of the nation, have been an inspiration to all who have served with you as well as to millions of others throughout the country . Your strength of patriotism and dedication will always be an inspiration, your family says .
 I have been deeply saddened by this whole course of events, I hope that you and your family will be sustained in the days ahead by well-justified pride in all that you have contributed to the nation by your years of service as Vice President .
 On the morning of October 10 I met with the Republican and Democratic congressional leaders. "On October 10, we met with Republicans and Democrats," he says. "We're not going to be surprised," he adds .
 I said that our objective was to achieve peace without losing the support we had been able to build up in both the Arab and Israeli camps . I said: "I said that . Our objective was . achieving peace without . losing the . support we . had built up in . both the
 Neither side felt that we had turned against it. So far we had succeeded, and neither side felt it had turned . So far, we'd succeeded. We had succeeded . We'd succeeded .
 It was clear that none of these men, not even the most ardently proIsrael among them, was enthusiastic about the prospect of a Mideast war that might involve American participation .
 Later that morning, as Agnew was entering his plea in a courtroom in Baltimore, the Israeli ambassador came to the White House to deliver a letter from Golda Meir . Meir delivered the letter to Agnew .
 President Obama's decision to stop the flow of U.S. matériel to the U.N. State Department . President Obama has been criticized for the decision .
 Your decision will have a great and beneficial influence on our fighting capability. Your decision is a great, beneficial influence,’s decision will be a great .
 I know that in this hour of dire need to Israel, I could turn to you and count on your deep sympathy and understanding . I know you will be able to turn to us for support, and we will continue to support Israel .
 "We are fighting against heavy odds, but we are fully confident that we shall come out victorious. We are fighting ... but we're fighting," he said .
 Kissinger: "I had been checking almost hourly with Kissinger to see how our re-supply effort was coming" Kissinger says he was checking with Kissinger almost hourly to see if the effort was successful .
 Defense Secretary James Schlesinger was apparently concerned about offending the Arabs and therefore did not want to let any Israeli El Al transport planes land at American military bases .
 A massive Soviet airlift of weapons and supplies was under way to Syria and Egypt, and that three Soviet airborne divisions had been put on alert . Three Soviet divisions were also on alert in Egypt and Syria .
 The Arabs were obviously trying to consolidate their initial military victories . The Arab leader was trying to take advantage of his initial military victory .
 It was unthinkable that Israel should lose the war for lack of weapons while we were spraying paint over Stars of David . Israel lost the war because of lack of arms while we sprayed paint over stars of David, says Yossi .
 The situation was further complicated when we received intelligence information that our strong ally King Hussein had decided to send a small contingent of Jordanian soldiers to fight with the Syrians . The situation is further complicated by the fact that King Hussein sent a small Jordanian contingent of soldiers to Syria .
 General Brent Scowcroft, who had replaced Haig as Kissinger’s deputy, called the Israeli ambassador and expressed our hope that Israel would not widen the war by attacking Jordan . General Brent scowcroft said he hoped Israel wouldn't attack Jordan .
 In the midst of the developing Mideast crisis I had to turn my attention to the selection of the new Vice President . In the middle of the crisis, I was able to focus on the selection .
 "Several members of Congress came to the White House to talk to me about it," President Obama says . "I'm not sure if it's true," he says .
 Many Democrats were understandably apprehensive at the prospect of the sudden elevation of a strong Republican to a position of national prominence . Many of the Democrats are understandably anxious .
 Vice President would enjoy many of the advantages of incumbency if he became the Republican nominee in 1976, he says .
 There was already a drumbeat of demands from the more partisan Democrats that I not appoint anyone who was going to run for President in 1976 . They wanted a caretaker Vice President who would fill out Agnew's unexpired term .
 Senator John Sherman Cooper of Kentucky and Bill Rogers of Kentucky were his choice of choice . Rogers was a Republican senator from Kentucky .
 Connally, Rockefeller, or Reagan would meet with very strong opposition in Congress, he said . He said that Connally or Rockefeller would meet strong opposition .
 This was a signal that if I nominated one of these dynamic Republican presidential contenders, the Democrats would turn very partisan . This was, and I am sure was meant to be, meant to signal that . I nominate one of those dynamic Republican candidates, Hillary Clinton .
 I said that the primary criterion had to be the man’s qualification for the job, and I deliberately mentioned Jerry Ford as an example of a qualified man . Jerry Ford is a prime contender for the top job in the United States .
 On October 11 I left for Camp David with Rose’s compilation of recommendations and text of an announcement speech . The speech was prepared with four optional endings: for Connally, for Rockefeller, Rockefeller, for Reagan, and for Ford .
 Ford was first choice among members of Congress, President Obama says . Ford's nomination would require approval from Congress, he says . "They were the ones who would have to approve the man I nominated," he says of Ford .
 As early as October 6 I had asked Haig to call him and see whether he would take the position if it were offered to him . Haig: "I had asked him to call me to see if he would be interested in taking the job"
 I had also wanted to know Connally’s own assessment of his chances of confirmation . Connally: “I’m not sure if I’ll be confirmed to be a senator in the U.S.”
 He would be opposed by an overwhelming number of Democrats who would fear him as the strongest possible Republican candidate in 1976 . He would face an overwhelming majority of Democrats .
 'I could not become embroiled in a massive partisan slugging match over the selection of the new Vice President. With all the problems I was having with Watergate, I could not get embroiled in such a massive partisanship slugging .’s choice of Vice President would be a major
 I had Haig call Connally again and tell him that, while he still remained my first choice, I was very seriously concerned whether he could survive a confirmation battle . I had to tell Connally that while he was still remained his first choice .
 Connally replied that he had been checking through his own sources and had reached the same conclusion . Connally: "I was checking through my own sources"
 I felt that Jerry Ford was qualified to be President if for any reason I did not complete my term . I knew that his views on both domestic and foreign policy were very close to mine and that he would be a dedicated team player . He would be the easiest to get confirmed, says
 "I returned to the White House early on Friday morning, October 12, and told Haig of my decision," he said . "I'm not going to let Haig down," he added .
 He agreed immediately that Ford was the right choice in the circumstances . Ford was chosen by the president of the United States .
 I wondered if Connally remembered, as I did, that I had once told him about a conversation I had had with Jerry Ford in 1972 . Ford had told me that in his view Connally was the man for 1976, Connally would be the man .
 We now had one week to decide if we wished to appeal the decision to the Supreme Court . The decision was made in a bid to appeal to the highest court .
 Hugh Scott and Jerry Ford arrived to talk about the congressional schedule for the next few days . Hugh Scott: "It's a good start to the week"
 Ford had been hoping that during this visit he would learn that he was going to be named Vice President . Ford had appeared downcast when he left the White House . Ford: "I was amused by news accounts that he seemed downcast" Ford:
 Plans for resupplying Israel with military equipment have become seriously bottlenecked . Israel's military equipment supply needs to be resupplied to Israel, says CNN's John Sutter .
 No insurance company was willing to risk issuing policies for chartered private planes flying there . Because Israel was a war zone, no insurance companies were willing to issue policies for private planes .
 The Pentagon is considering mobilizing a part of the Civil Reserve Air Fleet . The U.S. military says it has no insurance policy .
 The option of flying supplies to the Azores for transshipment to Israel was also considered . After much discussion we were able to persuade the reluctant Portuguese government to agree to this .
 Soviet airlift was assuming such massive proportions and the Israeli shortages, particularly ammunition, were becoming so serious . I concluded that any further delay was unacceptable and decided we must use U.S. military aircraft if that was what was necessary .
 I asked Kissinger to convey my decision to the Pentagon, have them prepare a plan, Kissinger said . Kissinger said he would convey his decision to have them prepared a plan for the Pentagon .
 Pentagon's proposal was that we send only three C-5A military transport planes to Israel . I was shocked when he told me that the Pentagon’s proposal was only three . The Pentagon is proposing to only send three military transport .
 A small number of planes would cause fewer difficulties with the Egyptians, the Syrians, and also the Soviets, the U.S. says . Their rationale was that sending a small number planes would .
 My reaction was that we would take just as much heat for sending three planes as for sending thirty . My reaction to the controversy was that it would be just as easy for sending 30 planes as sending three .
 I called Schlesinger and told him that I understood his concern and appreciated his caution . I called him to tell him that he appreciated his concern .
 I would accept personal responsibility if, as a result, we alienated the Arabs and had our oil supplies cut off . I assured him that I was fully aware of the gravity of my decision, he said .
 I said if we could not get private planes, we should use our own military transports, he said . "We should use the military transports," he added .
 When I was informed that there was disagreement in the Pentagon about which kind of plane should be used for the airlift, I became exasperated . "I became totally exasperated. I was told that the Pentagon had decided to use a different type of plane," he said .
 Jerry Ford was chosen for Vice President by President Richard Nixon on October 12, 1973 . President Nixon called Jerry Ford at home to ask if he was prepared to accept .
 Ford asked if we could call back on another number so that his wife, Betty, could share the call on an extension phone . Ford asked for us to call back to another number to share the conversation with his wife Betty .
 After talking with both Jerry and Betty, I went to the Residence to tell Pat the news . "I told Pat," she said, "I went to tell him the news"
 At nine that night the announcement was made at a televised ceremony in the East Room . The announcement was announced at 9 p.m. ET that night .
 Haig came in to discuss the latest Soviet message, which had been delivered to the White House earlier in the evening . Haig had just finished a small steak when he came in .
 The message stated that they had heard we were supplying Israel with bombs, air-to-air missiles, planes, and tanks . The message said they had been told they were supplying them with bombs .
 No threats were made, but the menacing tone and intention of the message was clear . The message was sent with a menacing tone, the police say .
 Thirty C130 transports were on their way to Israel the next day . Our airlift to Israel had not yet begun at the time he wrote .
 I also ordered that an additional ten Phantom Jets be delivered to Israel . Israel is the first country to receive the Phantom Jets from the U.S.
 The Israelis had already begun to turn the tide of battle on their own, he says . They were able to push all the way to the outskirts of Damascus and were close to encircling the Egyptian forces in the Sinai .
 Court of Appeals ruled against Special Prosecutor’s suit for nine tapes . It was not until Saturday morning that I finally had time to go over the decision of the court of appeals .
 In one sense the ruling was a victory, because the court accepted our argument that wholesale access to executive deliberations would cripple the government . In another sense, the ruling is a victory because of the court's decision to allow the government to hold executive deliberations in executive deliberations .
 The majority opinion said the ruling should be considered an “unusual and limited” requirement for a President to produce material evidence . The majority of opinion said that the ruling was an ‘unusual” and ‘limited’ requirement .
 The majority on the court rejected our contention that only a President could decide whether such material was or not privileged . But such a victory was relative at best, the court said . The majority rejected our argument that only the President could .
 Gallup showed us with 38 percent support; since then we’ve had a backbreaking schedule of foreign and domestic newsworthy events . After our August 15 statement, Gallup showed . us with . 38 per cent support . Since then, we've had three press conferences, and a back
 "We hear from some of our friends in Congress that Congress is in a better mood," says Rep. Tom Coburn . "Ervin is going down in public esteem," Coburn says . Coburn: Ervin is not as biased as it was .
 Gallup and Harris show our support going down from 38 in Gallup to 32 in Gallup . In Harris the number of resignation rising to 31 in Harris, with 56 opposed .
 "We were being worn down, trapped, paralyzed. Week by week, month by month, we were ... paralyzed," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to get back on the ground," says Obama .
 It had been four and a half months since Haldeman and Ehrlichman resigned; four months since Cox named . Cox was named four months ago; it was four months before he was named .
 Rumors that he wanted to indict me continued . Despite the fact that a President can only be impeached, rumors that he wants to indict him continued . The President was impeached by impeachment .
 Conservatives in Congress and on staff had long felt that he had to go, both because of liberal enclave he had established and also because of parasite he had become, dangerously draining the executive .
 "Firing him seemed the only way to rid the administration of the partisan viper we had planted in our bosom," says Obama . "We had planted ourselves in the bosom. Firing him was the only thing we had to do to rid him," he says .
 "I knew that it would be only a matter of days before Cox would be back for more, and then more after that," she says . Cox is back in the studio for a new series of re-takes from the White House .
 The ruling was imposed on the timetable imposed on us by the ruling . But any such considerations were extraneous to us, the judge said .
 Appointing a Special Prosecutor had been a major mistake, one that I knew would be difficult and costly to remedy, says President Barack Obama .
 The Watergate investigation was considered 90 percent complete months earlier . President Nixon decided to fire Cox and return investigation to Justice Department . Watergate investigation would not have interest in self-perpetuation .
 When the idea of supplying summaries instead of transcripts of the subpoenaed tapes had first been explored at the end of September, we had begun thinking of finding some outside person who could verify their accuracy . The idea of providing summaries was first explored in September .
 Stennis was a Democrat, the Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Standards and Conduct, a former judge . He was one of the few men in Congress respected by members of both parties .
 Summaries, we felt, would not compromise the critical question of precedent . Summarys would not be able to make a decision on precedent, we said .
 On Sunday, October 14, I saw Stennis for a few minutes after the White House worship service . I mentioned the possibility of Stennis verifying the accuracy of some tape summaries .
 Cox was officially Richardson’s subordinate, and therefore Richardson would be the one who would have to fire him . Cox would be Richardson's subordinate, therefore Richardson was the one to have to have him fired . Cox was the president of the U.S. House of Representatives .
 Richardson promised at his confirmation hearings that he would not fire Cox except for “extraordinary improprieties” Richardson might feel that if he fired Cox he too would have to resign for breaking his promise to the Senate . He had publicly acknowledged the constitutional foundations of my refusal to hand
 After their meeting Haig confirmed that this was indeed how Richardson felt . Haig also confirmed that Richardson felt strongly about Haig .
 Richardson's resignation was something we wanted to avoid at all costs . Richardson’s resignation is something we’ve never seen before . Richardson: ‘I’m not sure what I’ll do next. Richardson was something I wanted to do,’ says
 "I was still determined that this would be the end of our compromises with Cox," says Cox . Cox: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm still determined"
 Richardson felt that the plan was good and reasonable and that Stennis was perfect for the job . Haig told Richardson this and reported back that Richardson felt it was a good plan .
 He said he had received Richardson’s assurance that if Cox refused to accept the Stennis compromise, Richardson would support me in the controversy that was bound to ensue . He also said that he had . received . assurances that Cox would accept the compromise, he said .
 Haig said Richardson was confident there would be no problem and that Cox, who had been his mentor at Harvard Law School and with whom he had been friendly ever since, would agree to the compromise . Haig was confident Cox would agree with him .
 Haig and Buzhardt went to see Stennis and confirmed the arrangements on Monday . Haig: Stennis' funeral will be held at St. John's Golf Club .
 Stennis would verify the line-by-line summaries of the tapes that we produced and attest to the propriety of whatever omissions we made of material that dealt with irrelevant or national security matters .
 We had also decided to provide the verified summaries to Ervin and Baker for the Watergate Committee . The Watergate Committee will also be investigating the documents .
 On October 17 I met in the Oval Office with four Arab Foreign Ministers . President Obama met with Arab foreign ministers in October .
 At 8:45 p.M. on Thursday, October 18, we received word of a proposal the Soviets intended to submit to the UN Security Council for a joint Mideast cease-fire resolution . The proposal was intended to be submitted to the Security Council .
 Israeli successes and airlift proved too much for the Arabs and their Soviet sponsors, they said . They proposed a resolution based on a cease-fire in place, immediate withdrawal by the Israelis to the borders described in UN Resolution 242 .
 Soviet insistence that before any peace talks could begin, Israel would have to give up territory gained in 1967 war . Israel had gained territory they had gained in the 1967 war, but had to give it back to Soviet territory .
 This demand was utterly unrealistic, since the Israelis saw this territory not just as their leverage in any negotiations, but as essential to their national security in the present environment . This demand is utterly unrealistic . Israel's demand was not just their leverage, but it was essential to national security .
 Recent Israeli battlefield successes had given them a decided military advantage . Besides, the recent Israeli battlefield . successes had . given them military advantage, and there was no chance whatever that they would accept willingly the same terms the Arabs would have tried to impose if they had been the victors .
 I sent a response that did not commit us to accepting the Soviet proposal . I stressed the importance of keeping communications open, he said .
 I said that our détente would remain incomplete unless peace was achieved in the Middle East and both of us had played a part in it . Both of us said that peace in the Mideast would not be achieved unless peace had been achieved .
 In the meantime Haig reported that Richardson had talked with Cox but could not persuade him to compromise . Haig said that Richardson and Cox were unable to find a compromise .
 Richardson told Haig that Cox didn't have the sense of who Stennis was, his integrity, that Washington insiders had . Richardson said Cox didn’t have a sense of the integrity Stennis had, Richardson said .
 Cox wanted specific assurances of total access to all White House documents and tapes in the future . Cox also wanted access to White House tapes and documents . Cox: "I want to know if you have any of the answers to my questions"
 Richardson met with Haig, Wright, Garment, and Buzhardt on Thursday and Friday, October 18 and 19 .
 Haig told me Richardson suggested as an alternative to firing Cox, putting what he called “parameters” around him . Haig said Richardson had suggested putting "parameters" around Cox . Richardson suggested that Cox should be put in charge of the White House .
 The Special Prosecutor, as a part of the executive branch, was required to obey the orders of his superiors . He was ordered to obey those orders by the Special Prosecutor .
 The parameters could include an instruction that he was forbidden to sue for any further presidential documents .
 In the meantime we would bypass Cox with the Stennis compromise by offering the transcripts to the court and to the Ervin Committee . The transcripts should be offered to the courts and Ervin committee .
 Haig says everyone was certain Cox would resign if he did not accept the Stennis compromise . This would pose no problem for Richardson, according to Haig .
 On October 19, Brezhnev sent a letter from the Soviet leader to the White House . The letter arrived from a letter of support for Cox .
 He said the situation in the Middle East was becoming more and more dangerous . He said that the situation is becoming more dangerous and dangerous .
 Neither U.S. nor the Soviet Union wanted to see our relations harmed, he said . He said that we both should do our utmost to keep events in the Middle East from taking an even more dangerous turn .
 The Israelis were now defeating the Arabs on the battlefield, and over the next few days the Soviets would have to decide what they were going to do about it .
 In the afternoon I sent Congress a request for $2.2 billion in emergency aid for Israel . President Obama has asked Congress to send a request of $2 billion for Israel aid .
 The Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries had voted to reduce crude oil production . On October 17, the Arab oil producers voted to cut production in a vote of Arab nations .
 Israel, Abu Dhabi, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Algeria and Kuwait imposed total oil embargoes on the United States . Within a few days after my request for aid to Israel, the U.S. was imposed a total oil embargo by the Arab nations .
 "I felt that we could do no less for Israel at such a critical time," he said . "Even so, I felt that . we could . do no more," he added .
 Later that same afternoon, Haig brought word of what he called a “tepid’s complaint from Richardson about some of the terms of our plan for dealing with Cox . Haig says Richardson complained about some terms of the plan .
 They had been reached in New Orleans and Chicago respectively and brought to Washington aboard Air Force jets . They were brought to the U.S. aboard planes .
 When I told them about the Stennis compromise, they both seemed pleased and relieved . "They both seemed relieved and relieved," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I told him that I regretted that I had talked to him so bluntly on the telephone in July . Toward the end of the interview, he said he regretted that he had spoken so bluntly to him .
 He said that he had not realized at the time that I was ill and that no apologies were necessary . He said he had no idea he had been ill and said no apologies necessary .
 Haig notified the White House staff, Cabinet, and Jerry Ford . Baker and Ervin agreed to the Stennis compromise, Haig said .
 Bryce Harlow, who was helping Haig make the calls to the Cabinet, mistakenly called Elliot Richardson . It was reported to have been reported to be reported to me later that .
 Harlow reported this incident to Haig, who immediately called Richardson and said that he was astonished to hear what he had said to Harlow . Haig was shocked to hear that he had spoken to Richardson .
 He told Haig that he was very tired and had had a drink and that things were looking much better to him now . Haig said he was tired and that he had had drink and things are looking better .
 I announced the Stennis compromise in a statement released at 8:15 p.m. ET that night . The compromise was announced in a press conference in Washington, D.C.
 What matters most, in this critical hour, is our ability to act, not to be paralyzed and overwhelmed by them, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 At home, the Watergate issue has taken on overtones of a partisan political contest . At home it has become a political issue for the president .
 Watergate-related difficulties at home may tempt some to misread U.S. unity and resolve abroad, he says . He says the world may misread America’s unity in meeting challenges we confront abroad .
 Stennis compromise would be sent to Judge Sirica and to Ervin Committee . Then Stennis agreed to send verified summaries to judge Sirica, Ervin committee .
 I have felt it necessary to direct him, as an employee of the executive branch, to make no further attempts by judicial process to obtain tapes, notes, or memoranda of presidential conversations .
 "Any legitimate need of the Special Prosecutor is fully satisfied and that he can proceed to obtain indictments against those who may have committed any crimes," he says .
 President Barack Obama has taken action to prevent further indecision and litigation about tapes . Obama: "America will be spared the anguish of further indecisions and litigation"
 The initial congressional and public reaction to the Stennis compromise was favorable . The compromise was approved by Congress and the public .
 Congressional colleagues in both parties expressed confidence in Stennis . Congressional colleagues of both parties express confidence in his appointment .
 David Broder wrote a column describing him as the logical man for the job . He says he is the logical candidate for the White House .
 Brezhnev's suggestion that Kissinger go to Moscow for direct talks about the Middle East . Kissinger agreed to meet with Soviet leader in Moscow for talks about Mideast .
 Kissinger phoned Kissinger just before he left for Moscow to discuss his trip to Moscow . Kissinger had been in Moscow since October 19, 1973, when he was in Moscow .
 The next morning, Saturday, October 20, I sent a stern letter to Brezhnev . The next day, Saturday morning, he wrote a sternly-word to the Soviet leader . The letter was sent to the White House .
 "I purposely mitigated the hard language in the text with a handwritten note extending best personal regards from Pat and me to him and Mrs. Mrs. Pat," she said .
 Brezhnev is grateful for the regards and joins me in sending our best personal regards to Mrs. Mrs. Brezhneva . Mrs. Brezhnova: "We are grateful for your good wishes and your good luck"
 He said he is “certainly not out to get the President of the United States.” Adopting the air of a modest and even befuddled professor, he said, “I am certainly not out . The president of the U.S. should be
 He said that he was going ahead with his request for the tapes despite the compromise I had offered . He said he would not accept a compromise on the tapes .
 He questioned whether Elliot Richardson could give him instructions that he was legally obligated to obey . He said he questioned whether anyone but Richardson could have given him instructions . Richardson: "Anyone but Elliot Richardson can give me instructions that I'm obligated to follow"
 "I strongly felt that I could not allow Cox to defy openly a presidential directive," says Cox . Cox was ordered to stand down from the White House . Cox is the first woman to be allowed to leave the country .
 I thought of Brezhnev and how it would look to the Soviets if in the midst of our diplomatic showdown with them I were in the position of having to defer to the demands of one of my own employees . "I thought of the Soviets," he said .
 "I felt that he was trying to get me personally, and I wanted him out. Furthermore, I thought that Cox had deliberately exceeded his authority," he said .
 Haig called Richardson and asked him to fire Cox . Cox was fired shortly after 2:30 p.m. ET .
 Richardson said that he would not resign, and that he wanted to see me in order to resign . Richardson then said he would resign, but Richardson said he did not .
 There were rumors Richardson in conversations with others was now trying to back off from his own role in the formulation of the compromise and the cease-and-desist directive to Cox .
 When Richardson arrived at the White House, Haig appealed to him to withhold his resignation until the Mideast crisis had been resolved . Haig: "When Richardson arrived in the U.S. he had to hold his resignation at least until the crisis was resolved"
 The impact of his resignation during this crisis, while Kissinger was meeting with Brezhnev, might have incalculable effects, not just on the Soviets’ assessment of our intentions and our strength, but on the morale within our own government . Kissinger's resignation during the crisis
 Shortly after 4:30 p.m. he was ushered into the Oval Office to tender his resignation . He was ushered in the White House to tend to resign .
 "I talked to him about the gravity of the decision he was making and the ramifications of the things it might precipitate," he says .
 I told him how serious I thought the next days were going to be with respect to the situation in the Mideast . I repeated Haig’s arguments in a personal appeal to him to delay his resignation in order not to trigger a domestic crisis at such a critical time for
 He thanked me for being such a good friend and for having honored him with so many high appointments . He said: "I'm so proud of my friendship that I've had so much respect for him"
 Richardson’s Deputy, William Ruckelshaus, was the next in line to succeed as Attorney General, but he let us know that he too would resign rather than fire Cox . Cox was the Attorney General of Texas .
 I feared that we were in for a whole chain of resignations, and I was not sure where it would end . I feared it would be a chain of such resignations and I thought it would continue .
 The third-ranking official in the Justice Department was the Solicitor General, Robert Bork . Bork was the Attorney General for the Department of Justice .
 The resignations of his two superiors placed Bork in a painfully difficult position . Bork's two superiors resigned last week .
 President Obama says he fired Cox because he was a constitutional scholar . But he said he had the constitutional right to do so and that he therefore had the duty to carry out my orders .
 At 8:22 PM. on Saturday, October 20, Ziegler announced Cox was being fired, Richardson and Ruckelshaus had resigned . The office of the Watergate Special Prosecutor was being abolished .
 The television networks broke into their regular programming with breathless, almost hysterical, bulletins . The networks were almost hysterical .
 Commentators painted the night’s events in terms of an administration coup aimed at suppressing opposition . Commentators and correspondents talked in apocalyptic terms about the events .
 Some called it the “Night of the Long Knives’ in a tasteless and inflammatory comparison with Hitler’s murderous purge of his opposition in 1934 . Some called the ‘Night . of the long knives” in an inflammatory comparison .
 On Monday evening, the network news shows ran 19 different attacks on me by various congressmen . These were balanced by only five defenses, three of them by Bork, three by his defense .
 By Tuesday, October 23, there were twenty-one resolutions for impeachment in varying stages of discussion on Capitol Hill . The resolutions are in varying states of discussion .
 Six newspapers that had formerly been staunch supporters of the administration now called for my resignation . Six newspapers had previously called for me to resign from the White House .
 By October 30, in a straight party-line vote, the House Judiciary Committee voted itself subpoena power . On November 15 the House voted to allocate $1 million to begin the process of impeachment .
 I was taken by surprise by the ferocious intensity of the reaction that actually occurred . I had been prepared for a major and adverse reaction to Cox’s firing, I said . I was prepared to be prepared for the reaction, but I was surprised .
 For the first time I recognized the depth of the impact Watergate had been having on America . I suddenly realized how deeply its acid had eaten into the nation’s grain . The Watergate crisis was the beginning of Watergate's downfall .
 As I learned of the almost hysterical reactions of otherwise sensible and responsible people to this Saturday night’s events, I realized how few people were able to see things from my perspective, how badly frayed the nerves of the American public had become .
 "To the extent that I had not been aware of this situation, my actions were the result of serious miscalculation. To the extent, I had . not known this situation," he said .
 I felt I had no other option than to act as I did. But to the extent that it was simply intolerable to continue with Cox as Special Prosecutor, I said .
 Kissinger and Brezhnev produced the draft of a proposed cease-fire agreement in Moscow on Sunday, October 21 . In Moscow on October 21, the two leaders produced a draft of the agreement .
 Brezhnev was to inform Sadat and Asad of its terms, and Kissinger left for Tel Aviv to present it to Tel Aviv . Kissinger left to present the deal to the Israelis .
 Negotiation aims to establish a just and durable peace in the Mideast . Negotiation between the concerned parties aimed at establishing a just . and durable . peace .
 The Soviets agreed to direct negotiations between the parties without any conditions or qualifications . These terms were especially notable because they were the first in which they were first to call for direct negotiations .
 Both the Arabs and the Israelis accepted the terms, and on Monday, October 22, the cease-fire went into effect .
 Israeli troops completed encirclement of 20,000-man Egyptian Third Army on east bank of Suez Canal . Within hours, the Israelis charged that the Egyptians were violating it and resumed an active offensive .
 Kissinger received a message from the Soviets blaming the Israelis for the breakdown of the cease-fire . Sadat had suggested that the U.S. and the Soviet Union agree on measures to ensure physical disengagement of Egyptian and Israeli forces .
 Brezhnev sent urgent message to Washington-Moscow hot line on October 23 . Twenty minutes later, at 11 A.M. on Oct. 23, he received an urgent message from the Soviet leader .
 Although it began, “Esteemed Mr President,” the words were hard and cold . The words were cold and cold. Although it started, it was hard to say .
 Brezhnev ignored the Egyptian provocations and charged the Israelis with rupturing the cease-fire . The Egyptian provocation was the reason for the break-up of the ceasefire, he said .
 He urged that the United States move decisively to stop the violations . The U.S. should act decisively, he said .
 Egypt was the first party to violate the cease-fire, the president says . I sent a reply that, according to our information, Egypt violated the ceasefire, he says .
 I said that we had insisted that Israel take immediate steps to cease hostilities, and I urged Brezhnev to do the same on the Egyptian side . I said we had . insisted that . Israel take steps to . cease hostilities . I urged the same . on the . Egyptian side
 I closed by saying that he and I had achieved a historic settlement over the past weekend and should not permit it to be destroyed . "I closed by . saying that . he and . I . had achieved an historic settlement"
 By the time I reached Camp David that afternoon, Brezhnev had sent a message that the Egyptian side was ready for another cease-fire if the Israelis would agree . By the end of the day, there had been a truce in place, but it was not agreed .
 We sent back a reply urging him to press Syria as well as Egypt to accept the cease-fire . We also asked him to push Syria and Egypt to take part in the ceasefire .
 Charles Alan Wright was scheduled to appear before Judge Sirica on Tuesday, October 23, to announce his decision on the subpoenaed tapes . Wright was due to appear in court that same day, Tuesday, Oct. 23 . Wright had been subpoenaed by the judge .
 The Stennis compromise had fallen apart in the wake of the Cox firing, and shortly before Wright was to leave for the court I met with him, Haig, Garment, and Buzhardt to make the decision .
 I could see that we were going to have to act swiftly or risk an impeachment resolution being raced through the House . The House of Representatives voted to pass a resolution to impeach President Barack Obama .
 "At the same time, I knew the implications of such compliance, both for the principle of executive privilege and for my personal situation," he says .
 The White House is considering a vote on whether to remove the president from office . But that would force an even more binding decision, possibly a negative one .
 There was a need to relieve the domestic crisis in order to reduce the temptation the Soviets would feel to take advantage of our internal turmoil by exploiting the international crisis in the Middle East . Finally, I felt that there was a . need to . relieve domestic crisis .
 I consoled myself that these tapes might finally prove that Dean had lied in his testimony against me . Dean's testimony may finally prove his testimony was wrong, she says .
 That afternoon Sadat publicly requested that Brezhnev and I send a joint peacekeeping force to the Middle East . Sadat's request was met by the Soviet Union and the United States, President Nixon said .
 The Soviets would obviously back this idea, viewing it as an opportunity to re-establish their military presence in Egypt . The idea would be seen as a chance to reestablish their presence in the country .
 The Soviets were plotting for the nonaligned nations to sponsor and support a joint U.S.-U.S.R. force whether we liked it or not, says John Scali . Scali, now our ambassador to the UN, also picked up rumors about the plan .
 A resolution may be introduced into the Security Council this evening urging that outside military forces be sent to enforce the cease-fire . The United States and U.S.R. may also be asked to send forces to the Middle East .
 It would be impossible to assemble sufficient outside military power to represent an effective counterweight to the indigenous forces now engaged in combat in the Middle East .
 Should the two great nuclear powers be called upon to provide forces, it would introduce an extremely dangerous potential for direct great-power rivalry in the area, writes Andrew Hammond .
 He claimed to have hard information that Israeli forces were fighting Egyptian forces on the east bank of the Suez Canal . He said he has hard information about Israeli forces being fighting Egyptian troops .
 We knew that this was not true; it had been a relatively quiet day on the battlefront . We knew we knew that . This was not the case, it was the case that the war had been relatively quiet on the battlefield .
 There was clearly some ulterior motive behind Brezhnev’s message, and we would have to wait and see what it was . The message was clearly clear, but there was clearly a motive behind it, according to the Kremlin .
 Kissinger called Dobrynin and read the message to him just to be sure there was no mistake . The message represented perhaps the most serious threat to U.S.-Soviet relations since the Cuban missile crisis eleven years before .
 Brezhnev repeated his assertion that Israel was fighting despite the Security Council cease-fire . The Soviet leader also said that Israel had been fighting in violation of the UN Security Council agreement .
 He urged the United States and the Soviet Union each immediately dispatch military contingents to the region . Therefore he urged that the U.S. and the . Soviet . Union each other immediately dispatch .
 He called for an immediate reply and stated that if we did not agree to the joint action he proposed, the Soviets would consider acting unilaterally . He said if we didn't agree to a joint action, he would act unilaterally .
 When Haig informed me about this message, I said that he and Kissinger should have a meeting at the White House . Kissinger should formulate plans for a firm reaction to what amounted to a scarcely veiled threat of unilateral Soviet intervention, he says .
 Words were not making our point, we needed action, even the shock of a military alert . We needed action even more than words were made to make our point . We need action, not words, even shock of military alert, we said .
 "I asked you to consider the consequences for your country if the two great nuclear countries were thus to confront each other on your soil," he said . I asked the U.S. President Barack Obama to consider what would happen if they confronted each other .
 I ask you further to consider the impossibility for us for undertaking the diplomatic initiative which was to start with Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Dr. Cameron: "I ask you . consider the possibility for us to undertake this diplomatic initiative"
 Kissinger’s visit to Cairo on November 7 would be if the forces of one of the great nuclear powers were to be involved militarily on Egyptian soil . Kissinger's visit would be a major security risk for the Egyptian people .
 Kissinger, Haig, Schlesinger, Scowcroft, Moorer, and Director Colby of the CIA met at eleven o’clock in the White House Situation Room . Kissinger and Haig met in the Situation Room at 11:30am .
 Their unanimous recommendation was that we should put all American conventional and nuclear forces on military alert . U.S. military forces should be put on alert, they said .
 "In the early morning hours we flashed the word to American bases, installations, and naval units at home and around the world," the Navy says .
 I sent a letter to the Soviet Embassy for immediate transmission to Moscow . When we were sure the Soviets had picked up the first signs of the alert, I sent it to the Embassy .
 Mr General Secretary: I have carefully studied your important message of this evening . Mr Secretary of State: "I will not be surprised if I am not able to answer this question."
 I agree with you that our understanding to act jointly for peace is of the highest value and that we should implement that understanding in this complex situation . I agree, I agree that our agreement to act joint for peace in this situation is of highest value .
 I must tell you, however, that your proposal for a particular kind of joint action, that of sending Soviet and American military contingents to Egypt, is not appropriate in the present circumstances . I have told you that this is not the case for a joint action .
 We must view your suggestion of unilateral action as a matter of the gravest concern involving incalculable consequences . In these circumstances, we must view it as a serious matter of concern . We are concerned about the consequences of this unilateral action .
 It is clear that the forces necessary to impose the cease-fire terms on the two sides would be massive and would require closest coordination so as to avoid bloodshed . It's clear that it would be difficult to impose a ceasefire on Syria and Syria .
 This is not only clearly infeasible but it is not appropriate to the situation, it's not only clear that this is not the only way to deal with the crisis, but it's a waste of time .
 I said I would be prepared to agree that some American and Soviet personnel go to the area, but not as combat forces . I said that I would agree to agree to some U.S. and . Soviet personnel . But not as . combat forces, he said .
 It would be understood that this is an extraordinary and temporary step, solely for the purpose of providing adequate information concerning compliance by both sides with the terms of the cease-fire . The move is understood to be temporary .
 Mr General Secretary, in the spirit of our agreements this is the time for acting not unilaterally but in harmony and with cool heads . Mr Secretary says: "Mr General Secretary. Mr Secretary, this is a time to act not unilaterally ... with cool head"
 As I stated above, such action would produce incalculable consequences which would be in the interest of neither of our countries and which would end all we have striven so hard to achieve. Such action would not be in our interest of either of our nations, Mr Hague said .
 At 7:15am. on October 25 a message arrived from President Sadat that he understood our position and that he would ask the UN to provide an international peacekeeping force . At 7.15am, Sadat sent a message to the U.N. to say he understood
 "I met with Haig and Kissinger at eight, and less than an hour later I briefed the bipartisan leadership on these latest events," says President Obama .
 The room hushed as I described the exchanges of the last few hours . The room was hushed .
 "When leaders left, they said that they were fully in support of my actions and my policy, including the military alert," he said .
 Kissinger held a press conference after Brezhnev gave no word on the Soviet reaction . Kissinger was waiting for word of the Soviet response . Kissinger held the press conference at the time .
 Four of the questions at Kissinger’s press conference specifically related to whether the decision to call the alert had been based entirely on the military aspects of the situation . It had been a severe shock to the American people to wake up and find that during the night our armed forces had been
 Some even wondered whether the decision had been totally rational . Some even obliquely wondered whether it had been completely rational .
 As Kissinger was parrying questions, Brezhnev sent a message from the Soviet leader . Kissinger: "There is no doubt that we are going to be able to talk to each other again"
 In a few short sentences he announced that the Soviet Union was going to send seventy individual ‘observers” to the Middle East . The Soviet Union will send seventy individuals to the region, he said .
 This was completely different from the military contingent he had described in his earlier letter . This was a completely different military contingent, he said in his letter .
 We do not believe it necessary to have separate observer forces from individual countries operating in the area. We believe it is not necessary for individual countries to operate in the region .
 I evaluated the Soviet behavior during the Mideast crisis not as an example of the failure of détente, but as an illustration of its limitations . The Soviet behavior was an example, he says, of which I had always been keenly aware .
 The Soviet Union will always act in its own self-interest; and so will the U.S. The United States. It will act in the same way as the Soviet Union. The U.K. and the United States will act self-interested.
 All we can hope from détente is that it will minimize confrontation in marginal areas and provide, at least, alternative possibilities in the major ones . All we hope is that this will minimize confrontations and provide alternatives .
 In 1973 the Soviets feared that they would lose what little foothold they had left in the Middle East . In 1973, the Soviets had already reduced their presence in the region .
 As our direct approaches to Egypt and the Arab countries had met with increasing success, the Soviets had undoubtedly compensated with increased anti-Israeli bravado . The Soviets had certainly compensated with increasing anti-Israel bravado, writes David Cameron .
 The Arab countries were fanatically determined to regain the occupied territories from Israel if the Soviets would supply the means . Perhaps this indirectly encouraged the Arab countries, which were fanatical determined to recapture the territories .
 Brezhnev heatedly denied it when I talked to him at Summit IIT in Moscow in June 1974 . The Soviets may have gone even further and directly urged the Arabs to attack, writes Peter Bergen .
 The Soviets might have assumed that the domestic crisis in the United States would deflect or deter us from aiding Israel as much or as fast as we had in the past . The U.S. might also have assumed it would deflect the U.K. from helping Israel .
 Israeli counteroffensive made possible by U.S. airlift . American airlift made possible to counter Israeli offensive . Israeli forces had hoped to win victory in Gaza .
 For the second time in six years the Arabs lost most of the Soviet equipment that had been sent them . The Arabs lost the equipment that was sent them to the Soviet Union .
 For the first time in an Arab-Israeli conflict the U.S. conducted itself in a manner that not only preserved but greatly enhanced our relations with the Arabs . Even while we were massively re-supplying the Israelis, the United States re-subsidized the Israelis .
 Egyptian and Syrian leaders were ready to try the path of negotiation . They realized that military victory was now beyond their reach for at least several years .
 Russia has a new policy of carefully cultivated relations with Arab capitals . Arab leaders had a place other than Moscow to turn, says Putin . Russia's new policy is to cultivate direct relations with the Arab capitals, he says .
 Watergate was so obsessive that some reporters and publications continued to make suggestions that I had purposely provoked or encouraged the Mideast crisis to distract attention from Watergate . I was still capable of leadership and action, he says .
 CNN's John Sutter faced this problem head on at a press conference on October 26 . Sutter: "With this in mind, and thinking about the reporting on the Cox firing, I faced this issue head on"
 Brezhnev made a formal complaint about what he called Israeli hostilities . In particular he referred to their handling of food and medical supplies intended for the trapped Egyptian Third Army .
 He complained that the recent U.S. alert had not promoted a relaxation of tension . He also said the recent United States alert had surprised him .
 I said we would do our part to assist the transport of supplies to the wounded Egyptians in the Third Army . In my reply I said that we would help transport supplies to those wounded .
 In response to his criticism of the alert, I quoted the words he had written threatening to take unilateral action unless we joined his plan to send U.S. and Soviet forces to the Middle East .
 I repeated the fact that the peace of the world depended on the policies and actions of our two countries, he said . The peace depended on both a positive and negative sense, he added .
 She expressed her gratitude for the airlift . President Barack Obama met with her in the Oval Office .
 Lacking a settlement, the only policy is constantly being prepared for war . The only policy of peace is to prepare for war, the government says .
 I said she could be remembered as the leader who created an Israel that was not burdened with a huge arms budget or with having to fight a war every five years . I said that she could also be remembered for creating an Israel not burdening with an arms budget .
 Meir Meir seemed to understand the essential common sense of what I was saying . Meir: "Meir seems to understand what he was saying. He seemed to agree with me."
 She seemed to appreciate my lack of illusions about the limitations of détente or the nature of the Soviet threat . She also seemed to appreciate that she was not naive about the limits and nature of denteente .
 On November 5 Kissinger began his first of many journeys to the Middle East in which he personally guided first Israel and Egypt, and then Israel and Syria, along the unfamiliar and often painful road toward a peaceful settlement of their differences . Kissinger: "On November 5, Kissinger began the first of
 On November 7, 1973, after six years of tense estrangement, the United States and Egypt resumed diplomatic relations . Egypt and the U.S. restored diplomatic relations in 1973 .
 After Cox had been fired, I had intended that Petersen and his Justice Department staff would be allowed to complete the Watergate investigation, which they had begun and which was properly their responsibility .
 Congress is determined to have another Special Prosecutor . But it was evident that Congress was determined that Congress would need another special prosecutor .
 It was equally evident that I was in no political position to prevent it, it was also evident . "I was not in a political position, I would not have been able to stop it," he said .
 Robert Bork, as Acting Attorney General, began searching for a new Special Prosecutor . Robert A. Bork was acting Attorney General in the late 1980s .
 Leon Jaworski was a successful Houston lawyer, a former president of the American Bar Association, and a prominent Texas Democrat, was the right man for the job . A few days later Haig reported to him that he and Bork had concluded that he had chosen a Houston lawyer .
 Haig had already tentatively approached Jaworski, who had said he would accept if he could have our agreement that in the event we came to an impasse he could sue me in the courts for evidence . Haig: "I had already approached him, but he had already
 House and Senate leaders must have a 'consensus' of support before firing him, Sen. Mitch McConnell says . McConnell: "I agreed to this condition, and I agreed to it"
 Within ten days of Cox firing and after the high political price I had had to pay for ridding myself of Cox, I was back in the same trap of having to accept a Watergate Special Prosecutor . The former White House chief said he was 'back in the . same trap'
 I had been told that, unlike Cox, Jaworski would be fair and objective, he would be objective . I was told that he would not be like Cox, but he will be impartial .
 I was led to believe that he respected the office of the presidency and that therefore he would not mount court challenges just for the plaudits and publicity he would thereby receive . Although as a Democrat he would be under pressure from other Democrats to score partisan points, I thought that he would
 Haig said Jaworski recognized that Cox's staff assembled by Cox was excessively anti-Nixon . He said he was determined not to become their captive . Haig: "He was determined to not become a captive"
 Haig told Haig that he planned to bring in his own people and would see to it that the staff limited its activity to relevant and proper areas . Haig said he would bring in people to ensure the staff's activities were limited to relevant areas .
 Haig liked Jaworski and was impressed by him, Haig said . Haig told him Jaworki would be a tough prosecutor but not a partisan who was simply out to get me .
 On November 1, we announced that Leon Jaworski would be the Special Prosecutor . Leon Jaworki is a former FBI agent who worked in Washington .
 The political situation created by Richardson’s resignation dictated that in order to get his nominee confirmed, he would have to select someone who would not have to contend with charges of excessive personal loyalty to me . Richardson resigned as a result of his resignation .
 Senator William Saxbe of Ohio had long since established that he was a man without that problem . Saxbe had long established himself as an Ohio senator without a problem .
 In late September, when we were first preparing for the Stennis compromise, Steve Bull had had some difficulty locating several of the nine subpoenaed conversations . Steve Bull: "Steve Bull had difficulty locating some of the conversations"
 The Secret Service had catalogued the tapes, but their system was informal at best and haphazard at worst . Secret Service catalogued tapes but their catalogued was informal and haptazard at best .
 Bull finally finds an apparently missing conversation on a reel that had been erroneously labeled . Bull finally found the conversation on the reel .
 In the case of a June 20, 1972, phone conversation with John Mitchell, I remembered that I had talked to him from a phone that was in the Family Quarters and therefore not connected to any recording equipment . The phone conversation was not recorded, so Mitchell had to use a phone
 In another case, that of an April 15, 1973, conversation with John Dean, the tape simply could not be found . The tape of John Dean's conversation with Dean can be found in the book .
 Near the end of October, Fred Buzhardt conducted one of his own searches . Bull’s initial search was conducted about a month after the search began .
 He confirmed that the phone call to Mitchell was from the Residence and had never been recorded . The phone call was made from the residence and was never recorded .
 Bull confirmed why Bull had not been able to find a tape of the April 15 meeting with Dean . Bull also confirmed that Bull had also been unable to find the tape of that meeting .
 The Secret Service monitored the taping system, but had not anticipated that he would have several unusually long conversations there on April 14 and 15 .
 The reel of tape was near the end when I sat down with Dick Kleindienst at 1:15 on Sunday .
 The afternoon and evening meetings of April 15 with Haldeman, Ehrlichman, Petersen, Kleindienst, and Dean were never recorded . It ran out midsentence during our conversation .
 On October 30 Buzhardt informed Sirica that two of the subpoenaed conversations had never been recorded . Sirica was told that two conversations were never recorded . Buzhard told Sirica on October 30 that the conversations never happened .
 We readily agreed to have a panel of experts investigate our explanation for each case . Panel of experts will investigate each case in a separate investigation .
 A comparison of April 15 notes and the April 16 tape indicated that we had covered much the same ground in the two sessions . We also offered my written notes of the April 15 meeting with John Dean and the tape of that day .
 I was sure that a full explanation of how and why the phone call to Mitchell and the meeting with Dean had failed to be recorded would clear things up completely . I was . sure that . a full . explanation of why and how the . phone call and the . meeting with Mitchell and
 I simply did not understand the degree of public anticipation that had developed around these nine subpoenaed tapes; now I can see that it was largely the result of the degree to which my personal credibility had sunk . I simply didn't understand the level of public expectations that developed around the tapes .
 "People felt that I was toying with their patience and insulting their intelligence," said the author of the book . People felt that he was mocking their patience .
 Time, in its first editorial in fifty years, also said that I should step down . Time also called for me to step down, but I'm not yet .
 Even old friends, among them the Detroit News and ABC’s Howard K Smith, began to express doubts . The Detroit News began to voice doubts .
 It was in the wake of the two so-called missing tapes that Senator Edward Brooke of Massachusetts became the first Republican to urge that I resign .
 When Barry Goldwater saw the frenzied turn events were taking, he asked people to “curb their wild stampede” and give thought to the consequences of the hysteria if it continued uncurbed . Goldwater: “Give thought to ... the consequences”
 I looked forward to the chance to get some rest and to try to assess the damage. "I was looking forward to getting some rest," he says of his return to action .
 In April 1973, in a phone conversation with Henry Petersen, I had unthinkingly said that I believed that my April 15 conversation with John Dean had been recorded on tape . John Dean's April 15, 1973, conversation was recorded in April 1973 .
 Petersen reported Petersen's remark to Cox, who later wrote to us requesting this tape . Petersen reported it to Cox . Cox later wrote a letter requesting the tape for his investigation . Petersen: "It's not a joke. It's a joke"
 In order to avoid revealing the existence of the taping system, I told Buzhardt to write to Cox and tell him that the “tape” I had had in mind was actually the Dictabelt I had made after the meeting . Cox: "In order
 The April 15 conversation had never been recorded because the tape had run out . Now it turned out that the conversation was never recorded because of the tape running out .
 I had not actually checked when I told Buzhardt to tell Cox there was a Dictabelt, I said . "I'm not sure what I was doing," he said .
 I had assumed that I had made one, since I had been doing so almost daily in that period . My notes of the meeting were clearly marked for dictation . I had simply assumed that he had made a one, but my notes were clearly clear .
 Len Garment felt that the public revelation of this latest blunder would throw us into a fatal spin . Len felt it would throw the public into a dangerous spin .
 Both he and Buzhardt felt that they were not making any progress or doing any good . Beyond that, they felt that the government was doing nothing good .
 "There seemed to be no prospect for changing that pattern no matter what we did. We were always in a completely reactive situation," he said . "We were always always reactive," he added .
 "They had been hopelessly undermanned, chronically overworked, and regularly undermined by events and now by me," she said . She said .
 Haig and Haig agreed to look for another lawyer, perhaps someone from outside the White House, who would deal with nothing but Watergate . Haig concurred, saying that we should look for someone outside White House . They had urged, and both urged, that we looked for another
 Watergate weekend was "a new low point for me personally and a turning point for our approach to dealing with Watergate," says Nixon . Watergate was a "new low point" for Nixon administration, Nixon says .
 "There was only one way out. Even as I realized the depth to which we had plunged, I recognized that there was only way out," he said . "Even as I . realized that we had . plunged, there were only one ways out. I recognize that there is only
 We were under relentless attack by the opposition, and now we're faced with defections by our supporters as well . We're under relentless attacks by opposition, now we've faced defections as well, says Manuel Pellegrini . We are under relentless pressure from the opposition .
 "I had to address the increasing number of demands for my resignation," she says . "First, I had to talk to the people who had asked me to resign," she adds .
 On November 7, at the end of a televised speech on the energy crisis, I turned over the last typed page of the text to the handwritten notes I had made only a few hours earlier . The energy crisis was the first major crisis in the United States since 2008 .
 "Tonight I would like to give my answer to those who have suggested that I resign," says David Cameron . "Tonight is the night to answer those who want to resign," he says .
 I have no intention whatever of walking away from the job I was elected to do. I'm not going to walk away from my job, I'm going to do it, he says . He says he has no intention of leaving the job he's elected to .
 "As long as I am physically able, Iam going to continue to work sixteen to eighteen hours a day for the cause of peace abroad," he says . "I'm going to work 16 to 18 hours per day for peace abroad and for prosperity without inflation and without war at home
 "I shall do everything that I can to see that any doubts as to the integrity of the man who occupies the highest office in this land," he says .
 I pledge to you tonight that I shall always do everything that I can to be worthy of that trust in the future . And I am confident that in those months ahead, the American people will come to realize that I have not violated the trust that they placed in me when they elected me
 I decided to begin meeting with different congressional groups until I had personally talked to every Republican in Congress and to all my supporters on the Democratic side. "I decided to meet with different . congressional groups," she said .
 This would be a way of presenting my side of the Watergate case and answering whatever questions they had about it . It would also provide an opportunity for beginning to rebuild the badly damaged bridges of communication and shared purposes that had been among the casualties of Watergate .
 "In each meeting I ran over the charges and answered questions, repeating the defense spelled out in my public statements. In each meeting," he said, "I ran over each meeting and answered [questions] about the charges"
 "I explained to Ed Brooke that I would not consider resigning because it would change the American system of government," says Rep. Tom Coburn . Coburn says he would not resign if he were to resign .
 Watergate charges were reviewed by deans of the Senate, including Eastland, McClellan, Stennis, and Long . "I remember sitting with Eastland ... and starting to review the Watergate charges with them. I remember sitting in the Senate and reviewing Watergate charges"
 Jim Eastland leaned forward and said, “Mr President, we don’t need to hear any explanations. Mr Eastland said, "Mr President" The president was in the middle of a speech at the White House .
 Seventy-year-old John Stennis leaned over to Eastland and said, “Quiet, Jim.” Stennis . Stennis was a member of the U.S. Tennis Hall of Fame team .
 I told these congressional groups that we would issue white papers on the major charges . I told them that we will issue a white paper on each of the charges, and we would do so .
 I also said that we were contemplating releasing transcripts or summaries of the tapes that had been turned over to the court—something that they had all urged . The court is now considering releasing transcripts and summaries from the tapes .
 "Some of the congressmen suggested that I try to put Watergate to rest by making one grandstand play or one dramatic gesture that would answer all the questions and exorcise all the demons," he says . "I'm not going to make a dramatic gesture," he writes .
 "Some suggested that I voluntarily appear before a joint session of Congress and stay until I had answered every question that every member wanted to ask. Some suggested that . Some suggested . I voluntarily appeared before a . joint . session of . Congress and the White House are meeting in Washington, D
 The suggestion was well intentioned, but I had no confidence whatever that any single gesture would be successful at this late date . I'm not confident any gesture will be successful, but it's not a good idea, he says .
 Watergate had gone too far for me to be able to dispel it in one speech, I said . ' Watergate was going too far,' he said. 'It was too late to dispel Watergate'
 You are wondering why in hell the President can’t clear it up and so forth. So forth, you are wondering . Why in hell is the President not to clear up the President’s mistake?
 Newsweek coined a simple label for complex events in the wake of 9/11 . The media latched on to one coined by Newsweek .
 The intent of the label, of course, was to trivialize my effort, he says . " candor was something I thought could be turned on and off like a faucet," he writes .
 A sloppy press corps soon forgot that this label had been its own invention and started using it regularly without putting it in quotation marks or explaining its origin .
 Late that afternoon Haig came into the Oval Office looking strained and worried . Haig was looking strained, worried and worried.
 Lawyers had been preparing an index of the tapes that were to be turned over to Sirica, he said .
 Buzhardt’s earlier interpretation, based on the subpoena alone, was wrong . After checking the original subpoena against a supplementary document that had been sent by Cox during the summer, they had now decided that Cox had been wrong . The original subpoena was based on a supplement sent by
 The subpoena did cover the June 20, 1972, conversation with Haldeman . The supplementary document made it clear that the subpoena did . The tape is the tape with the gap .
 I asked if we could still argue that it wasn’t covered by the subpoena. I asked for it to be covered by subpoena, but it wasn't, he said . The subpoena was issued by the U.S. Department of Justice, a federal judge ruled .
 Haig said that he would get Haldeman’s notes from June 20, 1972, and try to reconstruct what had been said during the missing segment of our conversation . Haig: "I would try and reconstruct what I said during that segment of my conversation"
 When the notes finally arrived, they turned out to be a mixed blessing . The notes were the first to arrive, but they were not the best .
 Rose had estimated the time she had spent on the phone was four or five minutes . She said it would not run for just the four to five minutes that she had estimated .
 Buzhardt informed me that, after playing the tape through, they found that the gap ran 181/2 minutes . Buzhard told me that after playing through the tape, they had found the gap between the two teams had been 181-2 minutes.
 No one could explain how or why it had happened or account for the shrill buzzing sounds that punctuated the otherwise blank portion of the video .
 Buzhardt stayed in Washington to see if the 181/2 minutes of conversation could be electronically recovered . When we left for a few days in Florida on November 17, Buzhard stayed in D.C. to check out the conversation . He says it was a good time to
 He was also going to see if he could re-create the circumstances that had caused the gap and the peculiar sounds that now appeared on the tape . He was going to try and recreate the circumstances of the gap .
 On the way back to Washington on Tuesday, November 20, I stopped off in Memphis, Tennessee, to attend a meeting of the Republican Governors Conference . President Obama is traveling to the U.S. for a stop in Memphis .
 In a private and freewheeling session we covered every major foreign and domestic issue, including Watergate . In the private session, we covered Watergate .
 "At one point in the meeting I was asked if there were going to be any more Watergate bombshells. At one point, the meeting was about Watergate," says Bob Greene . Greene says he was asked about any more bombshells .
 "That was certainly in the bombshell category. I immediately thought of the tape with the 181/2-minute gap," he says . "That's certainly in a bombshell category," he adds .
 Buzhardt still hasn't said whether conversation can be recovered, or if it can be found . But we still had not heard from him whether we could find some logical explanation of how it had happened .
 I knew that if I indicated even the remotest possibility of a new bombshell, I would have to say what it was—and I still was not sure of the answer to that myself . I knew I would need to say something, but I still don't know what .
 Haig says Buzhardt confirmed that the missing portion of the June 20 conversation was not recoverable . Haig told me on the plane on the way back to Washington Haig said he was relieved that Buzhard confirmed the missing part of the conversation had been lost .
 Buzhardt had had no success in his efforts to reproduce the buzzing sound . Buzhard had been unable to replicate the sound .
 The headline in papers all across the country the next morning was my assertion that there would be no more Watergate bombshells. "The headline in . papers all over the country . the next day was . My assertion that . there would not be . more Watergate revelations, I said. "
 Buzhardt told Jaworski and Sirica about the 181/2-minute gap . Sirica announced it to the press that the gap had been 181-2 minutes .
 I know that most people think that my inability to explain the 181/2minute gap is the most unbelievable and insulting part of the whole of Watergate. The most unbelievable part of Watergate is that I don't know how long it took to Watergate to explain. I know most people don't
 "I am aware that my treatment of the gap will be looked upon as a touchstone for the candor and credibility of whatever else I write about Watergate," he says . "Because of this, I am aware of this," he writes .
 I erased the tape myself, or that Rose Mary Woods deliberately did so, either on her own initiative or at my direct or indirect request . I also know that the only explanations that would readily be accepted would be that I erased it myself . The only explanations would be accepted are that I
 I can only tell the story of the 181/2-minute gap—as incomplete and unsatisfactory a story as I know it is—from the vantage point of having watched it bring my reputation and my presidency to new lows of public confidence and esteem .
 Haig told me that Garment and Buzhardt were completely panicked by the discovery of the 181/2-minute gap . Haig said Garment was panicked by discovering the 181-2 minute gap .
 I wondered if Buzhardt himself could have accidentally erased the portion beyond the five-minute gap Rose thought she might have caused . Rose thought the gap might have been five minutes longer than she thought it was .
 Using the simple criterion of access to the tapes, there were many possible suspects . The tapes were recorded in the early 1980s and early 1990s .
 Haig and others joked darkly about ‘sinister forces’ being responsible for the gap . But we all wondered about the various Secret Service agents and technicians who had had free daily access to the tapes .
 We even wondered about Alex Butterfield, who had revealed the existence of the tape system . We also wondered about whether Butterfield had revealed it .
 He had had access to all the tapes; he had regularly listened to random passages to make sure that the system was working properly . He had also been monitoring random passages of the tapes .
 It would have taken a very dedicated believer in conspiracies to accept that someone would have purposely erased 181/2 minutes of this particular tape in order to embarrass me . But it would have required a dedicated believer of conspiracies, he says .
 The matter of the gap was turned over to a grand jury and a panel of experts . After an inconclusive public hearing the matter was turned to the grand jury .
 Watergate scandal represents one of the biggest, and least known, scandals connected with Watergate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I believe that these experts represent one of Watergate's biggest scandals"
 The White House is not without blame, because we approved the six “experts” appointed by the court . White House not alone, as we approved six ‘expertists’ appointed .
 If we had checked, we would have found that they were experts in the theory of acoustics but not the practicalities of tape recorders . We would have been more concerned about the practicality of recording, we said .
 Experts say buzzing sounds had been put on the tape “in the process of erasing and rerecording at least five, and perhaps as many as nine, separate and contiguous segments .
 The apparently incriminating sounds and magnetic marks attributed to specific manual erasures could have been made accidentally by a malfunction in the machine that caused the internal power supply to sputter on and off .
 Science magazine reported that other experts agreed with the feasibility of this alternate hypothesis . Science magazine also reported that Science magazine agreed with this alternative hypothesis .
 The only test that the court’s experts made of this hypothesis prior to the release of their preliminary report in January was made on a Sony, not a Uher 5000 .
 They apparently failed to see this as a lapse in standard scientific testing procedure . It is not the first time the company has failed to test its products in a lab .
 He acknowledged that after they had worked on the machine it no longer produced the buzzing sound they had noticed beforehand . He said after working on it they no longer produce the buzzing noise they noticed beforehand.
 Richard Salmon, national manager of Uher of America, Inc., in Ingle-wood, California, criticized the court experts’ report . The manufacturer of the machine Rose used criticized the report .
 On some specially modified machines pressing the “rewind” button in a certain way would cause the machine to erase automatically . He said that on some of their specially modified computers pressing the 'rewind' button will cause the machines to erase .
 It was worthless as a legal document, but it produced more than its money’s worth of incriminating headlines . ‘It was worthless for legal purposes, but for political purposes, it was worth a lot of money.’
 Rose Woods testified under oath concerning the 181/2-minute gap between a court hearing and a grand jury . Woods testified about the 181-2 minute gap between her and the grand jury before the hearing and grand jury.
 In the hearing she was subjected to hours of merciless cross-examination on this issue . The hearing is expected to last for three weeks .
 On July 17, 1974, Leon Jaworski informed Rose’s attorney that no case had been developed of any illegal action of any kind by Rose and that no charges would be made against her . No charges were made against Rose .
 Rose was exonerated by the Special Prosecutor in regard to the 181/2-minute gap . Jaworski, however, did not make a public announcement of this fact, and to this day many people are not aware of it .
 In late 1973, after the 181/2-minute gap had been revealed, it seemed as if nothing worse could happen to us, something worse did . In late . 1973, it was revealed that the world's fastest fastest motorcyclist had been overtaken by a 181-2
 From the start of his political career, I had tried to be scrupulously careful in the handling of public money . From the . start of my political career I had . tried to . be scrupulous . in the . handling of the . public money, he said .
 "I grew up in a home where politics was frequently discussed, and where the greatest contempt was reserved for politicians on the take," says David Frum . Frum says he grew up with contempt for politicians .
 "If anything, I have always gone far beyond most people in government to document and account for public money," he says . "I have always been very careful to document, account for, or document, public funds," he adds .
 Accusations of financial impropriety made during the fund crisis of 1952 had been particularly searing and embittering . This was why the accusations of financial immediation of financial impropriety had been especially searing . The accusations were made against the government in
 After the 1968 election, I decided to sell all of my stocks and outside holdings . After the . 1968 election I decided not to sell any of my . stocks and . outside holdings.
 "This divestiture was not required by law, but I thought it would be worth going the extra measure to avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest," he said .
 "I could afford to buy only the house itself and the surrounding grounds, about 5.5 acres," says owner . "I would like to buy the house and the grounds," she says .
 "I bought the entire tract with the help of a loan from my friend Bob Abplanalp. In order to keep the adjacent property under my control, I bought the whole tract . I bought it with the loan from a friend, Bob Abplalp, to keep it
 In December 1970 I sold the 20.5 acres, plus an additional 2.2 acres I had acquired from a neighboring tract, to Rebozo and Abplanalp and retained only the house and the 5.1 acres I'd wanted .
 In what now seems a bitter irony we decided to keep transactions private, not because there was anything improper about them, but because I knew how the Washington press corps would play up my acquisition of such a large and expensive property, and the fact that I was doing it with loans from my
 "This innocent secrecy led to suspicions that I could not dispel," he says . "Once Watergate snowballed and reporters began to tear the skin off every aspect of my life," he writes .
 Ervin Committee “sources” leaked a story to a California newspaper alleging that up to $1 million in campaign funds’ might have been used to buy my California property . Ervin committee "sources" leaked the story to California newspaper on May 13 .
 Even when Ervin claimed that he had never heard of such a thing, the newspaper would not retract its story . The story was quickly picked up by the national wire services . Ervin said he was not aware of the story, and the newspaper refused to retract .
 Early in July a leak caused by the Cox office produced a story indicating that they too were investigating whether union, corporate, or campaign money had been used to buy any of my houses . The leak was a story that indicated that Cox's office was also investigating .
 Leaked reports that my San Clemente property was underassessed for tax purposes . Other newspapers spread leaked reports of the underassessation .
 The Orange County Assessment Appeals Board determined that the charge was not true, but it had already left its impression . Subsequently, the Orange County assessment board determined that it had left an impression .
 "I sensed that unless we stopped this kind of story immediately, my personal integrity would come under as much of a cloud as my political integrity was now under," he said . The former New York mayor said .
 "I believed that the only defense against these kinds of charges was to put out everything. I had nothing to hide concerning my finances," she said .
 President Obama ordered the General Services Administration to assemble every document related to government expenditures at his homes . The president ordered the GSA to begin assembling documents related to his own homes .
 On May 25 we released a statement recounting the details of the purchase of my property in San Clemente and Key Biscayne, Florida . We are happy to clarify that the purchase was made in May .
 I also paid over $25,000 to have an audit of these transactions prepared, and I released the report to the press on August 27 . The audit was conducted on behalf of Mr. Obama .
 Despite these efforts the stories continued to be fabricated and to be printed . Despite efforts, they continued to print the stories .
 The Washington Svar falsely alleged that C Arnholt Smith, a wealthy Californian then facing indictment for tax evasion, possibly helped in the purchase of my property . For example, the D.C. Svar alleged that Smith, who was facing a tax evasion charge, helped in
 ABC reported the equally outrageous charge that I had “a secret private investment portfolio” of $1 million in corporate campaign funds . ABC also reported the same charge that he had ‘a secret investment portfolio .”
 Jack Anderson later charged Jack Anderson had Swiss bank accounts filled with cash . Anderson later claimed he had Swiss accounts filled in cash . Jack Anderson charged Anderson later said he had bank accounts full of cash .
 Newsweek even charged that I manipulated family property in such a way that my daughter Tricia may have filed false income tax returns . Newsweek also charged that Tricia's daughter may have made false tax returns on family property .
 For at least the third time that I was aware of in my political career, someone in the IRS bureaucracy violated the law and leaked my tax returns to the press . This is a third time in his political career that he has been leaked tax returns .
 The reporter who wrote the story based on this illegal act won the 1974 Pulitzer Prize for journalism . The reporter won the Pulitzer Prize in 1974 .
 At the end of November I announced that I was planning to release my tax returns in their entirety . I announced in November that he planned to release his full tax returns .
 The IRS re-examined my 1971 and 1972 tax returns . The IRS had twice earlier reviewed and approved my tax returns, but decided to reopen their examination .
 Texas Democratic Congressman Jack Brooks is one of the most partisan men in Congress . Brooks used his subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations to hold hearings on government expenditures on my houses .
 Every modern President has maintained property outside Washington for a change of pace and for the kind of privacy that is impossible in Washington .
 I had two of my own islands in Key Biscayne and San Clemente . I also sometimes used Bob Abplanalp’s island in the Bahamas, and sometimes used his own island .
 For me as for other Presidents, the government made expenditures on the places I regularly visited in order to ensure my safety when I was working or relaxing there . For me, I would like to see the government make expenditures on places I frequently visited to ensure that I was safe, he said
 When I took office, four of my thirty-five predecessors as President had been assassinated . Four of my 30-35 predecessors were assassinated and serious attempts had been made on the lives of several others . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 On the day Robert Kennedy died, Congress passed a new law that established extraordinary security measures to protect future presidential and vice presidential candidates and incumbents .
 The legislation called for the full cooperation of government agencies in meeting requests by the Secret Service for protective devices . The legislation was passed by the Senate .
 I was the first President in office after the legislation was passed to receive all the increased protection it provided . I was first to receive increased protection from the legislation .
 The General Services Administration installed warning devices and electronic alarms on the grounds . Bulletproof glass was put into the windows; bulletproof glass put into windows; special outside lighting was installed .
 Secret Service command posts and outposts constructed . landscaping was arranged and rearranged according to Secret Service requirements .
 The bulk of this amount went for electrical security systems, fire protection, and the replacement of a gas heater with an electric heating system . The Secret Service decided that the less expensive gas system was not sufficiently safe .
 I spent $217,000 of my own money on furnishings and improvements to the San Clemente house . I spent the money to buy the house, which is now a home in California .
 GSA spent $137,000—all but $7,000 of it on bulletproof glass—on two adjacent houses I owned in Key Biscayne, Florida . The GSA also spent $11,000 on bullet-proof glass .
 We used one as a family residence and the other as an office and work area . We used it as a home and office for a family and work space .
 At the same time I personally spent $76,000 for remodeling the houses and for improvements on the grounds . At the time, I personally personally spent .
 In addition to the money spent on the houses, GSA spent $950,000 on the grounds . GSA also spent $900,000 to build the homes .
 This amount covered the installation of security lighting and alarm systems, walls, guard stations, and relandscaping to restore the areas torn up when the protective equipment was installed .
 General Accounting Office study says almost all of the $1.1 million spent on my personal properties in California and Florida was spent for protective purposes . Study: With scattered exceptions, almost all the money spent on personal properties was spent on protection purposes .
 All but $13,400 was requested by the Secret Service . The Secret Service requested the money to cover the costs .
 Flagpoles had routinely been placed at the homes of Presidents and Vice Presidents before me . The office furniture would all revert to GSA after I left office .
 Scores of security and support personnel have to travel with him to make sure that he is safe and secure . Whenever a President travels there are scores of security personnel who have to go with him . They make sure his communications facilities are as extensive and secure as they are at the White House or
 "I felt that we also had to take these expenditures into account lest we be accused of trying to hide them," says President Obama . "We felt that . I felt . we had to . felt that these expenditures had to be taken into account"
 GSA audited every penny the government spent in San Clemente, Key Biscayne, and Grand Bahama, and on security for my daughters .
 More than 20,000 man-hours were devoted to combing 10,000 accounting records and 1,600 files . More than a quarter of the time was devoted to the search .
 In the end it cost the government $313,582 —50 percent more government money than had been spent on the houses—to answer congressional and press inquiries .
 Many people felt that this money had been spent on the homes themselves . Not surprisingly, many people thought this money should have been used to build new homes .
 Almost all the money had been spent on security measures . Over the next months we tried to correct those stories by pointing out that almost all of the money was spent .
 Almost 90 percent of the money was spent on administrative and protective support . Only 2 percent of that amount had been spent at the houses themselves, she says .
 Representative Brooks was determined that his house subcommittee hearings would make the most of the story . Rep. Brooks was only temporarily foiled when two of the subcommittee members, one of them an anti-Nixon Democrat, toured the San Clemente house and pronounced the government expenditures justifiable .
 Before my administration most of the requests for government expenditures at a President’s private property had been made orally and informally, says President Obama . The requests for President's private property expenditures at his private property are often made orally or informally .
 The Defense Department had handled the majority of such requests and expenditures for Lyndon Johnson . Lyndon Johnson had handled most of those requests .
 I was told that Brooks, who had been one of Johnson’s most intimate political allies, carefully confirmed the inaccessibility of the full Johnson record before proceeding against me . He said Brooks, a former ally of Johnson, had been carefully confirmed before proceeding .
 At least $5 million had been spent on various Texas sites for LBJ . LBJ Ranch, Haywood Ranch and boathouse in Llano County, Texas .
 Over $99,000 was spent remodeling and redecorating Johnson’s office in Austin . A million dollars was spent carrying out his request for a major redesign of the federal office building there and for construction of a helipad on the roof of the building .
 A small house Johnson owned near his ranch was remodeled by GSA according to his detailed instructions . He then leased it to the Secret Service . GSA remodeled it according to Johnson's instructions .
 Spiro Agnew provided the Secret Service with two rooms in his house in Maryland without any charge . Agnew, incidentally, had provided two rooms to Secret Service in his Maryland home .
 Testimony related to expenditures for President Kennedy at Hyannisport, Middleburg, Virginia, Palm Beach, Squaw Island, Massachusetts; and Atoka, Virginia . Kennedy expenditures were spent in at least six locations .
 The records of these expenditures had been kept by a naval aide to Kennedy . The aide accidentally dropped them overboard while his ship was either in the Philippines or somewhere near Europe .
 In preparing his tally of government expenditures, Brooks added up every penny paid to every person working, however remotely, in any connection with the president during every trip .
 He included the salaries of people like cleaners and custodial staff who would have been on the government payroll regardless of my trips . Thus he included those who would be on the payroll .
 He put it in a report labeled “Confidential,” which was promptly leaked . The report was labeled confidential, but it was published by the White House .
 Brooks’s subcommittee began its work in the fall of 1973; the final report, however, was not issued until May 1974 . The report was released in time for the opening gavel of the House Judiciary Committee's hearings on impeachment .
 One of the worst distortions to come out of Brooks’s investigation was the idea that Bob Abplanalp had benefited from government expenditures at his Grand Bahama home .
 The Secret Service requested the installation of intrusion alarms, fire detection systems, and special generators . Abplanalp paid for them out of his own pocket .
 He also built a bunkhouse for the Secret Service agents and allowed the government free use of other buildings on the property .
 Abplanalp paid for himself, saving the government more than $1 million . All these would have been completely legitimate government expenditures, he paid for them himself .
 "I still held the naive belief that all suspicion and press speculation about my taxes could be dispelled by the facts. I still held a naive belief," she said .
 President Obama's tax returns are being prepared for release to the public . President Obama says he is preparing his tax returns for release .
 I thought that in this way we would firmly and conclusively put to rest the malicious accusations about how I had bought my homes and whether I had paid the taxes I owed . I thought this way would put the allegations against me to rest, he said .
 In a press conference on November 18 I described my finances over the years . I described myself as a businessman . In the past, I have been a businessman, not a politician, but a philanthropist .
 Former Vice President George W. Bush says he had a net worth of $47,000 and a 1958 Oldsmobile that needed an overhaul .
 "I have earned every cent. I made my mistakes, but in all of my years of public life, I have never profited," he said . "In all of the years of ... public service," he added .
 "In all of my years of public life, I have never obstructed justice," he says . "I have never obstructed justice. And in all of the years of ... public life," he adds .
 "People have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. And I think, too, that I could say that I welcome this kind of examination," he says .
 "The attacks on my personal integrity were more disturbing for me and my family than all the other attacks put together," he says . The attacks on his personal integrity are more disturbing than all other attacks on him and his family .
 "I thought it was essential to put my defense in down-to-earth, understandable language," she said .
 From then on, variations of the line “I am not a crook” were used as a constant source of criticism and ridicule . The line was used as an almost constant series of insults and mockery .
 News reports complained that “most of the issues” were still unresolved . But within only a matter of hours other news reports said most of them were unresolved .
 Before long, I concluded that the release of the income tax returns had been a mistake . Before long I concluded . that it was a mistake. Before long .
 "They seized on the fact that I had large deductions as if it were immoral not to pay more taxes to the government than the law required be paid," he says .
 They were only looking for ways to keep the stories alive and for any new vulnerability that might turn up . They were looking for a way to keep them alive and to find any new vulnerabilities .
 There were two particular issues raised about my tax returns that were highly complex and on which tax lawyers disagreed . Tax lawyers disagreed on two of the issues, tax lawyers said .
 One question was whether I had made a taxable capital gain when I sold some of the San Clemente property to Rebozo and Abplanalp . I answered the question about whether I made a capital gain .
 He found support from some tax professionals and arguments from others . He found some tax experts and others disagree with his decision .
 The other controversial question concerned the deduction I had taken for the donation to the National Archives of my prepresidential papers . "I had taken the deduction," he said .
 The idea had come from Lyndon Johnson in 1968 when he told me about the statute providing for the deduction, which, he said, he had been taking for years .
 He urged that I take advantage of it and recommended that I employ the same expert appraiser he had used to assess the value of his papers . He urged me to use the same appraiser as an appraiser who assessed the value .
 Governor Pat Brown, John Kenneth Galbraith, George Wallace, Hubert Humphrey, Theodore Sorensen, and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. had been taking advantage of such deductions long before I found out about them .
 Ralph Newman, the appraiser recommended by Johnson, found that in his prepresidential files there were more than a million papers, worth approximately $2 million . The appraiser said the papers were worth $1 million .
 In December 1968 I gave a specific portion of these papers to the government and took the allowable tax deduction . "In December 1968, 1968, I gave the government an allowance for the tax deduction," he says .
 John Ehrlichman made a gift of papers that would spread out the maximum legitimate deductions over the next several years . The gift was intended to spread out a larger and larger gift to the next generation .
 In December 1969 Congress added an amendment to my tax reform act that repealed the provision allowing for any deductions for donations of papers . The amendment was added in December 1969 .
 I was confident that my staff and lawyers had taken this change of the law into account and had had everything in order, he said .
 "I was shocked and totally frustrated when, in 1973, I found that this was not the case. I was shocked," he said . "I'm shocked and ... frustrated when I found this out," he added .
 A question was raised first by the press and then by the IRS about whether the paperwork for my papers donation had actually met the retroactive July deadline . The IRS itself also raised the question about whether it met the July deadline to donate .
 Bryce Harlow urged that I let the Joint Congressional Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation review the controversial papers gift deduction and the question about the capital gain . The committee will look at the controversial gift deduction .
 He had worked with this committee in the past and found them thorough and objective . He had previously worked with the committee in past .
 Kenneth Gemmill, a prominent tax attorney who helped advise us, shared his views . He says tax rates are too high for Americans to rely on their tax returns . Gemmill: Tax rates should be higher for Americans with a balance sheet .
 On December 8, I wrote a letter to Wilbur Mills, the chairman of the joint committee, and asked that these two questions be examined .
 I said in the event the committee determined that the items had been incorrectly reported, I would pay whatever tax might be due . I said that in the . event the . committee determined the items . had been reported incorrectly, he said .
 Mills replied that the joint committee had agreed to consider the case . Mills replied on December 13 that the case had been brought before the committee .
 In ordinary times, the joint committee may have been objective . But in ordinary times it may not have been an objective .
 Some committee members turned out to be weak and irresponsible . Some of the committee members were weak, irresponsible . Others were irresponsible . Their large staff was even worse .
 Philadelphia Bulletin columnist Adrian Lee examined the political affiliations of the twenty-five members of the committee’s staff . Lee could not find one Republican in the committee .
 On March 8, 1974, before the committee had reached any findings, Chairman Mills said publicly that he thought he thought I would quit office after their report on my taxes came out .
 On March 18 he predicted that I would be out of office by November because of ‘dismay’ over my taxes . He predicted that he would be ousted by November due to “dismaying” over taxes . Mr. Obama said he was “out
 The deed for the gift of the papers had in fact been backdated by one of the lawyers handling it for me . I learned that, without my knowledge, the deed for my . knowledge, had been . backdated .
 My tax attorneys argued that the deed was not crucial to the gift, and that the important thing was that I had expressed my intent to make the donation and had delivered the papers to the archives three months before the July 25 deadline .
 The backdated deed undermined my position with my few supporters on the committee . Previous court cases supported that view, but the unnerving disclosure undermined that view . The disclosure of the deed considerably undermined that position .
 "A majority of the members were not even sufficiently concerned to go over the report or to hear my side of any of the major controversial issues," says the senator . A majority of members of the House of Representatives were not sufficiently concerned, he says .
 The committee staff report found that I should reimburse the government for the air fare when Pat and the family flew on Air Force One with me if they were not performing official functions .
 No other President had ever been charged for his family in this way . I was the first President to have reimbursed the government for unofficial flights by members of my family when I was not on the plane .
 Republicans on the joint committee expressed shock that the staff had arrogated such power to itself . Republicans expressed shock at the power of the staff .
 Harlow was promised that his supporters would insist that the whole matter be turned over to the IRS, but in the end all of them, with the exception of Carl Curtis, bowed to pressure and did nothing, he says .
 The IRS reversed itself and said that I should pay back the deduction I had taken for the gift of the papers, and also pay tax on the San Clemente transaction as a capital gain .
 "I had not made a legally proper gift. As far as the joint committee and the IRS were concerned," he says . The IRS was concerned, he says, that he was not legally allowed to give gifts .
 But as far as GSA was concerned I had, and they . therefore refused to return my papers to me . But as . far from GSA were concerned, they . refused to give me my papers back, and I was not allowed to leave .
 They said that the joint committee and the IRS had clearly bowed to political pressures and that I would win the case in court . The IRS said that they would win in court. They said they would not accept the case .
 "I had already lost the case as far as public opinion was concerned, and that was what mattered to me most," he said . "I was already lost in public opinion," he added .
 "I could hardly go back on that now. Besides, I had agreed to abide by the joint committee’s ruling," he said . Besides, he said, "I had agreed ... to abide" with the decision .
 On April 3 I issued a brief statement that I had heard of the joint committee’s decision to release a staff analysis of my taxes even before the committee members had had an opportunity to meet and evaluate the staffs findings . The committee released the staff analysis on April 3 .
 I said I would pay the taxes due because of the disallowance of the deduction for the donation and also the taxes on the capital gain . I said that I would . pay the tax due .
 Over the next several days we received $47,000 from citizens who wanted to help me pay my taxes . Over the past several days, citizens wanted to pay me pay the taxes . "Over the next few days, we received
 She said she and Ed had decided to sell their wedding gifts and give Pat and me the money for the taxes . She and Ed decided to give the couple the money to pay for their taxes .
 The effect of the tax issue was a devastating blow, coming as it did in the crucial months when the Judiciary Committee was beginning to weigh impeachment . There had been no fraud on my part, and no impropriety, but the effect was devastating blow . The tax issue is a devastating
 Something that starts as an idle discussion within the Washington press corps will soon be repeated in wider circles among the Washington establishment . Before long it is being reported, interpreted, and analyzed without thought to where it originally came from .
 Some of the more influential members of the Washington press corps concluded that I was starting to go off my rocker . As an example of this phenomenon, at some point in the hot, muggy summer of 1973, some of the .
 They decided that my decision not to answer the Watergate charges until after the Ervin hearings had ended, and my isolation from the press on Watergate, showed that I was peculiarly out of touch with reality, they said .
 Later that summer, my desire to take private drives without being followed by the press and photographed every moment was treated as a sign of mental pathology . President Johnson before me and by President Carter after me, President Carter before me . President Carter had a private drive without the press following him,
 Press corps had a ready-made explanation when I displayed an outburst of anger at Ron Ziegler in New Orleans . Since they were already thinking along these lines, the press corps had an already-made excuse .
 "This trip was one of my first public appearances after the Watergate hearings," says President Nixon . "We were counting on the large and enthusiastic crowds that had been predicted to help dispel the idea that I was isolated and unpopular because of Watergate"
 There was a serious threat of an assassination attempt, the Secret Service said . Azr Force One received a report of a threat of assassination attempt .
 "I could not endanger the safety of the crowds. Personally I would have been willing to take the risk," he said. "I would have taken the risk; but I could not ... endanger the public's safety"
 My temper was already frayed by the time we arrived at the hall where I was scheduled to speak . "I'm not going to get back in my temper," she says .
 When I saw Ziegler at the head of a pack of reporters, following right behind me into the VIP waiting room, I gave him a solid shove and an instruction to put the press in the special room that had been provided for them .
 I apologized immediately afterward to Ziegler, but the incident sent hot flashes through the press corps, and it was portrayed as the desperate flailing of a man at the end of his tether .
 John Osborne first put into print the talk among reporters that they had detected “something indefinably but unmistakably odd” in my gait and gestures in New Orleans . It was in his influential “Nixon Watch” column in the next issue of The New
 Osborne said he believed the assurance of my aides that I did not drink in the daytime, especially not before a speech . Osborne, however, said that he believed he believed his aides' assurances that he didn't drink . Osborne: "He believed he was not drinking in the daylight,
 Several weeks later this idea was presumably what accounted for the contention by some reporters that some reporters and commentators that I had maniacally manufactured the military alert at the time of the Yom Kippur War as a result of Watergate .
 Agnew resignation, troubled economy, oil embargo, fuel shortage, Cox firing and Cox firing . Many reporters apparently decided that I could only be in a state of mental overload, he says .
 At the daily press briefings reporters began asking whether I was under psychiatric care, if I were using drugs, and if I still prayed or believed in the efficacy of prayer . At the end of the day reporters asked if I was using psychiatric care .
 There was even a rumor in the press room that I was wearing makeup to disguise a fatal illness . There was also a rumor that she was wearing make-up to disguise an illness, she says .
 This was a forerunner of the theory that I planned to get a serious illness and use that as my excuse for resignation . This was the theory of a "serious illness" and "use that as a reason for resignation"
 The final evolution of this bizarre amateur psychiatry was a deduction at the time of my resignation and in the period immediately following it that my problem was a death wish and that I yearned for dramatic extinction . I said in the time I resigned, I thought I had a 'death wish'
 Watergate-obsessed Washington, feeding on its own inbred ideas . All these things were conceived, perpetuated, promulgated, and then analyzed by a small but immensely influential press corps .
 During this summer and fall of 1973 Pat and I seldom discussed the daily news stories and television broadcasts . Pat and Pat were able to talk about the daily events in the news .
 She was magnificent in this period of exceptional adversity, just as she had always been before . She was 'magnificent' in the face of extraordinary adversity, says the former footballer .
 She felt that in the end we would come out all right and that, above all, we must not allow the attacks to depress us to the point .
 I think of one time in particular when, after an especially difficult day of unrelenting attacks about Watergate, we had to attend a state dinner for Prime Minister Norman Kirk of New Zealand .
 Following Pat’s impulse, we took each other's hands and danced a short fox trot over to the stairs .
 "I believe that the attacks on my financial probity and integrity were the ones that hurt Pat most of all. I believe that that was the attack on Pat," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I think that that's the one that hurt me most, all. Pat
 When she had to join me in signing the statement relating to the preparation of the audit of our taxes, I could sense her tightly controlled anger . When she joined in signing a statement, she was angry, but she kept quiet .
 She said she could understand the political attacks that were being made because of Watergate . But she thought that the attacks on our personal and financial integrity were totally unfair .
 She pointed out how careful she had been in the White House and through all the years we were in government, she said .
 She said it reminded her of the agony and humiliation we had had to endure during the fund crisis in 1952 . With a visible shudder she said that this reminded her .
 At one point a Washington gossip columnist went to extraordinary lengths of innuendo to accuse Pat of unethically keeping jewels given to her as state gifts . Pat was accused of keeping the jewels she received as gifts .
 Pat Nixon had the jewels listed in a gift register so that there would be no question when they went to the Nixon Library after our administration . "Pat had to list the jewels in the gift register," he said .
 Tricia did not make many public appearances during this period, but whenever she was staying with us she would come to the Lincoln Sitting Room late at night just to be with me .
 "I knew that deep inside she ached with concern, but she never let Pat or me see it," she said . "She ached inside," she knew deep inside, but didn't want to see it, she said. "Deep inside, she ache with concern,"
 On Watergate, she said, “We always have to look down to the end of the road. On a few occasions when we talked about Watergate. On Watergate. She said, "We always . have to . look down" She said of Watergate.
 Julie decided that she wanted to go out and fight, and she threw herself into the battle with characteristic verve and intensity . Julie decided to go on the attack and threw herself in the battle .
 She made as many as six appearances in different parts of the country in one week . She appeared in six games in a week, including six matches in a row .
 David was just starting a new job as a sportswriter with the Philadelphia Bulletin, but he joined her when he could .
 They lived in the front lines of Watergate, and they suffered its brutal assaults every bit as much as I did . They suffered their brutal assaults, but they suffered every bit of it as much, I did. They live in the same kind of way as me did.
 The annual Radio and Television Correspondents’ Dinner in Washington is an event at which the political humor of the after-dinner skits and speakers is usually sharp and irreverent .
 Julie specifically asked to attend the 1973 dinner to prove that we were not ashamed or afraid to appear in public at such events . Julie asked to go to the event to prove she was not ashamed of the event .
 On the night of the dinner, his car ran out of gas as he was driving to meet her . His car was on the way to the dinner .
 Julie's husband hitchhiked the rest of the way, but he did not make it in time and Julie had to attend the dinner alone . Julie says she had to go to a dinner alone because her husband was too busy .
 Most of the after-dinner humor had to do with Watergate, and the jokes were cutting and brutal . "Most of the jokes had to be about Watergate," the author says .
 After the program she was approached by Ambassador Guillermo Sevilla-Sacasa of Nicaragua, the dean of the Washington diplomatic corps . She was invited by the ambassador of Nicaragua .
 She had steeled herself to the vicious jibes, but this kindness broke her heart . The kindness breaks her heart, she says .
 She could no longer hold back the tears, and with all the eyes fixed on her she rushed out of the room .
 "I did not want Julie to take the brunt of the Watergate questioning, but she could not bear the fact that there did not seem to be anyone else who would speak out for me," she says . "Julie's life is in the future, and she is going to be
 'My immediate family were not the only ones close to me who found themselves under merciless attack from the press' 'I'm not surprised that my family has been attacked by the press,' he said . 'My family was attacked by press for their actions,' he added .
 Reporters and investigators turned on Bob Abplanalp and Bebe Rebozo . Reporters also turned on Bebe and Bob Abplalp .
 Bebe Rebozo was the subject of an eighteen-month nightmare of harassment . Bebe was harassed for 18 months in the '70s and '80s .
 He was investigated by the IRS, the GAO, and the Miami District Attorney, in addition to being scandalously hounded by the Ervin Committee .
 Bebe Rebozo is one of the kindest and most generous men I have ever known . Bebe is a proud member of the world's most famous family .
 "Rasputin combined the worst traits of Rasputin and Al Capone. Yet anyone who read only the press stories about him, his business dealings, or his friendship with me would have had to conclude that he combined . He added that anyone who reads only press stories would
 The main vehicle for the attack was a $100,000 campaign contribution from Howard Hughes . Howard Hughes' campaign contribution was a campaign donation from the Hughes family .
 Rebozo accepted the money on his understanding that it was intended for the 1972 presidential campaign . He had accepted it on understanding that the money was intended to be used for a presidential campaign.
 In 1970, a serious power struggle erupted within the Hughes empire, marked by vicious infighting among several factions . Hughes was the subject of a series of infighting between factions in the 1970s .
 Rebozo remembered the 1962 California gubernatorial campaign and the issue that had been made then of the loan from the Hughes organization to my brother Don . Don's brother Don was the governor of California in 1962 . Don was elected to office in 1964 .
 He wanted to make sure that I was not embarrassed again by any connection with Howard Hughes . He decided not to mention the money to me and simply to hold on to it until after the election . He thought it could either be used to help pay any deficit the campaign had incurred or for
 In 1973 the IRS was in the midst of conducting an investigation of Hughes’s holdings, and Rebozo knew that he would be asked about the $100,000 contribution .
 "I said that unless we could obtain the approval of the Hughes organization to put it into the 1974 campaign, we should return it," he says . "He had told me about the money by now, and I said that . He had been told about it by now."
 The money was accordingly returned to Hughes’s representative in June 1973 . Hughes' representative returned the money .
 When the Ervin Committee found out about the Hughes contribution they had a field day with leaks and innuendos, ironically confirming Rebozo’s worst fears about the damaging publicity this innocent transaction could create .
 There were reports that the Ervin money was going to be put to my personal use and that the money had been a quid pro quo for a Civil Aeronautics Board ruling favorable to Hughes .
 Other stories reported charges that it was in exchange for an anti-trust favor . Other stories said it was a deal with the government in return for a trade deal .
 The Ervin Committee is investigating whether the money had helped to pay for the purchase of my San Clemente home . UPI said that the Ervin committee was investigating whether it had helped pay for my home .
 UPI ran a report alleging that he had been “hazy” on what happened to the money while it was in his possession . The report said that he was "hazy" about what happened .
 Another article reported that the contribution might have been in exchange for favors on Hughes’s tax-exempt medical institute . Another article said that the money might have come from a tax-free medical institute. Another article suggested that the donation might be from Hughes' tax-funded medical institute
 Hughes contribution was not the only weapon used to harass Re-bozo . Hughes' contribution was also a weapon of harassment .
 ABC had reported that investigators were checking reports that huge sums of illegal campaign contributions had been laundered through gambling casinos in the Bahamas with the aid of his bank, the Key Biscayne Bank . The Ervin Committee subpoenaed the bank’s records in connection with contributions run through
 There were no such contributions, and there had been no such ‘laundering” of them, the White House says . The contributions were contributions to the Republican Party, but there was no such .
 The story said that two corporations might have contributed more than $1 million to the campaign . Two corporations may have contributed to the effort .
 At That Point in Time is described in detail by the committee’s Minority Counsel Fred Thompson . The committee's minority counsel Fred Thompson describes the process in detail in the book .
 Staff investigators went to Miami four separate times to interview Rebozo, each group repeating the questions of the previous group . Each group repeated the same questions of previous group, says investigator .
 The committee interviewed his family and his business friends and subpoenaed financial records of everyone with whom he had engaged in business transactions over a period of six years . The committee subpoenaed the financial records .
 They interviewed everyone he had written a check over the last six years . They also interviewed everyone to whom he wrote a check . They interviewed all those who had written checks over the past six months .
 Rebozo was subjected to 14 weeks of IRS audits, an investigation by the GAO, and a probe by the Ervin Committee, and the Miami District Attorney, and finally the Watergate Special Prosecutor . He was the subject of an IRS audit, a GAO investigation, and an
 Not one of the television networks, which had been reporting the false allegations nightly, even mentioned Jaworski’s statement .
 In 1978 internal staff documents from the Special Prosecution Force were made public that showed the lengths to which the investigators were willing to go . In 1978 documents were released that showed how far investigators had to go to find out .
 A memo by the head of the Rebozo investigation acknowledged that the informant who prompted their investigation of the secret multimillion-dollar Bahamian bank account turned out to be a “con man with a criminal record” who had made an identical allegation years earlier against Earl Warren
 The memo concluded, “Like so many of the Rebozo allegations, it seemed at first to have great potential," it said .
 Rebozo was investigated by the Special Prosecutotr’s office for 16 months . The investigation was years later, and the investigation was ongoing for years .
 In the end all the allegations and innuendos proved false, and he was officially vindicated . "All the allegations against him proved false," he said .
 In the meantime, of course, he had been unmercifully harassed and defamed . In the meanwhile, he'd had been defamed.
 Those who made the charges, and those who had printed and broadcast them, did not have the decency to retract them or to apologize for the damage they had done . The Special Prosecutor’s office has exonerated him of the charges .
 Bebe Rebozo endured a modern-day Star Chamber of political persecution . Bebe's life was in a modern day of persecution .
 Polls had shown that despite a widespread assumption that | was involved in the Watergate cover-up, the public still believed I was a man of high integrity .
 The formal process of legal impeachment has to wait upon a kind of informal social impeachment whereby the man is stripped of the reverence, protections, and deference with which we treat our presidents . The process must wait for the president to be stripped of all the protections, protections we treat him with
 Small unflattering tidbits about Nixon and his family are now broadcast and repeated with the special satisfaction of the self-righteous . The selfrighteous .
 Von Hoffman predicted that an inevitable train of events had been set in motion based more on the imperatives of good drama than on questions of impeachable guilt or innocence . Von Hoffman predicts that the inevitable train-in-motion train-set in motion will happen .
 Nixon's policies such as they were would never get another man impeached . Nixon’s policies would never be enough to get him impeached, he says .
 None of this has to do with whether there are enough votes to do him in now, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I had said that I might make the subpoenaed tapes public, in summary form if not in full transcripts, I said . During my meetings with congressmen in November I said that he might make them public, but not full transcripts .
 The congressional leadership, particularly Hugh Scott, had strongly urged that I do so. "The congressional leadership," he said, "strongly urged" that he did so .
 Pat Buchanan was assigned to go over these transcripts and compare them with John Dean’s testimony . Pat Buchanan will go over John Dean's testimony and compare it with John's testimony .
 Dean Dean lied when he charged that he had conspired with him for eight months on a Watergate cover-up . Dean's tapes show that anyone reviewing the tapes would agree with Dean’s view that he lied . Dean says Dean lied about the eight-month-long cover-
 "I was sure that in the end people would recognize that it was what I had done that mattered, not what I said," he said . "I'm sure that it's what I did that mattered," he added .
 Haig brought Garment, Harlow, Ziegler, and communications aides Ken Clawson and Dick Moore in on the decision . Haig: "I'm not sure what's going to happen"
 Haig tried to soften his report of their opinion for me, but I could tell that they did not share my optimism that if we could weather the many admittedly rough passages, the tapes in their entirety would prove that Dean had lied and I had told the truth, Haig said .
 Harlow thought the tapes would be deadly because the conversations on them were just too realistically political for public consumption . Harlow in particular thought that the tapes were deadly because they were too realistic . The conversations on the tapes are just too realistic political to public consumption, she said .
 Dean Obeidallah says tapes would prove Dean a liar . He says he shared his belief that if we could survive the first shock waves, the tapes would end up proving Dean's lies . Obeydallah: "I shared his view that if . we survived the first .
 I felt that in our present parlous situation these considerations would have to be treated as paramount . But I also appreciated Harlow’s insight into possible public and congressional reactions, and I . felt that .
 Despite the expectations that had been raised by announcing our intention to release the transcripts, I decided not to do so . Therefore, despite the . expectations that . had raised by . announcing that . announcing our . intention to . release the . transcripts, he said . “I decided not
 Impeachment on these offenses implicitly requires Democrats and Republicans alike to render judgment not just on Mr Nixon, but on the political past . “1973 will be a better year,” I had dictated in my diary in December 1972 .
 It had been a brutal eight months, an endless cycle of blows and rallies followed by further blows . It was the longest eight months of a gruelling eight months in a row of blows .
 In May I had felt that there was a chance to renew, rebuild, and recover . In May, I felt there were opportunities to renew and rebuild, but I was not so optimistic .
 "Now I was reduced to analyzing my situation in the stark terms of the possibilities of simple survival," she says . "I was now reduced to analysis of the possibility of survival"
 It was after the weekend of Cox’s dismissal that I first considered what my actions had precipitated . Cox was dismissed from his job at the end of the weekend .
 If we waited for Cox making a major mistake which in the public mind would give us what appeared to be good cause for him to go would mean that we had waited until Cox had moved against us. Otherwise, if we had . waited for . Cox making major mistake would give . us
 We must learn from the Richardson incident what people we can depend on, Richardson says . Richardson: "We need to learn from this incident what we need to depend on" Richardson: We must also learn from Richardson incident .
 Establishment types like Richardson simply won’t stand with us when chips are down, Richardson says . Richardson: "They have to choose between their political ambitions and standing by the President who made it possible for them to hold high positions"
 "We need to put the final documents in the best possible PR perspective. As far as the tapes were concerned we need to . As far . from the tapes are concerned, it needs to put them in the . best possible . PR perspective," she says .
 The action with regard to Haldeman and Ehrlichman, Gray, Dean, and Kleindienst did not remove the cloud on the President as far as an impression of guilt on his part was concerned . Then the action with . regard to . Haldemen and E
 'Once they had tasted a little blood they liked it so much they wanted far more. In fact it increased that doubt and instead of satisfying our critics' critics, they wanted more . In fact, it increased the doubt that the film was made of the blood .
 We had 60 percent approval rating in the polls on that date and now we stand at 30 percent at best . "We are now at 30 per cent at best," says President Obama .
 "Now the question is whether our action on turning over the tapes or the transcripts thereof helps remove the cloud of doubt," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The Mideast crisis shows the need for RN’s leadership in foreign policy, says David Cameron . Also on the plus side, he says, it shows that the crisis is a good sign for the UK .
 The critical question is whether or not the case for impeachment or resignation is strong enough in view of the plus factors I noted noted in previous paragraph .
 "Over the past months I had talked about resignation with my family, with my friends, and with Haig and Ziegler," he says . "I'm not going to resign," he adds .
 I believed that my resignation under pressure would change our whole form of government . I thought that resigning would change the way government dealt with the country's politics, he said . He said: "I believed that resignation under . pressure would . change the whole form"
 The change might not be apparent for many years, but once the first President had resigned under fire and thereby established a precedent, the opponents of future Presidents would have a formidable new leverage . The first President's resignation would set a precedent for future Presidents .
 Congress, confronted with a President it did not like, could paralyze him by blocking him on legislation, foreign affairs, and appointments . It was not hard to visualize a situation in which Congress blocked him from legislation .
 Congress could claim that it would be better for the country if the President resigned . Then, when the country was fed up with the resulting stalemate, Congress could say it would benefit the country from the President resigning .
 By forcing Presidents out through resignation, Congress would no longer have to take the responsibility and bear the verdict of history for voting impeachment . By forcing presidents out through resigning, Congress no longer has to take responsibility .
 If I am forced to resign the press will become a much too dominant force in the nation, not only in this administration but for years to come, it will be too dominant for years, he says .
 Fight because resignation would set a precedent and result in a permanent and very destructive change in our whole constitutional system . Fight . Fight because resigning would set precedent and set precedent, he says .
 Fight because resignation could lead to a collapse of our foreign policy initiatives . Fight because resigning could result in collapse of U.S. foreign policy initiative . Fight back .
 Flanigan: Organize our hard core in the House, Senate, among top governors and our friends like Kendall, etc., who were working under Flanigan’s direction . Organize your hard core, among governors and top governors .
 "Be strong against unprecedented adversity but avoid intemperate remarks or conduct" Be strong against adversity, but avoid incurring trouble . Be strong, don't make ill-judged comments or conduct. Be strong and don't get into trouble. Don't get in trouble.
 "Dignity, command, faith, head high, no fear, build a new spirit, drive, act like a President," says President Obama . "Act like a winner. Above all else, above all else," says Obama .
 "Time to use full power of the President to fight overwhelming forces arrayed against us," says President Obama . Time to use 'full power' to fight 'overwhelming forces arraying against us' says Obama .
 As IJ assessed the situation, impeachment was not going to be decided on the basis of the law or historical precedent . IJ assesses the situation as IJ: Impeachment is not a matter of law or precedent . It's not a decision on whether to impeach the
 I had thought that 1972 was going to be my last political campaign . 1972 was my last campaign. 1972 was the last campaign I had been involved in in .
 "At the beginning of 1974 I recognized that I was about to embark on the campaign of my life," he says . "I recognized that at the beginning, 1974 I was . about to . embark on a campaign of his life. But at the start of 1974 he recognized that he
 I was sure that, regardless of the substantive issues involved in the impeachment effort, it was the politics of the situation that would determine the outcome . "I was sure," he said, "that regardless of what's involved, it would be the politics"
 Democrats would be trying to determine whether the Republicans would be worse off in the 1974 congressional elections and in the 1976 presidential campaign with a discredited President still in office, or with a new President bearing the political burden of his predecessor .
 Many congressional Republicans were now considering impeachment as a strictly political question in terms of the upcoming off-year elections . Many of them had an obvious and immediate interest in impeaching the president .
 For them, however, impeachment would clearly be a double-edged sword . They recognized that many Republicans, particularly the party workers, were outraged by the idea . The general public might consider their willingness to see me impeached self-interested and disloyal .
 As I increasingly saw it, therefore, the main danger of being impeached would come from the public’s being conditioned to the idea that I was going to be impeached, he says . As he says, the public would be conditioned to believe he was impeached . The
 Instead of campaigning for a political office, I would be campaigning for my political life . But this time, instead of being a politician, it would be for her political life, she says .
 As of December, the opinion polls showed that the people were still undecided . The people are still undecided, according to polls .
 45 percent would respect me more if I resigned so that the nation could concentrate on other problems than Watergate . At the same time, 45 percent of Americans would respect him more if he resigned, he says .
 The very thing I had been counting on to work in my favor had begun to work against me . "The very thing that I had hoped to rely on was working against me," she said . "I'm not going to be able to get back in touch with the people I love
 In April 1973 I had hoped that the public would get tired of Watergate and apply pressure to Congress and the media to move on to other things . I had been hoping that the Watergate scandal would lead to an end in 1973, but it was not .
 The public was increasingly seeing me as the roadblock and their desire to move on to other things was affecting their willingness to have me removed, he says . But the congressional and media assault and the controversy over the White House tapes had so embroiled me in Watergate that the public was seeing me
 Unless I could do something to stem this tide, it would sweep me out of office, he would be swept out, he says . "Unless I could . do something, I would be knocked from office," he adds .
 "I tried to weigh my strengths and weaknesses. As I had had every other campaign, I had to weigh up my strength and weaknesses," she says .
 As usual, the Democrats had the political edge because they had the numerical majority . Democrats have the majority of the House of Representatives, but they have the minority majority .
 Therefore impeachment was possible no matter what I did to try to stop it, he said . Therefore impeachment could be possible, regardless of what I tried to do, he added .
 It was probable if the Republicans decided not to help me or not to support me enough, he said . "It was probable that the Republicans would not help me," he said. "I would not be surprised if they didn't help me enough"
 Republican support in Washington has been eroding in recent years, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz: "I'm not a Republican. I'm a Democrat," says Cruz .
 As the impeachment hearings drew near, the prospect of the off-year elections threatened to become a personal barometer of public sentiment about me . Even the solid middle-ground Republicans, including the party leadership in Congress, had begun to send out signals that unless I could dramatically turn the tide
 I complained that it was typical Republican minorityparty jitters, but it was largely my own fault . I complained about it being typical Republican Minority Party jitters . It's not typical .
 Too many who had tried to defend me in the past had been burned, she says . "Many no longer felt sufficiently confident or motivated to take further risks for me," she says. "Too many people no longer feel sufficiently confident" to take risks for her .
 "My problems were compounded by the fact that all my activities with my congressional supporters had become uncomfortably self-conscious," she said . "I was uncomfortable with my activities," she added .
 No congressman could afford to seem to be too firmly committed to his camp lest he be accused of not considering the case against him on its merits . Many on the other side were openly campaigning for impeachment .
 Normal phone calls and invitations to White House briefings were called into question by the press . "Word started to come back that these activities might be made to look like attempts to influence votes," he said .
 This effectively barred any real strategy; my primary campaign weapon would have to be doing my job well and continuing to push for recognition of the fact that Watergate mattered so much less than the things I did well . Watergate mattered more than Watergate mattered, and Watergate mattered less than Watergate .
 At the same time, increasing irritation and factionalism began to build between the party’s liberal and conservative elements . The party's liberals and conservatives were frustrated at the time .
 The Watergate era was an off-year election campaign in the early '90s, when the Watergate scandal was still fresh . President Richard Nixon was in office at the time of Watergate . Nixon's administration was divided on whether to impeach the president .
 Across the country several small but dedicated support groups began to appear . Across the U.S. there are now several small groups of support groups around the country .
 Rabbi Baruch Korff of Massachusetts spent his personal savings for an ad that launched a nationwide movement . Don Kendall did a superb job trying to rally the business community . Rabbi Korff spent personal savings to launch a movement against the president .
 Cabinet has held firm during the rocky passages of the last eight months . Cabinet had held firm through the rocky passage of the past eight months.
 Commerce Secretary Fred Dent and Agriculture Secretary Earl Butz went out into the country to speak in my behalf . Some of them, such a Commerce Secretary, went out to speak out in the country, he said .
 Others showed loyalty simply by doing their jobs despite all the pressures they had to endure . Others stayed in Washington simply by simply doing their job .
 I do not for a moment concede that we were outclassed, but from the beginning we had been hopelessly outmanned . I'm not conceding, but I'm conceding that we had to be hopelessly outmanned in the first half . I do
 Dean Burch, former Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, took over the political operation of the White House staff . Burch is a former FCC Chairman .
 Ken Cole, the Executive Director of the Domestic Council, became Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs . Ken Cole is now the Assistant to President for domestic Affairs .
 White House appointees have 'created a certain welcome momentum around the White House' White House .
 Mel Laird announced he was leaving the White House to begin a new career in the private sector . Laird soon announced that he would be leaving the administration to begin his own career .
 Laird indicated publicly that he expected Jerry Ford would take over many of the domestic policy and congressional liaison functions he had handled . Jerry Ford had been sworn in as Vice President on December 6 .
 Evans and Novak wrote that Laird’s departure was a signal to Republicans that they were no longer duty-bound to protect the President . However, the Washington Post columnists who regularly reflected Laird's point of view said that his departure was not a signal .
 "By the end of 1973 my longstanding political opponents began consolidating their efforts to make sure that I would be impeached," says President Nixon . "They began to consolidate their efforts, and they began to try to get me impeached, but I was not."
 ACLU distributed a fifty-six-page handbook that described ways to hasten and ensure impeachment . The ACLU distributed the handbook to the public .
 Stewart Mott, McGovern’s principal contributor, published a broadside accusing me of twenty-eight indictable crimes ranging from the war in Vietnam to the Watergate break-in . Stewart . Mott's principal contributor under the guise of a “public interest” group
 After Cox was dismissed, Ralph Nader’s organization began phoning around the country to promote impeachment . Nader's organization called for impeachment after Cox was removed .
 An AFL-CIO lobbyist observed in January 1974 that “when the timing is good” they were going to make an “all-out lobbying effort on the Hill” to have me impeached, he said .
 The serious impact of organized labor’s decision to go all out for impeachment was underscored by the fact that 19 of the twenty-one Democratic members of the House Judiciary Committee had received a total of $189,196 in campaign money from organized labor in the 1972 election .
 The question of impeachment would first be debated, and the evidence to justify it would be investigated, by the House Judiciary Committee . One had only to be able to count to know that the Judiciary Committee was a stacked deck .
 Twenty-one of its thirty-eight members were Democrats; 17 were Republicans . Twenty-two of its members were Republicans; seventeen were Democrats .
 Of the twenty-one Democrats, 18 either came from the party’s liberal wing or had reputations as hard-core partisans . Of the 21 Democrats in the House, 18 came from liberal or hard-line backgrounds .
 Realistic observers of Washington politics conceded that these eighteen Democrats, despite their pieties about objectivity, were all going to vote for impeachment . Realistically observers of D.C. politics conceded at the outset that these 18 Democrats were all likely to vote against impeachment .
 Walter Flowers of Alabama, Ray Thornton of Arkansas, and James Mann of South Carolina, are among the three finalists for the CNN Travel Network .
 Democrats were the only unpredictable element on the Democratic side, says Sen. Ted Cruz . They had supported him in the past, often going against their party, on defense and budget restraint, he says .
 The consensus in Washington was that of the 17 Republicans on the committee, eleven would stand by me, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "The consensus in D.C. was that . of the seventeen Republicans on . the . committee, he says . 11 of the Republicans on
 Among the remaining six, some were liberals who had rarely supported me on policy matters . Some were facing difficult re-election campaigns, and some had already shown signs of personal disaffection because of Watergate .
 President Obama's only hope of averting impeachment recommendation would be to hold every Republican and pick up two of the Southern Democrats, or to hold 16 Republicans .
 The biggest danger I saw in the year ahead was that both the Special Prosecutor and the House Judiciary Committee would begin requesting more and more tapes . Each request was always with the disclaimer that each request would be the last, he said .
 There would never be an end to these requests until all 5,000 hours of tapes had been requested and surrendered . But there would never end the requests .
 These investigations had taken on a life of their own—I did not understand why more people could not see that. I was shocked to see that, and I was surprised to see it,’s not surprising. ‘I was shocked that more people had not seen that.
 "The various investigators were no longer trying to determine the truth of any particular charges against me," she says . "They are no longer looking at the truth," she adds .
 "They wanted to go through everything, to pursue every lead, no matter how remote," he says . "They were determined to find something that would in their view finally justify my removal from office," he adds .
 "For me, the continuing nightmare of the tapes was the possibility that, given enough time and enough tapes, they might find what they were looking for," says the author .
 In the past I had made the grievous mistake of saying I was going to stop it but failing to do so. In the future, I will not be able to stop the world's greatest power of destruction . I'm not sure how long it will continue to be a problem for
 "We would cave when the pressure started to build. Then, after paying the political price for refusing, we would cave," he said . "Then we would pay the political cost for refusing," he added .
 "I regretted not having followed my instincts about this in the past and wanted to begin following them right away," she said . "I wanted to start following my instincts right away"
 I argued that the best strategy would be to go to Congress and fling down the gauntlet and declare that enough is enough . I argued this would be the best way of dealing with the issue .
 I would announce that I would provide nothing more to the House Judiciary Committee or the Special Prosecutor. "I would announce nothing more," he said .
 I was persuaded against it by the argument that using the State of the Union to draw lines and force confrontations would not only heighten the impeachment issue but completely overshadow the important national policy issues in the speech . I was persuaded against it .
 The ones I had already reviewed were bad enough; now what might be on the others haunted us all . The ones were already bad enough, but now what may have haunted us now .
 "I had no way of remembering everything that was on the tapes, but I was sure that there were many more of the rough political patches that had already brought us to this point," he said .
 "I might survive any number of them, but eventually the accumulated weight would bring me down," he says . "Eventually, I might survive ... but eventually, I would bring it down," the author says .
 "Something Daddy said makes me feel absolutely hopeless about the outcome," she said . "I don't know what I really want to do"
 He has since the Butterfield revelation repeatedly stated that the tapes can be taken either way . He has repeatedly said he has no idea what happened to Butterfield .
 He has cautioned us that there is nothing damaging on the tapes . He has also warned us that he might be impeached because of their content . The tapes are not damaging, he has said, but he has cautioned that they might be damaging .
 Knowing Daddy, knowing Daddy, the latter is the way he really feels, he says . Because he has said the latter, knowing . Daddy, it's the way .
 So many people had gone out on so many limbs for me already—and I knew better than most of them just how shaky some of those limbs had really been . So many of them had gone to work for me, and I knew how shaky it was . I was proud of his
 Former President George W. Bush was impeached by the House of Representatives in 1993 . He was charged with obstruction of constitutional rights in the wake of the Watergate scandal .
 "I would have to inspire these people for the battle, even though I knew that in many respects the case was not very inspiring," she said . She said she would have had to inspire people to fight for justice .
 Although the case was badly flawed, I convinced myself that the cause was noble and important . What enabled me to justify fighting on and asking these people to fight with me and for me was that although the . case was . flawed, he said .
 As I came to see it, the cause now involved the nature of leadership in American politics, he said .
 I felt that if I could be hounded from office because of a political scandal like Watergate, the whole American system of government would be undermined and changed, he says . I felt if I was hounded out of office, I would be hosed from office, he said .
 I never for a moment believed that any of the charges against me were legally impeachable—none of them involved “Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors” as enumerated in the Constitution . “I never for one moment believed
 "If I had felt that I was actually guilty of a legally impeachable offense I would not have allowed anyone to extend himself in my defense," he said .
 The House Judiciary Committee could not reach agreement on the constitutional definition of impeachment . But this impeachment was going to be a political phenomenon . This was confirmed when the Judiciary Committee couldn't agree on a constitutional definition .
 Later, instead of deliberating until a consensus on a definition was reached, it was decided that each member would be allowed to make up his own mind along the way . Later, the decision was made to allow each member of the group to make their own mind .
 The decision made it clear that a political rather than a legal standard would govern the impeachment proceedings . If there had ever been any doubts before, this decision made a clear statement .
 "I felt that in terms of the important elements of presidential leadership, I still had much to contribute to America and the world," says Obama . "I still felt that I would still be able to make a difference," he says .
 As crippled as I was and was bound to remain throughout the rest of my term because of Watergate, I was still more experienced than Jerry Ford, who had only just been confirmed as Vice President . Jerry Ford was only just confirmed as vice president .
 The North Vietnamese were clearly preparing for a new offensive in Cambodia and South Vietnam, aimed at testing our willingness and ability to enforce the Paris agreement . North Vietnamese are testing us for our willingness to enforce Paris agreement, says David Cameron .
 The Soviets were holding back from concluding a comprehensive SALT agreement and would need a firm U.S. position to encourage them in the right direction . The United States would need to encourage the Soviets to reach an agreement .
 At home, the economy was extremely shaky in the aftermath of its experience with controls . The impact of the Arab oil embargo was going to make it a long hard winter for whoever was in the White House .
 The temptation to lash out against the Arabs would have to be kept in check in order to capitalize on the success of our policy during the Yom Kippur War . The temptation would be to keep in check, he says .
 "I was aware that the way I had handled Watergate so far and the inherent flaws in my case might endanger the very things I believed required my staying in office," says President Nixon .
 I realized that for many people I had made a mockery of national security and executive privilege by using them, as they saw it, to cover my own guilt . "For many people, I had used them, and used them to cover myself," he says .
 Many people felt I was irreparably damaging the strength of the presidency by persisting in my determination to be a strong President despite the weakness created by Watergate . I also realized that many people felt . I was . felt . that many felt I . was . irreparable damaging the
 "Rightly or wrongly, I convinced myself that I was being attacked by old opponents for old reasons," says David Cameron . "I'm not going to be surprised at what happened to me," he says .
 After living and fighting in the political arena for so long, I was not going to give up now and leave the presidency because of something like Watergate . After living in the politics arena, he said, "I was not . going to . give up"
 I would fight and do and say whatever I thought was necessary to rally my forces and maintain their confidence for this last campaign . I would do whatever it was necessary for this campaign. I would say whatever was necessary, he said .
 On January 9, 1974, while I was spending a few days at Sunnylands, the magnificent Palm Springs home of Walter Annenberg, I received a call from John Connally . Connally was the president of the United States in the early '70s .
 He is not a man who becomes easily or unnecessarily alarmed, but he sounded agitated as he talked to me . He sounded agitated when he spoke to me, but was not agitated, he said .
 CNN's John Sutter says he has been in Washington for more than a decade . He says a close friend is the best source of political intelligence he's ever known . Sutter: "He said that he had just been in D.C. and talked to one of his close
 His friend had told him that a group of Republicans, primarily in the House but including one or two senators, some top party leaders among them, had been meeting privately and concluded that staying in office would be highly detrimental to all Republicans running in 1974 .
 Connally: Some of these people, Connally said, were men who had been my friends in the past . Connally says some of these men were men he had been friends .
 Connally says Goldwater might be aware of the group's existence and intentions, but he was not one of its prime movers . Connally: Goldwater was not a part of it, and Connally said .
 He made it clear that the group was not limited to Arizonans . There were men from the East and the Midwest participating in the discussions .
 The supposed strategy of this alleged group was to delay the vote in the House Judiciary Committee until after the Soviet Summit in June, according to the report . The alleged strategy was to keep the vote from being delayed until after June .
 President Barack Obama says he would resign if he were still in office in November . Obama: "So many of my supporters in the House would lose their seats if I were in office"
 Connally said his source had emphasized that Jerry Ford had no knowledge of the group’s existence . Connally: Source said Jerry Ford did not know of group's existence .
 Connally repeated that his source for this disturbing intelligence was extremely reliable, and he insisted that I should not brush it off as just another rumor . Connally said he was not brushing off the rumor as a mere rumor .
 When I mentioned this information to Haig he was skeptical, and I agreed that it was the kind of thing that could be expected to turn up in the Washington rumor mills in times like these . Haig was skeptical of the information .
 Haig checked with Goldwater and reported that Goldwater claimed, and appeared, to be standing firm . Haig said Goldwater was standing firm and that he was standing .
 "At that time I did not believe there could be an organized Republican conspiracy to force me out of office," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I didn't believe there was a conspiracy," says Cruz .
 Washington is ruled by Darwinian forces, and if you are in serious political trouble, you cannot expect generosity or magnanimity for long . If you're in trouble you can't expect generosity for long, you're not likely to get it back .
 A consensus develops, sometimes no more than a shared instinct, that the burden of the wounded must be removed in order for the rest of the rest to survive . Often a consensus develops in the U.S. over removing the burden from the wounded .
 Pat and Pat sat silently in the car on the way from the White House to the Capitol. Pat and I sat silently as we left the Capitol . "Pat and Pat were silent as they left the car," Pat said .
 The whole family had discussed whether the members of the House and Senate would receive the speech courteously or whether there might even be an open demonstration of hostility . The family had been worried about whether the speech would be received with hostility .
 As soon as I entered the Chamber door, however, there was a loud, almost raucous burst of applause and cheers . As soon after I entered I was greeted with a loud burst of cheers .
 A small but vocal group of Republican and Democratic loyalists cheered so lustily that their colleagues felt obliged at least to stand, if not to follow suit . The Republican and Democrat loyalists cheer loudly enough to force their colleagues to stand .
 This 1974 State of the Union address was to be the final summing up of my domestic stewardship . This 1974 speech was the last of my stewardship of the White House . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1968 .
 "If it not been for Watergate, the actual state of the American Union in 1973 would have been acknowledged as proof of the validity of the political philosophy on which I had run in 1972," he says . "I believe that, if it were not Watergate, I would have run for
 The events of 1973 almost seemed designed to demonstrate just how inadequate the politics of the left would have been in dealing with the problems we had confronted and in solving them successfully . The events were designed to show how inadequate left politics would've been in solving problems .
 Mideast war ironically turned many of the prominent Vietnam doves back into hawks when Israel’s safety and survival were at stake . For example, the Vietnam war turned many prominent Vietnam duchessers back into hawkks . Israel's survival and survival was at stake in
 The recurrent inflation showed how recklessly the traditional liberal Democratic dollar politics would have affected the economy, says the president .
 Teddy Kennedy and Wilbur Mills tacitly acknowledged this by revising their highly publicized compulsory national health insurance proposal to make it resemble mine . Even Teddy Kennedy .
 The realities of the energy crisis forced pragmatic re-evaluations of the fashionable but one-sided environmentalist bias . And the realities of energy crisis have forced pragmatic .
 The country I had been elected to lead five years earlier had been on the ropes from domestic discord . The country had been 'on the ropes' after a series of domestic discord, says David Cameron .
 The cities had been burning and besieged; college campuses had become battlegrounds . Crime was increasing at an alarming rate; drug abuse and drug addiction were increasing . The military draft cast a disruptive shadow over the lives of young Americans . There was no program to deal with the protection of our natural
 In the five years of the Nixon administration we could point to some signal successes. We could point out some signals of success, but we can't point to those successes .
 The cities were now quiet; the college campuses had once again become seats of learning . The rise in crime had been checked; the drug problem had been massively attacked, abroad as well as at home . The draft had been eliminated; and we had submitted to Congress .
 As the speech progressed I was surprised and moved by the warm reception it was accorded to me, I was moved by it . The speech will be broadcast at 8pm on BBC One Live .
 Almost all the Republicans and even a number of Democrats were on their feet, applauding and cheering . Almost all of the Republican and Democratic voters applauded and cheered .
 When I had finished the address, I turned over the last page of my text and concluded with an extemporaneous and personal note . "When I finished my text I turned it over and wrote a personal note," he said .
 I would like to add a personal word with regard to an issue that has been of great concern to all Americans over the past year . I would also add that I would rather focus on the issue of sexual violence in the U.S.
 Watergate investigations were part of the investigations of the so-called Watergate affair . I refer, of course, to the probes of the Watergate affair.
 "I have provided to the Special Prosecutor voluntarily a great deal of material. As you know, I have provided . voluntarily," he said .
 "I believe that I have provided all the material that he needs to conclude his investigations and to proceed to prosecute the guilty and to clear the innocent," he said .
 "I believe the time has come to bring that investigation and the other investigations of this matter to an end," says President Obama . The president says the investigation should be brought to a conclusion .
 The time has come, my colleagues, for not only the executive, the President, but the members of Congress, for all of us to join together in devoting our full energies to these great issues that I have discussed tonight .
 I recognize that the House Judiciary Committee has a special responsibility in this area, and I want to indicate on this occasion that I will cooperate with the Judiciary Committee in its investigation .
 "I will cooperate so that it can conclude its investigation, make its decision," she says . She says she will cooperate in any way "consistent with my responsibilities" to the presidency .
 I will follow the precedent that has been followed by and defended by every President from George Washington to Lyndon B Johnson of never doing anything that weakens the office of the President of the United States or impairs the ability of the future Presidents .
 "I was elected to the office that I hold. Like every member of the House and Senate assembled here tonight," he said . "I'm not a politician but a person who I was elected for the office I hold"
 "I knew that I was elected for the purpose of doing a job and doing it as well as I possibly can," she says . "Like every member of the House and Senate, I knew that when I was . elected to that office, when I . was elected, I was
 "I have no intention whatever of ever walking away from the job that the people elected me to do for the people of the United States. And I want you to know that I'm not going to walk away," he says .
 1973 was "not a very easy year for me personally or for my family," says Bob Greene . "It would be understatement if I were not to admit that the year 1973 was not an easy year"
 The year 1974 presents very great and serious problems, as well as great opportunities, as also presented . And as I have already indicated, the year 1974 present very great . and serious opportunities, also presented, are also present .
 The White House was elated by the reaction to the speech, particularly the ovation that had followed his statement about the eight years of my presidency . Back at the White House I found the whole family elated with the reaction .
 Everyone felt that this was a positive sign that there was still a great deal of solid support for me in Congress. Everyone felt it was a good sign of support for President Barack Obama.
 The State of the Union speech seemed to have a generally positive reception . The speech was delivered by President Barack Obama on Tuesday .
 For a while it even seemed to supply the momentum that I had been seeking to break out of the Watergate morass . For a time, it seemed that Watergate had provided the momentum for me to escape .
 "I decided to take advantage of this situation while it lasted, and I made several trips out into the country," he says .
 More than 20,000 people gathered for an Honor America Day rally in Huntsville, Alabama, on February 18 . CNN.com's John Sutter reports on the rally .
 On March 15 he went to Chicago for a televised question-and-answer session . "On March 15, he was invited to Chicago to participate in a TV interview with CNN.com .
 The next day I flew to Nashville for the opening of the new Grand Ole Opry House . "The next day, I flew ... to Nashville," he says .
 President Obama spoke at a press conference at the convention of the National Association of Broadcasters in Houston, Texas .
 "I made a note to myself that I would take my case directly to the country right after the Soviet Summit in June," he says . "I was inspired by the success of these appearances, and buoyed by the obviously sincere enthusiasm of the people I met"
 Congress, distracted by impeachment, passed only about half the number of bills it had passed in a similar period the year before . In the meantime Congress passed only half the bill it passed in the same period .
 On December 21, 1973, UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim opened the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East . Waldheim had opened the conference in Geneva .
 Syria did not attend, but Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the United States, and the U.S.R. sent representatives . Syria was the only country to send representatives .
 Initial round of talks ended on December 22, with instructions to Egypt and Israel to begin immediate discussions on disengagement of their forces along the Suez Canal . Egypt, Israel and Egypt agreed to begin discussions on the disengagement .
 President Sadat had requested that Kissinger help work out the disagreements between Egypt and Israel relating to the disengagement of their troops . Sadat asked Kissinger to work out a deal between the two countries .
 The opening of these negotiations with Kissinger as the go-between called for great faith on the part of Golda Meir and for exceptional courage . Anwar Sadat also had exceptional courage, writes David Frum .
 President Sadat made a tireless effort to adjust each side’s position until an agreement had been produced . Meir's trust and Sadat's courage, Sadat, made a substantial beginning in resolving the differences between Israel and Egypt, writes .
 Egyptian-Israeli troop disengagement was finally achieved on January 17 . Egyptian and Israeli troops disengaged from Egypt's Sinai Peninsula . Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak visited the region in Cairo, Egypt, on January 18 .
 It was a tribute to Kissinger’s enormous stamina, his incisive intellect, and, not least, his great personal charm . Kissinger's enormous stamina and incisive intelligence, he says . It was also a tribute .
 It was an even greater tribute because he had to cope with the burden of a President weakened by political attack at home . It was also a great tribute to the President who had to deal with the pressure of a weakened President at home.
 I’m looking forward to meeting and working together with you for a permanent peace in the Middle East,” I said. “I'm looking forward ... to meeting, working together,’ I said . “We’ll meet and work together for a
 During the winter of 1973-74 America had an encounter with the future . America had a visit to the U.S. with the first atomic atomic bomb .
 "We passed a milestone of national awareness when we recognized for the first time that the bounty of energy resources we had taken for granted for so long was not as limitless as we had once thought"
 The predicament of the 1970s was the result of shortsighted government policies compounded by decades of wasteful habits . The government has been plagued by shortsighted policies and shortsighted spending policies .
 The United States consumes one-third of the energy used on earth . The supply of fuel was getting tight, and the U.S. is consuming one third of the world’s energy .
 As early as 1971 I had turned my personal attention to . giving an impetus to the production of nuclear energy . As well as 1971, he had turned his personal . attention to giving . impetus to nuclear energy, he said .
 I ordered the first American breeder reactor project to begin in the spring of 1971 . The first American nuclear reactor project was ordered by President Richard Nixon .
 By June 4, 1971, our study of the imminent energy problem had evolved into the first Presidential message on energy in our history . The message was the first of its kind and evolved into an energy message by President Nixon .
 In it I urged the continuation of the development of the breeder reactor and committed the creation of a program for converting coal into clean gaseous fuels and to the acceleration of oil and gas lease sales on the outer continental shelf .
 I also proposed that all the federal government’s energy resource development programs—some fifteen of them—be brought together under one agency . I also suggested that all of the government's energy resource programs be brought together .
 On April 18, 1973, I sent Congress five major new requests involving the energy program . President Richard Nixon sent Congress a list of requests for new energy legislation .
 In the twenty-two months since my first message the worsening energy situation had been almost ignored . In the past two months since I first sent the message, the situation was almost ignored. In the last two months the situation had almost been ignored .
 The administration had increased funding for experimental research and development by nearly 50 percent . Legislation was needed to forestall the crunch that we saw coming, the authors say .
 I asked Congress to deregulate natural gas and let the price rise with the market so that there would be more money and more incentive in the private sector for additional development, he says .
 I also requested tax credits for oil exploration, extended the deadline on unreasonable environmental regulations, and ended the mandatory quotas on imports . I also approved extending the deadline .
 By executive action I tripled the offshore acreage for oil and gas leases . President Barack Obama tripled the amount of acreage in offshore oil leases .
 I made requests for further research and development on nuclear and geothermal energy and on shale oil energy resources . I also requested further research on nuclear, geothermal, and shale oil .
 I also announced the creation of an Office of Energy Conservation and proposed a new Cabinet-level department dealing exclusively with energy, the Department of Energy .
 In mid-May, we began to insist on the voluntary sharing of gasoline resources between the major retailers and independent dealers . The move is in response to the public outcry over gasoline prices .
 John Love, governor of Colorado, is named head of new energy office . John Love will head the energy office in Washington, D.C.
 I renewed my appeal to Congress, calling for a $10 billion program for energy research over the next five years . The program would match the $200 billion that would be spent in the private sector, he says .
 I asked that people voluntarily reduce road speeds to fifty miles an hour . This alone would have saved 25 percent of the fuel consumed traveling at seventy miles per hour . I asked for people to reduce road speed to fifty mph .
 I said that the government was going to reduce its energy consumption by 7 percent over the next year . I urged that personal consumption voluntarily be cut by 5 percent . The government is also reducing energy consumption voluntarily by 7% .
 I again appealed to Congress on September 10, when I urged passage of seven bills . The bills include one approving construction of the Alaska pipeline, others covering deepwater port construction, natural gas deregulation .
 The first distant rumble of a possible Arab oil embargo began in the spring of 1973 . Arab oil was the subject of the first oil embargo in 1973 .
 King Faisal of Saudi Arabia was warning that unless our policy toward Israel changed, there would be a reduction of the oil sent to us . Saudi Arabia also threatened to reduce the amount of oil it sent to Israel .
 We are not proIsrael and we are not, not pro-Arab, says Israel . "We are not any more pro- Arab because they have oil and Israel hasn’t," he says . Israel hasn't, he adds .
 After the outbreak of the Mideast war on October 6, the Arab position hardened, and by the end of October we were confronted with a full-scale embargo . The embargo was imposed by the Arab Arab position, which led to an Arab embargo .
 By November it was clear that we were going to fall as much as 10 percent behind our energy needs . That figure could rise as high as 17 percent by winter, depending upon weather conditions .
 I called for a three-stage conservation effort, involving executive action, state and local action, and congressional action . President Obama called for the conservation effort to be successful .
 Heating in federal buildings would be lowered to between 65 and 68 degrees, he said . The government would also lower the temperature of private homes .
 I called for car pooling and asked state and local governments to set speed limits at fifty miles an hour . I also called for the speed limit to be set at 50mph .
 I asked Congress to pass an emergency energy act that would give me the authority to relax environmental restrictions on a case-by-case basis as I deemed necessary . The act would give him the power to relax restrictions on the use of energy resources .
 I asked that the country be returned to daylight-saving time and called for the imposition of a nationwide speed limit of fifty miles an hour on federal highways . I asked for the . imposition of the . imposed of the speed limit on federal . highways .
 I recalled the dedication that had characterized the Manhattan Project and the unity of spirit that had made the Apollo program a success . The dedication to the project and spirit that led to the success of the program, he said .
 It was clear that when the U.S. decided a particular goal was worth reaching, they could surmount every obstacle to achieve it, says President Barack Obama .
 Project Independence was the goal of attaining energy independence for America by 1980 . Then I announced the beginning of Project Independence, with the . goal of . attaining . energy independence .
 Only two of the proposals made it out of Congress before the Christmas recess . Light-saving and a lowered speed limit were among the proposals .
 Congress had failed to pass one major energy bill that I had requested, he says . With the important exception of the Alaska pipeline bill, which he signed on November 16, he said .
 Although the congressional response was disappointing, the American people rallied through the long winter months of 1973 and 1974 . The American people rally through the winter months, 1973 and '74 .
 On November 25 I had to tighten controls still further, banning the sale of gasoline on Sunday, requesting cutbacks in outdoor lighting, and announcing that we were going to have a cutback on gasoline allocations by 15 percent in order to have enough .
 Instead of flying to California on Azr Force One for the holiday season, Pat and Pat flew on a commercial airliner .
 Despite the truly valiant nationwide conservation effort, it was a long winter of energy discontent . Despite the efforts, the winter was not the best of energy conservation .
 People had to get up in the early hours of cold mornings to get in line for fuel . People were forced to line up for fuel in the morning hours of the day .
 A station might not open because its allotted shipment did not arrive . Even then, it might not be able to open because the station's allotted shipment didn't arrive .
 If it did open, it was often only a short time until the supply ran out . If it was open, the supply would often be short of availability .
 Before long the energy crisis had generated a serious new economic crisis . The energy crisis was a major economic crisis in the country's economy .
 As early as the spring of 1973 gasoline prices had taken the biggest leap in twenty-two years . The price of gasoline had taken a huge leap in the past two decades .
 The National Petroleum Council said it feared the energy crisis might lead to a recession . The National Energy Council said that it feared it could lead to an energy crisis .
 A Harris poll showed that 54 percent thought we were heading into a recession . 54 percent of Americans thought the economy was heading into recession . Harris poll: 54 percent think the economy is heading toward recession .
 The stock market, which had topped a record high of 1000 at the start of my second term, was now down in the 800s . It had topped 1000 at start of his second term .
 The Wholesale Price Index climbed 18. percent in 1973 and the Cost of Living Index registered the biggest rise since 1947 .
 There was even a lingering disbelief on the part of many Americans that the crisis was real . Many Americans still believe in the crisis .
 Every report assured me that the crisis had not been contrived by the oil companies . But every report I received assured me it was not a contrived crisis .
 There was no particular school of economics to be made the scapegoat, nor was there a particular school to be scapegoat . Nor was there any particular school, economics, to be blamed for the crash .
 Walter Heller, economic adviser to several Democratic administrations, said the energy crisis caught us with our parameters down . Heller: “The energy crisis catches us with its parameters down. We need to be careful not to fall victim to it,” he said .
 As the situation worsened, pressure for radical action increased on the issue of gas rationing . Gas rationing is a key component of the government's response to the situation .
 Senators Mansfield, Proxmire, and Jackson were spearheading a campaign to impose rationing . The rationing effort was a success .
 A number of governors also called for it, and before the winter was over they had been joined by several of my energy experts within the administration .
 My personal experience at the OPA had convinced me that rationing does not work well even in wartime when patriotism inspires sacrifice . The rationing is a waste of time in wartime, even in a wartime .
 "I knew that in peacetime an enormous black market would develop and the entire program would become a fiasco," says President Obama . "In peacetime, I knew that an enormous . black market" would develop, he says .
 The huge bureaucracy required to implement rationing would cost millions of dollars . Like any bureaucracy, it would be determined to perpetuate itself long after it was needed .
 I was sure rationing would end up being a cure worse than the illness . I thought rationing was worse than illness. I thought it would be better than illness, but it was worse .
 Congress adjourned for the Christmas holidays without passing any of the legislation I requested, so I met its return in January 1974 with a new appeal for four short-term actions and eleven other priority requests .
 In my State of the Union address I warned that the energy crisis was now our foremost legislative concern . In my SOTU address I . warned that . energy crisis is now our primary legislative concern, Mr. Obama said .
 "From the moment the Arab oil embargo began we had worked unceasingly to end it. From the moment of the embargo began," says the UK. "We had worked hard to end the embargo," says David Cameron .
 Kissinger discussed the problem with both King Faisal and President Sadat . Kissinger met with Sadat to discuss the problem . Kissinger also discussed the issue with both Sadat and the King .
 I told Sadat that without your personal willingness to confront the domestic issue nothing would have been possible . Sadat: "Without your personal . willingness, I told him that without . your personal willing to confront ... nothing would . have happened" Sadat says .
 Sadat promised me he would get the oil embargo lifted during the first half of January . He said that he would call for its lifting in a statement which praised your personal role in bringing the parties to the negotiating table .
 The United States is determined to make an effective contribution in the days ahead . However, the clearly discriminatory action of the oil producers can totally vitiate the effective contribution the U.S. will make in the future .
 President Obama should end the oil embargo and production restrictions against the U.S. at once, he says . "Mr President, Mr President, I must tell you in complete candor that it is essential that it be ended at once," he writes .
 The Egyptian-Israeli troop disengagement in January led to the lifting of the embargo . A few weeks later, after the disengagement, we began urging Sadat even more insistently to help lift the embargo, he says . The embargo was lifted in January .
 Arab leaders have agreed to lift the embargo on Qatar, writes David Cameron . A meeting to affirm this decision would be held in February, he says . Cameron says he hopes the meeting will affirm the decision .
 The embargo continued after the meeting turned out to be a stalemate and the embargo continued .
 Sadat soon sent me another message through our UN Delegate Shirley Temple Black, who had seen him privately . Sadat's message was sent to the UN in Cairo . Shirley said she had seen Sadat in the U.S.
 By mid-March there were reports that the embargo would be lifted conditionally, depending on the foreign policy behavior of the U.S. The embargo is still in place .
 The U.S. is not going to be pressured by our friends in the Mideast or others who might be our opponents to doing something before we are able to do it . The United States, as far as the embargo is .
 If it has implications of pressure on the United States it would have a countereffect on our efforts to go forward on the peace front, the negotiation front, he said . It would simply slow down, he added, our very real and earnest efforts to get the disengagement on the
 Seven of the nine Arab states agreed to lift the oil embargo on March 18 . The embargo was lifted after almost six months . The Arab oil embargo has been in place for more than a decade .
 The decision was not supposed to be conditional on American policy, but it was to be subject to review in June . The decision is to be reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 The Arab oil embargo caused America’s economic output to decline by as much as $15 billion during the first quarter of 1974 . The embargo was caused by the Arab embargo . America's economic output declined by $15billion .
 As the oil embargo was ending, Kissinger resumed his shuttle diplomacy . Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy resumed after the embargo ended .
 By this time both he and I recognized that we were in a race against time before another incident, inadvertent or otherwise, further froze the Syrian and Israeli positions and perhaps even drew the Egyptians back into the conflict .
 We were also racing against growing uncertainty in the thinking of some of the Mideastern leaders as impeachment turmoil threatened to undermine my position . We were racing against 'growing uncertainty' in some of those leaders' thinking .
 On March 21 I received a report from Henry J Taylor, a columnist and former ambassador to Switzerland, who had recently seen Sadat Sadat . Sadat had recently visited Switzerland .
 On Friday, March 1, John Mitchell, Bob Haldeman, John Ehrlichman, Chuck Colson, Robert Mardian, Gordon Strachan were indicted on charges of conspiracy and obstruction of justice . The CRP's lawyers, who had been one of the CR
 All but Parkinson, Colson, and Mardian charged with having given false testimony . Parkinson and Colson were also charged with giving false testimony. Parkinson was charged with perjury .
 On March 7 Colson, Ehrlichman, Liddy, and three others were indicted for the break-in at the office of Ellsberg’s psychiatrist . Colson was indicted on March 7 .
 A poll taken in Washington showed that 84 percent of the people there already thought they were guilty . These men were about to face trials in a city where it would be almost impossible for them to have an impartial jury .
 Haig told Haig that Jaworski had reassured him that no one currently in the White House was going to be named by the grand jury . Earlier in the year Haig had told him no one in the House would be named, including him .
 Grand jury material relating to me to Judge Sirica was sent to him in sealed report . Instead, it was a sealed report from a sealed grand jury report .
 On March 18 Sirica directed that this material be sent to the House Judiciary Committee . The material was sent to Sirica on March 18 .
 The grand jury’s report was only a compilation of evidence and drew no accusatory conclusions, he said . He also stated that, contrary to recent leaks, the grand jury's report was not an accusation of wrongdoing .
 The political prospects for Republican members of the House and Senate who faced re-election in November 1974 continued to worsen . Republicans faced tough reelection battles in the mid-'70s .
 I believed that the two issues of prosperity in the domestic economy and peace in the world would ultimately tip the balance in this one, too . The same two issues had swayed off-year elections for as long as I had been in public life, he said .
 Many prospective candidates apparently felt that Watergate was going to overshadow everything else and that they would have a better chance to win with Jerry Ford as President . But many prospective candidates thought that Watergate overshadowed everything else . They thought that Jerry Ford would be a better candidate for President .
 There were to be five special elections held in the first few months of 1974 . Five special elections were held in 1974 .
 Media treated it as 'significant votes of confidence' for me, says David Cameron . Ordinarily these would have attracted only minor interest, but in the superheated climate of the time the media treated them as highly important .
 From the stand-point of statesmanship, for a President of the U.S. to resign because of charges made against him which he knew were false and because he had fallen in the polls, would not be statesmanship .
 It would mean that our system of government would be changed for all Presidents and all generations in the future, says President Obama . And it would change the way the government was set up, he says .
 Senator Fulbright had once demanded Truman’s resignation when he was at a low point of his popularity . Four days earlier at a question-and-answer session in Chicago I addressed a similar question by recalling Fulbright .
 In March and April I knew that what had been at best only a remote chance to block impeachment in the House Judiciary Committee had now become almost nonexistent . In March, April, I knew there had been only one remote chance of blocking impeachment in Congress . I also knew that the chance to
 Whatever the result, whatever we learn or conclude, let us proceed with such care and decency and thoroughness and honor that the vast majority of the American people and their children after them will say, “That > 99 was the right course”
 Father Robert Drinan of Massachusetts urged impeachment for nearly a year . Another member of the impeachment panel was Father Robert Jr. of Massachusetts, who urged impeachment .
 Robert Kastenmeier of Wisconsin decorated his office with “Impeach Nixon” bumper strips . He decorated the office with bumper strips of bumper strips to honor Nixon .
 Rodino said committee members were going to proceed with “care and decency and thoroughness and honor” Rodino’s view . Rodino: “Care and decency” and “honesty” will be used to determine whether the evidence would justify impeachment
 St. Clair wrote to Doar asking to participate in hearings and to cross-examine witnesses . Doar has declined to say whether he will testify .
 St. Clair was allowed to participate in the closed sessions and question witnesses . He was not allowed to cross-examine witnesses in the trial .
 St. Clair wrote asking if he could see the grand jury material that Sirica had sent to the committee . He was refused access to the material .
 My failure to use the State of the Union speech to draw the line firmly once and for all as far as providing more tapes was concerned proved to be the error I had feared it would be. The error was not as good as it was supposed to be, says Mr Cameron .
 Jaworski on one side, and now the House Judiciary Committee on the other, kept pressuring us for more and more . "We're not going to give it to the public," says Rep. Tom Coburn . Coburn: "It's a good sign that we're not
 We had voluntarily turned over tapes in a civil case brought by Ralph Nader . The tapes were turned over in the civil case against Nader, who wanted them turned over . We voluntarily turned them over to Nader in the case .
 Nader’s lawyer, William Dobrovir, took a copy of one of these tapes and played it at a cocktail party in Georgetown . Nader was later quoted as saying it was “just for fun”
 The Special Prosecutor’s office was outraged, but Dobrovir excused himself by saying that it had been an impulsive mistake . The special prosecutor's office in the country was outraged by the decision .
 He was contradicted by his hostess, who said that he had told her in advance of his plan to bring the tape and play it . Hostess said she had told at least one of the guests about it beforehand .
 In December Jaworski came to us with a plea for access to another group of tapes . The tapes are still available to the public . They include a tape from the late President George W. Bush's White House .
 Haig told me that Jaworski had assured him that this would be his last request for tapes relating to the break-in and cover-up, and, on this assurance, we yielded . Haig said Jaworkski told him he had told him this was his last
 As of January 8, 1974, every request for tapes or documents that Jaworski had made had been met . Thus, as of that date, all requests had been fulfilled .
 St. Clair received letters asking for more than forty additional tapes . Twenty-five of the tapes relate to the break-in and cover-up .
 St. Clair wrote Jaworski and reminded him of the narrowness of the court ruling requiring us to surrender the nine subpoenaed tapes . The court ruled that the tapes must be turned over .
 St. Clair seemed to give him assurances that this one additional request would be the last request .
 Haig also met with Jaworski and reported that he was being very expansive and cooperative in evaluating the situation . Haig said Jaworsk was being cooperative and cooperative with Haig .
 Jaworski had told Haig that staff he inherited from Cox had a number of ‘fanatics’ on it . Haig was having great difficulty in keeping them under control .
 Ehrlichman’s attorney had taken too tough a line and, consequently, he had no choice but to proceed against him, he said . He told him that he was prepared to let him off easy, but he had to proceed on charges against Haldeman .
 Sirica, he felt, would not like the attitude of the members of his, Jaworski’s, staff who were, in his view, more interested in “getting the President” than in getting the facts, he said .
 Haig said that we ought to “use Vaseline” in responding to these requests . Jaworski urged Haig to give him “the softest possible turn-down,” and Haig agreed .
 St. Clair wrote to Jaworski again, saying that he hoped he would have reconsidered the broad scope of his request . The request for more than forty additional tapes was declined . St Clair: "For the second time, respectfully declining"
 Jaworski wrote to Senator Eastland, the Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, that he could bring indictments on the evidence he had, but argued that new tapes “may contain” evidence necessary for future trials . Jaworki: New tapes may contain evidence necessary to
 This kind of reasoning could be applied to any and all documents in the presidential files . It could be used to apply to any of the presidential archives .
 It was hard to see where, if anywhere, Jaworski would ever draw a line . It's not clear where he would continue his career .
 We had voluntarily provided access to seventeen additional tapes since the first court ruling . We had voluntary access to 17 additional tapes, the court said .
 The House Judiciary Committee would prove no different from the Special Prosecutor in its insatiable demands for tapes and other materials . The committee would be no different to the Special Prosecution in its demands for information .
 I agreed to answer in writing and under oath any question from the committee . I agreed in writing, under oath, that I would answer under oath to the committee, she said .
 "I also indicated that I was willing to be interviewed under oath, if that was deemed necessary," he said . I also indicated I would be willing to give evidence under oath .
 The committee's range of investigations covered scores of policy and political areas . At this time the committee’s investigations included Cambodian bombing in 1969 .
 House Republican Leader John Rhodes agreed that the committee’s request was extremely broad . Rhodes: "I met with House Republican leader John Rhodes, and he agreed that . He agreed that he agreed with House Republicans, he said .
 Doar confided that some of the committee members had not even known all Doar was doing . Doar said some committee members were not even aware of all his work .
 Rhodes said no Republican congressman could defend refusal by the White House to produce additional evidence . Rhodes was emphatic when he said that, as unjust as it undoubtedly was, no Republican could afford to defend the decision . The White House refused to provide additional evidence the committee requested .
 "I had to face the fact that we were over a barrel and that my weakened political situation gave the Judiciary Committee license for an unrestrained fishing expedition," she says . "We were over the barrel"
 One day it would be calm, and there would seem to be a chance we could survive . One day, it would seem that we would survive, but we would never be able to .
 News reports from the trial implied that John Dean had been unrattled in his testimony, whereas Stans and Mitchell had seemed shaken and had not been very effective . Some news reports suggested John Dean's testimony had been shaken .
 Both Stans and Mitchell were found innocent, and the jury told the press that it was Dean they had not believed . Ultimately, both were found guilty .
 We did not know that in March when the impeachment hearings were gearing up . But we did know that . In March, impeachment hearings had begun .
 The bombshell of my having to pay $400,000 in new taxes because of the disallowance of the deduction for my donation of my papers was still reverberating . We had just been hit with the leaks that Brooks’s subcommittee was charging that $17 million of government funds
 The court-appointed tape “experts’ had also recently issued one of their reports on the 181/2-minute gap .
 John Ehrlichman, on trial for the break-in at Ellsberg's psychiatrist’s office, asked and obtained a court subpoena for me to appear at the trial . The trial was held in California, California, for the psychiatrist's psychiatrist's office .
 John Connally is about to be drawn into a grand jury investigation over illegal contributions alleged to have been made to him from milk producers’ organizations . Connally was also drawn into an investigation into illegal contributions made by milk producers .
 In normal times the Justice Department would not have considered moving against a former Secretary of the Treasury, three-term Governor, and Secretary . of the Navy . The Justice Department is moving against him solely on the basis of a highly unreliable informant who succeeded in having the Special Prosecutor’s
 He was innocent, he said, and there was no way that he could ever be found otherwise . He said, "He was innocent"
 On April 13, for the first time, a Harris poll reported a bare majority, 43 percent to 41 percent, was now in favor of my impeachment . The president's impeachment is now the focus of a new poll, which suggests impeachment .
 House Judiciary Committee's request for more tapes is met with a compromise . "Because of the political realities of the situation, we had to compromise on the issue," Sen. Clair says .
 We decided to supply the committee with written verbatim transcripts from which only material unrelated to Watergate had been excised . Only material related to Watergate was excised from the transcripts .
 Our hope was that this response might, through its sheer bulk, bring home to the public what was being asked of me. Our hope is that this . might . bring home the public . what was asking of me, I said .
 It soon became clear that there were many gray areas in the conversations, not entirely unrelated to ‘Watergate,” as that term had constantly expanded in meaning . “Watergate’s” continued to expand in meaning, but unrelated to the cover-up,
 The White House offered to invite Rodino and the ranking Republican on the committee, Edward Hutchinson of Michigan, to come to the White House and hear any of the uncut original tapes .
 Peter Rodino warned that the committee might soon be asking for more tapes and documents dealing with income taxes, the San Clemente property, campaign dirty tricks, and other matters . Not long after this, he warned that Rodino may soon be asked for more .
 "Better to fight and lose defending the office than surrender and win a personal victory at disastrous long-range cost to the office of the presidency," Obama says .
 The House Judiciary Committee requested transcripts of tapes requested by the House of Judiciary Committee . President Obama said he gave the transcripts to the committee so that the committee could reach an informed judgment .
 I said I hoped that by violating the principle of confidentiality this once I could restore it for the future . I said that I hoped . by violating . the principle, confidentiality this . once, I hoped to restore it to the future, he said .
 I realize that these transcripts will provide grist for many sensational stories in the press, but I'm sure they will be used as a source for sensational stories . The transcripts will be published in the U.S.
 I have been reluctant to release these tapes not just because they will embarrass me and those with whom I have talked, but they will, he says . The tapes will become the subject of speculation and even ridicule, he adds .
 The transcripts are fragmentary records from a time more than a year ago that now seems very distant, the records of a President and of a man suddenly being confronted and having to cope with information which, if true, would have the most far-reaching consequences for his personal reputation .
 In giving you these records, I am placing my trust in the basic fairness of the American people, he says . In giving them these records—blemishes and all, he is placing his trust in basic fairness .
 "I know in my own heart that through the long, painful, and difficult process revealed in these transcripts I was trying in that period to discover what was right and to do what was wrong," she says .
 It is not possible to describe what it is like to see long-forgotten conversations suddenly reappear as lengthy transcripts .
 We are conditioned to think of the written word as a form of planned communication . But when the words of an ordinary conversation are put on paper they acquire a rigidity that, despite a literal accuracy in terms of what was said, may completely fail to capture or reflect the nature of the
 An observation can seem like an intention; an offhand comment appears deliberate and premeditated . A passing thought can strike the reader as a prescription for action . An observation seems like intention; a passing thought strikes a prescription .
 There is no way to explain how at one moment in a discussion one person is a devil's advocate and the next moment the roles all shift . Seeing the words there in lifeless type on a page, you realize that there are no way of explaining how .
 Outsiders reading only the words of those conversations about Watergate could know nothing of the torment, the spectrum of concern that lay behind them . Outsiders read only the . words of Watergate conversations in the . 1970s .
 More than for the substance, the transcripts would be criticized for the tone of the discussions . More than the substance of the discussion, the transcript would be critical of the tone . The transcripts would have been criticized for their tone .
 As much as many may have suspected beforehand that such things took place, I had to bear the brunt of having revealed the particulars that confirmed those suspicions . I had been told the details of the events .
 The myth that Presidents are always presidential, that they sit in the Oval Office talking in lofty and quotable phrases, will probably never die . The myth reflects an important aspect of the American character, the myth says .
 The reality of politics and power in the White House is very different, says CNN.com's John Sutter . But the reality of power in Washington, D.C., is different .
 It is a rough game, and the men J have known who have made it there reflect the ability to play rough when necessary and come out on top . It is the most difficult job in the world to do so, and it is a tough one .
 There is noble talk in the Oval Office to be sure, high-minded and disinterested . But there is more to be done, and it's not always about politics .
 There are also frustration, worry, anxiety, profanity and, above all, raw pragmatism when it comes to politics and political survival . But there is also frustration and worry, worry and anxiety, but there are also pragmatic reasons for politics .
 On May 3, four days after it had been released, I went to a rally in Phoenix, Arizona, to celebrate the release of the book .
 Barry Goldwater and John Rhodes came up individually to say how pleased they were with the reception and to assure me that I could continue to count on their support . Afterward, at a reception at Goldwater’s mountaintop house, they came up to say they were pleased
 The Chicago Tribune called for my resignation . Other old friends, including the Omaha World-Herald, the Kansas City Times, the Cleveland Plain Dealer, and the Charlotte Observer, called for impeachment .
 Los Angeles Times, the Miami Herald, and the Providence Journal join in . The Providence Journal is joined by several other media outlets .
 Jerry Ford felt that he had to make a comment on the transcripts, so he said, “They don’t exactly confer sainthood on anyone,” and he admitted that he was disappointed by them . Jerry Ford: “I was disappointed that they don�
 John Rhodes, his mind apparently changed from just a few days earlier, now said he would accept my decision to resign if I were to make it, Rhodes said . Rhodes said he'd accept his resignation if he were to resign .
 He said that my chances of winning in the House had been steadily reduced . At the moment he put the percentage at 51 to 49 against impeachment against impeachment .
 John Anderson, the Chairman of the House Republican Conference, suggested that he consider resigning . John Anderson said he would resign if he was asked to do so, but he declined .
 In the Senate, Marlow Cook of Kentucky and Richard Schweiker of Pennsylvania called for outright resignation . Milton Young of North Dakota said I should use the Twenty-fifth Amendment to step aside until I had been proved innocent .
 Barry Goldwater drew attention when he said he was sure I would resign if I were impeached by the House . Goldwater said he'd resign if he were to be impeached, but not if he was impeached .
 I would respect everyone’s views and understand the necessity they felt to express them. ‘I would respect them and understand that they felt necessary to express their views.’
 He said the combination of the Chicago Tribune editorial and Scott’s and Rhodes statements suggested to him a calculated effort to force me out of office . He said that the combination . of the . combination of . Scott's and Rhodes's statements suggested . to him that the . effort to
 Ford worried about news reports of an “informal” conversation Jerry Ford had had with reporters . Ford was quoted as saying he was concerned that my authority had been “crippled” and that Russia might try to take advantage of this situation .
 Ford was reported to have said that my failing influence could be seen in Teddy Kennedy’s successful efforts to secure a congressional cutback on aid to Vietnam . Teddy Kennedy said he had talked to Kissinger about these concerns but not to me, Ford said . Kennedy said Kissinger had talked with
 Ford issued a “clarification’s” statement after this report was published, but the damage was done . Ford has since apologized for his comments .
 All that have been presented to me today are false, and the one that heads the list is that that says President Nixon intends to résign. President Nixon, the president of the United States, intends to sign a bill .
 His attitude is one of determination that he will not be driven out of office by rumor, speculation, excessive charges, or hypocrisy, he says . He says he won't be driven from office by speculation or excessive charges .
 "He is up for the battle, he intends to fight it and he feels he has a personal and constitutional duty to do so," he said . "He feels it has been his constitutional duty" to fight the issue .
 "It undercut the impression I had left in my public statements that I had reacted like a prosecutor when Dean informed me of the cover-up," he says . On the other hand, it undercut his impression that he had reacted as a prosecutor .
 But however damaging any or all of it may have been, nothing on the tapes amounted to an impeachable offense . The tapes were taped in the early 1980s .
 The main Watergate issue had already shifted, and, as had been the case throughout the past thirteen months, I was in the position of settling a point after everyone had already moved on to another one . Unfortunately the main issue had been shifted, with the Watergate issue already shifting, and I
 The release of the transcripts was good strategy to the extent that it proved conclusively that Dean had not told the truth about everything, he says . In the areas where he had told truth, my actions and omissions, while regrettable and possibly indefensible, were not impeachable,
 Public opinion is not a court of law, and there would be no trial on this evidence . But public opinion not law, it's public opinion, not a case of law .
 The transcripts raised the distinctions between what was constitutionally impeachable and what was politically insupportable . The transcripts raise the distinctions that responsible congressmen would have to make between what is constitutional and what is politically insapportable.
 Some of these additional words or sentences helped our case more than hurt it. Some of the words or phrases helped us out of court . We are happy to clarify that the case is not a murder case .
 There was one admittedly serious discrepancy that dominated all the others . But there was one of the biggest discrepancies that dominated the others.
 It was the section of the March 22 tape covering my final discussion with John Mitchell, in which I told him that unlike Eisenhower who cared only that he was “clean,” I cared about the men, he said .
 I told Mitchell that they could go before the Ervin Committee and “stonewall it, let them plead the Fifth Amendment, cover up, or anything else” if they thought they had to, he said . Mitchell: “Let’s go to the Er
 It was utterly ridiculous to assume that we would have deliberately omitted a damaging section of a tape that we knew the Judiciary Committee already had in its possession . The Judiciary Committee was already having in possession of the tape .
 "We took terrible heat for it at the time because we simply did not know what had happened" But we took 'terrible heat' for not knowing what happened, he says. "But we took terrible criticism for it"
 Only months later, when it no longer mattered, Fred Buzhardt figured out the answer . Only months after, when the answer was no longer matter, did he figure out the truth .
 Committee's copies of tapes must have been copied from originals at a higher volume, Buzhardt says . Final section of March 22 tape, which was inaudible on our copy, could be heard on the committee’s copy .
 The bitter irony was that this innocent discrepancy had made us look both sinister and foolish . It had been an innocent discrepancy that had made them look sinister, foolish .
 Jaworski told Haig that he had been named an unindicted coconspirator by the Watergate grand jury . Haig says he was named unindicticted by the grand jury in Watergate . Jaworsk: "I'm not a coconpirator. I
 If this is true, Jaworski had not been honest with Haig earlier in the year when he had told him that no one in the White House had been named . If this was true, he had not told Haig he had been honest when he told him .
 We knew Jaworski had doubted whether I could constitutionally be indicted while I was President . Jaworsk had doubts whether he could be constitutionally indicted while he was President. We knew he had doubts about whether he was constitutionally indicted .
 He knew by naming me an unindicted coconspirator he would have a wild card to produce in the courts when he needed it, he said . But he knew by doing so he would be able to get more tapes and to guarantee that he could use the tapes in the
 By having me charged by the grand jury, a forum that could not judge me, he could prejudice me before the House Judiciary Committee, he said . By having him charged, he would prejudice him before the . House Judiciary . Committee .
 If I would not agree to what he called his “compromise,” he was going to announce the grand jury’s action in open court in order to strengthen the case against me, he said . If I didn’t agree, he threatened to announce
 "Even after taking so many low blows from so many sources over so many months, I was still surprised that Jaworski would resort to what I felt was a form of blackmail. Even after taking . so many . low blows, I felt like it was an act of blackmail,"
 The thought of actually ending the courtroom battle over the tapes was like a siren song . But the thought of ending the trial was like an invitation to end the battle over tapes .
 He said, “We're at the point that we can see the barbed wire at the end of the street.” He added, ‘We're now in the process of removing barbed wires from the streets .
 "To cave now would forfeit our position that we would give no more," says St. Clair . Clair . He felt that to cave now, he felt that would forfeit his position, he said .
 Haig urged me at least to listen to the eighteen tapes and not reject the offer out of hand . Haig: "I'm not going to turn down the offer, but I'm going to take it seriously."
 Former President George W. Bush was assassinated in May 1974 . He says the assassination was the result of a flawed investigation into the White House .
 "I worked until late that night and for several hours the next morning listening to more tapes," she says . She says she worked late into the night listening to tapes .
 I broke just before midday for some appointments and a talk with Scowcroft about the situation in the Middle East . I broke into the studio for a lunchtime interview with the Foreign Office .
 Dean and Mitchell have come up with a plan to handle the problem of the investigation’s going into areas we didn’t want it to go . Haldeman said he was relieved that the investigation was not going to go into areas they wanted it to be .
 Haldeman: “I don’t think he knew the details, but I think he . knew,” he said . ‘I think he did,’ he had said .
 A week after the break-in, he told me that he thought Mitchell knew . His voice did not have a great deal of conviction when he said it, but there was no doubt .
 I had indicated in all my public statements that the sole motive for calling in the CIA had been national security, he says . He says he had indicated that the motive for the call was national security .
 There were no doubt now that we had been talking about political implications that morning . But there was no doubt that there had been political implications for the president .
 Haldeman: Only motive was national security concern that FBI's investigation might expose CIA operations . He says CIA director had said that national security was the only concern . CIA chief says he was concerned that the FBI might expose the CIA .
 I knew he believed it completely then, and so had I . I also knew that no one would ever believe it now. I knew it completely . No one would . ever believe that now. now. It's been more than 50 years since .
 "There must be other things that must be not apparent on these tapes," he says . "I consoled myself with the thought that there must be something else," he writes .
 The city was now full of new reports—and provocative new questions—about the CIA’s apparent awareness of the break-in before it happened and about its activities during the cover-up .
 We could not have been so wrong as to have completely rationalized a national security concern where none existed. Surely we could not be so wrong .
 "I thought that perhaps there would be something else, something helpful on another tape. I thought perhaps there was something else," he said . "Perhaps there would have been something else."
 In the afternoon | talked to Scowcroft, who sent in a report from Kissinger . In the evening, Kissinger sent in his report .
 Meir had apparently had some effect and the Israelis had presented a peace proposal that Kissinger thought had a chance of actually being accepted by the moderate Arab governments . Meir's proposal had apparently been accepted by some Arab governments, Kissinger thought .
 In another example of miscalculation, I did not recognize the tape then as the “smoking gun” it turned out to be. I didn’t recognize it then as a ‘smoking gun.” The tape was released in 2005, but the tape was
 "I knew that it would hurt—but so had so many other things, and we had survived them," she said . "So had so much other things ... and we'd survived them. We had survived it," she wrote .
 "I did not feel others should listen and have to be answerable for what they heard. And perhaps the Court would rule in our favor," she says .
 I can see that I should have asked Buzhardt to listen to all three June conversations with Haldeman, give me his independent judgment on them, and then have put them out . Now, he says, he should have listened to the conversations and put them on the Internet .
 The tapes would have been damaging, but far less so than being forced to make the tapes public after the Supreme Court’s decision compelled me to do so . The tapes were made public after a Supreme Court decision compelled him to make them public .
 St. Clair’s and Buzhardt's view is that we should draw the line on producing any further tapes . The tapes were produced in the 1980s and 1990s .
 On Wednesday I notified them both that I had decided not to give up any more tapes . On Wednesday he notified them that he had decided to give them both up .
 On May 22 I sent a letter to the House Judiciary Committee informing them that I would not supply any more tapes in response to the constantly escalating requests for them . "On May 22, I . sent a . letter to . tell them that . I would no longer supply . any more
 By March 1974, this margin had been badly worn down by House Judiciary Committee accusations and the attacks on my finances . The margin of support for President Richard Nixon had been worn down .
 The Democrats themselves had prior knowledge of the break-in, according to a new report . Hughes organization might be involved, the report says .
 He had known Jaworski in Texas, and he said he was calling to pass along something he'd heard from him . He said he had known him in Texas .
 By June it looked as if things were actually beginning to brighten . But then the tide seemed to change, and by June it seemed to be beginning to turn . The situation has been described as a 'messy mess'
 The Judiciary Committee’s patently unfair tactics had started to backfire . Whatever other reasons there might have been, there might be, it was that the Judiciary Committee's patently unjust tactics were backfire. Whatever other . reasons, there may have been .
 Rodino opened the committee’s investigation of the evidence with the announcement that the proceedings would be governed by rules of confidentiality . Rodino had opened the . investigation of . the evidence .
 The committee voted itself into closed sessions and then promptly started to leak everything that came into its hands . After this announcement, the committee began to leak its own information .
 St. Clair requested that the committee go into open sessions rather than continue its prejudicial game . He was rebuffed by the committee, saying it was prejudicial .
 The committee leaked details of the day Dean described the “cancer” growing close to the presidency . One of the clearest examples of the committee’s conduct was a leak about my diary dictation .
 This leak indicated that I was totally blasé about the information Dean had given me, he says . This leak went out over the networks and wires, he adds . It indicated that he was already part of the cover-up .
 Republicans on the House of Representatives say the evidence is not overwhelming in the way it would have to be in order to justify impeachment . On June 5 Timmons reported that Tom .
 John Rhodes called me to say that he had found that the attitude in the House and on the Judiciary Committee had grown more positive over the past week . John Rhodes said he found that he has found that . He said the attitude of the House, Judiciary Committee members is more positive .
 There are also reports of new grass roots organizations cropping up across the country to help me. There were also reports that there are new grass-roots organizations croppering up to help .
 Haig had finally started to organize the staff into task forces to fight impeachment . And Haig was finally starting to organize a task force against impeachment .
 On June 7, 1974, I resumed making detailed diary dictations at the end of each day . "I began making detailed diaries in 1974," she says .
 I began the first one by summing up the situation as it had appeared at the start of the summer . I began this article with a summary of the situation at the beginning of this summer .
 Diary Diary: I am not going to try to recap the events of this very difficult time . I will try to put some of the immediate developments in perspective and include some observations with regard to various collateral issues .
 Timmons: "I have kept in almost daily touch with Timmons in the past couple of weeks, and he believes that we have been gaining slowly but surely among Southerners and Republicans"
 Teddy White had talked to Rose and then talked to Ziegler today . Teddy White, Teddy White said, "Teddy White, interestingly enough, had talked with Rose today and today" Teddy White: "I'm not sure what happened to Rose"
 He said that two weeks ago he thought that the House would have voted an impeachment and that we would have won in the Senate by a margin of five or six votes . President Obama said that the impeachment would have been a victory in the House .
 House will not vote impeachment if a vote were to occur today, says Rep. Rick Dent . Dent says he believes that we have bottomed out and that impeachment would not be a vote today .
 Connally believes impeachment supporters will find themselves wiped out in the next election . Connally says impeachment supporters would be wiped out if they voted for it .
 We have been thinking for over a year now that the tide was turning, and then events occur which seem to put us behind the eight ball again . Of course, we have been . thinking for more than a year ago that the tides were turning, but then events occurred .
 What will motivate the House members at the present time may be their concern that if they impeach, they run the risk of taking the responsibility for whatever goes wrong in foreign and domestic policy after that . I think may be the concern that impeach .
 They also may be concerned from the Democratic standpoint that if they impeach, they put in office as an incumbent Ford, who would have a united party and an administration behind him against whoever they ran for President . They may also be concerned that if . they impeached, they would have
 The 181/2-minute-gap matter is being resolved fairly satisfactorily, although we never know what Jaworski may do . On the plus side, the 181-2 minute gap matter is also being resolved .
 Bebe is going through another intensive going over with, he said, about a hundred subpoenas to his restaurants, the yacht club, etc. Bebe says . Bebe's restaurants, yacht club and yacht club are under subpoena .
 What this poor man has gone through is really unbelievable and it is amazing that he has been able to stand up as well as he has. It is amazing how he has managed to get through the ordeal. What is amazing is that he is able to still stand up, he said .
 Al Haig told me that the Senate Watergate Committee had a pretty devastating report on Humphrey and Mills . Haig said that the report was a devastating one on Mills .
 The Republicans have it, but no one of the Republicans, of course, will leak it . The GOP has a lot of power to control the White House, but it's unlikely they will .
 The trouble is that the Republicans, like conservatives generally, are responsible and play with Marquis of Queensberry rules . Liberals go just the other way. Republicans are responsible, but liberals are responsible .
 The irony of this whole situation is that we are being accused of playing a foul game during the election and so forth, whereas what we have done as compared with previous administrations is hardly worth mentioning . Anything that comes out that hurts the conservatives, and particularly the President, gets enormous play .
 "I think one thing that seems to disturb our opponents in the media, in the Congress, and in partisan circles the most is that I have hung on," says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 I have had times of considerable discouragement although I have pretty generally been able to cover it so people are unable to see it . I've had times to cover up it, but I'm not always able to hide it from people, I say .
 David Bowie says he's been thinking about his legacy since 1973 . He says he felt that all that was necessary was for him to “persevere,” as he put it .
 Looking back over the year and just highlighting the events, the mistakes are quite apparent . The mistakes were quite apparent. Looking back at the year, it's quite apparent that the mistakes were made .
 Possibly the decision on Haldeman-Ehrlichman was right, but I am not absolutely sure that it was under the circumstances now . Possibly the . decision on the decision was correct, although I . am not . sure that . it was correct under circumstances .
 Richardson's appointment as Attorney General was the first major mistake for Richardson . Richardson was appointed by the Obama administration in 2009 .
 Richardson’s weakness, which came to light during the Cox firing, should have been apparent . Richardson's weakness should have come to light, but it was not apparent during Cox firing .
 This occurred, unfortunately, while I was out at the hospital, and I remember when Haig came in and told me about it . We discussed it, he said, and we discussed it. This occurred ... unfortunately, it happened while he was in the hospital .
 Garment stepped in with the idea that it would be a destruction of evidence or what have you. But here Garment, I think primarily, stepped in . But here, it's not clear what happened .
 The tapes themselves and the Supreme Court case would have been avoided had we just bitten the bullet then . But all the difficulties and difficulties we have had about the eighteen minutes and the two missing tapes, and, of course, then the tapes themselves, would've been avoided if we just bite
 The Agnew resignation was necessary although a very serious blow . Some thought that his stepping aside would take some of the pressure off the effort to get the President, all it did was to open the way to put pressure on the President to resign .
 Of course, the Cox firing probably was the right thing to do even with all the pain and suffering that it caused . Cox was ready to indict the President at that time and that could have been at a time that it could have had a fatal effect with the House, even though our
 "I think what has irritated me the most has been the handling of my personal finances," she said . She said she was annoyed by the handling her finances .
 We have an excellent case, but we simply couldn’t get a proper hearing on it,’s the author says . ‘We simply couldn't get proper hearing’ on it,' he says .
 On May 20, 1974, the district court hearing Jaworski’s suit for the sixtyfour new tapes ruled in his favor . The district court ruled in 1974 that the suit was successful .
 Jaworski immediately moved to bypass the court of appeals, requesting that the Supreme Court take the case directly . Jaworki: "I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to go to the highest court in the country"
 By the end of May Kissinger had spent thirty-two days traveling back and forth between Jerusalem and Damascus in the long attempt to achieve a disengagement between Syrian and Israeli troops .
 The Egyptian-Israeli disengagement had been easier because Sadat had adopted the attitude that if the major issues could be resolved, the minor ones could be settled at the ongoing Geneva Conference . Sadat's attitude that major issues can be resolved at the Geneva Conference was easier than before .
 The hatred between the Syrians and the Israelis went too deep for them to be able to think this way . But the hatred between them and the Israeli went too far, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Kissinger was at his finest in these sessions, probing like a surgeon the concerns that separated the two parties . Kissinger was indefatigably seeking the areas of mutual interest that would make an accord possible .
 Scowcroft brought Haig a message from Kissinger that he was coming back; he had done the superhuman and it still was not enough . Kissinger sent the message on May 16 that Haig was not ready to leave the country .
 'I sent back a firm message of encouragement directing that he give it one more try. I sent back an encouraging message to him,' he said .
 "I knew he was exhausted, but he was too close to a settlement to let the momentum slacken," says Daley . "He was exhausted. He was too tired to let it slacken. But he was tired enough to keep the momentum going," he says .
 The disengagement agreement was signed on May 31 . Both Israel and Syria accepted the terms, and the disengagement deal was signed .
 The next step in the American effort had to be an attempt to consolidate the new trust and extend the new dialogue . The U.S. has been in touch with the Arab world for decades .
 Plans were therefore activated for a series of major summits in the Mideast . Plans were also activated for the series of summits .
 I decided to make personal visits to Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Israel to help firm up the gains we had made, says President Vladimir Putin .
 The House Judiciary Committee turned to the topics of wiretaps and the Plumbers . Kissinger was forging the Syrian-Israeli disengagement .
 Kissinger had already testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee about the case . The House Judiciary Committee treated the materials on the case with characteristic irresponsibility .
 The committee began a systematic series of leaks implying that there were discrepancies in Kissinger’s statements . Kissinger's statements were leaked to the House of Representatives . The committee leaked a series of damaging leaks to the public .
 Foreign Relations Committee members reaffirmed their belief in Kissinger’s veracity, but the press would not let up . The press will continue to press Kissinger's story .
 The first press conference after his shuttle tour de force took an ugly and accusatory turn . Early in his first press conferences, questions were accusatory remarks .
 He was asked about reports that he had given false testimony to the Foreign Relations Committee . Asked whether he had obtained a lawyer because of the prospect of perjury, he declined .
 Kissinger’s character and truthfulness, added to the strains of a month of tense shuttling between Israel and Syria, set Kissinger on edge . Kissinger's nerves on edge after the attack on his character .
 He kept his composure during the press conference, but afterward he was shaken and disillusioned . Afterward, he said he was "shaken" and "disillusioned" by the experience .
 President Nixon was a symbol of the positive foreign policy accomplishments of the Nixon administration, says Sen. Richard Nixon . Nixon had the effrontery to show the nation and the world that the U.S. under my leadership was still able to command respect in the world and achieve significant results
 Shortly before leaving for the Mideast on June 10, 1974, I dictated two notes about the way the domestic situation had developed . Shortly before going on the trip, I wrote a series of notes .
 As the week ends and as the trip begins, there seems to be a feeling that the momentum is changing somewhat, although we have felt this before and have been disappointed . The momentum is beginning to be changing somewhat .
 The Supreme Court will rule on the case of the Supreme Court on August 1 . The case is expected to last until the first of August when the case is decided .
 I have tried to do this over the past year and a half, but it has been very difficult at times because we seem always to be fighting the battle or trying to deal with some new development . I have been trying to get the best out of myself, I said. I have
 "The great tragedy is that it seems to be a year and a half almost that is lost," he says . "All in all, looking back over this last fifteen or sixteen months, to me the great tragedy"
 "We have accomplished some good things but I have had to spend an inordinate amount of time thinking about this problem," he says . "Emotionally it has taken a great deal out of me," he adds. "I have spent a great amount of my time thinking"
 We certainly have made our mistakes but perhaps the year has taught us all more compassion and understanding . The year has also brought clearly to light the unbelievable battle in which we are engaged and how high the stakes are and how bitter and fanatical the opposition is .
 On June 5 I held a meeting for some of the leaders of the American Jewish community. "On June 5, I met with some of those leaders," he said. "I'm not afraid to say yes, but I'm glad to say 'Yes'
 Diary Diary I pointed out that hardware alone to Israel was a policy that made sense maybe five years ago but did not make sense today . Israel had to have in mind that each new war would be more and more costly because their neighbors would learn to fight, and there were more of them
 Someone would have to hold the ring against the Russians, as we did with the alert in 1973 . And that second, looking into the future, someone would have been holding the ring .
 I made it very clear there is going to be no blank check in our conversations with the Israelis . I expressed sympathy for their military needs and, of course, enormous respect for their bravery, etc.
 Whether Israel can survive over a long period of time with a hundred million Arabs around them is questionable, he says . As a matter of fact, he adds, Israel can't survive over long periods of time .
 The only long-term hope lies in reaching some kind of settlement now while they can operate from a position of strength, and while we are having such success in weaning the Arabs away from the Soviets and into more responsible paths, the only hope is reaching a settlement now .
 Afterward, while the girls and their husbands went downstairs to watch a movie and Pat went upstairs to finish her packing, I went to the Lincoln Sitting Room and dictated a note describing the problems and opportunities I saw in the historic trip we were to begin the next morning .
 Diary Diary: I don't know whether I got across adequately the point that not just this trip when it is concluded, or the two and a half years remaining, will mean that we have secured our goal of a lasting peace . Diary diary: "I don’t know whether
 It is going to require tending thereafter by strong Presidents for the balance of this century . It will need to be done by President Obama for the rest of the century . President Obama has been a strong force in the world for decades .
 "All I must do is to do everything possible to see that we leave a structure on which future Presidents can build," he says . "A structure based on military strength, diplomatic sophistication, intelligence, and, of course, a strong strain of idealism"
 President Obama traveled to the Mideast on June 9, 2012 . The trip is significant for the U.S. in the region and for the United States .
 President George W. Bush's first trip to the U.S. was in the midst of the Watergate attacks . He said he was fully aware that the success or failure of this trip might make the decisive difference in his ability to exercise presidential leadership .
 The irony is that the press will be more obsessed with the minuscule problems involved in Watergate than they are with the momentous stakes involved in what I will be doing and saying in the Mideast .
 This is probably a turning point in terms of Watergate issue, but also the presidency itself, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This is probably the turning point of the whole Watergate issue"
 Iam going to devote myself over this next ten days to doing everything possible to restore some respect for the office as well as for the man . I'm going to spend the next 10 days trying to do everything possible, restoring some respect .
 Kissinger was talking about holding a press conference in Salzburg in order to answer this charge, Kissinger said . Kissinger said he would hold a press press conference to answer the charge . He said Kissinger was planning to hold the press conference on the charge of espionage .
 Kissinger should approach the question positively on the ground that the wiretaps were legitimate and necessary . Kissinger should not be defensive but approach the press conference positively, he said .
 He called a press conference and opened it with a long and emotional statement . He called it an emotional press conference . It was the first time he had been to speak to the media since his arrest .
 After going through the details of his testimony on the wiretaps, he introduced an aggrieved personal note .
 The real bombshell came during the question period that followed, he said, “I do not believe that it is possible to conduct the foreign policy of the United States under these circumstances when the character and credibility of the Secretary of State is at issue.”
 I issued a public statement expressing my understanding of Kissinger’s desire to defend himself against malicious leaks, adding that all Americans would recognize, as I did, that his honor needed no defense . Kissinger's honor needs no defense, he said .
 The Times and Washington Post attack on Kissinger is the total irresponsibility of the Times, Washington Post and all of our opponents . Kissinger is traveling abroad at a time we are traveling abroad to take him on this flimsy issue .
 The mistake that he made, of course, was to hypo his case with the threat to resign, which, among other things, is an empty cannon . He made the mistake, he said, "to hypoize his case"
 Kissinger’s threat to resign was a resounding chorus of support for him . Kissinger has threatened to resign from the White House . The first reaction to Kissinger's threat was a chorus of backing for him.
 Even a few of his supporters were calling his Salzburg performance a tantrum, while a small band of critics was claiming that it had been a calculated maneuver to distract attention from the charges against him .
 Threat to resign had the effect he desired and put critics on the defensive . But in the end his threat to resign was not enough to put his critics on defensive .
 Later, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee reconsidered his testimony and announced that he was still in good standing with them . The committee later announced that the committee still stands with them.
 We stayed overnight in Salzburg overnight in order to get used to the time change .
 Diary Diary: I felt good this morning except for the fact that my left leg is having exactly the same symptoms it had when I was in Hawaii and had what was diagnosed as a blood clot . Diary Diary .
 I am having Lukash come over and take a look at it since he was the one who measured it before . I am not sure if Lukash will be able to measure it again . Lukash was one of the ones who measured the pitch before .
 It is much larger than the right leg and it really makes me quite lame. It really makes him quite lame, he says . It is not the only leg that is bigger than his right leg .
 I, of course, will not allow them to do anything which will disrupt the trip at this point . I will not let them do anything that will disrupt this point, he says . I'm not allowed to travel with them, he adds .
 The danger of phlebitis is that a blood clot might form and break loose into the bloodstream . If it reached the lungs, it could cause a fatal embolism, says Dr. Lukash .
 The swelling in my leg was in fact the aftermath of the inflammation and that the greatest danger had already passed. Fortunately, he seemed to think that the swelling in his leg was the after the inflammation . The greatest danger in the leg is that the inflammation has already passed .
 He told me to wrap my leg in hot towels at least four times a day and to stay off it as much as possible . He said to wrap it up in a hot towel four times per day and stay away from it .
 I told him that I wanted the few people who knew about it to keep it absolutely secret . "I told him I wanted it to be absolutely secret," he said .
 President Sadat and his wife were waiting at the airport, and I was immediately impressed by both of them . Sadat's wife was also impressed by the president's personal qualities .
 Sadat is a handsome man, somewhat taller than I had expected from his pictures . Sadat was born in Cairo, Egypt, in 2007 .
 President Obama received a tumultuous welcome in Cairo, Egypt, Cairo, on his first trip to the U.S. President Barack Obama's first visit to the Middle East .
 For mile after mile along both sides of the road people were packed a hundred deep . For miles after mile . Both sides of road were packed with people . People were packed 100 deep .
 Even more impressive than the sheer number was the sincerity of the crowd’s emotion . But even more impressive was the obvious sincerity .
 Sadat seemed to sense what I was thinking, because he leaned over and shouted in my ear so that I could hear him . Sadat then leaned over to whisper in his ear to tell me what he thought .
 When the motorcade finally reached the palace where we would be staying, Sadat suggested that we delay our first meeting for an hour or two . Sadat: "When we arrived in Cairo, the first meeting was a meeting of the first time."
 I thought he was simply being polite because of the exertion of standing up and waving for almost an hour under the blazing sun . But I thought it was because he stood up and waved for nearly an hour .
 He had suffered two mild heart attacks as recently as 1970 and took extremely cautious care of himself . He suffered two heart attacks in 1970 and was extremely cautious about himself .
 He did not press me privately about U.S.-Israeli ties, but publicly he made a strong appeal for return of the occupied territories, the rights of the Palestinians, and the status of Jerusalem .
 Describing his dealings with the Soviets, he said that he had asked them for military help before the October war, and they had not come through . The Soviets had not been able to provide military help in the war .
 Sadat and I stood waving from an open coach as Sadat waved from open coach . They jammed the entire route on our three-hour train ride from Cairo to Alexandria . Sadat: "It's a good day for Egypt, but it's a bad day"
 It was hot and dusty, dusty, and the swelling in my leg grew painful from standing so long . It was the first time I had stood in a hot, dusty place in my life .
 "I realized that Sadat felt it was important for as many people as possible to see us together," she says . "But I realized that . Sadat . felt it important for . as many as possible, she said . to see them together. But I realized . that Sad
 Sadat: U.S. contribution to peace in the Middle East is key to peace . Sadat spoke to reporters aboard a train from Cairo to Cairo .
 One wonders whether they came out simply because they think we are bringing a bag full of money to deal with their problems . One wonders if they think they are bringing out money to help them deal with problems .
 Egypt is the key to the Arab world, and thanks to Sadat and the Egyptian people, the trip got off to an excellent start . The trip to Egypt is a great start to the trip to the Middle East, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Our objectives were to provide support to Egypt in pursuing its moderate course, and to encourage and strengthen Sadat in his roles as leader of his country and as a constructive and essential influence for any future Middle East negotiations .
 At the conclusion of the U.S.-Egyptian summit, Egypt and the Middle East agreed to work together for peace in the region . Egypt and Egypt are committed to working together in peace .
 We also agreed to negotiate an agreement under which we would sell nonmilitary nuclear reactors and fuel to Egypt for the production of electrical power .
 "He looked much older than his admitted sixty-seven—according to our intelligence reports, seventy-two—years," says President Obama . "I'm not surprised that he's a very old man," he says .
 Despite this obsession, Faisal was one of the wisest leaders in the entire region . He was a leader of the Arab Spring in the region, but was also considered a wise leader .
 Saudi Arabia was not directly involved in the Middle East peace negotiations . Faisal’s stature in the Arab world and financial support he provided to Syria and Egypt gave him a vital role .
 I was able to discuss with him the serious global impact of the high oil prices caused by the recent Arab oil embargo and to encourage his moves to moderate oil prices . I was also able to talk with him about the serious impact on the global impact on global impact .
 Faisal: "Anybody who stands against you, Mr President, in the U.S. or outside the United States of America, or stands against us, your friends in this part of the world" "Obviously has one aim in mind, namely that of causing the spl
 My visit to Syria required the most delicate diplomacy of the entire Mideast trip, says President Obama . Obama's visit to the region required the "most delicate diplomacy" of the trip, he says .
 Syria had been one of the most radically pro-Soviet, anti-Israeli, and anti-American of the Arab nations . Syria was one of Syria's most radical pro-Russian, pro-Israeli and antiAmerican nations . The Syrian government has been overthrown in the past .
 The problems that my visit presented to President Asad were summed up in the story he told me about his eight-year-old son . The problems are summed up by the story of his son, Asad said .
 Asad: "That is the question all my people will ask, and that is why we have to move at a very measured pace as we develop our relations in the future"
 "For years my people have been taught to hate the Americans," she says . "They've been taught particularly to hate Nixon who represents the capitalists who have always supported the Israelis," she adds .
 Kissinger's visit was an opportunity to encourage, support, and nurture the new Syrian-American relationship that Kissinger had begun . The agreement to disengage forces in the Golan Heights had been an achievement of substantial proportions .
 Asad 'exceeded expectations' on the conversations he had with Henry, says Asad . Asad: "He exceeded my expectations"
 "He was, as Henry had said, a tough negotiator, but he has a great deal of mystique, tremendous stamina, and a lot of charm," he said .
 "He laughs easily, and I can see he will be a dynamic leader if he can just maintain his judgment," he says . "I can see him as a great leader," he adds .
 In our last conversation he came down very very hard against any separate peace . In his last conversation, he said he came hard against a separate peace. He said: "In our last conversations he came very hard"
 "He seemed to be quite reasonable with regard to the various regional approaches we were making. But on the other hand, he seemed quite reasonable," he said .
 "All in all he is a man of real substance, and at his age—forty-four—if he can avoid somebody shooting him or overthrowing him," he says .
 Pat noted that he had a flat head in the back which she said was probably because he hadn’t been turned when he was a baby . She said it was probably probably because of his flat head .
 President Obama has a forehead like Pat Buchanan’s, says Sen. Ted Cruz . He says he has the same kind of brain and drive and single-mindedness that Buchanan has .
 In the Syrian capital of Damascus, the oldest continuously inhabited city in the world, U.S. flags were flying for the first time in seven years .
 Syrian authorities gave no publicity to the Syrian authorities . Everywhere we went large and friendly crowds turned out to welcome us, despite our movements and itineraries being given no publicity .
 I viewed this as a measure of the people’s strong desire for friendship with America, for an alternative to the Soviets, and for peace . I view this as an indication of a strong desire to friendship with the U.S. and peace .
 At the conclusion of my visit we announced the resumption of diplomatic relations between our two countries . I stated our willingness to resume educational and cultural exchanges and to cooperate in Syrian economic growth .
 When I said goodbye to Asad at the airport, he kissed me on both cheeks — the highest compliment that can be paid a visitor and an extraordinarily important gesture for the man who, until a few months earlier, had been the leading anti-American firebrand of Arab world .
 Syria is "by far the most difficult country we have in terms of working out some kind of positive continuing relationship" with the U.S.
 On the other hand, they desperately want to have another string in their bow . The team is desperate to have a new string in its bow .
 Syria wants to play us against the Russians, says President Vladimir Putin . "They want us in there," says Putin . Putin: "We must explore every possible way to make some moves toward Syria in the economic area"
 President Obama spoke with Sadat and Asad in Egypt and Syria . He says the U.S. can be a force for peace in the Arab world .
 If we could provide the lead, these two pragmatic and patriotic men were willing to seek a compromise settlement with Israel as a prerequisite for turning their attention to the development of their own countries, writes David Cameron .
 The Soviets had alienated their former Arab clients, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says it was particularly interesting to discover that this was not just the case at the leadership level .
 Manolo was an excellent source of information and insights, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he was traveling with Manolo when he was in New York City .
 Diary Manolo gave some interesting sidelights about the trip when we asked him about which country he liked the best . Manolo said he liked Australia the most .
 He said that he liked Egypt the best because the Egyptians were so friendly . He also liked Egypt because of its friendly nature .
 He said that they all said they were glad to see the Americans come in and the Russians leave . He said they said they are glad they came in and left the Russians out .
 It reminded me of my first conversation with Sadat, where he said that in six months America had gained more in Egyptian popular support than the Russians had been able to gain in twenty years . Sadat: "America has gained more support than Russia has in 20 years"
 Manolo said the Egyptians told him over and over again that the Russians were grim and mean . The Egyptians told Manolo that they lived apart and did not treat the people kindly . Manolo says that the Egyptians said they would not treat Russians kindly .
 He ran into the same thing in Syria, where one of the people working in the kitchen told him that the Americans were smiling and the Russians were always grim . He says the Americans are smiling and Russians are grim .
 Most Americans "basically like other people," CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: With all of our faults, most Americans are like people . He says some Americans are arrogant, but with the exception of some arrogant Americans .
 "They want to be liked, and so they go overboard in trying to win other people," he says . Putting it another way, they want to like others, he adds . "They go overboard," he said .
 The Russians, with their inferiority complex and their single-minded communist determination, are a very different breed . The Russians are a different breed of communist breed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They don’t let their good qualities show through except when they are dealing with what they consider to be absolute equals . They’s good qualities are shown only when they’re dealing with ‘absolute equals’
 Sadat told Sadat that the real problem between China and Russia was that, deep down, the Chinese consider themselves superior and more civilized than the Russians . I recalled a conversation I had had with Sadat in which I thought that I thought .
 Our reception in Israel, although warm by ordinary standards, was the most restrained of the trip . Our reception was the warmest of the visit to Israel, with a warm welcome .
 Golda Meir had resigned just two months earlier and Yitzhak Rabin had taken over as Prime Minister . Yitzak Rabin was heading up a fragile coalition, heading up an unstable government .
 Given the unpopularity of my Mideast policy in many quarters in Israel, Rabin was understandably unwilling to be more than correct in the treatment he accorded me . But he was also bluntly anxious to know how much more aid he could depend on from us .
 The primary purpose of my meetings with Rabin and his top Cabinet officials was to make it clear to them that while we would not waver in our total support for Israel’s security, we would insist on their playing a sincere and serious part in maintaining the momentum of the peace
 Israel and the U.S. proposed to negotiate an agreement on non-military nuclear reactors and fuel supply similar to the one we had concluded with President Sadat .
 I said that of all the world leaders I had met none had greater courage, intelligence, stamina, determination, determination or dedication to their country than Golda Meir .
 She was sitting nearby at the head table, and I could see how flustered and flattered she was . She was sat nearby at a head table at the time .
 "I thought that I, having worked with her, having become her friend, and she has been my friend, that I might have the honor and the privilege to ask you to join me in a toast to the former Prime Minister," he said .
 Typically eloquent even when taken by surprise, she made a brief reply to the question . She said: "I'm not surprised. I was surprised."
 The one is an easy one, politically politically, and that is the status quo . The status quo is a status quo, he says, but that is not the end of history .
 Don’t move, because any movement has risks in it, and therefore resist those initiatives that may be undertaken, that might lead to a negotiation which would perhaps contribute to a permanent, just, and durable peace . ‘Don't move,’ says French President Nicolas Sark
 Israel is not a solution for Israel’s survival, it is not right that every possible avenue be explored to avoid it in the interest of the future of those children we saw by the hundreds and thousands on the streets of Jerusalem today .
 Jordan's King Hussein was once again impressed by the charm and intelligence of King Hussein .
 He and I spent over two hours in a private discussion of his unique role in assisting the settlement of conflicts . He said: "He and I . spent over 2 hours in private discussion about his role in helping to settle conflicts"
 He had long been a staunch and loyal friend of the United States, sometimes to his considerable peril . He affirmed that he would continue to do his part on behalf of restraint and moderation on the long road .
 There was a large crowd waiting on the South Lawn of the White House to welcome Pat and me. Pat and Pat were greeted by a crowd of people .
 He said he was here with many others to wish you Godspeed ten days ago . He said: "Mr President, about 10 days ago, I was here . I was . here to wish [President] Godspeed," he said .
 President Obama's trip to Mideast trip reflected on the practical perspective of the domestic reaction to it, he says . "I briefed congressional leaders on the opportunity we had to exert leadership for peace in the Middle East"
 We must have gotten some lift from the trip, although it seems almost impossible to break through in the polls . We are still struggling to find a way to get back on the track .
 'Of course, this is not surprising after the terrible banging we are taking,' she said . 'This isn't surprising,' she added .
 The most important thing, of course, is to keep working to make sure the trip bears the fruits of peace, or at least progress .
 Sadat constantly emphasized the point that it was unnatural for the Egyptians and the Americans to be enemies, and natural for us to be friends, he says . Sadat: "It is unnatural for Egypt and the U.S. to have enemies"
 This is the most significant benefit from the presidential trip as distinguished from all the negotiations. This to me, I said, is the biggest benefit of the president's visit to the U.S.
 The Arabs really want to be friends of the Americans, and now it’s up to us to be their friends . The Arabs want to prove that friendship with America is worthwhile, says the Arab leader .
 Israel would be strong enough to negotiate with Israel, but not so strong that they felt they had no need to do so, he says . Israel is strong enough that they would not fear to negotiate, he adds . Israel has been a thorny thorny place in the Middle East since
 Israel should also be strong enough so that their neighbors would not be tempted to attack them . Israel should have an incentive to negotiate with its neighbors, says Israel's ambassador .
 President Obama's trip to the Mideast put Watergate into perspective, Obama says . "All the terrible battering we have taken is really pygmy-sized," he says .
 This, I suppose, is what we must always keep front and center regardless of what happens in the future . This, he says, is . This is what I suppose .
 Fred Buzhardt had suffered a heart attack on June 13, while he was in Egypt . Fred died in Cairo, Egypt, a month after his death .
 "Once I was assured that he was going to pull through, I tried to assess the impact his illness would have on our legal situation. Once I was told that he would pull through I thought it would have affected his legal situation," she said .
 We also had to prepare for the pretrial hearings in the Watergate cover-up case on defense motions for documents, and to respond to demands for documents .
 Kissinger was returning to testify on wiretaps before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . The House Judiciary Committee was continuing its demands for more tapes .
 The leaks from both members and staff had become so frequent that Democrats and Republicans were expressing their disapproval . Democrats as well as Republicans expressed their disapproval of the leaks .
 On June 21, two days after his return from the Mideast, the House Judiciary Committee finished hearing all the evidence on all the charges against him . The evidence ran over 7,000 pages and ultimately filled thirty-eight large printed volumes .
 The quantity of the evidence was overwhelming, but its quality was weak . Most of it had little or no direct bearing on my own actions, he says .
 Washington columnists noted that John Rhodes, for the first time in weeks, was beginning to emerge as a leader in my behalf . John Rhodes has been a thorn in the arm of President Obama's administration . Rhodes: "John Rhodes is now a leader"
 Pro-impeachment Democrats are pushing hard for an early House floor vote . They feel the committee’s slow pace had let the momentum slip .
 The Washington Post ran a front-page story that the committee had begun to polarize . The D.C. committee has been polarizing since it was formed .
 Waggonner was a veteran of seven terms in the House . He headed an informal group that sometimes numbered as many as a hundred House Democrats, mainly Southerners, he says .
 He had been a great source of strength to me throughout the whole Watergate period . " hardly a week went by that he did not call to reassure me of his continued support," he said. "He had been the great source . of strength"
 "He was always totally realistic, and he never tried to encourage me falsely," he said . But he was always realistic, he said, "but he was totally realistic," he added .
 Mr. Nixon said he had seventy anti-impeachment votes in his group that he thought were pretty solid . Now he was saying that he . had seventy . anti-IMPEachment votes . Nixon said that he had sixty anti-Impeachment . votes in the group that
 The only thing that might change them, he said, would be if for any reason I were held in contempt of the Supreme Court .
 Other than that he did not think there was any chance for an impeachment, he said . He said there was no chance of an impeachment .
 On June 22 and 23 I reflected on the tentative new sources of support showing up in Congress, and even in the House Judiciary Committee itself . On June 23, he reflected on his support for the bill .
 Diary Diary: Thank God some Republicans on the committee led by {Charles Wiggins [of California], are standing up . Diary Diary diary: "Thank God some of our Republicans ... standing up" Diary Diary Diary .
 This may be the new factor that could change this situation, but with the one caveat, that is, that what happens in the Supreme Court is going to put us to a real test . The Supreme Court may be going to test us, but that's not the case .
 I still hope and feel, however, that there would be a fairly good chance this time that the Court, as it looks down to the future of this country, will not want to set such a devastating precedent . The future of the Court itself is at stake in this case .
 The Court all lives in Washington, are affected by the Washington stories, and the poison they see in the Washington Post must really seep in . But the Court all live in Washington .
 "It’s very difficult for people to read it every day and not be affected by it," says the author of the book . "It's very difficult to read [the book] every day," she says .
 In thinking today, after my call with Joe Waggonner, when he said that unless there was contempt of the Supreme Court we would win the impeachment, I realized that we really are looking at about thirty days in which the climactic decision with regard to whether we are able to
 What I have to do in these next thirty days is to live every one of them up to the hilt and not be concerned about what happens in between . I have been here for 30 years and I'm not worried about what's next .
 "We just have to be sure that we do everything we can to be worthy of whatever responsibilities we have," says Toni Kroos .
 This is why as time has gone on, when we add up the Dean week which was just a year ago—and the tape issue—and then Agnew . Then Agnew, followed that up with the two-tapes business—the tax business—and all of the other
 "We can only thank God for the strength of the family, as I have often said," he said . "Some of our close friends, and the iron will of Haig, who I think is the strongest man in the whole group— supported, of course, by Zieg
 I told him that I knew he must be worried about what was going to happen in September, and that I felt for him very, very deeply, just as I did for John Ehrlichman and John Mitchell . "I told him I felt very deeply," he said .
 He said, well, he just lived day by day and didn’t think about the outcome in the end . He said he didn't worry about the end of his life .
 I suppose that something might happen in the future with regard to the Court that would end in eventual impeachment, I thought of all of the others who must be going through much worse—sleepless nights and so forth . People who don’t have strong physical or emotional faculties as
 It's really remarkable that we have so many among our own group who have stood up under a terrible battering, and have taken the worst shots that they could get and have still survived. It’s really remarkable to see how many of our own players have survived .
 As I analyze things on this rather rainy Sunday, June 23, I must say that we are probably, as Al says, stronger than we were a couple of months ago . We shall now see what happens as we go to the Soviet Union, come back, and as the tension then
 At least the Mideast trip tended to break the momentum and to focus attention on other subjects . The trip was a distraction for the White House .
 Al feels that the press wants to do that, that they are rather tired of the other subject, he says . "Al feels that he feels that they want to . The press is tired of that subject," Al says .
 I trust he’s right, although I think that we will find that many of our opponents will not play that game because they desperately want to get us out of the World Cup . I trust that they will find it hard to play, but I think they won't play that
 "My family and I tried to make the time we spent together as happy and carefree as possible," she said . "I'm not going to get into trouble again. My family and friends are going to be together again," she added .
 "They were young, and they needed freedom to live their own lives," she says . "Instead they were having to fight my battles day in and day out. They were young and needed freedom," she adds .
 Julie would often leave her New English edition of the New Testament on her bedstand, opened to some consoling passage . Julie often left her copy of the Bible on the bedstand .
 Tricia would come to the Lincoln Sitting Room at some of the lowest times and just sit with me while I read or worked, in a quiet tribute of love and support . Tricia's support was a quiet, quiet tribute to her husband's love and strength .
 It became a favorite sport of insatiable gossip columnists to fabricate rumors of a “rift” between me and Ed, or even between Tricia and Tricia, Ed. Ed.
 It finally reached the point that Tricia was forced to issue a statement denying that her marriage was about to break up .
 In fact, she and Ed seemed to grow stronger and draw closer the more they were forced to endure . The couple's relationship grew stronger and stronger as they endured the ordeal .
 In March, without informing me beforehand, they jointly wrote a courageous and eloquent magazine article in my defense . They jointly wrote an article in March without informing him beforehand, he says .
 Julie and David were directly in the blast of the hurricane for the entire final year of President Obama's presidency . "Julie and David" were directly affected by the hurricane .
 Living in Washington ensured that they could never escape from the ceaseless media scrutiny or from the stifling atmosphere of the threatened impeachment . Living in D.C. ensured they could not escape the media scrutiny .
 I never accepted that life could be so unfair and it’s unquestionably just the beginning of the beginning. ‘It was unquestionably the beginning,’ she said of her life .
 I spent the better part of this week wrestling with my feelings on the situation . I spent a lot of time wrestling with what I felt about the situation in the past .
 I wondered when it was you experienced your ‘despair so absolute’—14 years ago, 1 year ago—our may have been last week . We may have experienced our "despair" 14 years ago and a year ago .
 We are happy with any part of redeeming the work you have done for America and we aren’t alone either, come what may . We aren't alone either. Come what may. We’re happy .
 The next day she had bounced back, and within a week she and David decided to hold a press conference in response to the storm of criticism of the transcripts and the calls for my resignation that were now coming from friends and enemies alike .
 At one point during their press conference a reporter for CBS began talking about the ‘sins of the fathers” being visited on their children .
 His implication was that their spontaneous decision to hold the press conference was part of a calculated move to shield me from reporters . His implication is that they planned to hold a press conference to shield him from reporters, he said .
 'As a daughter it is my obligation to come out here. Now if the media has a hang-up, an obsession about resignation and feels they must be reassured by members of the family, I feel as a daughter I feel I should be reassured'
 I have seen what my father has gone through, and I am so proud of him that I would never be afraid to come out here and talk to any members of the press about resignation or anything else, even though it goes against my grain . I know he does not want me out
 "There was a strength of character unmatched, I believe, in the history of American politics. She worked to keep our spirits high when we were together as a family," says Hillary Clinton .
 She was, as Jerry Ford proclaimed her, “First Lady of the World,” and on March 11 she made what was to be the last of her trips as my representative abroad . On March 11, she traveled to the United States for the last time .
 This time she visited Brazil and Venezuela, where she captivated everyone . She visited Brazil, Venezuela and Venezuela for the first time .
 On the plane back reporters immediately started pressing her about Watergate . They wanted to know just how much pain she had suffered in the last year, just how bad it had been for her .
 In January 1974, the Soviets had agreed to announce the date of Summit III, scheduled to be held in Moscow in the summer . Summit III was scheduled for the summer of 1974 .
 I evaluated this decision either as an act of faith on their part that I was going to prevail over impeachment, or as an indication of their interest in seeing détente continue regardless of who was President . I evaluated the decision as either a sign of faith or a sign that I would
 Anti-détente forces reached fever pitch as I was getting ready to leave for the Soviet Union . Summit III was probably the most crucial and hardest fought battle of Summit III took place in Washington .
 The liberals were now in full cry with what had become fashionable outrage over Soviet repression of political dissidents and their restriction of Jewish emigration . The liberal outrage was now fashionable outrage .
 The conservatives of both parties were united in their determination to limit trade with the Soviets or ban it altogether . The conservatives were still united in trying to ban trade with Soviets .
 Summit III might actually succeed in producing a breakthrough on limiting offensive nuclear weapons or a limited nuclear test ban . The military establishment and its many friends in Congress and the country were up in arms over the prospect of a breakthrough .
 This convergence of anti-détente forces would have existed regardless of any domestic political problems, says CNN's John Defterios . This convergence would have been possible regardless of domestic problems, he says .
 Watergate damaged my ability to defuse, or to circumvent, them as effectively as I might have been able to do . But Watergate had badly damaged me, he says, but I could still defuse it .
 Kissinger reported that Brezhnev seemed to be confronting some of the same problems as we were of military opposition to a permanent agreement to limit offensive nuclear weapons . Kissinger went to Moscow on March 24 for four days of talks aimed at setting the agenda for Summit III .
 U.S. military opposition to a new SALT agreement came to a head at the meeting of the National Security Council on June 20 . Secretary of Defense Schlesinger presented the Pentagon’s proposal .
 U.S. President Barack Obama took a hard line against any SALT agreement that did not ensure an overwhelming American advantage . It amounted to an unyielding hard line on any Salt agreement .
 There was a moment of silence, and then Schlesinger said, “But, Mr President, everyone knows how impressed Khrushchev was with your forensic ability in the kitchen debate.”
 Jerry Ford broke the silence that followed Schlesinger’s remark and moved the discussion into the broader area of the defense budget . Ford: Defense budget is a key part of the conversation .
 After this had gone on for a few minutes, I made a statement about the way I viewed the development of détente over the two years remaining to me in the White House . After this, I said that I wanted to make a statement .
 Diary Ford is on the kick that we ought to have a huge increase in the defense budget, and that that will give us a bargaining position with the Soviets, he says . Diary Ford: "Diary Ford is ... on a kick"
 He’s right in one way, of course, and wrong in another, because we aren’t going to be able to bluff them in this particular case . He says we won't bluff them, but we’re going to have to .
 "My great concern, as I said at the meeting, is that whoever might succeed me in this office might not fight these bloody battles," he said .
 We could have someone who, despite all the white-hot talk that the United States has to be number one, would cave in to the peacenik views that the establishment press would undoubtedly be expressing .
 It is very important, if we possibly can, to get some constraints on the Soviets at this time. That is why it is very crucial, if you possibly can. That's why it's very important to get a constraint on the Soviet Union, he says .
 "If we get into a runaway race, it may be that they will be uninhibited and we will be inhibited. Because later on, if we get . into a race race, they may be . uninhibited," he said .
 As I tried to point out at the NSC meeting, when the President of the U.S. makes a decision, it’s very different from a decision made by the General Secretary of the Soviet Union. As I . tried to . point out, when . the President
 We can be very sure that his decision is one that will and can be carried out . We can't be sure that he will and will carry out his decision .
 He doesn't have to be too concerned about his public opinion, if at all . He doesn’t have to worry too much about public opinion .
 When the President of the United States makes a decision, however, he can’t ever be absolutely sure that his decision will be carried out . The President can't be sure that he will carry out his decision .
 It’s certainty versus the uncertainty that weakens, not our actual bargaining position so much, but makes it essential that we take this factor into account in negotiating the terms of any deal that we make with the Soviet Union . It's certainty versus uncertainty is what weakens our bargaining
 If we have an agreement which constrains us both, it means that we will be constraining them in something that they will inevitably do. Because if we have a agreement . We are constraining both ourselves, we will have to accept it, he says .
 When we constrain ourselves, it may be that we are constraining ourselves in an area where we wouldn’t be doing anything anyway, says Dr. John Sutter .
 This, of course, was exactly the situation with regard to the ’72 agreement . This is exactly the same situation with . regard to . the ‘72 agreement,’s ‘71 agreement . The agreement was reached in 1972, but the agreement was never reached .
 It is just as well, however, that we don’t fight this battle right now, says President Obama . "We will have rendered a great service to our national security as well," he says .
 Many of the Defense people don’t want any agreement because they want to go ahead willynilly with all the defense programs they possibly can and they do not want constraints . ‘Many of the defense people don't want any agreements because they don‘t want constraints.
 The situation has been compounded by the fact that Henry hasn’t been able to work on it . The situation is compounded by that fact that he hasn't worked on it, he said .
 He has been so tied down with the Mideast that he hasn’t been able to pull this other one together, he says .
 Maybe it's just as well, however, because this as I said is not the time to fight this battle . Maybe it’s just as good, though, because it is not as well to fight the battle .
 For the first time since the Watergate break-in, Brezhnev expressed concern about my ability to make decisions domestically . For the second time in four decades, he said: "I'm not going to be able to make a decision"
 He had gone very far out on a limb for détente, and he was understandably concerned that my sudden or unexpected departure from office would leave him in an embarrassing and exposed position within his own hierarchy .
 Brezhnev seemed particularly concerned that our domestic problems could hinder the course of events, says ambassador to Moscow . In April 1974 we received a report from Walter Stoessel, now ambassador to Russia, describing a meeting at which he was particularly concerned .
 He viewed the President’s opponents as ‘senseless, ” Stoessel reported . ‘Senseless’ was the president's view of opponents, he said .
 When Gromyko came to see me on April 11, he opened by reassuring me that despite anti-Soviet stories and articles that appeared in the U.S. press, the Soviets were firmly in support of détente .
 In unusually personal moment, Gromyko said he admired his standing up, despite difficulties . Then, he said he simply wanted to say to me that he admired my standing up .
 The rest of our meeting was spent in a wrangle over SALT numbers, a preview of what was to come in Moscow . It was a prelude to the meeting in Moscow, with the rest of the meeting being spent on SALT .
 "I thought that it would be especially useful to dramatize the continuing viability of the Atlantic alliance before sitting down with Brezhnev. I thought that . I thought . It would be particularly useful to . dramatizing the continuing . viability of . the NATO alliance .
 In a formal statement to the NATO Council, I said that the period of détente was one of great opportunity but also of great danger . In my formal statement I said: "Détente is one of many opportunities and great danger"
 Fear of communism was no longer a practical motivation for NATO . If NATO were to survive, it would need other binding motives to keep it together . We had to accept the fact that fear of communism no longer an effective motivation .
 It was just before I left for Brussels that the story of my phlebitis attack during the Mideast trip broke in the U.S. press . The story of the attack broke in American press just before he left for Belgium .
 "The reporters immediately watched my every movement for signs of a limp or pain," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: The reporters immediately looked closely at his every movement .
 In fact, my leg was still swollen and painful, but I was determined not to betray how much I had done . I was still in pain, but was determined to carry on .
 It's amazing that my health is as good as it is, says President Obama . "I told Ziegler, the main thing about this leg situation is not to let them build it up in a way that they think the President is crippled mentally as well as physically," he says
 We must make sure that people never get the idea that the President is like Eisenhower in his last year or so, or like Roosevelt, or, for that matter, even like Johnson when everybody felt that Johnson was probably ready to crack up, and was drinking too much and so forth .
 Summit III got off to a very auspicious start with a reception in Moscow on June 27 . Summit III will be held in Moscow, Russia, on June 28 . Summit is the first of its kind in Moscow since it was held in 2007 .
 A fairly large crowd had been allowed to stand behind barriers and wave paper flags . Crowds were allowed to wave flags from behind barriers .
 Unlike 1972, there were also crowds along the streets as we drove to the Kremlin . Unlike in 1972, crowds were also visible in the streets .
 Shortly after we arrived, Brezhnev invited me to his office for a private talk . Shortly after that we arrived we were invited to meet with him for a talk .
 He told me about his recent meeting with Teddy Kennedy and Averell Harriman and said that they both supported détente . He said that he met with Kennedy and Harrimans and that they supported denteente .
 I told him it was fine for him to meet with leaders of both parties between now and 1976 because we wanted them all to be in support of détente . I said he could meet with both parties in 1976 and 1976 . We wanted all of them to be supporting the dét
 He said that he had followed the political situation in the U.S. and he was convinced that he would be in until 1976 .
 Kissinger and Haig had a brief meeting in Kissinger's car, where they could talk without being bugged . Kissinger suggested to Haig that we have a private meeting in my car, which was bugged, he says .
 His talks with Gromyko during the afternoon had been seriously undercut by anti-détente agitation within the administration . As I had guessed, the domestic harassment over wiretaps still bothered him, as well as his realization that his negotiating position was seriously undercut .
 On the first day of formal sessions we took up the question of a nuclear test ban . The nuclear test test ban was discussed in the first session of the nuclear conference .
 The Soviets, as in the past, would not agree to the necessary on-the-ground verification procedures . The Soviet Union did not agree with the necessary verification procedures, it has said .
 I was convinced that without such ironclad verification procedures to make sure that they were abiding by the terms, a total test ban was too dangerous to consider . Without such verification procedures, the ban was 'too dangerous' to consider.
 We also had to take into account that such a ban was no longer as meaningful as it would have been when we were the only two nuclear powers, and in those days the Soviets had refused even to consider it .
 Neither France nor the P.R.C. would halt nuclear testing regardless of what we did . Neither would Israel or India stop nuclear research. Neither would stop nuclear testing .
 During Kissinger’s preliminary visit to Moscow in March the Soviets had suggested a “threshold” test ban . The Soviets suggested a "threshold" test ban in March .
 Nuclear weapons could not be tested as long as they did not cross a certain threshold of size and force . Under such an arrangement, nuclear weapons could be tested but not tested .
 Since seismic equipment could be used in each country, on-the-ground verification would not be necessary . Since these infractions could be determined by seismic equipment, there would be no need for verification of infractions .
 Summit III Brezhnev suggested that instead of wrangling about the threshold levels for a limited test ban, we solve the question by agreeing on a comprehensive test ban . Summit III was the first full day of the Summit III summit of Summit III .
 I recorded in my diary, “During this session, Brezhnev was very tough, just like at the dacha in 1972 on Vietnam on Vietnam,” he said in his diary . “I recorded in . diary, "During this . session, . Bre
 There was no way to forestall this digression if Brezhnev was determined to have it, I decided . I decided that the only way to counter was with a vigorously frank and pragmatic approach .
 "If Kosygin and the others expected me to hedge uncomfortably, they would be disappointed by the tone and substance of my reply," he says . "I'm not going to hedge," he writes .
 At the other end of the spectrum, however, there are equal numbers who favor no ban at all . The problem of verification is still to be resolved .
 "This is the only way we will get the support of the majority of our Congress," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz says he wants to keep the bill passed .
 "Those who applaud our efforts toward détente over the past two years now, for reasons that are more partisan than philosophical, would like to see our efforts fail," says President Obama .
 I will move in the direction of détente because it is indispensable for the peace of the world, he says . "That is why we want every possible agreement we can make and implement"
 I can handle our so-called hawks—but only one step at a time, and I do not want this process to be interrupted . "I can handle this process," she says. "Only one step is at one time," she adds .
 We will always find, Mr General Secretary, various factions in the United States and in other countries who, for differing reasons, want to see détente fail, he said .
 "We, on our part, do not want to take a step that we have not prepared the support for," she says . "And we do want to ... not to take that step," she adds .
 "This bit of plain speaking broke the rhetorical spiral they were building," the author says .
 Brezhnev said he would have to consult with his colleagues and discuss it again later . He added he would consult with colleagues and discussed it later .
 The Crimea is one of Russia's most popular tourist destinations in the world . It is also one of the world's most populous regions, Crimea .
 "I think I crossed my leg a great deal during it and that seems to start the swelling. I think I cross my leg during it," she said .
 Brezhnev's villa on outskirts of Yalta on the Black Sea is the site of talks with the former Soviet leader . The former Soviet Union leader was visiting the Crimea with his wife .
 Since the name Yalta still carried unfavorable connotations, we called this the Oreanda Summit, after the area in which the dacha is situated . The Oreanda summit was called after the name "Yalta" and "Oreanda"
 Brezhnev's wife said, “Ochen priatno,” a Russian phrase of greeting I had learned, which seemed to please her . She said, "Ochenpriatno," a phrase of greetings I learned from her .
 Diary: I told Brezhnev on plane that ceremonies at the tomb of the Unknown Soldier in D.C. and in Moscow, where I had laid wreaths, always made me feel the profound importance of the work that we are doing . Diary: "I told Bre
 Brezhnev talked about how terrible it was to see thousands of dead people in the war . He said it was terrible seeing thousands of people die in the conflict .
 In winter, he said, it was particularly bad to see them frozen in grotesque shapes .
 The mood lightened during the sixty-four-mile drive from the airport to Oreanda .
 For most of the hour-and-a-half drive, we looked out the windows at the rolling green mountains covered with blue and gold wild flowers . The trip was the first of its kind in the region .
 Brezhnev clearly loved being in the Crimea, and he enjoyed taking me for walks through the lush greenery surrounding his hillside villa .
 On the first day after we arrived we walked to a small building built partly into the rock, with large picture windows looking out to the sea . The first day of our visit to the island was the first time we had been to the site .
 We went in, took off our coats, and talked privately for over an hour before the others joined us for a plenary session . We went into the building and took off their coats, taking a break from the rest of the session .
 Diary Diary Diary: We had a very frank and forthcoming discussion on the subjects he had apparently wanted to talk to me alone about . Diary Diary diary: 'We had a frank discussion'
 He did some doodling—what it looked like was an arrow with a heart, an arrow through the heart, he said . He said it was a heart-broken heart .
 U.S.-Soviet treaty would see each country come to the defense of the other if either country or one of its allies were attacked . The treaty would be a joint defense of both countries if attacked .
 Brezhnev’s complete switch on China was his complete switch, he says . One thing that was particularly interesting about our conversation at the cabana was that he spoke to us at the Cabana .
 In 1973 he had expressed great concern about it, but now he affected almost complete lack of interest . He said in 1973 he was concerned about it but now there is almost complete interest .
 Gromyko warned that the Chinese were a great threat to peace because they had a huge population and would sacrifice anything, including their own cities and their own people, to accomplish their goals . The Chinese would sacrifice their cities and people to achieve their goals, he says .
 If détente unravels in America, the hawks will take over, not the doves . I urged him to make some sort of gesture on Jewish emigration if only to pull the rug out of under some of the media critics .
 Kissinger said he would pass statistics to Dobrynin and Kissinger would pass them on to Kissinger . Kissinger said the statistics would be passed on to the secretary of state and vice president . Kissinger would then pass on the statistics .
 Our conversation ranged freely from the proposed conference on European security to the reduction of nuclear weapons . We asked about the proposed European security conference .
 He pointed out, incidentally, that his predictions with regard to the Mideast proved to be true .
 He said that under no circumstances, however, did he expect that there would be an Arab attack when he warned me about the explosive situation .
 "They had done everything that they could to stop it. That they, as a matter of fact, had done . That they had tried to do everything they could," he said .
 He was expressive with his gestures at this point, he said, trying to hold them back . “We were unable to do so," he said . He grabbed me by the arm and said, tried to hold back .
 When the others joined us at the cabana, the conversation returned to the impasse we had reached over multiple-warhead nuclear missiles .
 "I had concluded that he decided to use this ostensibly casual conversation as the final go-round on SALT at Summit Ill. I had concluded . He decided to end the conversation as a final round of SALT, he said .
 Kissinger stated bluntly that the numbers proposed by the Soviets were impossible for us to accept . Kissinger: "Kissinger said that we would not accept any of the Soviet numbers"
 If we did, we would have to stop MIRV construction within a year, while the Soviets would be able to continue for four more years . The Soviet Union would be allowed to continue its work for another four years .
 Lest the discussion lose sight of the reality of the situation, he introduced a gentle and subtle threat . "We're not going to be able to talk about it," he said .
 At the first opportunity I broke in, suggested that we keep to the schedule and go on the boat ride that Brezhnev had planned for us . At the end of the tour, he said: "At the first chance I suggested that [Brezhnevs] keep to
 It is time to go out on the water,” he said, and immediately led us down to the dock . We boarded Brezhnev’s Soviet Navy yacht for a sail on the Black Sea .
 Brezhnev was in good form and the toasts went rather well . It was a little rocky and some of the plates fell off, but after we all sat down, some of them fell off . The toasts were a bit rocky and the plates came off .
 The spirit of Oreanda I described as peace where we reach agreements equally fair to both sides . Oreanda: "The spirit of the spirit is peace. It's not just peace, it's peace where people are equally fair"
 I also proposed a toast to the diplomats who do the work so that the leaders can rest. I also propose a toast for the diplomats . The world's leaders should rest, says President Obama .
 Brezhnev-Nixon doctrine described as one that was fair to both nations and one which would leave a legacy of peace for generations to come .
 'The most interesting session was after lunch, when he joined me in sitting at the back of the boat and we just talked together,' he said .
 He pointed out Yalta and Bear Mountain and all the other points of interest . He also pointed out the importance of the area in Russia .
 He became very emotional; he said that he wanted this summit to be one that would be remembered as were the other great events that had taken place, including the Yalta .
 He put his arm around me and said, “We must do something of vast historical importance. He told me, ‘We need to do something very important.” He said. ‘I'm going to do it,’ he said .
 In Crimea the war was one of the most useless wars in history and one where both sides lost terribly . The Crimean War was a useless war, one where neither side lost terribly, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I made the point, just to try it out on him, that the danger in advanced nations and, of course, the Soviet Union among them, is the weakening of character . The danger of advanced nations, he said, is that they weaken character .
 If he thought it through he could have thought of Mao’s Red Guards and the Cultural Revolution, he could also think of Mao's Red Guards . If he did, he would have thought about Mao's Cultural Revolution .
 Brezhnev agreed and said sociologists and psychiatrists are now studying this question . He added that the question is now being studied by psychiatrists and psychologists .
 As people got more material goods they became less “hungry,” lost their drive, and become almost totally obsessed with self, selfishness, and every kind of abstract idea . The point, of course, was that as people became more materialistic, they became obsessed with
 As we later walked back to the dacha after getting off the boat, Gromyko was on my right and I was glad to have a talk with him . As we walked back, he was on his right and was on the way back .
 He said that his analysis was that he was doing considerably better politically in the U.S. in the United States. "He said that he said that was that I was doing significantly better politically"
 Crimea had been the cradle of war in the nineteenth century and could make it the birthplace of peace in the twentieth century . I said that the Crimea had . said that we could . make it . the birthplace . of peace .
 He again came back to the theme that I was always welcome in the Soviet Union, even after ’76, he said . He said: "I always came back ... even after '76"
 The long boat ride, after the morning walk and the afternoon session, was very tiring . It was a tiring experience .
 "That night I had dinner with Pat alone on the balcony outside our room," she says . "I'm not going to let Pat get away from me," she adds . "We're not going away from each other," she writes .
 Pat said that since she was a very little girl, when she looked at the moon, she didn’t see a man in the moon or an old lady . Pat said she always saw the American flag when she was looking at it .
 This, of course, was years before anybody ever thought of a man actually being on the moon or an American flag being there . This was years later, when the American flag was still visible in the sky .
 An American flag was spotted in the moon by a woman in the U.S. She pointed it out to me and, sure enough, I could see it, she said .
 "He took advantage of the long ride to importune me again on the Middle East," he says . He says: "It's a great way to learn about the Middle Eastern region"
 Nasser appealed to a stronger sentiment of pan-Arabism, he said . Sadat might believe in putting Egypt first, but Nasser had appealed to stronger sentiment, he added . He said Sadat had appealed for a stronger pan Arab sentiment .
 I did not repeat for him my analysis of what I considered to be Sadat’s brilliant positioning in the flexible middle ground between those extremes . Sadat was a brilliant position in the middle ground, I said .
 Diary Diary: "Don’t let the Mideast become the Balkans for the U.S. and the Soviet Union" Diary Diary I simply said, “Don”t . Don’s not the Balkans become the . Balkans . Diary Diary Diary .
 I had used this argument with him in pointing out how Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin had gotten along well, particularly emphasizing the Roosevelt-Stalin relationship in fighting the war . They did not allow differences on what the peace was going to be like to deter them from their main goal of
 Churchill was right in insisting that there be more discussion at that point, says Churchill . "We should have made some kind of deal that would have avoided the division of Europe on the basis that it finally came out"
 The subject of religion came up, and Brezhnev said, “What the hell difference does it make what God Americans pray to—we recognize all religions.” The Soviet Union leader said: “We recognize all religious beliefs. We recognize religions. We are not
 During this ride I suggested we have a “mini-summit” before the end of the year . I suggested a ‘mini-Summit’ with the government .
 We felt it should not be held in Washington or Moscow but in some place in between, and he mentioned Switzerland . I used the term halfway house, and used it as a halfway house .
 I told him it was essential to reach agreement on offensive weapons before the end of the year, he said . He said: 'I told him that it is essential that he reached agreement before the year'
 President Obama warned that no agreement had been reached at this summit, Congress would go forward on a greatly increased defense budget . Otherwise, he warned, since no agreement was reached, Congress will go forward with an increased defense spending .
 Kissinger suggested that Kissinger return to Moscow in September to arrange the agenda, and then Brezhnev and I could meet again in October, November, or December . Kissinger: "I suggested a return to Russia in September, October or November, to arrange an agenda"
 I said that we must agree in principle on a reduction of military arms, and he nodded his head vigorously . I told him that we need to agree to a reduction in military arms .
 Brezhnev went back to Moscow and Pat and I flew to Minsk, Belarus . When we arrived at the airport, the Soviet Union leader went back home .
 The crowds that greeted us everywhere during Summit III seemed genuinely and spontaneously warm . The crowds were genuinely warm .
 Brezhnev and Kissinger agreed that Kissinger and Gromyko should make one more attempt to reach an agreement on limiting offensive nuclear weapons . Kissinger and Kissinger were in Minsk to try to reach a deal .
 Kissinger came up to report that he had not been able to make any progress whatever . Kissinger was back in his room in the Kremlin, he said . Kissinger later reported that Kissinger had been unable to make progress .
 Gromyko had spent the time nit-picking and was apparently unable or unwilling to negotiate seriously . The former mayor of New York City said he was "unable or unwilling" to negotiate .
 Kissinger and Kissinger walked up and down in the open courtyard, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "In order to be able to talk freely, Kissinger and I went outside" Kissinger says. "We were able to walk freely. In order to speak freely, we went outside."
 The Pentagon’s last-minute aboutface had made it impossible for us to engage in any flexible negotiating . But the Pentagon's last-mile aboutface made it .
 Kissinger was convinced that we would have been able to educate public opinion to accept it, Kissinger says . Kissinger: "If we had been . able to return with even a controversial SALT agreement, Kissinger was . convinced that public opinion would have accepted it" Kissinger:
 Despite this disappointment, he felt that Summit III had been a success even without the SALT agreement, he said he did not think that I would be impeached now .
 You’ve done a superb job under enormous pressures against overwhelming odds. You've done it under enormous pressure,’s your boss, says Obama .
 Summit HI was not going to produce any big news as far as new agreements were concerned . It was clear by this time that Summit HI had no big news to come out .
 Some in the press were already trying out a critical line that attributed this failure to my Watergate troubles, implying that the Soviets were holding out either because they thought I might make greater concessions because I needed a foreign triumph to alleviate my domestic problems .
 Summit III would have been hailed as a successful meeting in normal times . Summit III has been dubbed a 'successful meeting' by the media .
 It produced the threshold test ban, further restrictions on ABMs, agreements to seek controls on environmental warfare and for cooperation in energy . The mini-summit also produced the opening of additional consulates in both countries . It produced an ABM ban, a test ban and other restrictions on
 Brezhnev had decided to go all out for détente and place all his chips on his survival and his ultimate ability to deliver on what he promised . Our intelligence beforehand—and my distinct impression while in the Soviet Union—was that Brezhnnev . Brezh
 Military establishments of both countries were bridling against the sudden reality of major and meaningful arms limitation and the real prospect of arms reduction if and as détente progressed .
 There are some, of course, who will want to put blame on Watergate for failing to get an agreement on offensive nukes . But, on the other hand, I think that it came out about right .
 We went as far as we could go without raising an issue which could have lost us some of our good conservative supporters . We did just about what the traffic would bear. We did not raise an issue that could have been a problem .
 As it turned out, it’s probably just as well that we were unable to reach any agreement with the Russians on the nuclear front, because to have to take this thing on now would mean that we would have to be opposed to some of our best friends prior to the impeachment
 I think that both Brezhnev and I grasped this situation at the outset, and that is what accounted for his highly personal and warm demeanor . "I think that he and I grasp this situation in the beginning," he says . "That is what accounts for the warm demeanor,"
 We both understood that if the process of détente could be maintained through a holding-pattern summit, we might make a breakthrough at the next meeting .
 Summit HI is a mixed bag for Summit HI . Success or failure would have to be determined in light of the way events developed before the next meeting .
 Diary Diary: There is nit-picking to the effect that it was not as successful as the other two . Diary Diary .
 "The main thing is that the process went forward, and this is in itself an achievement," says Daley . Daley: "This is an achievement. The main thing that is important is that it went forward and that this is a good thing"
 Peace is never going to be achieved once and for all—it must be constantly worked on . Peace must be achieved in peace not once, but it must be continually worked on. Peace is not achieved once it's achieved once, all .
 The United States and other major powers must go forward, even though we don't have great announcements to make after each one . That’s why these continuing summits between major powers should go forward . That's why these summits must go ahead, says President Obama .
 I am inclined to think that in arranging the next summit, it’s the informal meetings which provide the greatest opportunity for progress . I think in arranging a summit, the informal meeting provides the greatest chance for progress, he says .
 "Everybody’s talking for the record and making a record. I think the formal ones ... produce the least," he says . He says the plenary sessions produce the most productive .
 Brezhnev has been much more forthcoming when we meet informally in the car or elsewhere than when we are sitting down in a formal group with others present . The former Soviet leader is more forthcoming than when he meets with others .
 This is something that is true in all forms of society, but it is particularly true in the Soviet Union and in the Communist states . The Soviet Union was one of the most repressive states in the world, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 On July 2, the last night of Summit III, we gave a reciprocal dinner at Spaso House, the U.S. ambassador’s residence . The dinner was held at the ambassador's residence .
 Brezhnev, like most Soviet wives, seemed uncomfortable in the limelight of Western visits . She opened up and talked freely about her family during her visit to Russia .
 At dinner Brezhnev spoke very warmly, grabbing me by the arm, first, about the meeting that we would have in between . The so-called summit at halfway house would be a meeting . After 1976 he wants to see me .
 Brezhnev’s granddaughter was very pretty, and he has a very handsome son-in-law as well . He also has a handsome son in-law .
 Brezhnev commented on Tricia, who had visited Russia, saying when she stepped off the plane she looked like a white winter snowflower .
 At one point, incidentally, he told me about his great-grandchild—a girl—one and a half . He told me that he has a daughter, a girl, a one-and-a-half, a baby .
 Brezhnev said that the child had started walking at ten months and I said that taking the first step was always the hardest . The first step is the hardest, he said, and taking it the hardest is the first .
 He said in the case of his great-granddaughter now after that first step, the only way they could keep from falling down was to almost run . He said the way to keep them from falling was to run .
 He clowned it up a bit by hitting a couple of keys on the piano, which allowed me to say something about playing a duet the next time he came to the U.S. He said he'd play duet with him if he came back to the United States .
 It's very difficult, however, to get the Russian elite to respond to any comments that are humorous, particularly when they are in a large group . It’s very difficult for them to respond, especially in large groups .
 Individually they will be warm and friendly, but collectively they immediately freeze . "They have to watch what the others do before they react," she says of the team .
 The last morning in Moscow Brezhnev and I held a final meeting alone in his office . The last time in Moscow he and I met with him alone, the last time he was in Moscow .
 I repeated my strong belief that we should try for a SALT accord by the end of the year so that the U.S. did not go ahead at an increased pace in the development of arms . The United States is developing arms arms at a rapid rate, he said .
 I also urged what I called “increased communication” between us for taking care of the kind of problems that had arisen in the Middle East . I also called for increased communication between the U.S. and the region .
 Vladimir Hall for the final signing ceremony at the end of the day . Vladimir Hall: "We must not be discouraged by the fact that we did not settle every issue every time"
 They obviously want to put as good a face as possible on the summit as Brezhnev had in his dinner toast the night before . He took some credit for the end of the war in Vietnam and holding off in the Mideast .
 In both areas the Soviet Union did not play a positive role, but, on the other hand, while they could not take credit for bringing about either of the peace settlements, they could have intervened more strongly than they did and made it impossible for us to accomplish our goal of having any
 The Soviets ended Summit III with a flourish of ceremony and spectacle . The Soviets end Summit III in a triumph over the world .
 We signed protocols on the new limitation of ABMs to one site only, the treaty on the limitation of underground nuclear tests, and a joint statement on negotiations to control environmental warfare . We also signed the protocols on limits of the limits of nuclear weapons and underground nuclear testing .
 At the end of Summit I, a buffet was laid out on two tables running the length of the vast room at St. George Hall . A buffet that exceeded even the sumptuousness of the one at the rest of the .
 The small orchestra on the balcony was playing the music that had been played at Tricia’s wedding .
 Brezhnevnev, Gromyko, Podgorny, and Kosygin all climbed into the car with me for the ride to the airport . To my surprise, I was surprised to find out that they were all in the car .
 He was quiet on the way out, letting Kosygin and Podgorny do most of the talking . He was extremely quiet on his way out .
 As I was walking to the plane, I said that my only regret was that he was not coming with us back to the U.S. Diary Diary: "My only regret is that he wasn't coming with me back to America" Diary Diary Diary .
 He said he had been thinking the same thing as we drove out to the airport . And he said that, as a matter of fact, he said he'd been thinking about the same .
 "I really think he had a feeling of loss, and felt sad that the trip was over," she said . "He had a really sad feeling," she added .
 He had looked forward to it, had built it up, had hoped that it would achieve a great deal . But now that it was over he was getting somewhat of a letdown .
 "I think he realizes that it wasn’t a “home run,” and yet it did make some progress," he says . "We talked on several occasions, including the last time at the dinner, of a meeting, perhaps in November, at a neutral place
 He started very late in the morning—10:30 or 11 o’clock—for every meeting, he said . He started late in morning meetings, he says, for every meeting .
 "My other feeling was one of disappointment on the fact that we couldn’t get some sort of agreement on SALT and that the chance of getting it in the future looked pretty hard," he said .
 "I am sure everybody felt that way when they got on the plane this time," says Obama . "I'm sure everybody feels that way" says Obama.
 All the while we were in the Soviet Union, the impeachment effort at home had continued much as before . All the time we were there, the attempt to impeach the government continued .
 A few days after my return the House Judiciary Committee began releasing Doar’s compilation of evidence on the Watergate break-in and cover-up . Watergate would dominate the headlines in the weeks before the crucial vote on impeachment .
 The Ervin Committee also began to leak and then to release accusations from its supposedly secret report . The committee has been accused of leaking its findings .
 Despite its headline impact, however, this so-called evidence was generally admitted to be weak . Despite this, this is not the only evidence that the government has been accused of wrongdoing .
 That the evidence against me fell flat was satisfying; but the situation was still far from reassuring . That the case against me was satisfying was satisfying, but it was still not reassuring, he said .
 Diary Diary I remember Harlow saying almost a year ago, this issue has no legs to it . Harlow: "This issue has never been solved" Diary Diary Diary: Harlow said almost a . year ago this issue 'has no legs'
 So many doubts have been raised that one wonders what the situation is now . He may be right, but so much has been added on .
 "You get that sinking feeling in the bottom of your stomach and sometimes there are nights that are sleepless. I think of myself worrying as I have from time to time"
 "I think of people like Kalmbach and Porter, others who are threatened with being sent to prison for fifteen to twenty years and so forth. I think of those people ... who have been threatened with prison for 15 to 20 years," he says .
 Ziegler and Haig left some deep scars, as I pointed out to both on the plane coming back from Russia . Perhaps as years go on attitudes may change, but they have left deep scars .
 Our only course of action is to keep fighting right through to the last and not to die a thousand deaths in the meantime . We need to 'keep fighting' right through the last, not to 'die a thousand' deaths .
 Pat had pointed out that Bebe had been almost depressed . She said that he had been really depressed. Bebe said that she had been very depressed .
 "The whole purpose of course is to discredit, destroy, harass everybody around the President," says President Obama . Obama's administration has been accused of trying to discredit and destroy the President .
 Iam glad that Pat sensed that from her talk with Rose coming home on the plane because Rose has gone through hell on this whole eighteen-minute business and she certainly has stood up with great character and great courage . I'm glad Pat sensed she did so much, and I am glad
 Bebe makes the point when I tell him how regretful I am that he and other decent people have to go through all this hell, he says that my own strength has inspired them all . Bebe says that when he tells Bebe that he is regretful he and others have
 I am inclined to think that I have not been as strong as I could have been or should have been, but I must say when we have such people like this we can’t let them down, and I have got to fight every inch of the way . I'm inclined
 In any event, if we can get through the Court and by the impeachment vote we will then have a couple of years to do as many good things for the country as we possibly can. In any case, if . we can do so, we will have a few more years to
 "What we have to do is to hold ourselves together through this next very difficult two-month period," he says . "We are going to be very difficult to hold together," he adds .
 On June 27, 1974, Peter Rodino told a group of reporters that all twentyone Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee were going to vote for impeachment . Rodino: "All twenty21 Democrats" on the Judiciary Committee voted for impeachment in 1974 .
 His first reaction was to try to cover up; he even went before his colleagues in the House and insisted that he had not made the statement . He even went to his colleagues before telling them that he did not make the statement, but he did .
 Reporters from the Los Angeles Times and ABC who had been there confirmed the accuracy of the story . But reporters from the L.A. Times, ABC confirmed it was true .
 "By this time there was no question in my mind that the House Judiciary Committee was going to vote to impeach me," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "I'm going to be impeached"
 It was the margin of that vote that would assume a vital importance, because it would have a direct effect on the vote of the full House . The margin of the margin would be crucial to the outcome of the vote in the House .
 The critical votes were still the six swing Republicans and the three Southern Democrats . Six swing Republicans were still in the Senate .
 "The way these nine men voted would tell me whether I would be impeached by the House," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz says the vote would tell him whether he would be charged with impeachment .
 He calculated that each vote we lost in the committee would cost us five votes from our supporters on the floor of the House . He said each vote would cost the House of Representatives five votes on the House floor .
 In the first week of July, after we returned from the Soviet Union, Timmons felt we would win at least one of the three Southern Democrats and lose at least two of the six Republicans . In the early weeks of July he said he would win one Southern Democrat and two Republicans .
 If we could hold our losses to these numbers in the committee, then we could be optimistic about beating impeachment in the full House . The House of Representatives is expected to vote on impeachment in a vote on Thursday .
 Watergate was not worn out as an issue, but it appeared to be receding from public conversation . Godfrey Sperling of the Christian Science Monitor wrote that Watergate is receding in public discussion .
 Hugh Sidey, Time's White House correspondent, told Henry Kissinger that his editors had decided that he was going to weather the impeachment storm . Kissinger: Time's editors decided that Nixon would weather the Watergate storm . Nixon's resignation from the White House was a major embarrassment .
 John Osborne, The New Republics White House watcher, told Ron Ziegler that he thought the House would not vote to impeach . Osborne: "I think the House will not vote on impeachment"
 RNC Chairman George Bush called the White House to have me appear on a fund-raising telethon . Don Rumsfeld offered to resign as Ambassador to NATO and return to help work against impeachment . John Rhodes said he was for me unless he was presented with overwhelming evidence he should not
 Haig told me that his talks with the Cabinet members also indicated that the tide had turned . Haig said talks with Cabinet members indicated that he believes the tide has turned in the US .
 The big battle now is to try and hold the committee as well as we possibly can during the next couple of weeks . Whatever the case may be, the big battle is to hold the Committee .
 Dean will come again pretty soon and probably slap me around some more, but we don’t think there are any other shoes ready to drop, although from the past track record no one can really be sure .
 Getting back to Washington always gets you back into really the depths . Ziegler says that the press is not nearly as hostile as the press .
 But there is a depressing atmosphere here, and when you compound this with the family problem it makes it pretty tough . "There is also a family problem that makes it hard to deal with," says the author .
 "Having survived this long I am convinced that we can see it through to the end," he says .
 On July 12, 1974, President Richard Nixon signed the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 . The act was a "personal and national triumph," he says . Nixon signed a bill that he considered a national triumph .
 After five years of nagging, urging, and pleading, we had finally pushed through legislation that would make Congress face its responsibility for keeping the federal budget at agreed-upon levels . Despite Watergate, Watergate weakened position, Congress pushed through bill .
 After the ceremony Jerry Ford came over to me with his big, confident smile . "After the ceremony he came over and said he was proud of his achievements," she said .
 Bryce Harlow, a man who knew Congress as well as any congressman, was also at the ceremony . The ceremony was held in Washington, D.C.
 "I wanted to believe these enthusiastic reports, but I knew Washington too well to think that the forces ranged against me would quit or forfeit the battle so easily," he says . "Washington too well knows Washington too much to think," he writes .
 Twenty-five years of political instinct told me that despite appearances, things were not good . In fact, my instinct was stronger than ever that somehow, on some subsurface level, the political tide was flowing fast, and flowing against me .
 Rep. Ted Cruz says he's not sure he's undecided on a particular question . He says he is only trying to be polite in declining to state his opposition before the vote is taken . Cruz: "I knew from experience that, more often, when a congressman tells someone from the
 Democratic congressional leadership would be desperate if it looked as though impeachment was actually going to be voted down, he says . Another reason was that he knew how forceful, organized, and powerful the Democratic Congress leadership was .
 Having brought things this far, they would rightly fear the risk of a backlash if the impeachment drive failed . Voters would feel that the agony of Watergate had been prolonged for partisan motives, they say .
 Jaworski petitioned for sixty-four additional tapes . Supreme Court would soon be handing down its ruling on the petition . The Supreme Court is yet to rule on the matter .
 St. Clair was optimistic, but even he conceded that the Court would probably end up voting along political lines . "We had the stronger legal case," he said, "but the Court probably will probably vote on political lines"
 In the event that the Court ruled flatly against me in the tapes case, I could decide to defy the ruling . I could defy the decision, he says .
 But that would almost certainly bring about impeachment and therefore could not realistically be considered . It would be almost impossible to imagine impeachment .
 Another choice was to abide by the Court’s ruling without actually complying with it . Another choice is to abide with the decision without actually responding to it .
 This would involve some plan to turn over the tapes only in excerpted form . This is not the first time the tapes have been turned over .
 "I knew that even this approach would not take care of the real problem. In fact, I knew that . In fact . Even this approach . would not solve the problem, he said . "In fact, even this is not the only problem," he said.
 "I had not heard all the tapes, but I was concerned that in those thousands of hours of conversations there might be material that would be so damaging that I would not want to turn it over," he says .
 The Supreme Court ruling was going to have a tremendous—and almost certainly a detrimental—influence on the course of my impeachment hearings, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 At this time, I must say, I am not particularly optimistic, although I would not be surprised about anything. Diary Diary Diary: "At this time I'm not particularly hopeful" Diary Diary diary: "I don't want to be optimistic"
 If only and his colleagues can look at the terrible impact if they are coming down in a way that totally destroys executive privilege, the impact that it will have in the future on Presidents. If only, it will be a terrible impact .
 In any event, if only we could get over this hurdle without tripping and falling and giving the House some ground for impeachment we can then insist on a vote in the House and then move on to other things .
 If they leave any air in the balloon at all, if we could find a way to comply or abide, this would be the best of all worlds for us . Then they could go on with their vote in the House and then we could make up for the time that has been lost
 I also felt that the optimists among my supporters had not taken into account the political realities that would come into play when the full House of Representatives was faced with having to vote on an impeachment resolution . The president's impeachment resolution is expected to be passed by the House on Thursday night .
 In addition to partisan Democrats who were sure to vote for impeachment, an increasing number of Republicans would become concerned that if I were still in office during the November elections, I would be like an albatross around their necks, he says .
 If my support in Congress was halfhearted and disorganized, the White House staff was not in much better shape . The White House is not in a better shape, says President Obama's administration .
 Haig’s eleventh-hour efforts to organize a group that would lead the fight from within the White House were handicapped by the “arm's length” requirement that our congressional supporters had put on their contacts with us, he says .
 "I knew, too, that they were handicapped psychologically by their own uncertainty about the case, by their fear that there might be still another bombshell," she says . "They feared that they might be out on the front line when it hit"
 I was also concerned because the economy, which most voters still named as the issue of number-one concern to them, was standing on wobbly postembargo, postfreeze legs . I'm also concerned that the economy is standing on post-embargo legs, post-
 To the considerable degree that the economy affected national confidence and that national confidence would affect attitudes toward impeachment, this was a cause for the most serious concern . This was a serious concern, the author says .
 "There was not much that I could do about the problem. Unfortunately there did not seem to be much to do about it," she said .
 I had convened and attended a number of meetings focusing on it, and there was general agreement that the best course was just to wait and ride it out . The best course of action was to 'wait and ride out' and 'ride it out', says Mark Hughes .
 "I felt that, consciously or subconsciously, they had a vested interest in my impeachment," she says . "They had an interest in me," she said of the impeachment .
 After months of leaks and accusations and innuendo, the media stood to lose if I were vindicated. After all the months of leaking and accusations, I was vindicated . After all, I said, 'I'm not going to give the media a chance to see if I
 Most of the reporters and commentators were still filtering everything through their own Watergate obsessions . Most of them still filtered everything through the own Watergate obsesses .
 NBC reported that the White House was seeking to create the “impression” of a “busy President, back from an important and exhausting peacemaking mission, trying to do his job” despite harassment from the House Judiciary Committee .
 The president's instincts about the outcome of the impeachment effort were more pessimistic than those of most of his advisers . These were some of the reasons that his own instincts about impeachment were pessimistic .
 I often thought of something Tricia had observed several months earlier that seemed to me to be a perfect description of our problem . Tricia's observations seemed to be the perfect description for our problems .
 John Ehrlichman was convicted of perjury and conspiring to violate the civil rights of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist . We received word aboard Aizr Force One that John had been convicted . We were told of the conviction on Aizir Force One .
 When Pat, Ed, Tricia and Tricia, and I arrived in San Clemente on the afternoon of July 12, everything seemed to be the same as it had been on every other California trip .
 Ed and Tricia decided to take a walk before going to bed . It was a cool, clear night, and Ed decided to go for a walk with Tricia .
 They went through the garden and around the pool out to the golf course . They went on a tour of the course in the garden .
 When I bought the house in 1969, some local supporters had formed a group called Friends of the President . They had raised money to build and maintain a three-hole golf course on Bob Abplanalp’s property .
 The sight is sickening, not because it is a sickening sight, but because of what it signifies . The sight was sickening not because of the sickening nature of it, but what it means .
 Ed and Ed came upon it on our first stroll around the grounds, and its quality of finality, of hopelessness, smote us with an almost physical intensity . Ed and I came upon the . quality of . finality of the . hopelessness . smote them with an
 "We made light of it to Daddy by saying we like to see it wild as it was when we first saw San Clemente. We made light, he said, by saying that we like it wild."
 Despite these dark counterpoints, the reports from Washington continued optimistic . Despite the dark counterpoint, the majority of Americans remain optimistic .
 I tried to be skeptical and detached, but almost irresistibly, I found myself charting out in my diary plans for the future . I was fascinated by the story of the book, which was published in 2007 .
 We shall always have to keep in mind Tricia’s philosophy, that we have got to look down to the end of the road to see that we will come out all right, whatever may be and whatever way it is, .
 "This is very hard to do, but it is the only thing that can sustain us through these other critical and difficult times," says President Obama . "It is very difficult to do. This is very important to do," says Obama .
 It is the only thing that has sustained us as a matter of fact through the enormous blows that we have been getting from all sides for such a long time . The only thing has kept us alive is the fact that we are here to fight for our country's future . We hope to
 "As I sit here in my upstairs library, I am looking at a really beautiful portrait, hanging over the fireplace," she says . "I'm looking at the portrait hanging over my fireplace. It's really beautiful," she writes .
 I don't know whether it is a portrait or probably a photograph touched up of my mother when she was twelve years old . I don’t know whether the portrait or photograph is a photograph of her .
 She was born in 1885, which would have meant that she would have been ninety years old now . She is believed to have been born in 1886 .
 Someday I must write a monograph about her, which I think could be a very moving one. Someday, I think she could be the subject of a monography .
 On July 15 there was a violent coup on the strife-torn island of Cyprus . The coup took place in Cyprus on July 15 .
 Fighting between the Greek and Turkish Cypriot factions seemed imminent . The Greek-Turkish-Cypriot faction is divided in the island .
 Kissinger suggested to Kissinger that he send Assistant Secretary of State Joe Sisco over to monitor the situation at the scene . Kissinger suggested that Sisco be sent over to watch the situation .
 St. Clair was finally given a chance to present a summary of his defense to the House Judiciary Committee . "Very reluctantly, I was finally, and very reluctantly, given a ... defense," he said .
 "He did a brilliant job, and the overall impact of his appearance was extremely positive," says former Manchester United star Mark Hughes .
 Committee Democrats are "scrutinally panicked" about the outcome of the investigation, sources say . The impression heightened even further further that Democrats are worried about the possibility of a subpoena .
 St. Clair was asked to present a defense of himself on television once the hearings began . He said he was prepared to defend himself in court .
 Timmons’s reports became troubled as these hearings approached, Timmons said . As these all-important hearings approached he became more troubled .
 He picked up signs that Democratic leadership was turning on tremendous pressure in preparation for a fight to the finish . The Democratic leadership is turning on enormous pressure, he says .
 Democratic National Chairman Robert Strauss stated publicly that no responsible man could vote other than for impeachment . DNC Chair Robert Strauss said no responsible person could vote on impeachment .
 Tip O'Neill was putting pressure on Rodino which Rodino was passing along to Doar to do something to get impeachment back on track . Doar passed along to Rodino to do what he needs to do to get impeached back on the track .
 Diary Diary: It is a little bit foggy this morning and in a curious way, I think this is the day that I may have been preparing for in terms of really shaking up our own thinking to get prepared for the battle of August and perhaps even, if Timmons’
 "I began to think really about the whole impeachment process and very objectively and coldly," she says . She says she began thinking about the impeachment process 'coldly'
 O’Neill’s bunch is going to be able to get a majority vote out of the committee and a very close vote in the House . All in all, it appears very possible although not probable, that O'Neill's bunch is likely to get majority vote .
 This leaves out the thing that has been worrying me earlier in the week, the Supreme Court thing . This completely leaves out what I had been worrying about earlier in this week, he says .
 The problem we have here is trying to hold the line with the Southerners in the House and that means trying to get at least two of them of the committee, and hopefully one of them .
 Haig has agreed that we have got to get the Cabinet out just as soon as St. St. Haig is due to be out .
 "We have got to push every button and mobilize every asset that we have got," he said . "In fact, as he said, we have . got to pushing every button"
 Haig thinks that at a minimum that we should get fourteen votes in the committee . Haig: "We should get 14 votes in a committee" Haig says the committee should get more votes .
 We would hope we could end up with 16; . If we got eighteen that would be a great victory . We would be happy to have 16; we would hope to have 18 . We hope we can end up having 16 .
 Sixteen would be manageable , 14 would be a bit tough, but he thinks still not beyond the point where we could still win on the floor . Sixteen is manageable, he says .
 On July 19 John Doar delivered a masterful argument calling for my impeachment . Doar's "masterful argument" led to impeachment, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: Doar made a passionate argument for impeachment .
 The committee had continued its media blitz, releasing mounds of material on different subjects . The public televised hearings to begin on July 24 are scheduled for July 24 .
 Everything was moving quickly now, as we approached the time when the hearings would be ended and the vote would be taken . The vote would take place in the Senate on Thursday .
 Diary Diary: 'I intend to live the next week without dying the death of a thousand cuts' Diary diary .
 At the end it will be over and even if it is over in the terms of an impeachment, we will just have to live with that . And second, we'll be sustained by the fact that at the end, it will not be over . Even if it's over in terms
 By this time next week we may have both the Court and the committee vote . The committee vote is expected to be held next week .
 On the night of July 21 we all went to a party for some of our old California friends at Roy Ash’s house in Bel Air . Roy Ash's house is Roy's old California friend Roy's house .
 It is quite calm, quite still and if your eyes are closed you don’t notice the unnatural darkness which surrounds you . If you are closed, it is quite still . It's quite calm and quite still. If you’re not, it's quite quiet .
 You recall a time without “Watergate” or when Watergate simply meant a rather extravagant place to live . Watergate simply simply meant "Watergate" or when . Watergate .
 "Then you see the darkness you see is the darkness of the storm. But then your eyes open," she says . "But then you see ... the darkness is the storm," she adds .
 Guests were composed of old friends and others that the Ashes felt could be helpful . The Ashes were in high spirits .
 Roy Ash party, dating from the day following it, something was lost. Ever since, something has been lost. Something was lost, says Roy Ash Party founder .
 The straw became so brittle and worn that you could almost hear it breaking asunder . The straw was so brittle it became brittle that it could almost break asunder.
 By the beginning of the week of July 22 there had been no new evidence introduced since late June . It had been generally acknowledged that the evidence was not sufficient to justify impeachment .
 We were told that Goldwater had said that he was going to ask me to resign, but when Haig called him, Goldwater laughed and said he never said that, nor would he .
 Wilbur Mills was said to be getting to his fellow Arkansan Thornton . Rodino was reportedly having private sessions with Flowers and Flowers . O’Neill was rumored to be putting a strong arm on Mann .
 The political consensus had already been reached, and the political consensus was to impeach . Most people don’t recall it, but long before the new “evidence” of the June 23 tape was produced, it was already a political consensus .
 In emotional tones he announced that he had decided to vote for impeachment . "I'm going to be impeached," he said, adding that he would vote for his impeachment .
 Many of his colleagues, and some news commentators, said that Hogan’s effort to jump the gun was an effort to shore up his faltering campaign for governor of Maryland . Some news commentators said that .
 In San Clemente we tried to minimize the damage Hogan caused by concentrating on the many people who criticized him and his motives . Hogan: "I'm not sure how much damage I've caused" Hogan has caused .
 I told Haig bitterly that if this was the result of our hands-off strategy, we could hardly have done worse by outright lobbying, he said . I told him bitterly that he was disappointed with the outcome of the situation .
 "I said that we had to do something to try to get at least one of the Southerners back," says President Obama . The president says he's trying to get a Southern accent back .
 Haig mentioned that one of George Wallace’s aides had sent word that I had only to call on Wallace if there was anything he could do to help me . Haig said Wallace's aides had told him to call Wallace if he could help him . Wallace's aide said he
 I agreed that it was worth a try, and Haig said he would arrange the call . Haig: "I'm sure it's a good idea, but I'm not sure if it's worth a call"
 He said he hadn’t expected the call, that nobody had told him about it . He said: “He said he couldn't quite hear me at first, and then said that he hadn't expected it .”
 He said he didn’t think it was proper for him to call Flowers, that he thought Flowers might resent it . He said if he changed his mind he would let me know he would call Flowers .
 He urged that I call Alabama Senator James Allen to ask if he could help with Flowers . He urged me to ask for help in helping Flowers .
 "He was concerned and friendly, but he was too honest to give me any false encouragement," he said . He said: 'He was too polite and friendly'
 Joe Waggonner said with the three Southerners gone, he could hope to hold only between thirty and thirty-five of the group . Waggoner said he could hold only about 30 to thirty-35 of the Waggons .
 This meant that I could not possibly have enough votes on my side when the full House voted . This meant . I was not able to get enough votes to win the vote in the House of Representatives .
 I was trying to work on a speech on the economy that I was to give on national television in two days . That night I sat in my study trying to think on the speech . I was going to give national television for two days. I was about to give a speech .
 "I tried to organize and outline my thoughts for it, but my mind kept wandering back to the afternoon, and a sense of hopeless loss and despair kept welling up in me"
 I had to decide either to leave the presidency voluntarily, or else confront the hard decision of whether the country could stand six months of having the President on trial in the Senate . "I had to choose between leaving the presidency, or leaving the country, or facing six months on trial,"
 "Over the past few weeks I had talked with Haig and Ziegler several times about resigning," says Haig . Haig says he had talked several times to resign from the Senate .
 Haig argued resignation would look like an admission of guilt, but it would mean a dangerously easy victory for radicals . Haig: "Resignation would mean an easy victory over me but over the system" Haig says resigning would be a "dangerous victory" for radicals
 If I resigned I could expect an onslaught of lawsuits that would cost millions of dollars and take years to fight in the courts . My family had already been put through two years of hell, but if I resigned, it would be a nightmare for them .
 "It's difficult to separate personal considerations from political, party, and national interests," says Sen. Ted Cruz . "I'm not sure if I'm going to make a decision, but I'm sure I will," he says .
 "I had worked on the speech until 2:30 A.M. and it was after nine o'clock when I picked up the bedside phone," he says . The speech was a speech that took place at 2.30 a.m.
 This decision in the case of United States Nixon was widely heralded as one of the Court’s finest hours . The decision in Nixon's Nixon case was widely hailed by the Supreme Court as a one of its finest hours.
 As one television reporter described it, the U.S. had triumphed . The United States won the election .
 The United States had lost in the U.S. decision to pull out of the World Cup, CNN.com's John Sutter reports .
 The problem was not just that we had lost but that we'd lost so decisively, it was so decisively . The problem is not only that we lost, it's also that we've lost so badly, says David Cameron . Cameron: "The problem is that we have not been able
 We had counted on some air in the Court’s ruling, at least some provision for exempting national security materials . The Supreme Court's decision was overturned .
 For a few minutes we discussed the option of ‘abiding’ by the decision in the Jeffersonian tradition . For the first time, we talked about the possibility of “abiding” the decision .
 "Full compliance was the only option. But after checking with some of our strongest supporters in Washington, we concluded that full compliance was necessary . We are happy with the decision, but we are not sure if it will happen again .
 St. Clair asked how long he thought it would take to turn over the sixtyfour tapes covered by the decision . The decision was made by the Supreme Court .
 He said with all the problems involved in listening to them and preparing transcripts, we could probably take a month or more . He said that with all of the problems .
 When Haig called Buzhardt to discuss the decision, I took the phone and asked him to listen to the June 23 tape and report back to Haig as soon as possible . Haig: "When Haig was in doubt, he listened to the tape and reported back to
 This was the tape I had listened to in May on which Haldeman and I discussed having the CIA limit the FBI investigation for political reasons rather than the national security reasons I had given in my public statements, he says . This was a tape he'd listened to on which he and
 "When I first heard it, I knew it would be a problem for us if it ever became public," she says . "Now I would find out just how much of a problem," she adds .
 St. Clair: Even though it was legally defensible, politically and practically, it was the ‘smoking gun’ we had been fearing . The "smoking gun" was the 'smoking gun' that we feared, he says . He says it was legal defensible but politically
 Haig called Buzhardt back and asked him to listen to the June 23 tape a second time . Haig: "I don't think it's a coincidence that I'm trying to find out what happened"
 On the night that the Court’s ruling was handed down, the House Committee began its televised sessions . The House Committee is scheduled to hold televised sessions on the night of the ruling .
 The Democrats postured shamefully, pretending that they had not made up their minds . The Democrats posted shamefully. They pretended that they hadn't made up a decision .
 Underneath the June 23 tape was a June 23 recording . The tape was like slow-fused dynamite waiting for dynamite to explode . Underneath it all, the tape was still a secret .
 The House Judiciary Committee voted on the first article of impeachment July 27 . The vote was held at Red Beach, near San Clemente, California .
 It charged that I had engaged in a “course of conduct” designed to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate case . The Watergate case was brought to light by the White House .
 "I was getting dressed in the beach trailer when the phone rang and Ziegler gave me the news," she says . "I'm not going to be able to go to the beach," she adds .
 Our family dinner that night was not subdued, but it was more quiet than usual . Our family was subdued .
 Diary I remember that Tricia said as we came back from the beach that her mother was really a wonderful woman . Diary Diary: Tricia and Tricia's mother were really wonderful women .
 "She has been through a lot through the twenty-five years she has been in and out of politics," she said . "I'm sure she has had a lot of ups and downs," she added .
 Both at home and abroad she has always conducted herself with masterful poise and dignity . She has been married for more than 30 years .
 How she could have gone through what she does, I simply don’t know. But, God, how she could ... not know, she said . "I simply don't know"
 'That night and the next I sat up very late trying to grasp the new situation | faced and decide on the best course of action to deal with it. That night, I spent the next night trying to understand the situation and decide how to cope with it .
 If we do make that decision, then I have a hard call—that call being as to whether I decide to bite the bullet on resignation or whether I continue to fight it through the House and wait until the House vote and then resign .
 Ziegler makes the point very strongly that if we ever connote the impression that we have given up, then everybody will run to the hills, he says . "If we ever give up, we will never be able to do so again," he adds .
 Al says under no circumstances must we do this for another reason . Al points out that under no . circumstances must . us do this again .
 If we don't get a third in the House that it would look as if we had run out, so forth. That if we don’t get one, we would look like we had ran out of the House. That’s not the case, it’
 "I have had a feeling of calm and strength during this period. As a matter of fact, I have had to be calm," she said .
 "I realized that we had lost the ball game and faced at least a six-month trial in the Senate," he said . "This is due in part to the fact that after hearing of the total defection of the Southerners, I realized that . I . realized that
 I think the calmness and strength may have come from somewhere back in my background, perhaps from my father and my mother . To a certain extent, I think I'm calm and strong, but I'm not sure how much of that comes from my upbringing .
 We have to try to work out what we can do to live out whatever life I have left as President and thereafter in a decent way . We need to live a decent life, says President Obama .
 "I recognize that I would have to face up to the hard fact of how I could take care of our personal expenses in the time ahead," she says .
 Whether I can sell a book or papers or what have you in order to have the funds that would be needed to maintain an adequate staff in the office and in the house, I can't sell anything, he says .
 "My present inclination is to sell the property in Florida and take what equity I have there so that I have some cash on hand," he says .
 As far as the San Clemente house is concerned, I will simply have to make a determination as to whether we want to keep it, he says . The mayor will make a decision as soon as possible .
 "It might be that we would be better off to take a reasonably comfortable apartment at some place and live out our lives there," says the author .
 "How we are able to handle our staff like Manolo and Fina—our household staff—and even the minimum staff of Rose and two or three secretaries to work with me on the book, God only knows," he says .
 "At the present time what I have to do is to recognize that we are in a battle for our lives," says President Obama . "We are in the present moment," says Obama .
 He means by that that that this would be a very bad thing for the country should I go the resignation route. He said that he would be very bad if he resigns, adding that would be bad for country .
 Henry came in to see me, very mournful but, bless him, he was thinking only with his heart . Henry was very mourned, but he thought only with the heart, she said .
 'A very unusual approach for a man who is so enormously endowed with extraordinary intellectual capacity,' he said . 'It's a very extraordinary approach for him to take this approach,' he added .
 He said that his wife had told him that history in four years would look back on the President as a hero .
 President Obama says he was 'outstanding President' in the end of his presidency . Obama says history will show that he was outstanding President .
 "Daddy came as close to outward emotion as he ever does when he said how much it had meant to him for us to be in California with him," he said .
 "Without further expression, I felt as if these words marked an end of an era," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I felt like it was an end to an era. Without further expression," he says .
 St. Clair returned from a long weekend in Cape Cod, where he had gone to get some rest . He had gone there to spend some time with family .
 St. Clair had become tired and touchy and that we would have to be careful if we wanted to keep him on the staff . He said that he had become 'tired' and 'touchy' and that he was 'touching and tired'
 He agreed with Buzhardt that this was the smoking gun, but he said it contradicted the arguments he had made before the House Judiciary Committee . He said he would become party to an obstruction of justice unless it was made public .
 The House Judiciary Committee passed two more articles of impeachment . The June 23 tape shows the damage of the tape . The committee is weighing the damage .
 Article I, passed on July 29, charged that I had committed an impeachable offense by abusing the powers of the presidency . Article I charged that he had committed a crime by abusing his powers, he says .
 It contained a number of different charges ranging from an alleged attempt to use the IRS for political purposes to the 1969 national security wiretaps . The charges include a charge of using the IRS to spy on political purposes .
 Article HI, passed on July 30, charged that I had committed an impeachable offense by defying the committee’s subpoenas for tapes and documents . Article HI charged that . I had . committed an impeachment . offense .
 After voting down two more articles of impeachment, the House Judiciary Committee recessed . The House voted down two articles, one dealing with the Cambodian bombing and the other with personal finances .
 The next step would be the vote on each of the three articles of impeachment by the House of Representatives . The House would then vote on the impeachment of the president .
 "After tossing and turning for a few hours, I finally put on the light and took a pad of notepaper from the bed table," she says . "I was so tired I had to take a nap," she writes .
 I wrote the time and date at the top—3:50 AM., July 31—and I began to outline the choices left to me . The time is 3:50 a.m. and the time is July 31, and the choices are listed .
 I could resign right away, or fight all the way through the Senate . I could stay on until the House had voted on the articles of impeachment and then resign if impeached, he says . "I could quit right away," he adds .
 "The idea that I would be running away from the job and ending my career as a weak man was repugnant to me," he said . The idea that he would run away from his job was "repugnant" to him .
 Resignation would be taken by many, and interpreted by the press, as a blanket admission of guilt . Resignations would be seen as an admission of wrongdoing by the public .
 Resignation would set a dangerous precedent of short-circuiting the constitutional machinery that provides for impeachment, says President Obama . Obama's resignation would set dangerous precedent, he says .
 I also had to consider that my family and many of my supporters would want me to fight and would be hurt and disillusioned if I gave up before the battle was over . I had to decide whether I would give up before I had the battle over, he said .
 After Watergate, the nation badly needed a unity of spirit and purpose to face the tough domestic and international problems that would not wait through the six months of a Senate trial . I knew that after two years of being distracted and divided by Watergate, we needed unity .
 "I didn't know whether I could subject the country to the ordeal of a weakened presidency during such troubled and important times. Besides, I would be crippled politically as soon as the House voted to impeach," he says . "I did not know whether the country would suffer the ordeal
 I would be defeated and dishonored, the first President in history to be impeached and convicted on criminal charges . President Obama would be the first person to be convicted of criminal charges in history, he says .
 "It would free the party from having to defend me. Another positive effect of resignation, one I knew to be uppermost in the minds of many Republicans, was that it would free me," he said .
 The 1974 elections would not become a referendum on Nixon and Watergate, he says . Their campaigns and their congressional seats would not be held hostage to his political fortunes, he writes . Nixon's presidency would not have been a referendum for Watergate .
 "That was what my instincts and my intuition told me was the right thing to do," she says . "That's what my instinct told me," she adds .
 As bad as Watergate was, it would be far worse to set the precedent of a presidential resignation . Even if the alternative was the removal of a President because of a political scandal, the scandal would be more serious .
 I would need Haig to rally whatever loyal staff left and to keep the White House running if I chose not to resign but to face a Senate trial . I would have to rally loyal staff and keep the House running, he says .
 On Wednesday, July 31, Haig read the transcripts of the June 23 conversations for the first time . Haig: The transcripts were recorded on June 23 in New Hampshire .
 On Thursday, August 1, I told Haig that I had decided to resign. The decision was made on the basis of my decision to resign .
 "If the June 23 tape was not explainable, I could not very well expect the staff to try to explain and defend it," he says . "I could not expect the . staff to ... defend it"
 I said I planned to take the family to Camp David over the weekend to prepare them and then to resign in a televised speech on Monday night . I said that he planned to resign from the White House in a TV interview on Monday .
 "I would stay in Washington for about two weeks putting things in order, then fly to San Clemente," he says . He would stay two weeks in Washington before flying back to California . He says he would then fly back to the U.S.
 Haig suggested that he resign even sooner, perhaps the next night, perhaps Friday, August 2 . Haig said that we could work out the arrangements however I wanted, but he suggested that I resign even before August 2.
 The June 23 tape was in the group to be handed over to Judge Sirica that morning . Haig thought that I should have resigned and been gone from the scene before the tape surfaced publicly .
 By that time, he said, so much attention would be focused on the new President that the damaging impact of the tape might be muted .
 Haig: "I decided to think about it, and I asked Haig if in the meantime he would take some notes and then have Ray Price begin work on a resignation speech . Haig asked Price to take notes, then begin working on Price's resignation speech, he said .
 I told Price that I would acknowledge that I had made mistakes; but I did not want Price to write a groveling mea culpa . I told him that he would acknowledge he made mistakes, but I didn't want him to write it . Price: "I would acknowledge
 "I wanted him to say that I no longer had the political support in Congress or in the country that I believed I needed to govern effectively," she said . She said she wanted to see if he would be able to do so .
 I also asked Haig to see Jerry Ford and tell him that I was thinking of resigning, without indicating when . I also told Jerry Ford that I would resign, without indicated when, he said .
 I said Haig should ask Haig to ask him to be prepared to take over sometime within the next few days . Haig is a well-known figure in Washington DC .
 This was a decision I had to make for and by myself—tright up to the end, he says . This was the decision I made, he writes . "This was the hardest decision I've ever made," he says.
 I told him that I would be put in a humiliating position if it got to the point that the Republican National Chairman or a group of senators or congressmen, or a delegation of Cabinet members, began requesting or demanding that I resign, he said .
 "I knew that if that happened, my lifetime instincts of refusing to cave to political pressure might prevail," he says . He says he knew he would not cave under pressure from President Obama .
 I felt that if I could focus strongly enough on carrying it out in all its details, it would be easier to get through the painful decisions and duties of the next few days . Now that the decision to resign had been made, I decided to resign, he said .
 "I could see that Haig had already talked to him. As soon as he came in, I could see him already talking to him," he said .
 I told him that I knew Jerry Ford was not experienced in foreign affairs. "Jerry Ford's foreign affairs is not experienced," he said. "I told him I knew he would not be able to deal with foreign affairs."
 Haig advised Ziegler to resign quickly and resign the following night . Haig argued that such a move would be precipitate . Zieglers says Haig's advice to resign would be a precipitate move .
 I realized that he was right, if for no other reason, that I owed it to my friends and supporters to give them a chance to react to the June 23 tape, rather than leave them behind holding the bag . I was still in office when I left office . I decided to
 The least they deserved was the chance to reverse their position if they wanted . The least is the chance they deserved is to do so, and they should be allowed to do it .
 After Ziegler had left, I read some of Timmons’s congressional reports and listened to the last group of tapes that had to be turned over to Sirica the following week .
 Bebe Rebozo had just arrived from Miami . Bebe had been in Miami with a group of friends .
 Haig asked Haig if he could arrange a dinner on the Sequoia . An hour later we were sailing up the Potomac under a sultry evening sky .
 I will always remember the stricken expression on Rebozo’s face when I said this. ‘Rebozo's face’ was the most stricken expression in the world when I told him. “I will remember this moment in my life,” he said
 I told him about the June 23 tape and said that once it was released there would certainly be a trial in the Senate, with the likelihood of conviction, he said . He said he told him that once the tape was released, he would certainly have a trial .
 He urged that Russell Long and other leading senators in to listen to it and not just take the evaluation of a small group of staff . "He urged that I get Russell Long . Russell Long ... not just ... just take a small team of staff," he said .
 I said even if I had a chance in the Senate, the country simply could not afford six months with its President on trial . I said that even if . I was a candidate for a Senate seat, I would not be able to stand for six months .
 As we sailed back toward Washington, I asked Rebozo to help by backing me up with the family . "Rebozo is a great friend," he says. "He's a good guy. He's a great guy," he adds .
 He said he would do everything he could as long as I would promise not to make the decision irrevocable until we made one last try to mount a defense, he said . He said: "I would promise to promise to not make the . decision irreversible until we . made one
 When we returned to the White House, I went to the Lincoln Sitting Room. "When I went there, I was in the Lincoln sitting room," she said. "I went to see the Lincoln sat in the sitting room. When we went back, I saw the Lincoln portrait of
 Haig asked Chuck Wiggins to read the June 23 transcript and give us his preliminary evaluation of its impact . Wiggins says the transcript of June 23 will be published in the next week's edition of this week's Washington Post .
 Haig reported to me that Wiggins said impeachment in the House and conviction in the Senate were now no longer in doubt . Wiggins: Impeachment in House and Senate conviction in Senate are no longer a doubt . Haig: Wiggins says impeachment in House now is no longer an issue .
 He said that when these tapes became known, we would lose all but two or three Republicans on the Judiciary Committee—possibly including himself . He said he would lose some of his colleagues if the tapes became public .
 He said unless I planned to withhold the tape from the Court by pleading the Fifth Amendment, I should get ready to resign right away . He said he should resign immediately if he planned to do so .
 St. Clair felt that unless he reported the existence of the tape, he would himself become party to an obstruction of justice . He said he felt he would be a victim of obstruction of Justice .
 "That night I began the painful task of telling my family about the June 23 tape and preparing them for the impact it would have on my attempts to remain in office," says Gov. Rick Perry . The tape was taped in a bid to keep his job in office .
 She informed me that Daddy had had a talk with her that was serious but she hesitated to elaborate over the phone . She said he had a serious talk but didn't elaborate .
 "I pushed the Secret Service button and informed them I would be leaving on the next shuttle for Washington. I pushed it down," he said .
 While boarding the jet at La Guardia Airport, catcalls, boos, and obscene words were hurled at me by a group of Eastern employees . Eastern employees were lounging around their vehicles in the airport .
 "I was caught between two agents, one on the step above me," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he was "caught between the two agents" "I don't know what's going on," he says .
 I attempted to bypass the agent on the step below so that I could verbally take head-on the cowardly group . The cowardly group of agents was in the middle of a confrontation .
 "I thought it was more important to make this flight than to protest the treatment. But the agent was not inclined to cooperate," she says .
 At the White House, I took the elevator to the second floor, then scurried to the secret stairway at the East Hall and climbed to the third floor . The White House has a secret staircase at East Hall, a secret entrance to East Hall .
 Seeing me, she disengaged herself and I calmly asked her what Daddy had said to her yesterday . She saw me, and then calmly asked what he had said .
 Julie and I talked some more and I learned that Mama had not been told of Daddy’s tentative decision . Mama's tentative decision to move to Florida was a surprise .
 "Strange because worry is contagious and difficult to conceal other than with words," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Worry is contagious, and it's difficult to hide, he says .
 In the end it is kinder to reveal what the person you are trying to spare already feels . So in the end, you should reveal what you want to spare is the truth .
 Mama and I talked briefly and made plans to walk with the dogs later that afternoon . Mama and the dogs went for a walk with her on Sunday afternoon .
 "This is something I refrain from doing, so when he answered he knew he knew the motive had to be serious," he said . The motive for the shooting was serious, he said, so he knew it was serious . The suspect was arrested in connection with the shooting .
 President Obama said it would be “delightful” if he could come down to Washington that evening for dinner .
 Bebe had just been in the Lincoln Sitting Room with Daddy and he surprisingly told me that Daddy had told him about resigning from the White House . Bebe said she was surprised by the revelation .
 Bebe suggested that I should go to Daddy and pretend I knew nothing so that Daddy could tell me himself . Bebe said she should pretend she didn't know what happened .
 "Daddy was seated in his brown armchair with his feet up on the ottoman," he said . "Daddy's feet were up in the armchair," his mother said .
 President Obama describes tape recording as "a clear description of the June 23 tape" and analysis of his position . Obama says the tape is proof of his support for the president .
 I only interrupted when he began to speak of resigning for the good of the country. "I only interrupted him when he said he would resign," he said. "He said he will resign for the sake of his country."
 When Daddy said, “I hope I have not let you down,” the tragedy of his ghastly position shattered me . But when Daddy said "I hope he has not let me down," the tragedy shattered her .
 Mama, Julie, Bebe, David, Julie and Bebe had just been called into the Lincoln Sitting Room by Daddy . Mama and Julie were in the Lincoln sitting room at the time of the call .
 Daddy had been talking to us for about twenty minutes when Ed arrived and joined our little band . Ed joined our band and joined us in a little band.
 Just prior to Ed’s arrival, Daddy picked up the receiver of the nearby phone and asked to speak to Al Haig . Ed asked to talk to Haig just prior to the arrival of Ed .
 Haig asked Haig to send over transcripts of the June 23 tape he'd been describing to us . Haig says the transcripts are transcripts of a June 23 conversation with Haig .
 In about ten minutes Manolo brought us the papers bearing the bothersome words . In about 10 minutes he had returned to the studio .
 Ed arrived and the four of us (Julie, David, Ed, and me) removed ourselves from the room to carefully peruse the transcripts . Ed arrived .
 Ed and Ed agreed the words could be taken one of two ways depending upon who was judging them . Ed and I agreed that the words were taken one way depending upon the judge's view . The words were said to be taken with the help of Ed, Ed and others .
 We returned to the Lincoln Sitting Room with its interior deceptively gay-looking from the soft light cast by the fire burning in the fireplace .
 "All of us were in concert of feeling that we wanted Daddy to do what he felt he should," she says . "But all of us are in concert"
 He spoke of doing the right thing for the country, of how he thought a weak President in the position of being impeached would be a disaster to the country . The President spoke of a 'weak President' who was impeached .
 Daddy did not appear overly anguished at the events . Daddy did appear to be properly anguishing at the event .
 Daddy was left alone in his chair staring into the fire . Finally there was nothing left to say, and we left him alone .
 "Undoubtedly more telephone calls would be made and received long after we were gone," says the author . Undoubtedly more phone calls would still be made long after they were gone .
 "In the time we were in that room with Daddy, years had been lived, re-lived," says daughter . "In that room we had years had already been lived" says mother-in-law .
 The future held, he said, either resignation or removal from office by the Senate . He said the future held either resigning or removal .
 Upstairs Mama, Ed, and Ed went to the third floor to say good night to Julie and David . Mama and Ed said goodbye to David and Julie .
 "We all broke down together, and put our arms around each other in circular, huddle-style fashion," she said . "We put arms together in circular huddle style"
 "I sat alone in the Lincoln Sitting Room that night for several hours, trying to decide the best course of action," says President Obama . "It was a very difficult moment for me to think of what I would do," he says .
 They had been through so much already, and still they wanted to see the struggle through to the end . They wanted to end their struggle through, even though it had been so long .
 Pat, who had let the others do most of the talking in our meeting, told me that now, as always before, she was for fighting to the finish . Pat told me she had always been for fighting, and now she is for it .
 I decided instead of resigning on Monday night, I would release the June 23 tape and see the reaction to it . I decided to release the tape instead, and see how people react to it, he says . The tape will be released on June 23 .
 If it was as bad as I expected, then we could resume the countdown toward resignation . If it's as bad, then the countdown to resignation could resume, he says .
 If by some miracle the reaction was not so bad and there was any chance that I could actually govern during a six-month trial in the Senate, then we could examine that forlorn option one more time .
 More than once over the next days I would yield to my desire to fight, and I would bridle as the inexorable end drew near . But more than once, more often, I would give in to the end of the fight . I would also bridle, but I would
 I called Haig and told him that Ray Price should stop working on the resignation speech for Monday night . Price should instead begin work on a statement to accompany the release of the June 23 tape .
 On Saturday afternoon I decided that we should get out of Washington and go to Camp David . I decided to take a break from the White House and take a vacation .
 Even up there in the mountains it was hot and humid, so as soon as we could change our clothes we all went for a swim . Even in the heat, it was so hot that we had to go for a dip .
 Then we dressed and sat on the terrace, looking out across the wide valleys . Then we sat on a terrace to look out across valleys .
 On evenings like this it was easy to see why Franklin Roosevelt had named this place Shangri-la .
 After a swim on Saturday afternoon I was in the sauna when Eddie came in. Eddie was in a sauna at the time of the incident .
 At dinner on Saturday night we reviewed the situation again, and everyone urged that I at least postpone any decision until after the tape had been released on Monday .
 I told them I would consider their arguments and delay my decision to resign . "I said they would delay their arguments," she said . She said she would consider her decision and delay her resignation .
 Sunday was a cloudy day, but the clouds did not reach quite to the top of the mountain on which Aspen Lodge is situated . Sunday was the first cloudy day of the week for the lodge .
 I was awake at dawn, looking out over the great uncharted sea of clouds, pondering the decision yet again . "I was awake in the morning, looking ... pondering ... the decision," he says .
 Some of the senior staff members of the staff members and writers came up from Washington. That afternoon some of them came to Washington. "Some of the most important things we need to do is get out of the way"
 "We had decided that a written statement would be better than a speech to discuss the June 23 tape. We had decided to decide not to give a speech, but to make a statement . We decided not to speak to the media for the first time .
 I wanted to emphasize the fact that as soon as Gray had informed me on July 6, 1972, of his concern about White House intervention, I had told him to press on with the investigation . I wanted the statement to emphasize that Gray had told me that he would press on .
 The lawyers and staff produced a draft that shifted the emphasis of the statement from the contents of the tape to my failure to inform them of its existence, he says . The draft was changed to reflect the fact that the tape had been taped, he adds .
 I handed Haig a page of notes from my yellow pad on which I had formulated the information I wanted to convey, he said . Haig then handed him a page from his yellow pad .
 President Obama ordered a full FBI investigation into the FBI into an FBI investigation . Obama says he did not hesitate to order the investigation to proceed without regard to any political or other considerations .
 We’ve been working all afternoon on this thing, and this is the best we can come up with . We've been working for an hour and a half of an hour on this project, and it's not the best .
 On Monday morning, August 5, the daily press briefing was postponed several times . The last days of the White House Correspondents' Correspondents will meet with President Obama on August 5 .
 It was canceled at 1:30, and a statement was promised by three o'clock . A statement was supposed to be made by 3:30 p.m. at the end .
 The statement and the lengthy tape transcripts of the June 23 conversations were released at four o’clock . The lengthy tape transcript was released at 4:30 p.m. ET on Monday .
 In the rush to produce copies of these transcripts for distribution to the press, some personal references were carelessly and unnecessarily left in . Some personal references may have been left in the transcripts .
 The Seguoia was the first time the president had dinner with his family . President Barack Obama had dinner there with the family .
 I did not want them to have to endure the ordeal of watching the evening news broadcasts. I wanted them to be able to watch the news broadcasts .
 As we walked to the cars, about a hundred young staff members, most of them secretaries from the East Wing and West Wing offices, were waiting for us .
 The breeze off the water stirred the sultry air, and we sat on the top deck watching the sunset . It was the first time we had been to the Caribbean since 2004 .
 When we passed under bridges, reporters and photographers would suddenly surge forward, hanging perilously over the railings, trying to get a closer glimpse or a closer picture .
 Julie and David talked about the summer weather and a movie they had seen . They talked about their summer weather . They also talked about a movie Julie had seen that night .
 Rose had a firm way of fending off impertinent reporters, Rose said . They talked about the firm way Rose had of dealing with reporters .
 During dinner I began to reminisce about all sorts of people in so many places who had been good to us over the years . During dinner he reminisced about how good people had been to him and his wife .
 I said that someday, even if it were not for a long time, all the recent experiences we had endured would mean a lot to us because they had brought us closer together . "We would see how they had been brought together," she said .
 "Everyone agreed that our life in politics had been enriching, the bad as well as the good," says David Cameron . Everyone agreed that the good and bad had been the good of the past .
 "There was no talk about resigning that night, but several weeks later I learned that the next morning Pat had begun to organize our clothes, getting them ready for packing . The next morning, Pat began to organize his clothes, preparing them for packing, she said .
 Washington is being whipped into a frenzy by the revelation of the June 23 tape . "I knew that while we were sailing on the tranquil river, the city of Washington was being whipped up in a frenzy of excitement," she says .
 By now everyone would be scrambling for position, and few, if any, would want to be found standing with me . "Few of the people I would be standing with would not want to stand with me," he said .
 "I asked Rose to call Haig and get a report on the first reactions," he says . "I went down to my cabin and stretched out on the bed with my left leg elevated as the doctors had ordered," he adds .
 A few minutes later Rose Rose came down and read me her shorthand notes of her conversation with Haig . Rose then read them to read them in a few minutes .
 The one that Dean Burch talked to regularly’—that would be Goldwater—“is going to keep quiet” Goldwater, Goldwater’s secretary of state says .
 Senators Curtis, Cotton, Bennett, Bennett and Eastland, Stennis, Waggonner, are very much back of him but concerned about what it will do . Senator Wagganner: "I'm very much behind him. But I'm not sure what will it do
 I had been planning to hold a Cabinet meeting ever since we returned from San Clemente. I had planned to hold it ever since I returned from that trip . I had hoped to hold the Cabinet meeting, but it was too late for him to say yes .
 Late Monday night I asked Haig to see if he could arrange one for Tuesday morning, August 6 . Haig: "I'm looking forward to a meeting with the media"
 "No plans had yet been set in motion. Although I recognized the inevitability of resignation, no plans were yet in motion," he said .
 Once resignation came, "I intended to play the role of President right to the hilt," he said . But until then, he said, he would resign "quickly and complete"
 Until my decision had to be announced, the government had to remain stable at home . Nations around the world must have no reason to think that America was without a leader, he says .
 The Cabinet and White House staff should be reminded that their first responsibility was to their jobs . In the meantime, I felt that the Cabinet and the White House should be reminding that .
 Despite Haig’s reports that they were all holding firm I knew that there would be great pressure on them all, and great temptations, to make public demands for my resignation . I knew my Cabinet well, and despite Haig's reports that . they were . all holding
 I was determined not to appear to have resigned the presidency because of a consensus of staff or Cabinet opinion or because of public pressure from the people around me .
 "For me and no less for the country, I believed that my resignation had to be seen as something that I had decided upon completely on my own," she said . "I believed that . My resignation had been seen as . something that . I thought that my resigning had to
 I was unable to sleep that night, and about two o’clock I walked down to the Lincoln Sitting Room. ‘About two o'clock I went down to see the Lincoln sitting room,’ he said . ‘I was unable . to sleep. I was
 No fire had been laid, so I stacked some logs together, lighted them with paper, and sat down in my big armchair in front of the blaze . No fire was laid, but I stacked logs together and lighted paper with paper .
 A few minutes later, as I sat lost in thought, the door burst open and two of the night-duty engineers rushed in . The door bursts open and the engineers rushed into the room .
 Apparently everyone thought everyone thought I was in bed, and my amateur fire had set off an alarm . Apparently everyone had thought everyone was asleep when the alarm went off .
 After they recovered from the shock of finding me there, they checked the chimney to make sure that the flue was open . The chimney was checked by the family after they found out that it had been open .
 Just as they left, the younger of the two turned around and said, “Mr President, I just want you to know that we’re praying for you,” and quickly closed the door behind him .
 "I thought about these two men, and about the office workers that afternoon," he says . "I think about the millions of others like them all across the country who still had faith in me," he writes .
 We had passed through the first blast of the fire storm, but it was still raging . The first blast was the first of the 'first blast' of the storm - but it's still raging.
 "During every other crisis of the administration, my entrance had been greeted with applause," he said . "I was greeted by applause when I entered the White House," he added .
 The Cabinet rose silently as I came into the room and walked around to my chair at the center of the big oblong table . Today the Cabinet rose silent as I sat in the middle of the table .
 Watergate was the top Watergate scandal in the White House . President George H.W. Bush was the president of the United States in 1972 .
 I said that I understood how many people were genuinely upset by the June 23 tape . "I said that many people are genuinely upset," she said . She said that she understood how upset people were .
 I thanked Cabinet members for their statements of support in the past. I thanked the Cabinet members . I thanked them for their statement of support .
 "I knew that many times it had not been easy to stand up for me, and I was grateful when they did," she said . She said she was grateful that people stood up for her and her family .
 I had to consider resigning now because of the tremendous pressures on me to do so would establish a precedent that could start America down the road to a parliamentary type of government in which the executive stays in office only as long as he can win a vote of confidence from the legislative branch .
 I said that I would not expect any member of the Cabinet to do anything that would be personally embarrassing or politically harmful . I would expect any Cabinet member to do nothing that would embarrass him or embarrass him politically .
 My problems were my own responsibility, and I only asked that they try to run their departments especially well over the next weeks and months . I'm not asking the government to do so, but to run them especially well, he says .
 Jerry Ford says his situation is particularly difficult . Jerry Ford: "It's a very difficult thing to deal with" Jerry Ford .
 He said he had decided to remain silent about impeachment from now on . It appeared that the vote in the House was going to be unfavorable, and he said that despite his admiration and affection for me, he would remain silent .
 I said that this was the right position, and that no other member of the Cabinet should do anything that might jeopardize his ability to carry on his present responsibilities, or responsibilities he might have in the future, in the event I did leave office . I said no other Cabinet member should
 I repeated that they should not become involved in the impeachment controversy but must instead give their full attention to running their departments, I said . I said that they shouldn't be involved in impeachment controversy .
 Cabinet Secretaries to think of themselves as trustees of the President and the government . If I became occupied with a Senate trial, I said, I wanted the Cabinet . I said I wanted Cabinet . Secretaries . to be functioning trustees of President and government .
 There was a brief discussion of the new agricultural appropriations bill, which I said would have to be vetoed . It was an out-and-out giveaway measure, exceeding my budget limitation by $450 million, he said .
 The discussion then turned to a proposal for an economic summit between Congress and the executive branch sometime in the near future . The economic summit would be held between the two parties .
 Saxbe broke in, saying that perhaps we should wait to see if I would have sufficient leadership to implement any of the economic measures we were discussing . Saxbe said he would not be able to implement such measures .
 George Bush indicated that he wanted recognition . Saxbe said he wanted to be recognized for his work .
 There was a moment of embarrassed silence around the table at the end of the meeting . There was an embarrassed silence before the meeting ended .
 I told him how much I had appreciated his support and his handling of the foreign policy problems over the last months, he said . He said: "I told him I appreciated his . support and . handling of . foreign policy issues over the past months"
 He said that if I decided to fight it through to the Senate I would be picked to death and further dishonored in a trial, and the foreign policy of the nation might not be able to survive such a situation .
 It was one thing for the President to be under political attack as I had been for the last two years; it was quite another thing for him to be in the dock for half a year with his chances for survival in office dubious at best .
 I told him that I totally agreed with his appraisal and thanked him for his loyal friendship . I also said that I was proud of his loyalty to me and that he was a loyal friend .
 Bill Timmons: Kissinger defections are the latest in a long line of congressional defections . He says Kissinger's departure from the White House is a sign that the U.S. is on the way .
 Two days earlier we had estimated that I could almost count on having the thirtyfour votes I would need to avoid conviction in the Senate . Two days ago we had been optimistic that we would have enough votes for conviction . But now we have just had to count on just four votes to avoid
 Timmons: Only seven men in the Senate I could count on to be with me if I decided to stay and fight . Today, Timmons said, there were only seven men I can count on if I wanted to stay, he said .
 Barry Goldwater had been asked by the Republican congressional leaders to bring me personally their assessment of how hopeless the situation was, Goldwater said . He said that as the party’s former standard-bearer, he had asked for the assessment .
 I told Haig to make arrangements for Goldwater to see me on Wednesday afternoon . Haig said he would make arrangements to see Goldwater again . Goldwater was elected to the presidency in 1964 .
 Haig said that he had received a phone call from Haldeman, who was strongly opposed to my resigning . Haig: "Haldeman said he would not allow me to resign." Haig says he was forced to resign from his post .
 Haldeman thought that it would be in my interest to grant him and the other Watergate defendants a full presidential pardon as my last act in office . If that was my irrevocable decision, however, I would grant him a full pardon, he would do it as his last act
 Watergate pardons would be combined with amnesty for draft dodgers, he suggested . Nixon suggested that amnesty for Vietnam draft-dodgers should be added to Watergate pardon list .
 The next day I learned that John Ehrlichman had called Rose and Julie with a similar recommendation . John called the next day to ask them to take a look at the White House .
 Before we could discuss this, Steve Bull came in to say that Rabbi Korff was waiting for his appointment . Steve Bull then said that he was waiting to be seen by the Rabbi .
 I had asked Ziegler to tell him that I had decided to resign and that he should not try to change my mind . I asked him not to try and change his mind, he said . He said he would resign if he was asked to do so .
 Rabbi Korff summoned his usual eloquence and said that although he would accept whatever I decided, he felt obligated to say what he thought . He said he felt compelled to speak .
 "He spoke with the fire of an Old Testament prophet, but he saw that my mind was made up," she said . "He saw that he saw my mind made up. He saw that I had made up my mind."
 He said that if I did resign, I owed it to my supporters to do it with my head high, and not just slip away . He said: "I owe it to the supporters of my supporters, and I owe it with a head high" He added that if he did
 "I told her that I needed her help in telling the family that I did not want them to go through the agony of watching the television news broadcasts reporting more defections over the June 23 tape," she says .
 "There was no need for them to worry over something we could no longer do anything about. There were no need to worry about something we were no longer doing anything about," she said . She added: "There were no more people who need to be worried about their lives."
 I also asked her to tell them that my support was so low I could no longer govern, and that I was going to have to resign, she said . "I'm not going to resign. I'm going to be forced to resign," she said. "My support is so
 Haig said that it would be a worthy exit as worthy as opponents were unworthy . Haig: "It would be an exit that would be as worthy of my opponents as unworthy"
 "I gave them additional thoughts I wanted included in the first draft of my speech," he said of his speech . "I wanted them to include some of the things I thought about," he added .
 I wanted to say that this had been a difficult time for all of us, and that the situation had now reached a point where it was clear that I did not retain the necessary support to conduct the business of government in a way that would assure that the best interests of the nation were
 I wanted to include a statement that I understood the motivations and considerations of those who were no longer able to stand with me, and that I would be eternally grateful to those who had stood with me . "I wanted to say that I understand the motivations ... of those ... who were
 As we entered the street between the two buildings, reporters rushed out to watch us . As we enter the street, reporters watched us. As we left the building, reporters burst out .
 'I suddenly saw how tired he was, how much all the political stress had taken out of this superb military man,' he said . 'He was tired and tired. I saw how much political stress took out of him,' he added .
 As I pressed the button, I turned to them and said, “It’s settled then.” It was the first time I'd press the button .
 Julie had prepared dinner for David’s parents, who were in Washington for a visit . Julie and David were at their own apartment as I went up to meet the family in the Solarium .
 In my room I began clearing our drawers of five years of memories and became shattered at the significance . In our room we began clearing the drawers and were shattered . We are devastated by the loss of our five years together .
 Rose in tears this afternoon told us in the Solarium that Daddy had irrevocably decided to resign . "Daddy's decision irrevably made to resign," she said .
 Now we must all be as stoical as possible, and show him that this action has our blessing, praise him for it . Show him we love him more than ever, and he must be stoical .
 Del Latta said he felt he had been run over by a truck when he heard the June 23 tape . "Del Latta, who had been one of my strongest supporters on the House Judiciary Committee," he said .
 "If anything could have changed my mind, this would have done it," he said of his decision to leave the country .
 "I felt, deep down in my heart and mind, that I had made the decision that was best for the country. Not because I was tired and fatigued, and certainly not because I had given up, but because I felt it was the best for my country," she said
 I took Julie’s note and put it into my briefcase to make sure that it did not get lost in the massive move that was about to take place . I took the note and placed it in a briefcase .
 The countdown toward resignation was already proceeding smoothly, says President Obama . "When I got to the Oval Office at ten o’clock on Wednesday morning, August 7, I was already going to resign," he says .
 Haig had told Jerry Ford to be ready to assume the presidency on very short notice . Haig told Ford that he was ready to take over as president on short notice from Haig . Ford was the president of the U.S. for the first time in four decades .
 Ray Price had attached a short memo to it saying that the resignation, although sad, was necessary . Ray Price: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 He said he hoped I would leave the White House as proud of my accomplishments there as he was proud to have been associated with me and to be my friend .
 "As I walked through the West Wing I heard phones ringing in every office," says President Obama . "The West Wing is a very small part of the world," he says .
 The switchboard was deluged with calls from people who had stood by me through it all . 'The switchboard is delugged with calls,' she said . 'I'm not going to give up on my job,' she added .
 The White House has a closed street that separates the White House from the Executive Office Building . The street is closed between the two buildings and the Oval Office . President Barack Obama was in office at the time .
 The crowds waiting outside the iron fence surrounding the White House surged forward when I came into view . Crowds surged forward as I came in view of the crowds .
 Ed Cox had called it a death watch, but I believed that there was more than simple curiosity involved . I felt that these people were drawn by the sense that history was about to happen, and they wanted to be nearby .
 "I could sense the tension of the Secret Service agents, and I moved as quickly as possible up the broad stone stairs and into the office," the author says . "I was in the office. I could sense a lot of tension," she says .
 Bob Haldeman's eleventh-hour plea to the White House is finally accepted . Bob's story will be featured in a new book, "The White House Jam," published by Law Watt .
 I said as much as I was torn by the conflicting principles involved, I thought the country would be better off this way . I said that as much . I thought that as . much as he was torn, he thought that the country . would be best off this . way .
 He urged me to take more time and think it through again, but if I had made up my mind, he would like me to consider issuing a blanket pardon for all the Watergate defendants, he said .
 Watergate would be better off if Watergate did not drag on for more months and years with endless subpoenas and lawsuits, he said . He said the country would benefit from Watergate if it was not dragged on for months or years .
 He added amnesty for draft dodgers would deflect criticism of the Watergate pardons . He added that amnesty for Vietnam draft-dodgers would also deflect criticism .
 His proud and brusque way of dealing with people had aroused fear in some and inspired loyalty in many others . As he talked, my mind wandered back to the campaign days and the White House days .
 I could not help but feel and share the despair that he must be feeling . I could help but share the sadness that he has felt .
 I had hoped that after the 1974 election I would be in a position to grant pardons, but I had never foreseen all that would happen . "I had hoped ... that after 1974 election, I would have been able to pardon people," he says .
 Charles Sandman, hitherto one of my strongest defenders on the Judiciary Committee, had said that the June 23 tape was insurmountable . He said he could command fewer than twelve votes in the whole House, and reckoned that I could command just 12 votes .
 I had promised Julie that I would see Bruce Herschensohn, one of the most ardent loyalists on the staff, on Monday .
 He was emotional as he argued against what he suspected was a course already in motion . He said he suspected a course of action was already underway .
 He argued that the example of a President who faced his attackers and went down defending himself would better serve the American people than any relief that the ending of Watergate would bring them .
 I thanked Herschensohn for his frankness and said that he was probably right . I thanked him for his honesty .
 The decision was not an easy one, but in a case like this perhaps there were no easy decisions, or even any good decisions, but only decisions that had to be made . The decision is not always easy, but perhaps it is a good decision to make .
 "We still wanted to caution him to be sure resignation was the only step to take," he says . Because nothing had been announced publicly, we still wanted him to resign .
 "We were afraid that in a moment of weakness or discouragement he might make the wrong decision to bring an end to the unbearable harassment," says the family of the victims .
 He would be hounded habitually after leaving office—by trials, lawsuits, etc. etc. After leaving office, he would have been hounded by trial, lawsuits and lawsuits .
 We were afraid he would wake up the morning after leaving office feeling he had made a terrible mistake by resigning . We were also afraid he'd wake up feeling he'd made a horrible mistake by leaving office .
 There comes a point when fighting alone must come to mean fighting against yourself . But there comes to a point where fighting alone means fighting against you is difficult .
 A little later Ed and David came in together and argued the case for waiting, even if only for a few days . Ed said he and David both agreed to wait . David and Ed argued for waiting .
 I told them that I felt that executive authority would be damaged by a vote of impeachment in the House and a long trial in the Senate that it would be almost impossible to govern . I told the House that impeachment would be so damaging to executive authority that it was almost impossible, he said
 Ed countered that the most important role for the President was in foreign affairs, and that even crippled by impeachment, he would be a lot stronger and more credible than Ford . Ed said that even if he was impeached, Ford would be stronger and credible than him .
 "From a personal standpoint, my resignation would not accomplish anything," he said . He added that resigning from his job would not have accomplished anything .
 The tragedy had to be seen through until the end as fate would have it . In other words, the tragedy had been seen through .
 David agreed that if I had the personal will to see it through, I should do so, he should . David agreed to see the project through, and I decided to do so .
 He responded forcefully when I mentioned the argument that I should resign for the good of the party, he said . "He responded forcefully," he said, "when I mentioned that he responded forcefully"
 "Before they left, they assured me that the family was ready for whatever happened, and would be behind me in whatever I decided to do," she said .
 I have met with leaders of House and Senate, including my strongest supporters in both parties, both parties. Insert: "I'm meeting leaders of both parties" Insert: I'm meeting with leaders in both chambers of Congress. I'm going to meet with them. I've met with
 "I do not and will not have support in Congress for difficult decisions affecting peace abroad and our fight against inflation at home," he says . "They have unanimously advised me that because of Watergate matter, I do not ... have support"
 I called Steve Bull, who had greeted Goldwater and his colleagues in the West Lobby, to ask about his experience . Steve Bull was the man who greeted the Goldwater family in the lobby .
 Barry Goldwater, the former standardbearer and now the silver-haired patriarch of the party . Hugh Scott, the Senate Republican Leader, and John Rhodes, the House Republican Leader. John Rhodes is the House GOP Leader .
 "Over the years I had shared many successes and many failures with these men. Over the years, I had many successes, many failures," he said .
 CNN.com will feature a new series of iReporters in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . This week's gallery includes some of the world's most important questions: "What do you think of the future?"
 "I pushed back my chair, put my feet up on the desk, and asked them how things looked," she said . "We're going to see how things look," she added. "I'm not going to let it slide down, but I'm going to ask them how
 I winced at the names of men I had worked to help elect, men who were my friends . Involuntarily, I wonced at names of those I had helped elect, including men who had been friends with me .
 Rhodes had not noticed that I had been making a statement rather than asking a question . Rhodes said he did not want to tell reporters waiting outside that he had discussed any specific alternatives with me . Rhodes did not notice that he'd made a statement, and he earnestly replied that he did
 "I called Rose and asked her to tell the family that a final check of my dwindling support in Congress had confirmed that I had to resign," he says .
 "I asked her to tell them that Goldwater, Stennis, Scott, and Rhodes were all going to be voting for impeachment," she said . Goldwater was impeached in 1964, Rhodes died in 1998 .
 "My decision was irrevocable, and I asked her to suggest that we not talk about it anymore when I went over for dinner," she said . "I asked her not to discuss it anymore," she replied .
 I went back to the Oval Office and asked Kissinger if he could come in, he said yes . Kissinger was the president of the U.S. State Department of Energy and Defense Department . Kissinger is the son of former Secretary of State John Kerry .
 We talked briefly about notifying foreign governments and about sending special messages to the leaders of China, the Soviet Union, and the Middle Eastern countries . We also talked about sending messages to foreign governments .
 "Every nation would need reassurance that my departure from the scene would not mean a change in America’s foreign policy," he said .
 Jerry Ford was Vice President in the House of Representatives and as Vice President . Ford: "They would have little knowledge of Jerry Ford, so I wanted to let them know how strongly he had supported my foreign policy while he was in Congress"
 For a minute I tried to imagine the different reactions to these cables . For a second, I thought of the cables as cables to the world's most powerful cables .
 I did not envy the night duty officer who would have to decide whether to wake Brezhnev or wait and give him the news when he got up . The officer had to decide between waking him and not waking him up .
 Brezhnev had placed so much emphasis on the importance of our personal relationship as the foundation of détente that I suspected his first instinct would be to assess what my resignation would do to his own situation .
 In Cairo and Tel Aviv, news would arrive while the cities still slept . in Damascus and Amman, the news also would arrive when the cities were still asleep .
 Eight weeks ago I had been hailed as a triumphal peacemaker and accorded unprecedented acclaim by their peoples . But now I'm back in the spotlight again, and I'm not so pleased with the results .
 "The whole world will need reassurance that my leaving won't change our policies," he says . "I'm not going to change my policies. The whole world needs reassurance," he adds .
 Each one respected the opportunities public life had given her; and when the blows came, each reacted with dignity, courage, and spirit . "Each one respected public life and responded with dignity and courage," she said .
 She held her head at the slightly higher angle that is her only visible sign of tension, even to those who know her . She holds her head higher than the other side of the aisle .
 "As I walked in, she came over and threw her arms around me and kissed me," she said . "As she walked in she came . She came over to give me a hug and kiss," he said .
 Julie sat in one of the bright yellow armchairs, tears standing in her eyes . Julie's tears stood in the eyes as she sat down in the armchair .
 Rose, who is as close to us as family, sat on a large ottoman next to my yellow easy chair . Rose sat in the chair next to me as I sat down in a large chair. Rose was a member of the family.
 "Someday, I said, we would be able to talk about this night, and then we would want to remember everything about it," he said . Someday, he said, "I said, 'We would never forget this night. Someday."
 "I asked Pat to come down to the Rose Garden for a final photograph, but that was simply expecting too much. I asked Pat, who is a great friend, to be down there for a photo," he says . "That was simply asking too much," he adds .
 As we entered the Rose Garden, she took my arm just as she had done three years before when she married there . She took her arm as she did three years ago when she had married there.
 Like me, Tricia seldom displays her inner emotions so people can see them, she says . Tricia's mother Tricia rarely shows her inner feelings to the public .
 She smiled at me and looked as young and, if possible, more beautiful than on the day of her wedding . She smiled and said she was still young and more beautiful now .
 "We went upstairs, and I asked that the dogs be brought in for the last pictures," she said . "I asked that that was the last picture of the dogs," she says .
 Tricia suggested that we form a line and link arms as we had done in one of our favorite family photographs taken in front of the Christmas tree in the Blue Room in 1971 .
 I knew that the only way we would get through this night would be to pretend a bravado we did not really feel, so I said that I would have to take over the designing of the photo . The only way to get through the night was to pretend to be bravado,
 After he had snapped some pictures, he turned his head away, but we could all see the tears streaming down his cheeks . He turned his eyes away from the camera, but the tears were streaming down .
 She threw her arms around me sobbing, “I love you, Daddy,” she said, and Ollie, through his own tears, captured that moment as well . She threw herself around her father sobbing .
 "All I can see in them is the tension in the smiles, and the eyes brimming with tears," says author . "I can see the tension and the smiles in the eyes of the children," she says .
 No one had much appetite for our last dinner in the White House, so we just asked that trays be brought up to the Solarium . No one wanted to eat much of their last dinner, so they just asked for trays brought up .
 "Because we were there together and so close to each other, it is one of the priceless moments that I will carry with me for the rest of my life," she says .
 We tried to talk animatedly, even to laugh at the dogs and their comical begging for food . The dogs were so hungry that they had to beg for food in the streets of the city .
 When we had finished, I went to the Lincoln Sitting Room to continue work on the resignation speech . Mr Obama's resignation speech was the first time he had left the White House .
 I could even feel a kind of calm starting to settle in now that the family had been told of the tragedy . I could feel the calm finally settling in after the family was told of their loss .
 As we talked about the tremendous swings of fortune we had known over the past two years, he recalled a famous quote from Teddy Roosevelt . He recalled a quote he had used often in his speeches .
 It was the one in which TR had described the “man in the arena,” whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes short again .
 At nine o’clock I picked up the phone to see if Kissinger was still in the office and if he could come over . Kissinger was in his office at the time, and Kissinger was there to meet with Kissinger .
 We talked for an hour about our present relationships with the Chinese and the Soviets, and about our problems in the Middle East, in Europe, and in other parts of the world .
 "For some reason the agony and the loss of what was about to happen became most acute for me during that conversation," she said . "I felt the pain and loss of that conversation most acutely," she added .
 "I found myself more emotional than I had been at any time since the decision had been set in motion. I found myself emotional," she said .
 I told him that the worst thing that could happen to America and to all our initiatives to build a more peaceful world would be for him to resign after I had resigned, he said . I said: "The worst thing could happen was that he resigned after I resigned"
 There was simply no one else on the horizon who could even shine his shoes, let alone fit into them . There were simply no other options .
 I reminded him how, three years earlier, we had drunk a toast after we received the invitation to go to Peking . Three years later, we were in Peking, China, for the first time . We were drinking a toast to celebrate the invitation, which he had received from
 I walked down the dark hall to the family kitchen and brought back the same bottle of brandy . I walked back to the kitchen to find out what happened to me .
 After a sip we put our glasses down, we left them unfinished on the table . But after a sip, we put their glasses down and leave them unfinished .
 Kissinger was moved from the Lincoln Sitting Room to the Lincoln Bedroom right next to it . Kissinger was about to leave when Kissinger was forced to leave, he says . Kissinger is the son of President Richard Nixon .
 In Lincoln's time, long before the West Wing had been built, this had been the President’s office . Lincoln's office was the President's office in Lincoln's era .
 It contains one of the five copies of the Gettysburg Address in Lincoln’s own handwriting, as well as the desk he used at his summer White House . Lincoln used the desk at the Old Soldiers’ Home in the District of Columbia . Lincoln's own handwriting is on the
 Kissinger told Kissinger that he was not one to wear his religion on his sleeve . Kissinger said he realized that, like me, he didn't want to wear it on his sleeves . Kissinger: "I realized that I realized that ... he was like me"
 I said we probably had different religious beliefs if we were to examine them in a strictly technical way, but that deep down I knew he had just as strong a belief in a Supreme Being as I did . I said that we probably . had different . religious beliefs .
 Every night, when I had finished working in the Lincoln Sitting Room, I would stop and kneel briefly and, following my mother’s Quaker custom, pray silently for a few moments before going to bed . On an impulse I told him how every night I would . stop
 On the eve of my resignation I knew that my role was already symbolic one, and that Gerald Ford’s was now the constructive one . Gerald Ford's was now Gerald Ford, says Bob Greene .
 My telephone calls and meetings and decisions were now parts of a prescribed ritual aimed at making peace with the past . His calls, his meetings, and his decisions were already the ones that would shape America’s future, he writes .
 Ziegler arrived and described the technical arrangements for the resignation speech and the departure ceremony . The resignation speech was part of the resignation ceremony for the former president .
 As we walked out of the Lincoln Sitting Room, I asked Manolo to go ahead of us and turn on all the lights .
 From the outside the second floor of the White House must have looked like the scene of a festive party . From outside the outside it looked like a scene of festive party.
 "I asked Manolo to wake me at nine in the morning, and I started toward my room," she says . "Manolo was the first person to wake her up," she adds .
 Thursday, August 8, 1974, was the last full day I served as President of the U.S. President . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1968 .
 As on other mornings of my presidency, I walked through the colonnade that had been designed by Thomas Jefferson, through the Rose Garden, and into the Oval Office . As on many mornings of his presidency, he walked through .
 I called Haig in and told him that I wanted to veto the agricultural appropriations bill we had discussed in the Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, because I did not want Ford to have to do it on his first day as President . I called . Haig .
 He sat down at the side of the desk, and for a moment the room was filled with silence . "For a moment there was silence," he said . "I'm not going to let it slide down," he added .
 I have never thought much of the notion that the presidency makes a man presidential. I'm not sure if that's true, but I think it's a good idea for a president .
 Each man remains distinctive in the American presidency, says President Obama . Each man is distinctive, says Obama .
 I thought that Jerry Ford would measure up well under that magnification . Jerry Ford is a good guy, and I thought he would measure well under magnification .
 We talked about the problems he would face as soon as he became President in almost exactly twenty-four hours . We also talked about how he would deal with the challenges he faces .
 I stressed the need to maintain our military strength and to continue the momentum of the peace initiatives in the Middle East . I stressed need to continue to maintain military strength .
 "We must not allow the leaders in Moscow or Peking to seize upon the traumatic events surrounding my resignation as an Opportunity to test the United States in Vietnam or anywhere else in the world," he said .
 We must not let the Communists mistakenly assume that . executive authority had been weakened by Watergate that we would no longer stand up to aggression wherever it occurred . We must never let the . Communists mistakenly . assume that executive authority . had been so weakened that . we would not stand up against aggression
 I said that I was planning to send messages to all the major world leaders that Jerry Ford had been one of the strongest supporters of my policies . Jerry Ford said he would send messages that he could count on him to continue those policies with the same firmness .
 I said that as far as I was concerned, the only man who would be absolutely indispensable to him was Henry Kissinger . Henry Kissinger. I said he would be indispensable to the president, but not necessarily to him, he said .
 "There was simply no one else who had his wisdom, tenacity, and experience in foreign affairs," says President Obama .
 If he were to leave after I resigned, I said, our foreign policy would soon be in disarray throughout the world . I said he would soon leave after he resigned, he said . He said, "Our foreign policy will soon be disarray"
 Ford said he intended to keep Kissinger on for as long as he would be willing to stay . Ford said firmly that he wanted Kissinger to stay as long he was willing to .
 I urged him to keep Haig as Chief of Staff, at least during the transition period . I also urged him also to keep him in the post-war era .
 Haig, I assured him, was always loyal to the commander he served, and he would be an invaluable source of advice and experience in the days ahead . Haig would be invaluable, he said, when there would inevitably be a scramble for power within the Cabinet and White House staff
 I told Ford that I would always be available to give him advice at any time, but I would never interject myself in any way into his decision-making process . Ford: "I told him that I . would always always give advice, but would not interject himself into his
 He expressed appreciation for this attitude and said that he would always welcome any of my suggestions, particularly in foreign affairs .
 I do not think that Ford knew that he had not been my first choice for Vice President when Agnew resigned . Ford had come in fourth in informal poll I had taken among Republican leaders, he says . Ford: I don't think Ford knew he was not first choice to replace Ag
 I knew that there were many who did not share my high opinion of Ford’s abilities, but I knew there was a lot of skepticism . I knew many who didn’t share my view of Ford, and I’m sure that many did .
 Jerry Ford was the right man, and that was why I chose him. But I had felt then that Jerry Ford would be the right person, he said. That was why he chose him .
 He said he had decided not to go to the Capitol because his former colleagues there might turn the occasion into some kind of celebration . He said that he decided to stay away from the Capitol to avoid a celebration .
 I said that I planned to be gone by noon; if he liked, he could be sworn in in the White House, as Truman had been . I said he could have been sworn in as Truman did, as he had been. I told him that he should be gone .
 Ford’s eyes filled with tears as we lingered for a moment at the door of his home . Ford's eyes filled up as he left the house with his wife .
 "I thanked him for his loyal support over the last painful weeks and months," she said . "I thank him for the support he has given me," she added .
 After Ford left, I once again walked the familiar route to the EOB office . Ford: "I don't think it's going to be a great thing for the public"
 Only the steady ringing of the phones gave the place a sense of purpose, of life . The steady phone ringing of life gave the building a sense, of purpose .
 Fred Buzhardt came in and showed a letter from Haldeman’s attorney, requesting a presidential pardon, he says . Haldemans' attorney requested a pardon, but the president denied it .
 Haldeman included a specially typed page to insert in his resignation speech announcing the pardon and proclaiming a Vietnam amnesty . The page was included in my resignation speech from Vietnam .
 I told Buzhardt to call the other lawyers after the speech and tell them that I had said no. I told him to call them to tell them they had said yes .
 It was a painful decision not to grant his request, but tying their pardon to the granting of amnesty to Vietnam draft dodgers was unthinkable . The decision was made by President Richard Nixon, who died in 1968 .
 To grant a blanket pardon to all those involved in Watergate would have raised the issue to hysterical political levels . And granting such a pardon would have been a mistake, he says .
 I felt it was vital for the country that my resignation be a healing action, and in the climate then prevailing I was afraid that to couple resignation with a blanket Watergate pardon would vitiate its healing effect, he says . He says he was afraid to couple resign with the blanket Watergate
 Haig had just come from meeting with Jaworski to inform him that he was going to resign . Haig: "I was just about to resign. Haig was just in the process of telling him that I would resign"
 "I would not be coaxed out of office by any special deals, or cajoled into resigning in exchange for leniency," he says . He says he would not resign from office by accepting a plea deal .
 Haig said Jaworski believed I had made the right decision . Haig: Jaworsk believed I made the decision, and from their conversation he got the impression that I had nothing further to fear from the Special Prosecutor .
 I said that, considering the way his office had acted in the past, I had little reason to feel reassured . I said: 'I said that . considering the . way his . office had . acted, I said . had little . reason to be reassured. He said .
 "It galled me that people might think that my decision had been influenced by anything as demeaning as the fear of prosecution, or that the Special Prosecutor and other attackers had forced me out of office," he said .
 "I did not care what else people thought as long as they did not think that I had quit just because things were tough. I didn't care what other people thought," she said . She said: "I didn't want people to think I was quitting just because of things tough
 By the time we reached the last fifty yards, there were only two of us straggling in for next to last place . By the end of the race, only two players had finished in the top three .
 Still, I sprinted those last yards just as hard as if I were trying for the first-place ribbon . Still, he sprinted the last yards as if he were trying to win the first place ribbon .
 She was going to type it on the special large-face typewriter we used to use so that I would not have to wear my glasses on television . "I would have had to wear glasses on TV," she says .
 She was wearing a pink dress and pink shoes in an attempt, I knew, to defy the darkness of the day . She was trying to defy darkness by wearing a dress and shoes .
 She said that the family had discussed it, and they wanted to be in the Oval Office when I delivered the speech so that the whole world could see they were with me . She said she said that she said she wanted to give the speech to the world .
 "I said it was simply out of the question, because I would not be able to get through the speech without breaking up if they were even nearby," he said .
 She said that they had anticipated my feeling, and so at least wanted to be in the next room when I spoke . She said she had anticipated her feeling and wanted to speak .
 "I asked her to explain that this was something I would have to do alone, and, as a favor to me, to ask them to stay in the Residence and watch the speech from there," she said .
 She said that Air Force Colonel Theodore Guy, the head of the POW organization, had called in tears, saying that Rose must not let me resign . She said she also thought she should know that Air . Force Colonel . Theodore Guy had called to say that Rose should not be allowed to
 I had not given up on them, he had said, and they would not give up on me . I was not giving up, he said . I had given up, but I had never given up .
 The White House says it's not unusual for the usual groups of staff or press to watch or take photos of the event .
 Ziegler carried out his wishes completely, and we saw no one as he and I made the short walk . "We see no one," he said. "Ziegler carries out my wishes completely"
 I shaved and showered and then picked out the suit I had worn in Moscow in 1972 when I delivered my speech on television to the Soviet people . I then picked up the suit and tie that I had . worn in . 1972 . I was in Moscow to deliver a speech to the
 It was slate blue, light in texture, and consequently cool under the hot television lights . It was a slate blue .
 I went back to the EOB for a brief meeting with the congressional leaders, I told them officially that I had decided to resign . I then went back and told them that I was going to resign from the House .
 Veterans knew that the coming and going of Presidents, whatever individual or personal consequences, is not the only thing that matters to the country . These men were veterans, and they knew that .
 We talked about coming to Capitol Hill together in the same freshman class in 1947 . We were both freshmen at the same time in Washington .
 I told them all that I had appreciated their support on many issues through the years, and that I was especially grateful for their support during the last Soviet Summit, when I knew that partisan pressures and temptations were very great .
 I said I had always respected them when they had opposed my policies . I said that I had respect for them, even if they opposed me policies .
 I was looking directly at Mike Mansfield when I said this, but he did not react at all . I was . looking directly . at Mike . Mansfield, who was in the audience at the time, was not reacting to the comments .
 I said, “Mike, I will miss our breakfasts together,” and he nodded, but without much responsiveness . ‘Mike’ will miss his breakfast with me,’ he said .
 As a Southerner and a conservative, he was always one of the most underestimated men in the Senate . He was always a conservative .
 In his face was a look of understanding that spoke more than volumes of words . "In his face, he said: 'I'm sorry. I'm sorry."
 My eyes ran over the familiar elephants, the gavels, the framed cartoons and plaques, the books, and the pictures of Pat and Tricia and Julie . "I'm looking forward to the memories of Pat," Tricia, Tricia said .
 Forty-six men were crowded around the table and in the chairs along the walls . Forty-two men were gathered at a table in the room .
 Forty-six friends and colleagues in countless causes over three decades . The most recent cause of honor is to honor the lives of those who have died in service to the nation .
 Some of these men had already been in the House for years before I arrived as a freshman from Whittier . Some of them had arrived with me in 1947, full of hope and dreams and plans for America, he says .
 Democrats and Republicans beat back the Goliath of liberal Democrats and liberal Republicans in the Senate and the House . Together over the past five and a half years, they had worked together time and again to form the slim but sturdy coalitions that beat back liberal Democrats .
 Without the initiatives, I said, it would have been impossible for me to take the initiatives that led to the new relationships with China and Russia, to progress toward peace in the Middle East .
 "I said that I wanted to stay and fight, but that a six-month trial in the Senate was too long for the country," he said . "I wanted to remain and fight," he added. "But that a . six months trial in a Senate was . too long
 I said that a full-time President would be needed now for the tough calls that would be coming up. President Obama said a full time President was needed now . President Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 The presidency is bigger than any man, I said, than any individual President, and even bigger than their great loyalty . The president's loyalty is even more important than his own, he said, as well as his personal popularity .
 Now it was Jerry Ford they must support with their votes, their affection, and their prayers . Now it is Jerry Ford . Ford is a candidate for the Democratic Party .
 When I heard Les Arends, one of my closest and dearest friends, sobbing with grief, I could no longer control my own emotions, and I broke into tears . I could not control the own emotions and I was in tears .
 Everyone was jammed together so tightly that my chair would not move, and Bill Timmons had to pull it back for me . Everyone was jamming together so closely that the chair wouldn't move . Bill Timmon: "Bill Timmons pulled the chair back for us. Everyone's chair
 "Haig came into the small office next to the Oval Office where I was looking over my speech," Haig says . Haig: "A few minutes later Haig came in to look at my speech. He came into a small office where he was looking at his speech"
 He had witnessed the scene in the Cabinet Room, and was concerned that he might not be able to get through the broadcast . He had been concerned that I might not have been able to hear the broadcast, he said .
 "Al, I’m sorry I cracked up a bit in there, but when I see other people cry, particularly when they are crying for someone else rather than themselves, it just gets to me," he said .
 I sat in my chair behind the desk while the technicians adjusted the lighting and made their voice check . I sat behind a chair behind a desk while they adjusted the lights and checked their voice checks .
 At forty-five seconds after nine, the red light on the camera facing my desk went on—it was time to speak to America and the world . The red light went on at 40 seconds after 9:00:00 GMT .
 I began by saying how difficult it was for me to leave the battle unfinished, but my lack of congressional support would paralyze the nation’s business if I decided to fight on, he said . "I began by . saying that it was difficult to . say how difficult to
 "It's become evident to me that I no longer have a strong enough political base in the Congress to justify continuing that effort," he says .
 I shall resign the presidency effective at noon tomorrow. Looking directly into the camera, I said, "I shall resign from the presidency"
 I would say only that if some of my judgments were wrong, they were made in what I believed at the time to be in the best interest of the nation, he said . He said if some were wrong—and some of them were wrong -- they were in what he believed at
 I talked about my own attempts in twenty-five years of public life to fight for what I believed in . "I talked about myself trying to fight against what I believe in," she said . She also talked about her own attempts to change the law .
 I recalled that in my first inaugural address I had pledged to consecrate myself and my energies to the cause of peace among nations . President Obama said in his inaugural address he had pledged "concentrate himself and his energies" to peace . Obama: "I am committed to peace among
 "Throughout the speech I looked down at the pages of the text, but I did not really read it," says Obama . "I did not read it. throughout the speech," he says .
 "I looked up and saw the technicians respectfully standing along the wall, pretending that they were not waiting for me to leave so that they could dismantle their equipment," she says . "I was not waiting to leave," she said. "I'm not going to leave. I'm not
 He said, “Mr President, after most of your major speeches in this office we have walked together back to your house. Mr President,” he said. “After most of his major speeches, we have . walked together again, Mr Obama said .
 Kissinger’s voice was low and sad as Kissinger walked past the dark Rose Garden . Kissinger's voice was sad as he walked through the Rose Garden, Kissinger said . Kissinger: "As we walked past, Kissinger”
 He said he thought that historically this would rank as one of the great speeches . He said that history would judge him one of America's greatest Presidents .
 I quickly headed for the elevator that would take me to the Family Quarters . "I don't want to go back to the family quarters," she said .
 The long hall was dark and the police and Secret Service had mercifully been removed or were keeping out of sight . The Secret Service and police were mercifully removed or kept away from sight .
 "When the doors opened on the second floor, the family was all waiting there to meet me," she says . "I was able to meet my family. When I got to meet them, they were waiting for me"
 "Slowly, instinctively, we embraced in a tender huddle, drawn together by love, faith" "We embraced in the tender huddles," says the author . "We were drawn together in love by love and faith," she says .
 Suddenly I began to shake violently, and Tricia reached over to hold me . Tricia held on to her as she tried to hold her daughter's mother .
 I had perspired heavily during the speech, and I must have caught a chill walking over from the office, I said . I had a chill when I walked over to the office. I had to perspire heavily .
 Most of the initial reactions to the speech were positive, most of which were favorable .
 Many of the television commentators and newspaper columnists spoke of it as a speech that was aimed at bringing the country together . Many of them said it was a speech aimed at uniting the country .
 "This turned out to be the briefest honeymoon of my entire political life," says Hillary Clinton . "Within a few hours came the second thoughts, negative and critical" Clinton .
 Finally I said that we should try to get some sleep because we had a long day ahead of us tomorrow . We should also try to sleep because of the long day of tomorrow .
 As we walked out into the hall, we could hear the sound of a crowd chanting outside . We could hear a crowd chant outside of the hall as we left the room .
 Mama misinterpreted and thought the group was one of supporters when actually it consisted of the same people who throughout Daddy’s presidency had hounded his every effort . Mama thought it was a group of supporters but it was actually the same group of people who hounded him every effort.
 Mama tried to propel Daddy towards the window so that he could see the crowd . Mama also tried to get Daddy to the window to see a crowd of people .
 In fact, I had been able to hear the crowds earlier, before the speech, before I got to hear them .
 "I assumed they were against me, but I did not really care about the shouters, and they did not bother me," he says . "I did not care about them, and I did really care," he adds .
 "I asked Manolo to bring some bacon and eggs to me in the Lincoln Sitting Room," he says . "I placed phone calls to friends and supporters and staff members until around 1:30. I placed phone call to friends, supporters, staff members," he adds .
 "To each I expressed my appreciation for his support, I told each that I hoped I had not let him down," she said .
 There was a knock at the door and Manolo came in to see if there was anything I wanted before he went to bed . Manolo said he wanted to ask if he had anything he wanted before going to bed.
 Just as last night had been a time for light, tonight was tonight's time for darkness, says President Obama . The White House was at the centre of the world's most recent crisis .
 This house had been my home for almost six years, and I knew every inch of it . This house was my home when I lived in it, and it had been for six years .
 Johnny Johnson, one of the White House waiters, is a former White House chef .
 I told him that instead of having my usual orange juice, wheat germ, and glass of milk, this morning I would like something more substantial . This morning he said he would like a little more substantial.
 I ordered my favorite breakfast of corned beef hash and poached eggs . I asked him to bring it down to the Lincoln Sitting Room . I ordered his favorite breakfast . He brought it down .
 White House staff members, Cabinet members and Cabinet members will be coming to the East Room at 9:30 to say goodbye . After finishing breakfast I took a yellow pad from my briefcase and began to think of something to say .
 After what I had been through during the last twenty-four hours, it was difficult to think of anything new to tell them . "I'm not sure what I would say to them," she said .
 It would be delivered in a few hours, at 11:35 A.M. on the 2,027th day of my presidency . President Obama would be delivering the gift to the nation .
 After Haig left, I remembered something I had read in a biography of Theodore Roosevelt . I asked one of the Residence staff to go over to the EOB office and bring the books from the edge of my desk .
 Herman Wouk’s The Winds of War, Allen Drury's The Throne of Saturn, and TR by Noel Busch. He came back with The Winds Of War, The Throne Of Saturn .
 When I called Haig to say a final goodbye, he was in the middle of a staff meeting dealing with the problem of making a smooth transition between administrations . Haig: "When I called him to say goodbye, there was no time to talk to him about the transition."
 Five minutes later, however, he was standing at the door of the Lincoln Sitting Room . He was standing there at the end of the day .
 I said that words could not express my gratitude for everything he had done for me over the years . I wished him the very best. I said he had been very good to me and wished him best .
 They were not coming with us but would stay to supervise the shipping of our things to San Clemente . They would stay with us and would stay for the next few days .
 Tricia and Ed came out of their room and stood together, waiting for Pat . Tricia, Ed and Tricia stood together as Pat waited for Pat to arrive .
 She was wearing a pale pink and white dress, and she tried to smile when she saw us waiting . She was in the middle of a long line of people waiting for her .
 Julie was wearing dark glasses to hide the signs of two sleepless nights of preparations and the tears that had finally come that morning . Julie said she had been preparing for her daughter's first birthday .
 "I knew how much courage she had needed to carry her through the days and night of preparations for this abrupt departure," she said . "She had been very brave and very brave," she added .
 There would be no round of farewell parties by congressional wives, no testimonials, no tributes . Instead, there would be a farewell party by Congress wives .
 Manolo came over and said that the residence staff had lined up to say goodbye to him . Manolo said that Manolo's staff were lined up for him to leave .
 I gave a little talk to them, saying that I had been in the great palaces of Europe and Asia and had visited with hundreds of princes and prime ministers in houses of great antiquity and splendor .
 I said that we had not failed to notice the countless ways and times they had made every guest, whether a king or a retarded child, feel welcome in the President’s house .
 I had decided to read the passage directly from it, and since there was no time to have it copied on the speech typewriter, for the first time I would have to wear my glasses in public . I decided to wear glasses for first time in public, so I could read the
 As we rode down, Steve Bull described the arrangement of the East Room and told each member of the family where they were supposed to stand behind me on the platform .
 It was too much, they said, that after all the agony television had caused us, its prying eye should be allowed to intrude on this last and most intimate moment of all . They said: 'It's too much'
 We stood for a moment steeling ourselves for the ordeal beyond the doors . We stood in front of the doors for the first time since the doors were closed .
 Pat decided not to wear her dark glasses, and Eddie said it was proper because this was not a moment to be ashamed of tears . Pat decided to wear dark glasses instead of dark glasses .
 I took three consciously deep breaths to clear the light-headedness that had struck me . I took a few deep breaths before taking a series of deep breaths .
 As the doors of the hall swung open to the Grand Hall, its beauty was flooded with the startling intensity of the television lights . The Grand Hall was filled with television lights.
 The warmth they generated surrounded us like a cocoon both pleasant and unpleasant, both comforting and stifling . The warmth was both pleasant, unpleasant, and comforting, but oppressive .
 There seemed to be an electricity in the air produced by the surrounding humanity . The electricity was powerful enough to propel our little band forward .
 I was almost immune from her deep sorrow as I was beyond mere grief itself . I was also immune to the pain of her deep grief . She died in hospital after her husband died of a heart attack .
 Then I extricated myself, conscious of wanting to catch up to the rest of the family who were several steps ahead of me now . Then I took a few steps to the other side of the road, but it was a long way to go .
 There was a resonance of applause resounding through the House through all who really cared . There was applause resoundingly resounding, resounding .
 "The words themselves were unique for Daddy because they were from the heart," he said . "Daddy's words were unique because of the heart. The words themselves themselves, he said, are unique."
 I was glad that at the end people at last had a glimpse of the fine person he had always been . I'm glad that people had a chance to see him as a fine person, he was always been.
 At last the “real” Nixon was being revealed as only he could reveal himself . At last, the ‘real’ Nixon was revealed as he revealed himself .
 Herb Stein was respected for his cool and analytical intellectual ability and his dry sense of humor . To this day I can remember seeing Herb Stein, a man I had always respected, with tears streaming down his face .
 "I knew that if I continued to look around this way, it would be difficult for me to contain my own emotions," she says . "It would be hard to contain your own emotions. I knew I was going to have to contain myself," she adds .
 "I turned away from the red eyes of the crowd and looked only at the red eye of the camera, talking to all the nation," he says .
 Last night had been the formal speech for history, but now I had a chance to talk personally and intimately to these people who had worked so hard for me and whom I had let down so badly . Last night's speech was the formal .
 "I had come so far from the little house in Yorba Linda to this great house in Washington," she says . "It was a great house," she said of her new home in Washington .
 "I thought about my parents, and I tried to tell these people about them," she says . "I tried to talk about them. I thought about myself," she said .
 "I think that they would have called him sort of a little man, common man," she says . "They would have been called sort of the little man"
 He was a streetcar motorman first, and then a farmer, before he had a lemon ranch . "He was a farmer first, then he was a ... farmer, then a lemon rancor," he says .
 "He was a great man because he did his job, and every job counts up to the hilt, regardless of what happens," he says . "Every job counts in the heart of every job," he adds .
 "I think of her, two boys dying of tuberculosis, nursing four others in order that she could take care of my older brother for three years in Arizona, and seeing each of them die, and when they died, it was like one of her own"
 I had wanted to find a new way of saying something to the White House staff that would inspire them. "I had to find something to say to them," she said .
 "I had tried to find a way of urging them, without any platitudes, to look beyond this painful moment," she said . "I was trying to ... look beyond the painful moment. I had tried . I had been trying to find . a . way of encouraging them,
 When she had just become a mother, when her life seemed to be just begun and when her years seemed so bright before her, then by a strange and terrible fate death came to her .
 I said that TR had written these words when he was in his twenties . Putting down the book, I said he had written the words in his 20s .
 "Always in the arena, always vital. But he went on, and after that he served his country for many years," he said . "He not only became President, but after that, he served many years"
 I said that his experience should be an example for everyone to remember . "I said that he should be a model for everyone, remember his experience," she said .
 We think when someone dear to us dies, we think that when we lose an election, that all is ended . We think that we think when we suffer a defeat, that we can't live with that loss, we have to accept it .
 Always give your best, never get discouraged, never be petty; always remember, others may hate you, but those who hate you don’t win unless you hate them, and then you destroy yourself .
 Jerry and Betty Ford were in the Diplomatic Reception Room on the ground floor . Jerry Ford was in the room at the time of the assassination .
 President Barack Obama visited the U.S. on a visit to the White House in Washington, D.C. on Wednesday . The trip was the first time the president has visited the nation since 2001 . The president is expected to make the trip to Washington in 2015 .
 "Pat embraced Betty, Betty and Julie" as they left the stage . "We were there, quickly shaking hands with Jerry," she says . "Pat embracing Betty, kissing Julie— saying goodbye to David," she adds .
 Pat, Ed, and Tricia already inside, standing at the top of the steps in the doorway, turning, looking back one last time . Then I was there alone, Pat, Tricia and Ed, standing outside the door .
 The crowd, covering the lawn, spills out onto the balconies, leaning out of the windows . The crowd covered the lawn and spilled onto the balcony of the building .
 Someone waving a white handkerchief from the window of the Lincoln Bedroom . The Lincoln Bedrooms are a favorite of the late President Richard Nixon .
 The flag hangs limp in the windless, cheerless morning . The flag on top of the House hangs limp .
 "I turned into the helicopter, the door was closed, the red carpet was rolled up. I turned into a helicopter," she says . "The red carpet is rolled up," she adds .
 The Tidal Basin was beneath the Jefferson Memorial and the Jefferson memorial . Another swing and another swing and the Tidal .
 Azr Force One was waiting for the flight home to California . Another swing, and we were on course for Andrews, where Azr .
 The Nixon brothers were in Yorba Linda, California, in 1922 .
 Donald, seven, in the tire; Richard, nine, Richard, 9; Harold, 13, already sick with tuberculosis, wearing a bathrobe; and Arthur, four, in a tire . Harold, thirteen, already . Already sick with TB, Harold, was wearing bathrobe .
 1950s campaign for the United States Senate in California’s San Joaquin Valley .
 E. E. received the nomination for Vice President at the 1952 Republican National Convention in Chicago . E. was nominated for vice president at the convention in 1952 .
 Eisenhower | Says of His Explanation Tevts of EBisenhowrr and Nizon Text of the Stevenson specch im Bultimore. Eisenhower . Eisenhower says of his Explanation . Eisenhower: "Imites' Explanation for the Stevenson Speculation: 'I Eisenhower'
 Richard M Nixon of California has been vindicated of charges jin connection with a privately . raised expense fund . Dwight D Eisenhower said jtonight that his Vice Presidential jrunning mate had been . vindicated .
 Dwight D Eisenhower |Voted for retaining Mr Nixon on lhe would make public a list of the . and his running mate, Senator Richard M Nixon, left, respond . Eisenhower would make the list public .
 General Eisenhower declared he believed Senator Nixon “had been lying’s secret” Stevenson refused to disclose his involvement . Eisenhower declared that he believed Nixon had been lying .
 Vioe-Pres dent turned away from the pomp and ceremony of an official reception at Kallang Airport to shake hands with 20 or more of the hundreds f ordinary Singapore working men and boys .
 To the chagrin of hund:eds of security men and high police officers who ‘guarded the disembarkation apron, Mr Nixon leaned over a wire fence and shook hands with a tiny Malay boy .
 President Eisenhower stands with two grandchildren, Anne and David Eisenhower; RN with Tricia and Julie .
 The RN’s first and only White House news conference as Vice President was held in November 1957 . David and Julie were to be married twelve years later .
 Sir Winston Churchill pushed aside his aide to stand alone before the cameras at his door in Hyde Park Gate, London, November 1958 . Winston Churchill stood alone with his aide at the end of the day .
 Khrushchev made a point in the 'kitchen debate' at the American Exhibition in Moscow in 1959 .
 With Fidel Castro in RN’s office at the U.S. Capitol, April 19, 1959 . Pm if ae .
 Eisenhower at Griffith Stadium for the first baseball game of the season on April 18, 1960 . Eisenhower attended the game with President Eisenhower at the stadium .
 Henry Cabot Lodge was the Republican vice presidential running mate in 1960s . Lodge was a member of the 1960s Republican National Convention . Lodge and Lodge attended the convention together .
 Democratic vice presidential candidate Lyndon Johnson and Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen visited RN when an infected knee forced him into the hospital during the 1960 campaign .
 The “last press conference’s” following the 1962 election for governor of California was held in 1962 . The last press conference was held following the election of California's governor .
 RN RN holds Julie’s victory gift— the Great Seal of the United States in crewelwork . John Mitchell looks on as RN holds the seal of the U.S. Navy .
 Meeting with Vice President Hubert Humphrey two days after the 1968 election, at the airport at OpaLocka, Florida, Florida .
 Julie Eisenhower was married to David Eisenhower in December 1968 . She was escorted by the President of the U.S. on December 22, 1968 .
 Behind RN are National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger and Secretary of State William Rogers . Behind RN is Henry Kissinger, President Richard Nixon .
 The operation took place in the White House's Roosevelt room at the Roosevelt room after the Cambodian operation in May 1970 .
 One of the Nixon family’s favorite photographs of the White House years, taken in the Blue Room during the Christmas holidays in 1971 . The Nixon family's favorite photo of the Christmas holiday in 1971 was taken by President Richard Nixon .
 Tricia Cox was married to Edward Cox in 1971 . She was escorted by police in the Rose Garden on the day of her wedding .
 The historic handshake with Premier Chou En-lai in Peking on February 21, 1972 . The handshake was a handshake between the two leaders of China .
 RN's most vivid memories of the 1972 China trip were this audience at the gymnastic exhibition they visited in Peking . RN: "The audience was made up of both men and women"
 At the Great Wall of China in 1972, the Soviet Union signed the SALT agreement with China . The agreement was signed in Moscow in May 1972 .
 Campaigning for re-election in October 1972, in Atlanta, Georgia . With Prime Minister Golda Meir of Israel following a White House dinner on March 1, 1973 .
 The tense press conference took place October 26, 1973, following the controversial firing of Archibald Cox as Watergate Special Prosecutor and after the military alert during the Yom Kippur War .
 RN RN with Julie after informing the family of his decision to N August 7, 1974 . RN Julie with Julie . RN after informing family of decision to move to N. August 7th 1974 .
 See Cambodia; Laos; Vietnam Friendly Persuasion, The , 13 Friends Church . The church is based in Cambodia and Laos .
 Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event . Simon and Schuster will bring authors from all over the world to speak at a live event.