 American F-8s swooped so low over Carlos Gonzalez's camp in western Cuba that the camouflage that covered his weapons would rattle and he could see the pilots saucily waving goodbye . Carlos Gonzalez was killed in the Cuban Revolution .
 Even now, four decades later, the thought brings Gonzalez, 71, to the edge of his seat . Gonzalez: "I'm not sure what I really want to do with my life," he says .
 The former artilleryman shakes his fist in the air as he did to the low-flying jets that snapped photos of the nearby Soviet missiles his platoon guarded . With blustery bravado, he shook his fist and shook his fists in defiance of his platoon .
 The world teetered on the brink of nuclear holocaust in October 1962, with 40,000 Soviet troops assembled in Cuba - four times the number that the U.S. knew about at the time - and nuclear warheads 50 times more powerful than those dropped on Hiroshima .
 Gonzalez remembers most, what still brings a smile to his line-creased face, is his willingness to die rather than allow another ""imperialist"" invasion like the one at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . Gonzalez: "I'm not afraid to die"
 President John F Kennedy's top advisers, former Soviet generals and Cuban officials exchanged declassified documents . Documents reveal they came even closer to an apocalypse than historians had thought .
 Documents released include account by former Soviet intelligence officer aboard one of the submarines stationed at naval quarantine imposed by Kennedy to stop additional weapons from reaching Cuba .
 Vadim Orlov's B-59 submarine and three others patrolling the waters around the island carried nuclear weapons . Unknown to U.S. intelligence, the submarine and four others were armed with nuclear arms .
 The Soviets shot down a U-2 spy plane over eastern Cuba in Oct. 1962 . Kennedy indicated time was running out on Cuba .
 In Orlov's sub, with communication to superiors impossible and U.S. destroyers persistently dropping explosives, one of the submarine's officers ordered a nuclear torpedo assembled . One of the officers ordered the torpedo assembled.
 He insisted conditions for firing the torpedo, including damage to the submarine's hull, had not been reached . But he insisted conditions including damage from the torpedo's hull were not reached .
 Richard Heyser, a U-2 pilot, snapped the first photos confirming Soviet missiles outside Havana . The crisis was set in motion on Oct. 31, 1962 . The first photos of Soviet missiles were taken by a U.2 pilot .
 Kennedy announced to the country what the photos had found eight days earlier and ordered the naval quarantine . On Oct. 11, Kennedy announced the photos and ordered a naval quarantine.
 About 180,000 troops were mobilized along the United States Southeast, ready to invade Cuba if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev did not meet demands to withdraw the missiles . About 18,000 U.S. troops mobilized in the Southeast .
 Castro convinced a U.S. attack was imminent and Cuba's sovereignty was at stake . Castro was convinced a United States attack would be imminent in 1961 . Castro: Cuba's very sovereignty is at stake.
 Anti-aircraft weapons positioned along Havana's seaside Malecon avenue . Cuban forces were on high alert with the outlines of U.S. destroyers visible on the horizon .
 A labyrinth of tunnels and trenches was built at Havana's fabled Nacional Hotel . A few feet under the grassy bluff where tourists now sip mojitos . The tunnels were built at the hotel a few feet below the bluff .
 Workers and students in green and blue militia uniforms marched the streets with rifles slung over their shoulders . Workers, students and students were in militia uniforms with rifles in the streets .
 Finally, they thought, they had an ally to help ward off Yankee aggressors and weapons powerful enough to protect their new social experiment . They thought, finally, they'd have a weapon to help .
 "People were ready to fight and die for the revolution,"" said Elio Pena, 61, a guide at Havana's Museum of the Revolution . Operation Mongoose was Cuba's first major anti-government operation .
 Women substituted for their husbands at work and some took cradles so they could care for their babies . Women substitute for husbands while they are at work . Women were often left alone to care for the babies .
 McNamara insisted Kennedy did not intend to invade Cuba before discovering the missiles . Kennedy did authorize Operation Mongoose, a covert plan to overthrow the communist regime, McNamara said .
 Some made comparisons to the current situation with Iraq . Some have compared the situation to that of 40-year-old .
 Most Kennedy advisers recommended an attack on Cuba, but Kennedy opted for a naval quarantine . Most of his advisers recommended attacking Cuba but he opted for the middle road, a military quarantine .
 Former Soviet commander Dmitry Timofeevich Yazov was stationed in Cuba at the time of the crisis . Yazov said Bush's position on Iraq shows American arrogance .
 Cuban officials this weekend insisted Khrushchev put them at an almost insurmountable disadvantage by denying the installation of missiles, thereby giving Kennedy the moral high ground . Cuban officials say Khruschev's actions gave them the moral advantage .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy came to an agreement behind Castro's back . On Oct. 13, 13 days after Kennedy was alerted to the spy plane photographs, war was averted .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's guarantee he would not invade Cuba . Kennedy's deal was made in return for a guarantee that he wouldn't invade Cuba in Cuba .
 The promise did not convince many Cubans that they were safe from their powerful northern neighbor . But the promise did little to convince them that they would be safe .
 One man remembers a co-worker's astonishment at reading in the newspaper that the missiles were being repatriated . The missiles were repatriated from the U.S. State Department .
 Gonzalez now thinks Khrushchev acted intelligently in removing the missiles . Gonzalez: Khruschev acted wisely in removing missiles from the Soviet Union .
 40 years ago he felt his heart drop as he watched them carted away on huge trucks . But 40 years later he felt the heart drop when they were taken away from him .
 Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union was marked by its need for Soviet support and distrust of its leaders . The relationship would be marked for years by both Cuba's need for support and its distrust of the Soviets .
 A transcript of a November 1962 conversation between Che Guevara and First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan reveals the complex relationship . The conversation was recorded in November 1962 .
 Guevara tells Mikoyan the Soviets ""offended our feelings by not consulting us"" about the missile withdrawal . Guegara tells Moyoyan that the Soviets did not consult him about the withdrawal .
 Putin made the comparison in a speech in Portugal, but warned that Cold War tensions should not be repeated . Putin said the Cold War should not have been repeated .
 The discovery in October 1962 that Moscow was secretly building nuclear missile launchpads in Cuba pushed the world close to nuclear war in a terrifying 13-day brinkmanship between Russia and the United States .
 The United States has outlined plans to locate interceptor missiles in Poland and a radar in the Czech Republic in order to guard against possible missile attacks from Iran . The U.S. has also outlined plans for a radar system in Czech Republic to protect Iran .
 Moscow has reacted angrily to the plans, saying the missile defense system is actually aimed at Russia . Moscow says the plans are aimed at attacking Russia .
 Perino says she is convinced Putin is willing to cooperate to resolve the dispute . Perino added she was convinced Putin was willing to work with her .
 The two countries are also at odds over how to deal with Iran's suspect nuclear program . The U.S. and Iran are at odds in the past over Iran's suspected nuclear ambitions .
 Bush believes that ""Russia agrees that Iran should not be allowed to have a nuclear weapon"" after talking with Putin earlier this week, Perino said .
 Half a century ago, the Cuban missile crisis dominated global news as Washington and Moscow sparred right on edge of thermonuclear war . The Cuban crisis was the height of the Cold War and the threat of nuclear weapons .
 This distinctively terrifying crisis holds important lessons for current foreign policy . Despite the passage of time, this terrifying crisis still has important lessons .
 They include the exceptional difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the uncertainty of events in a crisis and the vital importance of prudence at the top .
 Intense debate over nuclear plans and capabilities of Iran, plus other security concerns, give these insights considerable continuing importance . Intense current debate over Iran's nuclear plans, capabilities, gives these insights much more importance .
 U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed that the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances . President John F Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options after the photos were revealed .
 On Oct. 1962, Kennedy addressed the nation and the world over television, declaring unequivocally that the U.S. would not permit such missiles in Cuba . Kennedy: The United States would not allow missiles to be built in Cuba.
 Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles, Armageddon was only a misstep away . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1962 .
 Kennedy administration officials assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles in Cuba . CIA Director John McCone had assumed Moscow never would put missiles in the country .
 Khrushchev and associates felt the move would be too risky, they erroneously thought Khrushchevitch and associates thought it would be a risky move . The move was a mistake, and the Soviets thought it was too risky .
 Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba had been severely curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow . They were resumed only because McCone aggressively, adamantly pressed the matter .
 Hard photographic evidence of the Soviet deception was received just before the missiles were to be activated . Images of the deception were obtained just before they were activated .
 There is already substantial circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable agents in Cuba, that something of this nature was under way . However, there was already substantial . evidence of this was already .
 At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment among advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for military destruction of the strategic missiles and launchers .
 JFK decided instead on a naval blockade as the U.S. first step in response to the Soviet move . JFK decided to use naval blockade instead of a military response .
 Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba . They had authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of Cuba .
 A recent book documents at least one occasion in which a Soviet sub commander nearly launched one of these against a U.S. Navy surface warship . The book, "One Minute to Midnight," was published by Michael Dobbs .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy’s history of the nuclear age, “Danger and Survival,” published a quarter century after the crisis, reveals JFK accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . Bundy's history of nuclear age reveals JFK
 He assembled an ad hoc group, the Executive Committee or ExComm, which freely debated a wide range of options . He assembled a group of ad hoc groups, the ExComm . ExComm was a free-ranging debate group .
 In this atmosphere, the initial strong support for a military strike faded . The initial support for the military strike has also faded .
 The previous year, a very inexperienced JFK had too casually signed off on a Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military — the experts — . The next year, the previous year . JFK had signed off .
 Scripps Howard News Service Co. Co. pyrig ht 20 12 Chicag o Sun-Time s , Inc. has been at the center of the world's most famous stories .
 A furious Soviet submarine commander ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo armed for action but then controlled his anger and brought the sub to the surface . The sub was hunted down by the U.S. Navy off Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis .
 The previously unreported incident might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book released this week . The incident was disclosed in the book released in a new book .
 The four diesel submarines, armed with conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes, sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula . The four submarines were armed with . conventional and . nuclear-armed torpedoes .
 A spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry refused to comment Friday on the incident . The book was written by a Russian journalist and published in Russia .
 The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw missiles in exchange for President John Kennedy's no-invasion pledge .
 St. Lo uis P o s t-Dispatch Cit Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'Book TELLS OF ENCOUNTER WITH SOVIET SUB IN 1962'
 For 13 days in October 1962, America and the Soviet Union stood on the brink of nuclear war . American spy plane took aerial photographs showing Soviet missile sites on Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States .
 Under the compromise that ended the missile crisis, President John F Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove nuclear weapons from Turkey if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev would remove the Soviet’s nuclear arms from Cuba . President Kennedy agreed to remove Turkey's nuclear weapons if Khrush
 Some scholars consider Iran’s nuclear development “a Cuban missile crisis in slow motion” because it is taking years to build . U.S. or Israel must decide whether or not to attack Iran, they say .
 Obama administration has pushed hard so far on Israel to continue diplomatic route, sanctions route, Kornbluh says . That can be seen in the way the Obama administration “has pushed hard’s pushed hard on Israel,” he says .
 21st-century crisis is waged on multiple fronts with more information coming at decision makers faster and with more pressure from the media, Williams said . In contrast, the 21st century crisis is being waged on several fronts, he said .
 Unlike past conflicts, nations are not the only players, he says . Terrorists are participants, too, he said . The U.S. has been involved in some of the world's most recent conflicts .
 After decades of dissection and analysis, reams of analysis, conferences, and confessions, one could dismiss the Cuban missile crisis as irrelevant today -and be dead wrong .
 The confrontation aggravated a hostility between Cuba and the U.S. that continues to this day . For one, the confrontation aggravated the hostility between the two countries .
 The events of October 1962 still have the power to horrify and astonish . More broadly, seen in post-Cold War light, the events of that day still have power to astonish and astonishment .
 Horrify, because the world came far closer to nuclear devastation than most people realized at the time . Horrifying, because of the threat of nuclear devastation, is the story .
 The world's nuclear arsenal still could destroy mankind many times over . Astonish, because knowing what we know now, the world's nukes could still destroy mankind . Astonishing, because of what we now know now .
 U.S. U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba photographed Soviet-missile installations 35 years ago . New book brings to life tense White House discussions that took place after the incident .
 President Kennedy and his advisers were keenly aware that any move -a surprise attack on Cuba, threatening Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, a blockade - could set off nuclear war .
 At the time of the crisis, the Soviets already had 45 nuclear warheads in Cuba, 90 miles away from Key West . The Soviets had nine short-range rockets that possibly could have been set off by battlefield commanders . U.S. leaders didn't know it then, at the time
 Today we can be thankful that neither nation pushed the ultimate button . Neither country pushed the button .
 Former enemies still maintain about 7,500 long-range, more-sophisticated nuclear weapons each - many times the destructive power of 1962 . Yet the former enemies still have 7,000 long range weapons each .
 START II treaty calls for both Russia and the U.S. to cut back to 3,500 warheads . Russia's Duma, or parliament, remains reluctant to provide the needed final blessing . The treaty would require both countries to reduce their number of warheads .
 Terrorist groups, rogue nations, and trigger-happy megalomaniacs could be crazy enough to obtain and set off a nuclear device . Then there are the terrorists, rogue groups, and rogue nations who could set off nuclear devices .
 35 years after the world avoided nuclear war, we can't stop remembering how close we came . That's why, even 35 years later, we still remember how close it came .
 For 13 days in October 1962, the U.S. and the Soviet Union faced each other in a standoff over the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The standoff lasted for 13 days .
 Through several galleries, visitors follow the crisis while looking at such artifacts as a 35-foot Soviet SA2 missile . Visitors also look at film canisters from U2 spy planes that took photos of missile sites under construction in Cuba .
 Also on view are props from the movie Thirteen Days, based on Robert F Kennedy's book of the same name . The film is based on the Kennedy assassination .
 There's even a classroom bulletin board re-created by Joan Hammill, who was a third-grade teacher at St. Mary's .
 The display features a silvery aluminum-foil rocket and other Space Age designs made by her students .
 It starts with the first reports of missile sites being prepared in Cuba and follows with President Kennedy's announcement of the situation to the nation . It follows with the shooting down of an American plane over Cuba .
 Museum personnel went to Havana to obtain materials from the Cuban Museum of the Revolution, the National Library and other sources . Museum personnel traveled to Cuba to obtain material .
 One dossier on Khrushchev is on Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB chief in Washington . Another dossier is on Fomin who was a go-between in the negotiations . The dossier also includes a dossier on the KGB boss in Washington who was involved in the talks .
 Admission to crisis exhibit only is $5.95 for adults, $4.95 . Admission to the crisis exhibit is $3.95 to students and $5 .
 A Greenville man was the only U.S. serviceman killed by hostile fire during the 13-day crisis in 1962 . Greenville, South Carolina, man was killed during the crisis .
 Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was 35 when the U2 spy plane he was piloting over Cuba was shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air missile . Anderson was 35 at the time of the attack .
 Anderson died when his plane crashed in the island's eastern jungle . U.S. officials first interpreted the action as a planned escalation of the conflict directed from the Kremlin . Anderson died in the crash .
 It was later discovered that the order to shoot down Anderson's plane actually came from a Soviet commander on the ground in Cuba . Anderson was shot down by Soviet commander in Cuba, who ordered the shoot down .
 Many high-ranking officials in the United States military believed that the Anderson incident called for Americans to retaliate by bombing the offending missile site . President John F Kennedy refused to retaliate .
 Anderson was stationed with his family wife, Jane, and two sons, Rudolph III and James at Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas . He was stationed in Texas at the time of the crisis .
 He was a 1944 graduate of Greenville High School and a 1948 graduate of Clemson College . He majored in textile engineering at Clemson .
 A memorial plaque dedicated to Anderson can be found in a display at Greenville High School . A replica of Anderson's airplane is on display in Cleveland Park, in downtown Greenville .
 CNN.com's John Sutter reports that a lieutenant was crying in the wake of the attack . The lieutenant was killed in the attack on the USS USS Littlejohn .
 When called to the orderly room in the middle of the night, where I typed up serial numbers of the equipment to be loaded on the flat cars, I couldn't help but notice one of our lieutenants was weeping . One of us was weeping when we were called to write serial
 Throughout the night, under flood lights and to the sounds of hammers striking wood blocks, the loading proceeded . The loading proceeded tanks, trucks, artillery, tanks, artillery. The loading continued throughout the night .
 Troops train from central Texas to near the Georgia coast, not far from Hinesville . Then the long haul by troop train from Texas to Georgia coast .
 "They told us to remove our uniform patches cherrons, unit designations, everything," says D.C. officer . They told them to remove their uniform patches, cherrones and chevrons .
 We'd already begun to wonder about the miles of flatbed cars on railroad sidings loaded down with the olive-drab machines of war . We'd been wondering about the millions of miles of flattbed cars loaded down .
 President John F Kennedy revealed that the Soviets did have ballistic missiles in Cuba aimed at U.S. cities . President Kennedy revealed on Oct. 31, 1962 that the Soviet Union had missiles aimed at the United States .
 Kennedy ordered an air and naval blockade to keep the cargo from reaching Cuba . Cuba was shipping in more when the alert was sounded and the blockade was sounded .
 The United States had 2,000 nuclear warheads that it could have launched at the Soviets . The U.S. could have used the warheads to launch a nuclear strike at the Soviet Union .
 So we were on our way to Cuba but, fortunately, made it no farther than the Savannah harbor . So, unfortunately, we were going to Cuba, but made it to Savannah harbor instead .
 Some field-grade officers at Fort Stewart, Ga., seemed irritated after the Russian ships turned back in the face the blockade .
 Fort Stewart was to be the assault assembly point for the 1st Marine Division, airborne divisions and our outfit, the 1th Armored Division . The 1st Armored Division was also to be an assault base for the Marine Division .
 The armored division, which played a role in North Africa in World War II, had been reactivated a year earlier . Thousands of draftees were dragged into the Army kicking and screaming .
 With Kennedy and Khrushchev reaching agreement on dismantling the missiles in Cuba, our exercise ended with the burning of acetate invasion overlays . Red, yellow and blue arrows pointing at the elongated island 90 miles from Florida .
 The burning was done in perforforated steel drums with rocks inside to break up the ashes, lest unclassified eyes should see them . The burning of the ashes is done in steel drums .
 The content of the tapes today confirmed our worst fears back then that these guys in the seats of power were serious . We were told they were serious, and the tapes confirmed that they were of serious .
 Sen. Richard Russell of Georgia is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee . Russell is a Republican senator from Georgia . Russell says he's a "very conservative" Republican senator .
 The tone of some of these conversations sounds like dialogue from Stanley Kubrick's 1963 movie, "Dr. Dr. Kubrick" Some of the conversations are reminiscent of the dialogue from Kubrick's film, which starred in 1963 .
 "We've got to take a chance somewhere, sometime, if we're going to retain our position as a great world power," says President Obama . Obama: "We're not going to be able to live up to our standards in the world"
 A blockade, and political talk, would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this . A blockade would be seen as a weak response by many of us as a result of this .
 Craig Eisendraft was a U.S. foreign service officer during the crisis . He was a member of the United States foreign service during the war . Craig Eesendraft served as a foreign service official during the Korean War .
 In a Baltimore Sun review of the tape book, he said throughout the White House debate "Kennedy seems considerably less in charge than the editors of this volume claim"
 Kennedy who'd been much in the news these days with accounts of his extramarital affairs came to visit us in Georgia . Nevertheless, when it was over, Kennedy came to Georgia. Nevertheless, he was there .
 A little more than a year later, he would be dead from an assassin's bullet . A little over a year after his death, he was shot by an assassin from behind bars .
 The day the Cold War almost ended was the day the U.S. and the Soviet Union fought back .
 Revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a conference during the weekend at a trade union center in southwest Moscow .
 Pierre Salinger, former President John F Kennedy's press secretary, a conference participant and now an ABC correspondent, said Castro urged Khrushchev to fire missiles at the U.S. to head off an invasion . Salinger said in a private conversation that on Oct. 1962, Castro
 Cuban participants in the conference refused to confirm or deny the report, Salinger said . Cuban participants refused to comment on the report .
 This was the first joint meeting with Cuban officials who guided their country through the crisis .
 Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba . Kennedy's deal was made in return for a promise not to attack Cuba . The missiles were withdrawn in exchange with Kennedy's promise to not invade Cuba.
 McNamara says the figures were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo . McNamara: The figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate are provided by a Cuban official .
 American officials have said they were never sure whether any Soviet nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba . They assumed they had reached Cuba but that they assumed they did not .
 At the time of the crisis, 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were in Cuba . Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said that at the time .
 State Department official made the remarks in a closed session of the conference Saturday . They were reported to The Associated Press on Sunday by Raymond Garthoff, an official at the time of the crisis .
 The total stockpile of Soviet nuclear warheads designed to fire on the U.S. at that time was 60, Volkogonov said . The total Soviet stockpile of nuclear warheads was 60 .
 Soviet officials had previously been evasive about whether nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba, Garthoff says . Soviet officials were previously evasive on whether the warheads actually had reached Cuba .
 In his memoirs, Khrushchev implied that at the time of the crisis, the Soviets were ready to deliver a nuclear strike from Cuba . In the memoirs he said the Soviet Union was ready to strike Cuba from Cuba, but not Cuba .
 Dobrynin, said he didn't know at the time that Soviet warheads were already in Cuba . Dobrynkinin said he was unaware of the presence of Soviet warheads in Cuba in the 1970s .
 A deputy Soviet foreign minister said the warheads were not ready for firing . The warheads would not be put on launchers in preparation for a nuclear strike, he said .
 He said not one of the missiles was ready and targeted at the U.S. He said ""not one"" of the missile missiles were ready to target the United States .
 The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the U.S. learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba an island just 90 miles from the United States . The conference is scheduled to take place in Havana, Cuba .
 Khruschev withdrew weapons without consulting with Havana a move that enraged Fidel Castro's government . Following several tense days of negotiations with Washington, Nikita Khrusche withdrew the weapons .
 Also taking part in the Oct.-13 event will be a number of Soviet military officials, Fernandez said .
 During a similar conference on the Bay of Pigs last year, Cuban organizers worked with National Security Archive directors to release a wealth of documents on the failed invasion attempt .
 Fernandez is a retired military officer who helped lead Cuban troops during the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion . Fernandez was also a key organizer in last year's conference . He is a former Cuban military officer .
 Carter's assignment meant he could have faced the responsibility of deploying interceptor missiles to derail a Soviet Union attack at any moment . Despite his young age, Carter faced the grave responsibility for deploying interceptors to derail an attack .
 12th-graders at Nike Missile Base were given a trip through the doors of a barn at the base . Carter visited the base to give the 12th graders an experience they'll never forget .
 Nike Missile Base was named after the Nike Hercules missiles contained there . The Nike missile base is located near the Nike Nike Hercules missile base .
 The visit was organized by the students' history teacher, Charles Mahoney, to enhance their studies of the Cold War . The visit is organized by a history teacher .
 A park employee said the tour was a unique opportunity daily visitors are not allowed in the missile base area . The area is fenced off from public access .
 Carter helped get the site included in the National Register of Historic Places . Carter hopes the tour and his experiences as a soldier have a lasting effect on the youths .
 Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President Kennedy came on the television to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles would be capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere .
 Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President Kennedy came on the television to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles would be capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere .
 Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President Kennedy came on the television to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles could reach almost every city in the Western Hemisphere .
 Later that day, Ecker continued on in the same plane to Washington . After the film was developed, later that day of Oct., 1962, Eck continued on the same flight to Washington.
 Had he been, he might have had second thoughts about propping up the dying Cuban Communist dictatorship of Fidel and Raul Castro . He might have been more cautious in the future .
 If Obama really wants change in Cuba, all he has to do is wait a while . Obama has a long way to go to Cuba, he has time to wait for change .
 The two hard-core communist revolutionaries wanted to attack the United States, and for a while, they were in possession of enough nuclear-tipped missiles supplied by the Soviet Union to do it . Back then, in 1961 and 1962, the U.S. had enough nukes to
 Obama seems hell-bent on appeasing, befriending and rewarding the architects of 50 years of brutal repression of the Cuban people in order to pad his thin legacy as president . Instead of reflecting on that historic event, however, Obama seems to be hell-battling to appease,
 The Bay of Pigs was the U.S.-backed, aborted, aborted invasion of Cuba by dissidents seeking to overthrow Fidel Castro . But he did bring up the Bay of Pics, which was an aborted invasion by dissidents in Cuba .
 The mission ended in failure when the conflicted United States failed to provide air support . The U.S. failed to support the mission in the mission .
 The discovery led to a dangerous crisis between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, which was then the only other superpower in the world . The discovery of the missiles led to the collapse of the USSR .
 Kennedy's heroic action in halting all Soviet shipping to Cuba with a naval blockade . The crisis almost started a nuclear World War III, which was resolved by Kennedy .
 Kennedy promised serious military action against the Soviet Union if the U.S. were attacked by the Cuban missiles . Kennedy then promised serious action if the United States were attacked .
 Khrushchev removed the missiles from Cuba and in return the United States gave up a face-saving missile base in Turkey . The U.S. gave up the base in Cuba in return for a face saving missile base .
 Kennedy's action garnered him a lot of respect and cast him and the U.S. in a favorable light throughout the world . Kennedy's actions in the Vietnam War earned him a great deal of respect .
 It was a seminal moment in American history, and it more than made up for the negative reaction to the earlier failed invasion of the Bay of Pigs . The invasion of Cuba in 1961 was a major success for the U.S.
 Khrushchev, who earlier had belittled Kennedy as young and inexperienced, was taught a lesson . The U.S. emerged from the crisis as a stronger nation, Kennedy said .
 Obama, as is his habit, brought himself into the picture as well . To make matters worse, Obama brought himself in .
 President Obama implied that nothing much mattered in U.S. history before he arrived on the scene . What that has to do with anything is anyone's guess, except for his strong implication that .
 President Obama should look into it, if only to learn how a real president acts, he should look at it .