 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 is generally regarded as the most serious military confrontation of the Cold War . Richard Ned Lebow prepared for CIAO .
 American destroyers deployed along a picket line to intercept Soviet ships transporting missiles and nuclear warheads to Cuba . U.S. air, ground and naval forces prepared for air strikes against Soviet missile sites under construction .
 On Saturday morning, October 27, President Kennedy and his advisors were pessimistic about their ability to preserve the peace . President Kennedy was pessimistic about his ability to keep the peace in the U.S.
 Khrushchev and his advisors worried “that Kennedy intended to declare war, to launch an attack” against the Soviet Union . On Sunday morning, General Secretary Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchevich and his . advisors worried that Kennedy . intended to “launch an attack
 That same day, the two leaders reached an accommodation that, in retrospect, turned out to be one of the key turning points of the Cold War . The two leaders' accommodation was a key turning point in the 1950s .
 The administration organized an ill-fated invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro refugees in April 1961 . Unalterably opposed to Fidel Castro, the administration organized the invasion .
 After the “Bay of Pigs’ fiasco, the CIA tried to assassinate Castro and sponsored covert operations against Cuba . The Department of State organized an economic and political boycott of the country, and the Pentagon prepared and rehearsed a full-scale invasion of Cuba .
 The Soviet Union had become deeply involved with the Castro regime, and was especially pleased by its turn toward socialism . Castro was the prime minister of Cuba's first government .
 By helping Castro, Khrushchev thought he was doing something of historical importance . By helping him, he viewed Castro as “a modern-day Lenin,” Khrrushchev said . Castro was ‘a modern day Lenin”
 The Cubans were even more worried, and kept Moscow fully informed of U.S. covert operations and military preparations . The Cuban government kept Moscow informed of American covert operations .
 Khrushchev decided that as the Soviet Union was too far away to save Cuba by conventional means, a second invasion could only be deterred by deploying nuclear weapons capable of reaching the U.S. on the island .
 The American President was a reasonable man, 2 he would choose the former . And, as the American President, he would have chosen the latter .
 Khrushchev’s decision also seems to have been influenced by his desire to establish the psychological basis for political equality with the United States . The decision was made to establish psychological equality with U.S.
 Eisenhower Administration sought to reassure its allies by deploying intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Europe . After the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, the Eisenhower Administration deployed the missiles to Europe .
 Khrushchev appears to have decided to send missiles to Cuba in May 1961 after a trip to Bulgaria . The decision was made after a visit to Bulgaria in 1961 .
 Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Deputy Prime Minister Anastas I Mikoyan warned that their discovery might provoke a crisis with the U.S. Both doubted that missiles could be deployed secretly .
 Khrushchev compelled a reluctant Presidium to vote its support for the missile deployment after he had gained the acquiescence of Fidel Castro . The decision was made after he gained the support of the Presidium .
 Malinovsky, who also had doubts about the wisdom of the deployment, was put in charge of 3 operational planning . Malinovski was put into charge of planning for the deployment .
 Marshal Sergei S Biryuzov, recently appointed commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, said the rockets “would look like palm trees” to U.S. reconnaissance aircraft .
 A Soviet delegation, led by Marshal Biryuzov, was sent to Havana in late May to consult with the Cuban government . The Soviet delegation has been sent to Cuba since May .
 They felt they had no choice but to accept the missiles because of the material assistance they were receiving from the Soviet Union . They nevertheless felt they were given no choice .
 On July 2, Raúl Castro arrived in Moscow for talks and to negotiate a draft treaty . Castro has been in Moscow since July 2 for talks with Russia .
 Fidel Castro sent Che Guevara and Emilio Aragonés back to Moscow to plead with Khrushchev to deploy the missiles openly . Che Che sent the two men to Moscow in August to plead for the deployment of missiles .
 The Cubans feared that Kennedy would react violently to a secret fait accompli . The Cuban president was assassinated in June 1963 .
 Khrushchev made light of the concerns of Mikoyan, Gromyko and Polish leader Wladyslaw Gomulka .
 Khrushchev initially intended to send only a small number of missiles . Ministry of Defense plan called for 24 R-12 launchers with 36 SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles and 6 training missiles .
 Four motorized rifle regiments, two air-defense missile divisions and two air defense missile divisions to be sent . Two regiments of tactical cruise missiles, a regiment of 40 MiG-21 aircraft, and 33 IL-28 light bombers . A coastal defense force consisting of land-
 By mid-October, the total deployment would reach forty-two thousand of the planned forty-five thousand men . The total deployment is expected to reach 42,000 by mid-November .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the result of the Soviet Union’s nearly successful attempt to deploy nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba that were capable of reaching targets in the U.S. from Cuba .
 Kennedy and McNamara were less worried by the strategic than by the political implications of the deployment . President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara .
 They reasoned that the Soviet Union would sooner or later deploy intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of hitting targets anywhere in North America . The U.S. believed that the Soviets would soon deploy such missiles, they said .
 Kennedy had been under great public pressure to take a firm stand against Castro . Senators from his own party had joined Republicans in calling for an invasion of Cuba . Kennedy was forced to take the stand .
 He sought to avoid a crisis with the Soviet Union by walking a fine line on the Cuban question . He had sought to deflect these pressures by avoiding a crisis .
 In September 1962, he publicly committed his administration to oppose the introduction into Cuba of “offensive weapons” The move was meant to deflect Republican charges that he was “soft” on Cuba .
 By drawing the line here, he in effect told Khrushchev that he would not oppose the continuing buildup of Soviet conventional forces in Cuba . It was a major concession given the state of American public opinion .
 Presidential counsel and advisor Theodore Sorensen later admitted that this strategy was based on the assumption that the Soviet Union did not intend to send missiles to Cuba .
 Kennedy convened an informal group of cabinet officials and top civilian and military advisors to consider and plan an appropriate response . Kennedy convened a group of officials to consider the response to the crisis .
 The “naval quarantine” signaled resolve to Khrushchev while avoiding the kind of military action that might compel Soviet retaliation and escalate to a conventional or nuclear war . After several days of deliberation, his preferences changed, and he opted for a “quarantine”
 The President of Cuba announced the discovery of the missiles and the imposition of a blockade of Cuba to the nation and the world . On the evening of Monday, October 22, the President secured the support of key allies, 6 .
 By then, American destroyers and submarines were strung out on a picket line five hundred miles from Cuba . They were waiting to interdict any ships carrying weapons and military supplies .
 The Strategic Air Command sent a maximum number of bombers aloft and brought as many ICBM silos as possible to full alert status 22 . The blockade put Khrushchev in a thoroughly unenviable position .
 The Soviet missiles in Cuba were vulnerable to American attack, as was the Castro regime . The Cuban missile system was vulnerable to U.S. attack, and was also vulnerable .
 Prudence dictated accommodation, but withdrawal of the missiles under American pressure would involve serious domestic and foreign policy costs, and would require Castro's acquiescence .
 Khrushchev had Soviet work crews in Cuba step up the pace of construction at the missile sites . The missile sites are still under construction .
 He instructed one ship, not carrying any proscribed cargo, to challenge the U.S. blockade . The ship was not carrying anything that was banned from entering the sea . The Americans were expected to fire on the ship .
 He did not want to run the blockade, but felt he had to make a symbolic challenge to preserve national honor and political standing, he says .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba to stop, and the sixteen ships carrying arms to return to the Soviet Union . To minimize the risks of confrontation, he ordered Soviet ships to stop and return home .
 As much by default as design, Khrushchev pursued a twopronged strategy . The Soviet Union had a two-pronged approach .
 By appearing tough and uncompromising, he tried to extract concessions from Kennedy in return for withdrawing missiles . He tried to appear uncompromising in exchange for withdrawing the missiles .
 At home, he sought to convince his Presidium colleagues that failure to remove the missiles would provoke an American invasion of Cuba . At home he tried to convince him that failure would provoke a U.S. invasion .
 Soviet ships carrying 7 weapons to Cuba halted before the blockade line . Kennedy and his advisors breathed a sigh of relief when the ships were stopped .
 The blockade did nothing to prevent construction of missile sites in Syria . More and more missiles reached a state of readiness as the week wore on . But the blockade did not prevent construction .
 The hawks pressed for an air strike, convinced the Soviets would not dare to retaliate . The U.S. possessed overwhelming strategic nuclear superiority and conventional military advantages in the Caribbean .
 President Kennedy and Secretary of State McNamara resisted these pressures . They were convinced that even a limited strike against the Soviet missiles bases in Cuba would provoke a counter-strike against the American missile bases in Turkey . Kennedy and McNamara were convinced even a strike would provoke counter-attacks .
 The first real break in the crisis came on Friday evening, when the State Department received a letter from Khrushchev addressed to the President . The letter said the U.S. would cease military shipments to Cuba and withdraw the forces already there if the United States committed itself not to invade
 The latest CIA and military intelligence indicated that a Soviet ship was approaching the blockade line . Soviet construction crews were still working round-the-clock at the missile sites .
 Khrushchev demanded withdrawal of U.S. missiles in Turkey as a precondition for removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . At 10:17 that morning, the news ticker began to print out a message from the Soviet leader .
 The Soviet air-defense network in Cuba was apparently operational . Moscow seemed to have no compunction about shooting down unarmed U.S. aircraft .
 To the annoyance of the hawks, the President refused to authorize a retaliatory air strike . President Obama has been criticized for not authorizing a strike on Syria .
 He decided to respond positively to Khrushchev’s letter of the night before, ignoring the message of that morning that had insisted on the additional condition of the missile swap . Instead, he decided to return to the letter of that night .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk remained behind for a private talk with the President . Rusk and the President worked out a fall-back position if the offer to Dobrynin did not resolve the crisis .
 Rusk suggested that a request from the United Nations’ Secretary General U. Thant to both superpowers to withdraw their respective missiles from Cuba and Turkey would provide a face-saving way for the United States to accept a public missile trade .
 Rusk was authorized to prepare the initiative in case it became necessary . Rusk has been tasked with preparing the initiative for the first time .
 Khrushchev’s overriding concern was to prevent an invasion of Cuba and a possible attack on the Soviet Union, he says .
 Saturday cable was intended to facilitate a settlement by stipulating, which the Friday cable had not, that the Soviet Union would remove its missiles from 9 Cuba . The cable stipulates that the Soviets would remove their missiles .
 Khrushchev added the new demand about the Jupiters because he had been advised by the Washington embassy that the administration was prepared to remove them from the Soviet Union .
 He had no inkling of the consternation that his Saturday cable would cause in Washington and Havana . The cable was broadcast from Havana to Washington .
 He was not aware of most of the incidents raised concerns in the Ex Comm that had raised concerns that the two countries were close to war . Nor was aware of many of those incidents that raised concerns .
 Castro claimed credit for having shot down the U-2, which he said was shot down . Soviet military did nothing to discredit because they had shot down plane in violation of standing orders from defense minister Malinovsky .
 Khrushchev summoned key officials to his dacha for a meeting Sunday morning . The meeting later moved to a government mansion on the outskirts of Moscow . It was held at the dacha in the early hours of Sunday morning local time .
 Soviet and Cuban intelligence had reported that U.S. armed forces were ready to invade Cuba . Some officials worried that they would attack the Soviet Union as well with nuclear weapons .
 Ambassador's Dobrynin’s report stressed the urgency of a settlement in order to forestall an invasion . They were in receipt of Ambassador’‘Dobrynin's report,’ said .
 Robert Kennedy had told him that “hot heads” in the government were clamoring for an immediate assault . The destruction of the U-2 had made it more difficult to resist their demands, Kennedy said .
 Khrushchev had also received a disturbing cable from Ambassador Alekseev in Havana reporting that Fidel Castro had panicked and sought refuge in the underground bomb shelter of the Soviet Embassy .
 Castro urged Khrushchev to launch a preemptive nuclear strike against the U.S. Castro also called for a pre-emptive strike on the United States . Castro was president of the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 At 10:00 a.m. he created 10 two working groups to prepare a positive response to Kennedy’s Saturday cable . He created 10 working groups of 10 people .
 Kennedy was scheduled to address the American people on television that evening . He took the extraordinary step of having one of these groups prepare a message to be broadcast that afternoon over Radio Moscow to ensure it would reach the White House .
 President Kennedy was informed of Khrushchev’s message at 10:00m. in Washington, just before leaving for church . President Kennedy informed of the message just before going to church .
 The following day, Ambassador Dobrynin presented Robert Kennedy with a letter from Khrushchev spelling out the missile swap . The next day, Robert Kennedy was presented with the letter . Robert Kennedy received the letter from the ambassador .
 On instructions from his brother, Robert Kennedy returned the letter to Dobrynin . He explained that the administration was committed to the arrangement but did not want any document acknowledging it .
 The immediate crisis was over, but negotiations continued for some months between representatives of the superpowers over the implementation of their understanding . Talks continued for months to implement the agreement .
 Vice Premier Mikoyan had to travel to Havana to convince Fidel Castro to permit withdrawal of the Soviet missiles . Vice Premier had to convince Castro to allow withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 Early Western literature could only speculate about Khrushchev’s motives for deploying missiles in Cuba . The early Western literature on the crisis was unable to speculate about the motives .
 Ex Comm officials and scholars proposed a series of motives (e.g., to force concessions in Berlin, spread revolution in Latin America, offset American strategic superiority, build support against China in the socialist camp), most of them offensive .
 Khrushchev was intent on defending Cuba, offsetting American strategic superiority . He was trying to reduce the vulnerability created by the deployment of American strategic weapons on the 11 Soviet periphery .
 Khrushchev may also have been influenced by domestic considerations, writes John Avlon .
 He was extremely frustrated by the apparent failure of many of his key domestic programs . He was frustrated by many of those programs' failures .
 To sweep away the obstacles he believed stood in the way of their success, he took dramatic and risky actions . He took dramatic steps to sweep away obstacles he thought were the obstacles .
 The missile deployment fits this pattern; its most important purpose may have been to compel the U.S. toward a political accommodation . The missile launch may have forced the United States to accept a political compromise .
 This would strengthen Khrushchev’s hand at home and free scarce economic resources for agricultural and industrial development . This would be a boost to the Soviet Union's economic fortunes .
 Khrushchev told the officials around him what he thought was likely to win their support . Determining the motives and their priority is difficult, but it's still difficult .
 Kennedy and the Ex Comm, and many of the Cold War studies of the missile crisis, attributed the missile deployment to Khrushchev’s belief that Kennedy lacked the resolve to oppose it . Kennedy and Ex Comm. and many Cold War Studies of the . missile crisis attributed the deployment
 Proponents of this explanation maintained that Kennedy’s youth and personality conveyed the impression of inexperience and indecision . His refusal to commit American troops to the faltering Bay of Pigs invasion, his poor performance at the Vienna Summit, and his failure to prevent construction of the Berlin Wall
 Khrushchev’s comments indicate that he thought Kennedy was tough and resolute . There is little evidence in support of this interpretation, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Kennedy rejected Castro’s appeal for a publicly-announced missile deployment on the grounds that Kennedy would send out the American navy and stop or sink the ships en route to Cuba with the missiles . In this connection it is revealing that he categorically rejected Castro's appeal .
 Khrushchev insisted on a secret deployment because he had no doubt about Kennedy’s resolve, but had considerable respect, after the Berlin crisis, for his good sense . Kennedy insisted on the secret deployment .
 He regarded secrecy as essential, but never seriously investigated its feasibility, he said . He brushed aside the complaints of Mikoyan and others who said the operation could never be kept secret .
 He consulted few officials before committing himself to the deployment, and compelled a reluctant Presidium to sign off on the operation . The deployment is the first of its kind in the Middle East .
 It was illusory to think that a missile deployment could serve as a catalyst for accommodation, and that Soviet-American relations would improve after Kennedy was informed of the missiles .
 Kennedy had publicly committed himself to opposing the introduction of missiles into Cuba . He had received private assurances from Khrushchev that there would be no such deployment . This expectation entirely ignored the domestic and foreign policy costs .
 Khrushchev withdraws missiles after U.S. military superiority, nuclear and conventional, compelled him to do so . American military superiority compelled Khrushchchev to withdraw missiles from the Soviet Union .
 Recent evidence indicates that the crisis was resolved because both leaders rejected any course of action they thought might lead to an unstoppable spiral of military escalation .
 Their mutual commitment to settle the crisis peacefully grew in intensity as the crisis deepened . They devised a public-private deal to protect them both from reprisals from allies and domestic adversaries .
 Leaders had time to learn, to overcome their anger, and formulate policy in terms of broader conceptions of their national interest . Leaders should be able to learn and overcome anger, he says . Leaders must also overcome anger and formulate policies, he adds .
 Learning was facilitated by information each leader received during the crisis . Learning was facilitated by information learned from each leader during crisis .
 Kennedy’s correspondence with Khrushchev prompted him to revise his conception of the Soviet leader and his objectives . Kennedy: “I’m not sure if I’ve ever been able to find out what I really wanted to do with my life,” he
 He came to believe that Khrushchev had most likely stumbled into the crisis, and was desperately searching for a face-saving way out of the crisis .
 This realization made it easier for Kennedy to make the concessions necessary to end the crisis . Kennedy's decision to end crisis was made easier for him to do so .
 He no longer thought that Khrushchev would interpret concessions as a sign of weakness and respond by becoming more aggressive toward Berlin . He thought concessions would be seen as a signal of weakness .
 He expected Khrushchev to see his concessions as proof of his commitment to avoid war, and reciprocate with concessions . Instead, he expected his concessions to be reciprocated with concessions of his own .
 He was impressed by Kennedy’s caution and ability to restrain the U.S. military . Kennedy was impressed with his caution and restraint, he said .
 By Saturday night and Sunday morning, both leaders and many of their advisors thought that war might be imminent . Many of the leaders of the U.S. and Russia's leaders were worried that war was imminent .
 There is an old saying that nothing so concentrates the mind as the thought of one’s impending execution .
 Would-be victims sought desperately to cheat the hangman . In this instance, it inspired a creative search for accommodation, as well .
 The Ex Comm hawks, then and now, insist that the risk of war was remote . Ex-Commons hawks now say the risk was remote. The risk of a war is remote.
 The ‘doves’ felt the threat of war to be very real, although some of these former officials, and some scholars, now regard their fears as exaggerated . Some scholars now regard the fears as 14 exaggerated .
 Some scholars think the risk of war was greater than any officials supposed . Other doves –– Robert McNamara is the most prominent example –– and some doves .
 In 1962, hawks and doves speculated that Khrushchev could be pressured into making a deliberate decision to go to war . Their Soviet counterparts had the same fear about Kennedy being pushed into war by right wing political forces and the military .
 McNamara and Kennedy worried about runaway escalation once either side engaged in violence . McNamara, Kennedy also worried that escalation would lead to more violence .
 War could have been triggered by a cycle of titfor-tat reprisals, some of them unauthorized . New evidence suggests that their concern was realistic and realistic .
 The crisis was plagued by a series of incidents that indicated how difficult alerted military forces were to control . The crisis is plagued by several incidents that indicate how difficult it was to control.
 The Grozny, a Kazbeck-class oil tanker, attempted to challenge the blockade, but was recalled by Moscow at the last minute . Moscow successfully recalled the tanker at the end of the day .
 To this day, nobody in the West knows why the captain disobeyed his orders to hold his position . Nobody knows why he disobeyed the captain's orders .
 Later that morning, Soviet air defense forces shot down an American U-2 and killed its pilot . The pilot was killed in the incident .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba gave the order to fire in violation of a standing order from Moscow not to use any force unless fired on by the Americans . The order was a violation of Moscow's standing order not to fire on by Americans .
 A more serious American mishap occurred on Sunday morning, when a U-2 operated by SAC strayed into Soviet air space over the Chukotski Peninsula in eastern Siberia . Moscow in turn was troubled by the broadcast of the DEFCON II alert en clair .
 Khrushchev and his advisors worried that it was on a last-minute intelligence-gathering mission before a nuclear attack . The Soviets worried that the mission was an intelligence gathering mission before an attack .
 It is conceivable that American retaliation for the destruction of the U-2 would have led to the loss of further American aircraft and intensified pressure for additional air attacks, followed by an invasion of Cuba . President Kennedy feared — as he feared — for more air attacks .
 If a substantial portion of that invasion force had been destroyed by nuclear weapons, the next step is anybody’s guess . The next step in the battle is to find out what happened to the invasion force .
 The Cuban missile crisis has been intensively mined as a case study of deterrence . The missile crisis was a major focus of the U.S. strategy .
 For many years, the conventional wisdom was that it was a deterrence failure and a compellence success . But the U.S. government says it is now a deterrent failure . The U.N. has been accused of being a failure in the past .
 Kennedy was unable to prevent the Soviet Union from trying to deploy missiles in Cuba . Deterrence failed because Kennedy was not able to prevent Soviet Union deploying missiles there .
 General deterrence attempts to discourage a challenge through military build-ups, force deployments, alliances, and threatening rhetoric . The U.S. has not responded to any of these threats .
 Soviet officials testified that the American strategic buildup, the missile deployment in Turkey, and assertions of U.S. strategic superiority exacerbated their insecurity .
 President Kennedy had considered all of these actions as prudent, 16 defensive measures against Soviet threats, especially in Berlin . President Kennedy considered all these measures as prudent .
 Instead of restraining Khrushchev, they convinced him to do more to protect the Soviet Union and Cuba . They convinced him more than he did to protect his country, Cuba .
 Through their avowedly defensive actions, the leaders of both superpowers made their fears of an acute confrontation self-fulfilling . The leaders of each country's superpowers are making their fears self-fulling .
 Immediate deterrence attempts to forestall a specific challenge, in this case the deployment of offensive weapons in Cuba by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union deployed offensive weapons against Cuba in Cuba .
 Khrushchev made only cursory examination of the feasibility of secretly deploying missiles in Cuba . He committed himself to the operation before consulting with intelligence experts and foreign policy advisors .
 He sought out confirming opinions and discounted information that indicated that the deployment would be discovered and would provoke a serious crisis . He then sought to find out that he had been briefed on the deployment .
 Khrushchev’s behavior bore little relationship to the expectation of rational behavior that lies at the core of deterrence theory and strategy . “The behavior of the Soviet Union in the 1960s bore little relation to rational behavior,” writes Peter Bergen .
 Compellence was part of the reason why Khrushchev decided to withdraw the missiles, says historian . Compellency was part the reason for the withdrawal, he says .
 The single-minded focus in theoretical literature on deterrence and compellence tends to obscure the more complex, political reasons why Khrushchev decided to take out the missiles .
 Lack of evidence did not prevent historians and political scientists from interpreting the case in terms of their Cold War 17 conceptions . They used those interpretations to tautologically confirm their starting assumptions .
 Most of these books and articles need to be read with great caution . They are infected by Cold War attributions, a bias facilitated by the absence of any good evidence on the Soviet side . Most of them need to read with caution .
 The memoirs of American officials, and interviews with them, share the same bias . Memoirs of U.S. officials are the primary sources of most empirical studies .
 Some of the most important memoir-cum-historical accounts — those of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr, Theodore Sorenson and Robert F Kennedy — contained misinformation to preserve and enhance the President’s reputation and facilitate the American cover-up .
 Khrushchev’s memoirs, published in two volumes, were also heavily edited . His memoirs were published in a two volumes .
 New evidence emerged as a result of Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of glasnost . New evidence on the Soviet side emerged in the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Former Soviet officials were permitted to participate in a series of conferences on the missile crisis organized by the John F Kennedy Center .
 Their oral recollections triggered matching revelations by American officials . Memoirs, documents from Soviet and American archives, and secondary works based on these sources .
 Soviet documents are not yet available on line, but many can be obtained through the National Security Archive . Many memoirs of participants have been published in English .
 There are a number of good secondary sources on the crisis . The best of which base their interpretations on the new material .
 Choice About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years is the best and most honest inside account of the crisis by an American official . It appeared before many of these documents were classified .
 The KGB provided a select set of documents for the authors to use, and their interpretative claims often go beyond any documentary base . Author: KGB provided documents to the authors for use .
 Anatoliy A Gromyko, interview by the author, Moscow, 18 May 1989; Mikoyan. Author: "Gromyko is a Russian diplomat. He is one of the world's most powerful statesmen. He was assassinated in 1989 .
 Anatoliy Gribkov, “An der Schwelle zum Atomkrieg,” [On the Threshold of Nuclear War] Der Spiegel, 1982, no. 147, no., 147. Anatolievski . Anatomism is a form of nuclear warfare
 See Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Ch., for the influence of domestic politics on the framing of missile deployment .
 The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F Kennedy, Garden City: Doubleday, 1967, 220; Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Chs. We lost the cold war, says Stein .
 See Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Ch. Ch. 1, for a discussion of these motives . Stein: The Cold War may have been motivated by politics .
 See Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Ch. Ch., for an analysis of Khrushchev’s decision and the role that wishful thinking may have played in it .
 Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Ch. Ch., addresses the controversy surrounding the resolution of the crisis . Stein and Lebow's book, "We All Lost The Cold War," is published by Stein and Stein .
 Dean Acheson, Paul Nitze, John McCone, Douglas Dillon and Maxwell Taylor were the chief “hawks” on the Ex Commitees . The chief ‘hawks’ on the ex-Commiteeson were Achesons, Nitze .
 See Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Ch 12, for a discussion of risk assessment .
 See Lebow and Stein, We All Lost the Cold War, Chs. and 12 for a review of expectations and an assessment .
 May and Zelikow, eds., The Kennedy Tapes, is reported to contain serious errors of transcription . The Kennedy tapes are reported to have been taken from the Kennedy tapes .