 As Soviet ships challenged the US-imposed blockade in October 1962, Thant made several important proposals directly to the protagonists, United States President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 The first requested a moratorium on the U.S. quarantine and the movement of Soviet ships towards Cuba . The first request a moratorium was granted .
 Many of Kennedy's advisers looked upon Thant's initiative with derision . Kennedy asked Thant to send another message requesting again a cessation of Soviet shipping .
 The United States side even suggested the contents of this message, which was sent almost word for word as the United States requested . The U.S. requested the message, and it was almost exactly the same .
 Khrushchev gave Thant a way to stop his ships while saving face . Thant's messages were a way of stopping his ships and saving face. Thant: "It's a good thing to stop your ships and save face"
 This ended the threat of a sea confrontation and enabled the superpowers to focus on the main issues of the conflict . This ended a threat of sea confrontation, allowing the conflict to be resolved .
 Thant pushed the United States to realize that the Soviets would trade missiles for guarantees of Cuban security . The eventual solution was first proposed publicly and given salience by Thant .
 Thant travelled to Cuba to mollify Castro and confirm that missile deconstruction had begun . Thant also travelled to Havana to confirm that missiles were being deconstructed .
 He aided in post-agreement negotiations to resolve verification issues . Furthermore, he aided in the post-advisation negotiations .
 This unheralded role in one of the most dangerous conflicts of the twentieth-century is described in detail in this article .
 President Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile installations in Cuba . U Thant has put the world deeply in his debt .
 The U.N. was to play a signiﬁcant role in de-escalating and then resolving the nuclear standoff between the superpowers . In the deepening crisis, the United Nations, and . speciﬃcally Secretary General Thant, was
 Thant sent appeals and messages, relayed proposals, offered reassurances . Thant advanced the ‘non invasion for missiles” formula that formed the basis of the agreement .
 Both traditionalists and revisionists pay minimal attention to Thant’s mediatory role, as the historiography indicates . Thant was a mediator in the history of the French Revolution .
 Dag Hammarskjöld pioneered the UN’s third-party role in securing the release of 11 American ﬂiers held captive in China in 1954–55, and again during the Suez Crisis of 1956 . Thant had expanded the prestige of the United Nations and