 Using primary material it describes the initial decision of the U.S. and the Soviet Union to establish a hot line . The British attempts to become a third partner to the deal were rejected .
 A number of subsequent examples of the hot line in use are also discussed, most notably the superpower hot line dialogue during the Arab-Israeli war of June 1967 .
 The various rationales and purposes of hot lines are analysed and it is argued that since 1962 they have increasingly been valued for the prestige they bring to diplomatic actors rather than for their utility in crisis situations . Hot lines have been valued more for prestige than their utility for crisis situations since 1962 .
 Haraldur Þór Egilsson is a student of International Politics from Reykjavik . He is the author of a book on International Politics .
 The need for reliable and swift communications between governments has always been essential . Haraldur Þór Egilsson explains the origin of hot line diplomacy .
 This need intensified during the nuclear age and was dangerously apparent during the Cuban missiles crisis . The need to be prepared to deal with the threat of nuclear weapons increased during the Cold War .
 By misunderstanding or miscalculation the superpowers created a hot line to lessen the risk of war breaking out accidentally . To improve emergency communication with the intention to lessen . the . intention to . lessen the . risk of a war break-out accidentally, by misunderstanding or . misunderstanding the super
 A hot line is a direct communication link between heads of governments . It is used to prevent a crisis from escalating into armed conflict . Hot lines are used by heads of countries to prevent armed conflict escalating .
 Direct communication is not confined to acute situations and therefore does not confer the same sense of urgency as the hot line . A direct communication link on the other hand does not confrange the same urgency as a hot line. Direct communication links do not confound the urgency of acute situations .
 Some of the generally accepted knowledge about the hot line is erroneously based on its popular image . The hot line has been a hot line for over a decade .
 The aim of this paper is to outline the technical, diplomatic and political aspects of the hotline . It will examine whether the importance of hot lines has shifted from being a purely practical means of emergency communication to being used to symbolise the state of bilateral relations .
 The idea of establishing a direct communication link between Moscow and Washington can be traced to the late 1950s . The Cold War Hot Line was established in the 1950s in Moscow .
 Professor Thomas Schelling proposed the idea in his writings as early as 1958 . A group of American scientists suggested it to Nikita Khrushchev when he visited the U.S. in 1959 .
 In 1960 Gerard C Smith, a member of the Policy Planning Council of the State Department proposed that a hot line should be established .
 The idea was not pursued for the time being . The Council continued to ‘persistently advance on appropriate 1 occasions’ such a communication link .
 This was also discussed at a similar 1 time in the media, for example in Parade magazine . This is also discussed in a similar way with the media .
 Before the 1961 Vienna summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev the State Department suggested that the President should pursue the interest the Chairman had shown in a 2 ‘“white telephone” between the United States President and himself . The superpowers continued exploring the mutual interest in establishing a direct
 Khrushchev’s interest was confirmed early in 1962 in meetings between Pierre Salinger and Mikhail Khalarmov, Chief of the Press Division of the Soviet Foreign Ministry . President Kennedy's Press Secretary was President .
 The United States proposed improving communications by establishing reliable links between heads of government . At the Geneva Disarmament Conference on April 18 1962, the U.S. proposed improved communications by setting up reliable links .
 In discussions with the Japanese Fisheries Minister in May 1962, Khrushchev openly stated his opinion that a direct line should be established between him and President Kennedy in case 5 things went wrong . In discussions in May .
 At critical moments during those fateful days, the time to exchange messages through diplomatic channels, which included coding, decoding, translation, transmission, transmission and delivery, took not minutes but hours . At critical times during those crucial days, exchange messages took hours .
 Usually it was the same young black man, who came to the embassy on a bicycle . The embassy was attacked by a group of young men in the 1980s .
 This led both sides to use public broadcasts to convey messages to each other . This led to both sides using public broadcasts .
 At great speed, with sirens shrieking, a motorcade headed by Khrushchev’s assistant raced off from the dacha to the radio station . President Kennedy was broadcast at once .
 It was from this broadcast that I myself heard Khrushchev’s full reply, not by the cable with the text that arrived at the embassy via Western 7 Union two hours later . The cable was sent to the embassy by Western Union .
 The public knowledge of how things stood and each adversary’s conditions made it more difficult to resolve . Not only was this time consuming but the public knowledge made it harder to resolve, the time consuming process was more difficult .
 This method of communications clearly was not ideal and improvements were necessary . This method was clearly not ideal, and improvements are needed .
 The origin of the crisis was Khrushchev’s miscalculation of American reactions, says historian . ‘Krushchev miscalculated of American reaction,’ he says .
 The crisis made it evident that secure, reliable and swift communications were vital . The crisis has made it clear that secure and reliable communications are vital .
 The Americans wanted to take steps to prevent 8 war by accident, miscalculation or failure of communication . The U.S. wanted to prevent war by by accident or miscalculated or failure to communicate .
 The technology and techniques of modern warfare are such that much reliance is inevitable placed on the ability to respond rapidly and effectively to hostile military action .
 Events which may occur in connexion with the efforts of one state to maintain its readiness to respond to such action may, in varying degrees and with varying consequences, be misconstrued by another . Events may occur when one state is prepared to respond, such as in response to such
 The initiating state may have underestimated the ambiguity of such events, and may have miscalculated the response they would call forth . The initiator may have overestimated the complexity of the situation .
 The American proposal questioned the effectiveness of communication 10 available in times of serious military crisis and called for new measures .
 Agreeing the need for a direct communication link was only part of the task . It was agreed that a direct link would be needed between the two countries .
 What kind of a hot line, who and when to use it were important questions which had to be resolved . The hot line is important questions that must be resolved, including when and when it comes to hot lines .
 One of the lasting myths surrounding the hot line is that it consists of a telephone link . Technical and Practical Aspects of the Hot Line are discussed .
 There were 15 strong arguments against using a telephone connection . This was considered by both superpowers but there were 15 arguments against it .
 Americans asked the British General Post Office for quotations for both speech and teletype facilities . The Americans asked for quotations from the British general Post Office . The British Post Office provided quotations for speech and typing facilities .
 Before Geneva summit in 1961 the Americans were contemplating using a direct telephone connection between the State Department and the United States embassy in Moscow . Before the Geneva summit, the U.S. was contemplating using the telephone connection .
 The Americans pointed out that a teletype system on a reserved line could have dual capabilities and be used for voice communication as well should that 17 prove desirable .
 The superpowers agreed to a land line teletype link routed 18 through Moscow-Helsinki-Stockholm, Stockholm-London-Washington . The link will be routed through Moscow, Helsinki, Stockholm, Washington and London .
 Even when the hot line was subsequently modified, upgraded speech facilities were not added . Speech facilities were never added to the line .
 When it was suggested in 1983 that speech facilities should be added to the hot line many officials believed it already was a telephone as seen in the 19 movies .
 The telephone is the fastest and most common communication link in the world . It has proved itself an important tool of diplomacy since the 1950s, when phone services were made more reliable by the introduction of submarine cables .
 Diplomatic communications were previously mostly confined to telegrams . Telegrams have continued to be the most important communications link of diplomacy .
 With improved communications heads of government or ministers have the possibility to pick up a telephone and instantly or within minutes get their counterparts on the line . Heads of government can pick up the telephone and pick it up within minutes .
 The idea of heads of state salvaging world peace by dialling a counterpart captures the imagination . Heads of state should be able to call a counterpart to save world peace .
 Speed of communication makes it unsuitable tool for crisis 21 management . But it is precisely the speed of this form of communication which makes it an unsuitable .
 The argument against using a voice emergency communication link is both technical and political . It is not only technical, but political, it is also political .
 The hot line was designed to be used in the gravest situations, which make exchanges over a hot line even more precarious if done by telephone .
 Telephone diplomacy can be a double-edged sword in communications between adversaries . Telephone diplomacy is more suitable in relations between states on friendly terms .
 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12: 'It was more likely to lead to ‘inadvertent’ 17: 'Inadvertent' 17: ‘It’s more likely that it will lead to an accident than an accident’
 The Regan Administration and the Stalemate in Nuclear Arms Control. 2-323.2-323 . Regan administration . Stalememate in nuclear arms control .
 Misunderstanding because of these reasons or simply ‘slip ups of the tongue or ill-considered statements’ will be easily mended or instantly forgiven by friends but can make relations even more strained .
 "From a practical point of view there was also the problem of translation," says the author . "It was a very difficult task to do," he adds .
 A vocal hot line required conversations to be translated instantaneously at both ends . The line is now known as a "vocal hot line"
 24 in times of crisis accuracy in translation could not suffer because of it . Speed of communication was of utmost importance 24 in a crisis .
 Using a telephone link could increase the possibility of misunderstanding rather than eradicate it . Using a phone link could therefore increase the chance of misunderstanding, rather than eradicating it, experts say .
 London-Moscow hot line discussed in 1966 . London-Russia hot line was used to organise translation of the book .
 Translators had to be on call 24 hours a day to be close to Whitehall . They had to have their residence close to the capital's Whitehall headquarters .
 This led to discussion about getting two bachelors to 25 live in a local flat or a hotel room . It is possible to get two to 25 people to live together in a hotel or a flat .
 The spontaneity of the telephone conversation makes it unpredictable and therefore impossible to script . The spontanity of a telephone conversation is difficult to script, the author says .
 This can be an advantage depending on the situation, topic and the person’s ability to think on his feet . During conversations between heads of state in normal times, this can be a advantage .
 In times of crisis mistakes come at a high price and none higher than when there exists a risk of nuclear war . However, in times of crises mistakes come with a high cost .
 The words of a head of state carry most weight and are only retracted with much difficulty . "The words of an official carry most power and only retract with difficulty," says President Obama .
 Teletype minimises the risk of personal friction between heads of state . The teletype reduces personal friction with heads of states . Teletype is the world's only way to communicate with the world .
 Exchanging written messages gives both parties time for reflection, to analyse and respond, even just to let off steam . Exchanges written messages give both parties a chance to get back in touch .
 The telephone does not allow this latitude but on the contrary compels a response of some sort, which can result in a misguided reply or misunderstood answer . The telephone is not allowed to be given a wide range of responses, which may result in an error .
 This does not mean that translation or interpretation of printed messages is always reliable . It is not always always reliable to translate or interpret .
 Carter’s attempt to use the hot line to bypass diplomatic channels during the SALT-2 discussions proved disastrous . The hot line was used by the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s .
 22 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12. 12. The KGB translators on duty were not highly qualified and had no highly qualified translators . The KGB was not the best translators in the world .
 Oral communication is less reliable than the written record and leaves more room for speculation than written exchanges . Nevertheless, oral communication is more reliable than written record, says author .
 No time is lost on formalities or the danger of verbal decoys or stalling . Furthermore no time should be lost on verbal decoying or verbal stalling, say officials .
 In a crisis a number of people beside the head of government take part in forming policy and actions . This is the first time a government minister has taken part in a crisis .
 The flow of information must be efficient and the quickest and 27 most reliable way of distributing this kind of information is in written form, says CNN.com chief executive John Defterios .
 The first hot line was established in 1963 as well as all subsequent hot lines have taken the form of text-facility links, teletype, telex or facsimile . The first line established was set up in 1963 .
 The only reference to a telephone hot line comes from an East German document in 1969 . Only reference to the phone hot line is from a document in the East German government .
 In it the East German chargé d’affaires refers to the Peking-Moscow 28 hot line being a telephone link . The East German refers to it as a phone link .
 It is doubtful, considering that the Soviets were discussing or had established hot line links with France and Britain, that they would establish a telephone link 29 with China .
 The negotiation of the initial hot line agreement revealed that the teletype link had its shortcomings as well . Teletype link was also a problem in the early days of the hot line .
 At the last moment, the Soviets put in three final textual changes, which were accepted . At the end of the book, the Soviet Union put in the last few changes .
 The last moment change of heart by the Soviets caused a lot of commotion in Moscow and Washington a few years later . The Soviets changed their course of action in the 1980s .
 An unsuspecting Finnish farmer ploughing his field, unfamiliar with the communications link that lay in his fertile soil cut the only telegraph line .
 Finnish incident did not put the hot line in danger, because radio back-up facilities existed . But improvements would make the communications link more secure, experts say .
 Originally the Washington-Moscow hot line was stationed in the National Military Command Centre at the 33 Pentagon . Originally the hot line had been stationed at the Pentagon in Washington, DC .
 It was first put to use during the Six Day War it was soon realised that it was inconvenient to have the U.S. terminal in the Pentagon . The United States terminal was used during the war but was soon abandoned .
 Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defence, gave instructions that 34 messages should be sent directly to the White House .
 During the SALT-I treaty discussion in the early 1970s the Soviets showed interest in modernising the hot line . During the 1970s it was suggested that the Soviets would modernise the line .
 This was because of Soviet concern about their strained relations with China . This was not least because of their strained relationship with the country .
 The Soviet delegation was particularly interested in new measures to avoid nuclear war by accident, misunderstanding or miscalculation .
 U.S. chief negotiator says it was apparent that the Soviets were particularly worried about a nuclear conflict caused deliberately by a third party . Gerald C Smith, the chief negotiator, says the Soviets wanted to avoid a nuclear war . Smith: "The Soviets were concerned about a war caused deliberately
 Soviet officials made veiled references to China 35 as a possible source of such events . In private and official discussions Soviet officials discussed the possibility of China 35 events .
 The Soviet Delegation quickly agreed to the United States suggestion that communications 36 facilities should be improved and upgraded . It is therefore not surprising that the Soviet government agreed .
 Two satellite circuits were added to the hot line in order to increase its security and flexibility . The hot line has been expanded to include two satellite circuits .
 The hot line was a satellite link instead of a land-telegraph link . It served this purpose as well as making it less vulnerable in wartime .
 American technicians nicknamed the 38 Molink, the hot line . Other minor but practical improvements have also been made on the Molink .
 Clocks placed on each end show the time of day in the other capital after the SixDay War . Clocks were placed on the end showing the time in the opposite capital after that war . The clock clock was placed at the end of each end of the war .
 Moscow had started transmission at 3:00 A.M. is pure speculation . Whether this was because Moscow started transmitting at 3.00 a.m. is speculation .
 In 1984 the hot line system was further improved by adding the capability to transmit facsimiles . In 1984, the system was added to the system by adding a facsimile capability .
 Whole pages of text, maps and charts could be exchanged instantaneously . Whole pages could be swapped with instantaneously.
 This was all done with the intention of increasing the reliability and speed of information flow . This is all done to increase the reliability, speed and accuracy of the system .
 The 21st century hot line now consists of two satellite circuits and a landline teletype link, which is used as backup . The line is now used as a backup .
 It is quicker and more reliable than 40 before with the possibility of exchanging graphic material . The new system is more secure than 40 years old . It will allow people to exchange graphic material with each other .
 Speech facilities have not been included in the modification of the Washington-Moscow hot line . Speech facilities are not included .
 Because the link has not been in constant use it has had to be tested each day . The link has been tested every day since it was connected to the internet .
 Some of the exchanges caused puzzlement at least on the Soviet end . However some of the exchange was not quite clear .
 Blechman: "Efforts to Reduce the Risk of Accidental or Inadvertent War" U.S. tried to reduce the risk of accidental war .
 European powers had watched from the sidelines during the Cuban Crisis . During the Cuban crisis, European powers watched from sidelines .
 Kennedy administration kept allies closely informed nd but their influence was marginal . Kennedy administration had kept allies close informed but influence was only marginal . The Kennedy administration was kept in touch with allies .
 Dean Acheson flew to Paris on October 22 to keep French President Charles de Gaulle informed . He gave him a copy of Kennedy’s letter to Khrushchev and a draft of his speech .
 Kennedy kept British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan personally informed through their mutual telephone link . Kennedy kept the British PM personally informed of his plans .
 Both Macmillan and de Gaulle realized that they were being informed after the decisions had been made . Nevertheless, both MacMillan and De Gaulle were aware of the situation .
 De Gaulle stressed that it was important that governments keep in 42 close contact during serious times through embassies .
 When the hot line issue was raised again after the October crisis warning bells went off in the British Government . The hot line has been raised again when the government raised the issue again .
 People are beginning to ask whether Cuba will be in on the direct line to Moscow or whether decisions will be made by Khrushchev and Kennedy and communicated to us afterwards . People here generally realise that we have very good communications with the Americans .
 "At the moment we have no answer to these queries and have to pretend that we do not mind. At the moment, it is not clear what answers we have to answer . We have no answers to these questions and must pretend to pretend to do it,’s not to
 If Russia and the U.S. set up their system I feel myself that we 43 ought to have a Moscow line as well as a Washington one . In fact it is quite a serious point and if the Russians and the Americans do .
 Letting one country in on the hot line posed both political and technical problems . Letting a country into the line was both political, technical and political .
 From a technical point of view, it was difficult to add more users to the hot line without complicated modification . The hot line is a hot-line hot line that allows users to call the National Hot Line hotline .
 Too much information flow from different states in different languages could result in 44 ‘delay and confusion’ at a time when speed and decision were essential, the British embassy reported .
 From a political point of view expanding or excluding states from the hot line posed a greater problem . The hot line is a hot line for states that are not currently covered by the federal government . It's unclear whether states will be allowed to use the line .
 The usual suspects lined up as possible contenders for joining the hot line club . The club has been linked with a number of potential candidates for the job .
 Editors Charles S Sampson, Louis J Smith, David S Patterson, Louis S. Smith, and David S. Patterson .
 10 had aspirations to take part they were soon quashed . November 20, 1963, was November 20. 1963 . 10 people were killed in a car bomb blast .
 It became clear early on that the proposed hot line was supposed to be an exclusive communications link between Washington and Moscow . The proposed line was intended to be a direct communications link .
 Even if an extension or expansion of the hot line was unlikely it was important to express the desire to be involved to ensure no door was permanently closed .
 Britain wanted to be 47 included in such a link with the United States Disarmament Agency . The British government acted quickly and informed the U.S. Disarmaments Agency .
 The political arguments were strong for the U.K. to take part in such a project . It is doubtful whether establishing a hot line connection would improve existing British diplomatic communication links .
 Foreign Secretary suggested a separate link between London and Moscow to supplement the existing link between Washington and London . Foreign Secretary suggests a separate London-Moscow link .
 WashingtonMoscow line was to be routed through London . The first option became a tiein to the line with a switchboard in London to create the possibility of threecornered conversations .
 All messages passed between the superpowers would have been available to London . That would also have meant that all messages would be available to the world's capital .
 The switchboard would give Britain the chance to communicate with either of the superpowers without necessarily informing the other . However, the switchboard could be used by the U.S. and Britain .
 Foreign Office anticipated that the Americans and the Soviets could see this as an impediment to their bilateral agreement . The Foreign Office had hoped that the issue would not be an issue .
 The British demonstrated a persistent fear of rejection from either or both the superpowers .
 An impromptu premature action could have damaged relations with the U.S. and NATO solidarity . The U.N. has been criticized for its decision to take action after the incident .
 The British government was alert to the danger of being a possible scapegoat for the 49 Soviets if the latter got cold feet . Furthermore, the British government had been alert to being a potential scapegoat .
 For Britain to act without informing the U.S. could have put strains on relations between the two countries . For Britain, it could have been a blow to relations between Britain and the United States .
 A hot line was long-term policy and it was decided to wait and see how things developed before attempting to get involved either directly or indirectly .
 The U.K. has been allowed to use the hot line by the U.S. but the Russians also have to approve . The Russians also had to approve of the move .
 They wanted to keep the agreement with the Soviet Union as it was and keep other states out of it . The U.S. wanted to stay out of the deal with Russia, but wanted other countries out .
 At the same time they had to consider how it would affect their allies . The U.S. had to think about how it might affect its allies .
 The U.S. and Britain were confident that they were frontrunners in the hot line race . In light of the close relationship between the two countries, the U.K. and the UK were confident of winning .
 Italians, French and Canadians were not kept as closely informed . This feeling was strengthened by the fact that the Italians and French had not been kept informed .
 The British approached the Americans early in May 1963 . Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, proposed that any consideration of expanding the hot line should be postponed until after the United States and Soviet Union had reached an agreement .
 Rusk. But when the negotiations were concluded, the message 52 came from Rusk . Rusk sent a rather discouraging message from the Kremlin .
 I do not believe that it would be wise for us to raise with the Soviets at this time the question of transforming the contemplated “Hot Line” between Washington and Moscow into a tripartite system . I must confess that, upon considerable reflection, I do . . I do
 It is not our expectation that the ‘Hot Line’ would be used for normal conduct of business but it would be reserved for the emergency use which was its rationale under disarmament proposals . The “Hot Phone’s” is not expected to be used in normal
 The letter left open the possibility of a separate hot line between London and Moscow . The letter was nothing more than a polite brush-off .
 Rusk offered to assist the British in negotiations with the Soviets by discussing the technical and financial arrangements involved between the superpowers . Rusk also offered to discuss the technical arrangements involved in negotiations .
 By the end of the year British participation in the hot line had been shelved . The British government decided not to participate in the project .
 The Soviets could potentially use a hot line to try to divide 57 Britain and the U.S. in a moment of crisis . There were no pressing practical reasons to establish such a link to the UK .
 U.S. and USSR had been unwilling to let states participate in the hot line . The United Nations was a third party whom they could have kept involved without creating political problems .
 The Washington-Moscow hot line was not established to ease public concern but to lessen the risk of war by miscalculation or misunderstanding . The Washington and Moscow hot line has been established since 1961 .
 Using the hot line as a public diplomacy tool or for propaganda reasons was not the underlying factor, the author says . The hot line was not being used for public diplomacy reasons, he says .
 The public and many states would have welcomed the involvement of the Secretary General of the United Nations in the hot line agreement . However, the public did not welcome the idea of the agreement .
 This had been suggested early on by both the Americans and the Soviets and was one option the British considered if they could not be involved directly themselves . The British considered this option if they were unable to be involved in the conflict .
 There was speculation about U.N. involvement in the hot line scheme in the media . There has been speculation about United Nations involvement .
 Neither the Americans nor the Soviets showed any real interest in pursuing the idea and it was soon dropped . The idea was dropped by both the Americans and Soviets .
 For practical reasons it was sensible to keep the direct link as simple as possible by excluding states or international agencies other than the superpowers . The link will only be available to the UK and other countries .
 "Controlling the information flow to friends and foes alike was important," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 U.N. involvement could have increased the risk of leaks to parties that could try to influence or sabotage the superpowers’ actions . United Nations involvement could also increase the risk .
 It was not only states that were anxious not to be cut out of the picture. It was also states that wanted to be part of the process .
 Diplomats react cautiously to idea of direct government-to-government communications link . The diplomatic establishment reacted cautiously to the idea .
 Diplomatic Dimensions: The diplomatic establishment saw its vested interests threatened by the hot line . Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the world has been strained by the line .
 There is a possibility that such a direct line would not be confined to emergencies or crises but used in routine political discussions . There was a possibility such a line would be used in a routine political discussion .
 The State Department’s Policy Planning Council proposed a hot line between the superpowers in 1960 . Misgivings of a similar kind had been aired in 1960 when the proposal was proposed .
 Ambassador Merchant openly objected to the proposal and the idea was shelved for the time being . Ambassador Merchant said the 63 idea was 'unacceptable'
 Smith claims that because of the ambassador’s objections the idea was dropped . Smith claims the ambassador's objections prevented the idea from being discussed .
 Considering that presidential elections were near it is not inconceivable that the matter had simply been put on the shelf for the time being .
 FO’s Communications Department believed that messages passed through embassies were most likely to be effective .
 The 65 risk of misunderstanding was thought to be less likely than the risk of a misunderstanding . The risk of misunderstandings was also less likely to be greater than in other cases .
 Henry Kissinger claims that in times of crisis during his term in office getting messages through the Soviet embassy was a quicker route than the hot line . Kissinger claims to have been able to get messages from the Soviet Embassy in time of crisis .
 Governments need to improve communications between embassies and their embassies . But this all depends on good communications between governments and embassies, experts say .
 British officials got wind of the U.S. hot line proposals in 1962 . They started to consider how effective and secure their own communications with Moscow were .
 The outcome of this self-examination questioned the usefulness of British involvement in a direct government-to-government communication link .
 The diplomatic communications system was considered very reliable and quick . The diplomatic system was also considered reliable .
 Good communications links existed with Washington, the White House and the embassy in Moscow, officials say . The U.S. had good communications links with Washington and Moscow, they say .
 President to make contact within two minutes through commercial line teletype . President to be able to contact President of the U.S. President by phone in two minutes . President of U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to use teletype to communicate with President of USA .
 There was a direct telephone between the President and the PM, which could suffice as an indirect British involvement . The President and Prime Minister's telephone was used in the attack .
 Foreign Office officials thought that road traffic conditions in London could cause delays for a message going the other way . The message was revived shortly after the elections by Henry Owen and Walt Rostow .
 The superpowers could have decided to enhance embassy communication between their capitals . It is not the first time they have done so .
 Ideas were discussed about having hot lines pass though embassies to monitor the exchanges of messages . Ideas were also discussed about using hot lines to monitor messages from embassies .
 Messages did not pass through embassies but had to be kept informed . The messages had to elicit important information and advice from embassies .
 Setting up a hot line would enable heads of state to engage in personal dialogue . Hot line would allow heads of states to engage with personal dialogue, says David Cameron .
 A hot line, facsimile or not, does not improve the ‘intimacy of ... exchanges’ but it could ‘reduce Ambassadorial contacts’ for both sides, says PM .
 One of the lessons of the Cuban Crisis was that embassies had not been able to get to 72 higher placed officials . However one of the most important lessons was not being able to reach 72 officials in the country .
 Creating alternative communication routes was simply sensible crisis management to preserve options . Creating alternative communications routes was "sensible crisis management," the government said .
 Hot lines provide instant access and attention to the highest level, which might be closed to ambassadors in times of crisis . Hot lines allow instant access to the most senior level of staff in the world .
 Kissinger: Hot lines confer a sense of urgency, as Kissinger points out, and get the attention of the most important people immediately . Kissinger: "Hot lines are a good way to communicate with people in the U.S.
 For these reasons it had to be tempting to use it in other politically pressing matters even though its use ought to be confined to acute situations . The use of such a weapon should be limited to only acute situations, says the author .
 Gerard Smith says both parties to a hot line agreement would have to agree for the facilities to be used in other circumstances than emergencies . Smith: Both parties to an agreement would need to agree that the facilities would be used only in emergencies .
 Hot lines are direct communication of a certain kind of kind . Hot lines have been used to communicate with people in the U.S. for decades .
 They were established to enable states with nuclear capabilities to engage in dialogue to avoid conflict breaking out . The talks were established in order to prevent nuclear weapons being used in conflict .
 Just by activating the hot line a signal of urgency is being sent to the receiver . The hot line is being used to send a message of urgency .
 It is therefore difficult to make claims about how it has actually been used, it is difficult to say how it is used .
 On at least three occasions the WashingtonMoscow hot line has been used for matters not of direct consequence for war or peace . However, it has also been used on matters not directly related to the war .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski used the hot line to send a message to Brezhnev in a way it had never been used before . The hot line was used during the SALT-II negotiations between the Cold War and Soviet Union .
 On another occasion Carter used the hot line to try to get Brezhnev to help achieve a cease-fire in Lebanon through Soviet influence in Syria . Carter also tried to get the Soviet Union to influence the situation .
 Ministers argued whether it was appropriate to send a message through the 78 hot line in the Daniloff espionage case . Ministers argued over whether it should be appropriate to use the hot line .
 The elusive definition of a hot line has created a general misunderstanding about the usage of hot lines . Hot lines are often misunderstood about how they are used by people .
 The hot line would have ceased to be an emergency communication link . But this would merely have made Britain a mediator, it would have made it less of an emergency link .
 It is likely that the Prime Minister was thinking of the 76 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12 .
 Pro CAB 164/2 is an additional contact link for normal political dialogue but not a hot line as such . Visit of the Prime Minister H Wilson to Moscow 1966, February and July 17 hot line .
 Wilson’s ideas were perhaps similar to those established in 1997 between Greece and Turkey . The communication link established between the two countries was perhaps similar in 1997 .
 A direct line was created between NATO headquarters in Brussels and Athens and Ankara and Ankara . NATO headquarters is located in Brussels, Greece, Turkey and Turkey .
 Although this communication link was termed a hot line, it is questionable whether it fits the definition . The communication link is a communication link, but it is not considered a 'hot line'
 This could at best be defined as an indirect hot line with Brussels as a switchboard, similar to the British suggestion in 1963 when the Washington-Moscow hot line was established .
 The lack of clarity in distinguishing between hot line and other means of direct communications was never more apparent than during the attempt to establish a hot line between Canberra and London in 1969-1971 . A hot line was established between Canberra-London in 1969 and 1971 .
 This was technically easy and using a ciphering equipment with telex not too expensive . This was used to encrypt messages using telex technology and telex .
 Gorton wanted to establish a secure secure speech telephone . British officials were not keen on establishing both because of cost but also for technical reasons .
 The matter dragged on for two years and new Prime Ministers entered the scene . McMahon in Australia and Heath in Britain were the two new PMs .
 To create a direct secure telephone was one thing but to create a hot line all together different . The hot line was created in the 1970s and '80s .
 Canberra-London communication link was not a hot line at all but a personal contact line for heads of government . It was not used frequently, but it was used for personal contact between heads of governments .
 These Commonwealth countries were very unlikely to be at each other's throats . These countries are unlikely to have any problems at all this time .
 Both governments had sufficient communication links between them already . Both governments already had enough communication links to communicate .
 It was a matter of prestige to have such a link between the two states and giving it such an important name increased its political weight . On the other hand, it was an issue of prestige for the state .
 The political weight assigned to some acts is more significant than their intrinsic importance, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Political weight attached to some of the acts is greater than its intrinsic importance . He says the political weight of some acts has been assigned to them more important than their
 In 1992 a friendship treaty was signed in London between Britain and Russia . The treaty was the first since the 1766 Treaty of Amity and Commerce .
 It is not unlikely that the announcement served a public diplomacy agenda, to signify a change in relations between the two states . The announcement was made in a bid to make the announcement public .
 Another possibility is that it wasn’t a hot line per se but merely a direct communication link to discuss 85 routine matters of state not confined to emergencies .
 Whether the communication link in question is a hot line or not is sometimes irrelevant . The communication link is sometimes an important part of the communication process .
 The political significance connected to it is such that other considerations fall into the shadows . It is such a political significance that it's important to keep the issue in the public eye .
 It could even be argued that the importance of hot line agreements between the superpowers for disarmament was rather slight . Hot line agreements were rather slight.
 "From a psychological point of view its public appeal was and remains very important," says David Cameron . "Public appeal is very important. From a psychological ... it's very important to maintain public appeal," says Cameron .
 Creating a link between the leaders that controlled the majority of the Earth’s nuclear arms was reassuring . Creating a . link between leaders that . control the majority . of the . Earth's nuclear arms .
 It showed that an agreement was possible and differences could be accommodated, it said . The agreement showed that differences can be easily accommodated .
 The public diplomacy side of the hot line was put into use early on by President Kennedy . President Kennedy used the line as a way to communicate with the world .
 Seaborg, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test Ban. 19 . 19 to enhance understanding between the states by increasing contact and 88 communication. 19.19 . 19 .
 The Soviets were not as keen to use the hot line as a public 89 propaganda tool and were eager to play down the significance of the line . The Soviets used it as a propaganda tool .
 Perhaps it was a sour reminder of how much of a blunder the Cuban affair had been for the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was embarrassed by its mistake .
 The Soviets played a different tune when they reached an agreement on modernising the hot lines . Not many years later when the superpowers reached a deal, the Soviet Union agreed to modernise the lines .
 The original agreement had been signed by low-level officials in low-key fashion, but pomp and circumstance were the order of the day on 30 September 1971 .
 At a signing ceremony both Secretary of State William Rogers and Foreign 91 Minister Andrei Gromyko provided ample photo opportunities . The signing ceremony was held in Moscow .
 The form of the new hot line agreement proved to be the most difficult stage of negotiations . The new agreement will be signed by the Government on Monday .
 They wanted to make a fanfare out of this 92 achievement and the United States finally acquiesced . The U.S. acquiesced to the request of the U.N. President Barack Obama .
 The strengthening or building of confidence between governments has been one of the most valuable aspects of hot lines . Hot lines are key to building confidence between government and the public .
 They have increasingly been used as an important first step in building or enhancing confidence between friendly and unfriendly states . Diplomats symbolize improved relations or intention to do so, experts say .
 During President de Gaulle’s visit to the Soviet Union in June 1966 an agreement was announced that established a direct teleprinter line between the Kremlin and the Elysée Palace .
 The ParisMoscow hot line had not required lengthy technical discussions and clearly 93 was a political decision . The decision to use the hot line was made by President Vladimir Putin, a former Russian president .
 The President's Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President . Containing the Public Messages and Speeches of the president .
 For Britain it was important for its prestige to get a hot line link with the Soviets . Britain's prestige was important to get the link with Russia .
 Hot lines have continued to serve as symbols of improved bilateral relations . Hot lines continue to be a symbol of improved relations between the two countries .
 A sudden thaw emerged in the Cold War structure under Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin . The thaw came during a transition period under Gorbachachev and Yeltsins .
 One of the symbols of better relations with the Soviet Union and subsequently Russia was the establishment or upgrading of hot lines with its former enemies .
 A hot line was established between Bonn and the Kremlin in 1989 consisting of a telefax connection . The line was set up in 1989 using a phone-in-persona connection .
 German officials were ecstatic about the new connection and claimed it was better than what they had with the White House . German officials claimed the connection is better than the previous one .
 A month later it was announced in Paris that the Paris-Kremlin hot line was to be improved from being a telex to be replaced by a high-speed fax machine .
 Three years later good and direct communication between the heads of the British and the Russian government was used to illustrate a new dawn in relations between the states .
 The symbolic weight or in other words the public diplomacy value of linking a hot line to improved relations between these particular states outweighed other factors . "The symbolic weight" of linking the hot line outweighs other factors, the author says .
 With the end of the Cold War the importance of good relations with China was underscored . China is one of the most important countries in the world .
 Russia and the United States tried hard to improve relations with the giant of the East . Both Russia and U.S. tried to improve ties with the world's largest East .
 The Soviets had a hot line to the PRC leadership which they used during the frontier confrontation with China in March 1969 . The Soviets used the hot line during the confrontation with the Chinese government .
 The Chinese communists refused to respond to Kosygin’s attempts to contact Mao Zedong or any other leader of the Chinese Politburo . The communists would not respond to any of the attempts made to contact them .
 The attempts of the Soviet embassy to make clear Moscow’s desire for peace to the Chinese Foreign Ministry were also ignored . The Soviet embassy was also ignored by the Chinese government .
 The Chinese informed Moscow that the direct communication link ‘was no longer Moscow’ The Russian-Chinese link was ‘no longer a direct communications link’ with Moscow .
 This humiliation and disconnection of the hot line was perhaps a consequence of internal political struggle . It also sent a message to the Soviets about how seriously the relations between the states had deteriorated .
 Kissinger and Nixon’s desire to improve relations with China also resulted in a hot line proposal . Nixon and Kissinger also proposed a hot-line proposal for the country .
 In a secret meeting with Zhou Enlai in Beijing in November 1973 Kissinger made the offer . Kissinger offered the offer in secret meeting in November .
 He suggested this could be done either by simply announcing the establishment of a hot line or by hiding it in an agreement on accidental nuclear war like the Soviet-American one .
 The American proposal is interesting considering that the states had not established full diplomatic relations . The proposal was interesting considering the states having not established diplomatic relations.
 Embassies had not been opened but relations were conducted through liaison offices . Embassies were not opened, but relations with the U.S. had been conducted through liaisons offices .
 A hot line was a very visible signal of Sino-American rapprochement but at that moment it was probably too large a step to take for 99 the Chinese who never responded to the proposal .
 Chinese leaders attempted to improve relations and image after the 1989 massacre in Tienanmen Square . Chinese leaders tried to improve their relations after the massacre in 1989 .
 The United States had promised China to assist the PRC with this process in exchange for their abstention on UN resolutions against Iraq . U.S. had promised to assist China in return for this .
 Early in the 1990s there were discussions between the U.S. and China about establishing a hot line between the two countries .
 These discussions were postponed in 1996 when rapid reconciliation occurred between the old enemies Russia and China . The talks were postponed after rapid reconciliation between the two countries .
 This served both the means of propaganda and reassuring the public that both nuclear powers were taking actions to minimize the possibility of nuclear war . This served as both propaganda and reassured the public .
 This was particularly significant from a Chinese point of view because it could be seen as confirmation of China’s superpower status . This was seen as confirming of China's superpower status.
 Even an established hot line agreement has been used to mend bilateral relations . The two countries have been at odds for years .
 The relations between the superpowers deteriorated during President Carter’s last years in office, mostly because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and difficult SALT negotiations . The relations had deteriorated during the Carter administration .
 President Reagan’s rhetoric and depiction of the Soviet Union as the evil empire did not improve relations between the superpowers during his first years in office . Reagan's rhetoric did not help relations between Washington and Moscow .
 Reagan team was looking for topics to set up a summit between Reagan and Andropov in 1983 . Reagan team looked at topics for possible topics to discuss during Reagan-Andropov summit .
 One of the issues raised as a possible topic to initiate talks was upgrading the hot line .
 There existed a war of words between the two camps at the time and the Soviets were unwilling to enter into discussions about arms control they were willing to discuss upgrading the hot line . This shows how marginal and uncontroversial the topic had become .
 On the American side the suggestion of discussing upgrading the hot line was not thought to be exciting enough to get a summit meeting . On the U.S. side the idea of discussing upgrades was not discussed enough .
 It led to discussions which resulted in modification of the hot line . Nevertheless, it led to modifications of the line .
 Although functional aspects of hot lines are the reason for their creation, their symbolic value should not be overlooked . The symbolic value of the hot line should be not overlooked .
 Reagan Administration and the Stalemate in Nuclear Arms Control. The Reagan Administration . The Reagan administration and the Reagan Administration have been at odds for decades .
 The voice of Robert McNamara informed President Lyndon B Johnson at 7:57 A.M. in the morning of 5 June 1967 that Moscow was calling on the hot line . The voice on the telephone was Robert McNama informing President Lyndon Johnson that Moscow had called .
 Each time the hot line was activated during the 1967 conflict the core of the U.S. Ambassador to Moscow, Llewellyn Thompson, gathered round the teleprinter waiting anxiously for the translation .
 Kremlin officials waited in suspense to receive an answer . At the same time their counterparts in the Kremlin waited to receive a response .
 Messages had to be carefully reconstructed, each word laid out to make sure the sentences they formed would not be misunderstood or misconstrued . Messages were written in the Situation Room over scrambled eggs .
 Hot line lived up to expectations and proved to be effective tool to clear up misunderstandings, clarify intentions and avoid miscalculation which otherwise could have led to escalation .
 Through the hot line the Americans were able to clear false allegation from the Arabs that U.S. carrierbased planes had taken part in attacks on Egypt . The hot line cleared false allegation that United States carrier planes had attacked Egypt .
 Israeli gunboats attacked a U.S. Navy communications ship, the Liberty, killing 10 men and wounding hundreds . 10 men were killed and hundreds wounded in the attack on 8 June .
 The hot line was used to explain that the U.S. was sending an aircraft carrier to investigate and assist the Liberty . The aircraft carrier was sent to investigate the incident .
 A cease-fire agreement had been reached between Israel, Jordan and Egypt . But fighting continued between Israel and Syria on the Golan Heights on the Syrian border .
 A rough translation of a hot line message from the Kremlin received on the morning of 10 June indicated that the Soviets were contemplating sending troops to the Middle East . The Kremlin is believed to be considering sending troops .
 The atmosphere in the Situation Room in the White House was tense because the next message could decide which direction the conflict would take . The atmosphere was tense at the time of the crisis in Syria .
 Ambassador Thompson checked the accuracy of the translation of the Russian message . Ambassador Thompson said the message was accurate .
 Johnson realized that he had to send a ‘temperate and factual…’ hot line message to Kosygin .
 As the hours passed by the messages from the Kremlin became more temperate and tension eased . The tension at both ends eased .
 The overriding importance of the hot line was that it engaged immediately the heads of government and their top advisers, forcing prompt attention and decisions . "It engaged immediately," says the government .
 It is intended for use in the most critical moments in international relations . It is meant to be used during critical moments of international relations.
 At these times it can ensure better accuracy in understanding a message and sending one, it can also be used to send a message .
 The written form also makes it possible to distribute exchanges of hot line messages to the diplomatic establishment in a more accurate and secure way than if the hot line was a voice link .
 The hot lines established since the WashingtonMoscow example have generally followed this precedent . The WashingtonMoscow hot line has been established since that example .
 The hot line can have an advantage over normal diplomatic routes, for example the embassy, because a hot line message indicates importance and urgency and compels attention from the highest placed officials, which could be difficult to get to .
 They can be essential in tilting the balance in preserving peace between states, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 The Washington-Moscow hot line proved itself the first time it was needed during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war . The first time the line was needed was during the Arab-Arab war .
 In this instance it was useful in preventing escalating tensions between the superpowers . The U.S. and Russia are the world's most powerful nations .
 The Washington-Moscow link fulfilled its expectation in that crisis by reducing the risk of war by misunderstanding or misapprehension . The U.S.-Russia link fulfilled that expectation in Russia crisis . The Washington and Moscow link is expected to prevent war by misappreciating each other .
 In this sense its most prevalent use is to signal improved relations between states . The use of the term "statecraft" is often used to indicate improved relations with states .
 Establishing such a link can also be to underline strong and long lasting ties between states . Establishments such as a link between states can be important to the nation, say experts .
 A fourth role of hot lines is to signify the importance of states themselves . Hot lines are a symbol of states' importance to the nation .
 This is the prestige factor and the political reason why states seek to be involved in hot line agreements . The prestige factor is the reason for states to seek hot line deals, says the government .
 Hot lines have been established between most powerful states but not among smaller states . Hot lines were established between the most powerful state and the most populous state . Smaller states have also established hot lines between them .
 The Washington-Moscow hot line was a security device in relations between the most powerful nuclear powers . It was used in Washington and Moscow to discuss nuclear disarmament . The line was used as a key security device between the two countries .
 It was established to ensure that the superpowers would not inadvertently stumble into war with each other . The U.S. and the world's superpowers did not stumble into conflict .
 Later years they seem to be pursued because of prestige and symbolism rather than because of their practical value in emergencies . However, they are pursued because they are seen to be more popular than practical value .
 It seems that it has become more common in recent years to establish hot lines between states .
 However it is questionable whether they are all hot lines by definition or merely direct communication links to discuss routine political issues .
 This underlines how important hot lines are viewed in bilateral relations and for political prestige of states . Hot lines are seen as vital hot lines for countries and countries alike .
 There are other ways of communicating on political and less acute issues, such as political issues . There are also other ways to communicate on political issues such as immigration .
 For sensitive discussions the embassy route still provides a secure and reliable means of communications . The embassy route is still a secure means of communication for sensitive discussions .
 A hot line link, even though merely in name, confers a sense of importance . But possessing a hot line . Even though just in name it confers .
 The overwhelming majority of states use them in their relations with the outside world . They are used to communicate with the world .
 Perhaps hot lines will lose their sense of prestige once they become ordinary tools of the diplomatic trade . Hot lines are said to be so commonplace in the world of diplomacy .