 As president, John F Kennedy had to confront the challenges and fears of the of the Cold War . Describe Kennedy’s plan for the armed . Confront the challenges, fears, and complete a time line forces .
 Explain how Cold War influenced major events of the Cold War in the late foreign aid and the space program . Tell us about the late Cold War and how it influenced foreign aid, space programs .
 1950s and early 1960s. flexible response, Peace Corps, space Section Theme race, Berlin Wall, Berlin wall, Warren Commission Science and Technology During the Jan. 25th anniversary of the Warren Commission, the U.S. government announced the existence of the Peace Corps .
 For several tension-filled days that fall, the world seemed headed for nuclear destruction . The world was on the brink of nuclear war .
 The Soviet Union had placed missiles in Cuba 90 miles from the shores of the U.S. United States officials had discovered that the Soviet Union placed missiles there .
 When the Soviets refused to remove the weapons, a bitter weeklong standoff ensued in which the two superpowers hurled threats and warnings at each other and moved to the brink of nuclear war . The Soviets were forced to remove their weapons after the standoff .
 As Kennedy entered the White House, the nation’s dangerous rivalry with the Soviet Union continued to intensify . The nation was at risk of a nuclear war with the Soviets .
 In some Latin American countries, leftKennedy appeared ready to stand up to the wing movements aimed at overthrowing their governSoviets . The conditions spurred the growth of the left in Latin America countries .
 The U.S. pledged $20 billion to help Latin American countries establish liberty . The money was spent on schools, housing, health care, and land distribution .
 In some coun—quoted in Let the Word Go Forth tries—notably Chile, Colombia, Venezuela, and the Kennedy attempted to reduce the threat of nuclear Central American republics—the alliance did prowar .
 These included conventional weaponry money to keep themselves in power, economic aid, and the Peace Corps. program . These included a conventional weaponry .
 Kennedy took office at a less developed nations fight poverty was the Peace time of growing global instability . The Peace Corps Another program aimed at helping A More Flexible Response .
 Nationalism was Corps, an organization that sent young Americans to the developing world, and perform humanitarian services in these countries . Nationalism Corps was Corps. Corps . Corps. was Corps .
 Newsweek magazine wrote that the “greatest years in countries that had requested assistance’s help is how to . They laid out sewage systems in Bolivia and trained trained . meet the aggressive power of the Communist bloc.”
 Others taught English or Kennedy felt that Eisenhower had relied too much on heavy lifting to build roads . Others felt that he relied too heavily on the government to do so . Kennedy felt too much pressure was placed on the shoulders of Eisenhower .
 By late 1963 thousands of Peace ily on nuclear weapons, which could only be used in extreme situations . Corps volunteers were serving in over 30 countries . Volunteers were in the Peace Corps .
 Kennedy pushed for a buildup of convenTECHNOLOGY tional troops and weapons . Today, the Peace Corps is still active and remains one if nations needed help against Communist move .
 Although costly, a flexible response plan would allow the U.S. to fight a limited style of warfare . The Cold War moves into a limited type of warfare style . The plan would be costly but flexible .
 Special Forces were created in the 1950s to wage guerrilla warfare in limited conflicts around the world . President Kennedy expanded it and allowed the soldiers to space .
 Visit the wear their distinctive “Green Beret” headgear. sions continuing to rise, the American Vision Web site at tav.glencoe.com United States and the Soviet and click on Student Aid to Other Countries One area of the world where Union engaged in
 Governments often in the their competitive positions in the hands of the wealthy few and many of their citizens on Earth . Governments were often in their competitive position Frontier. Governments often have to rely heavily on the money from their citizens .
 By the time Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin walked on the moon in 1969, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had spent over $33 billion .
 Since that time, NASA expenditures have affected far more than space . Moon boot material developed for the space program is used missions . Moon boots are used in space missions .
 It has advanced knowledge of the nature of the improved shock absorption and universe, and people have applied them provides superior stability and to many technical fields and manufacmotion control processes .
 Kennedy was determined that the first humans to . immediately, Castro established ties with the Soviet . reach the moon would be Americans, not Russians, he said .
 Cuba’s alliance with the Soviets worried many before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Americans . In 1961 he recommended to Congress that “this foreign-owned businesses, many of them American. nation should commit itself to achieving the goal,” he wrote
 Neil Armstrong became the first person to set foot on the moon in July 1969 . Nikita Khrushchev was during Richard Nixon’s first administration, when also expressing his intent to strengthen Cuba . Kennedy's dream was realized in July .
 The Crises of the Cold War invasion was intended to touch off a popular uprispere . President Kennedy’s efforts to combat Communist ing against Castro led to some of the most intense crises of the 1950s .
 In office fewer than three left Americans and people in many nations months and trusting his experts, Kennedy agreed . Kennedy agreed wondering whether the world would survive to the operation with some changes .
 On April 17, 1961, 1,400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs . The first crisis occurred in Cuba, of Pigs on the south coast .
 Kennedy cancelled their air support to Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista in 1959 . La Brigada’s boats ran aground on There, Fidel Castro had overthrown the corrupt coral reefs .
 Using a minicomputer, the wheelchair responds to 35 single-word voice commands . The wheelchair can help physically challenged people perform tasks like picking up packages, opening doors, and opening doors .
 Remote-controlled robots reduce human injury levels because they can perform hazardous tasks men and women used to carry out . Remote controlled robots can also be used to perform dangerous tasks such as carrying out dangerous tasks .
 Robots can also perform operations no human being could, such as volcano research on the Puna Ridge of Kilauea, Hawaii .
 A communications satellite now in development will provide better telephone, television, and data service between western Europe, the Americas, and Africa . The satellite is expected to provide better phone, television and internet service between Europe and the Americas .
 Another communications satellite has improved ship-to-shore communications, which used to be interrupted frequently by bad weather . The expected popular uprising never happened .
 Guards posted along the wall two days, Castro’s forces killed or captured almost shot at many of those attempting to escape from the all the members of La Brigada . Guards posted on the wall, guards posted along two days .
 The Bay of Pigs was a visible symbol of the Cold War division Kennedy administration . For nearly 30 years afterward, the Berlin Wall was a dark moment for the U.S. for nearly 30 .
 Soviet technicians and equipment had arrived in Cuba beginning in June 1961 when he met with and that military construction was in progress . Still reeling from the Bay 1962, American intelligence agencies learned that of the Bay fiasco .
 The Soviet leader on October 22, President Kennedy announced on telewas determined to test the resolve of the young presvision that American spy planes had taken aerial photographs . President Kennedy said on tele .
 Khrushchev also wanted to stop the flood of tographs showing that the Soviet Union had placed Germans pouring out of Communist East Germany long-range missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union wanted to prevent the spread of the propaganda to the public .
 Kennedy ordered a naval blockade to stop the States, Great Britain, and France withdrawing from Soviets from delivering more missiles . He demanded that Berlin, lying completely within East Germany, they dismantle existing missile sites, and warned that .
 Khrushchev retaliated by building a wall through Union. States, he would respond fully against the Soviet. States . The wall would be built through the border between the two countries .
 Berlin, blocking movement between the Soviet and Soviet sector . Nuclear holocaust seemed imminent . Berlin was the scene of a nuclear holocaust .
 The missile crisis had Cuba and to remove its missiles from Turkey near the ominous consequences . It would remove the misreduction since the beginning of the Cold War siles if the United States promised not to invade .
 U.S. officials considered the United States forced upon the Soviet leadership offer, letters and cables flew between the two leaders . Letters and cables undermined the position of Nikita Khrushchev .
 The reality was that neither Kennedy nor new leadership was less interested in reaching agreeKhrushchev wanted nuclear war . The reality is that neither . nor Kennedy nor . new leadership were less . interested in . reaching agree .
 ‘Before they die crisis gave the Soviets evidence of their military infedestroy the world, could do this,” wrote the Soviet riority .
 Kennedy publicly agreed not to invade Cuba and the U.S. in the early 1980s . This buildup is attributed to a comparable military increase in the Kennedy-era .
 For a time, the arms vately agreed to remove Turkish missiles; the race undermined American support for negotiating with the Soviets . The race undermined U.S. support for negotiations with Russia .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union had The Death of a President been forced to consider the consequences of such a test ban . Soon after the Senate ratified the test ban treaty, war broke out .
 Kennedy's presidency came to a shocking and ready to work to lessen world tensions . In the following months, each country seemed John F Kennedy’s presidency seemed to come to an end .
 On November 22, 1963, Kennedy and his 1963, the United States and the Soviet Union conwife traveled to Texas with Vice President Lyndon Johnson for a series of political appearances . The treaty was reached after years of negotiation .
 Fears of communism peaked during the Cuban missile crisis . The presidential motorcade rode slowly through the history of the Cold War .
 Routine reconnaissance flights over Cuba revealed the construction of missile sites, fueling facilities, and launch pads .
 Someone had shot the president twice—once in the throat and once in the head . The president had been shot twice before, including once in his throat . President Barack Obama was shot in the face and throat .
 Kennedy was rushed to a nearby hospital, where he was pronounced dead moments later . Horrified government officials sped Kennedy to the hospital .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, the man accused of killing Kennedy, appeared to be a confused and embittered Marxist . Oswald had spent time in the Soviet Union . Oswald is accused of being the man who killed Kennedy in 1963 .
 He himself was shot to death while in police custody two days after the assassination . He was shot by police officers after he was killed in custody .
 Oswald was killed to protect others involved in the crime . The second gunman, local nightclub owner Jack Ruby, is believed to have killed Oswald . Some have speculated that Ruby killed Oswald to protect other members of the gang .
 In 1964 a national commission headed by Chief Justice Warren concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin . In 1964, a national . commission headed . Justice Warren said in 1964 that Oswald killed President Kennedy .
 Report of the Warren Commission left some questions unanswered . theories about a conspiracy to kill the president have persisted . None of the theories have gained wide acceptance .
 In the wake of the assassination, the U.S. and the world went into mourning . The assassination of George W. Kennedy was a major event in American history .
 Thousands traveled to Washington, D.C., to walk silently past the president's flag-draped casket . Thousands waited in a line that stretched for several miles outside the Capitol .
 A Final Salute John F Kennedy, Jr. bravely salutes his father’s coffin during the state funeral . Millions of others spent hours in front of their televisions to pay tribute to their father .
 In the streets of New Delhi, India, crowds wave of emotion that followed the president’s death, wept . Crowds wept after the president's death .
 In Africa, the president of Guinea said, “I have his successor, Lyndon Baines Johnson, would set out . to promote many of the programs that Kennedy left . John F Kennedy served as president for little more behind than 1,000 days .
 Kennedy's powerful personality and active approach to the presidency made a profound impression on most Americans .
 Use a graphic organizer to list the proour daily lives and standard of living that Kennedy used to reduce the threat of nuclear war and to try to stem 4. grams that . was used to . reduce the . threat of . nuclear war .
 Take on the role of an American citizen during the Cuban missile crisis . Descriptive Writing: The American citizen was a witness to the crisis .
 Write a journal entry describing the mood of the country during that time . Use this entry to describe the country's mood during that period .