 Waltz is a leading advocate of a school of thought known as nuclear optimism . He argues that fears of nuclear war are greatly exaggerated . Waltz says fears of war are exaggerated .
 While not directly stating that the risk of nuclear deterrence failing is near zero, requiring it to work “more or less in perpetuity” either implies that or sees the destruction of civilization as acceptable as acceptable .
 Time magazine had an online essay arguing that the Nobel Committee should have awarded the prize to the atomic bomb instead . In September 2009, Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to rekindle the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons .
 Handout is an exercise in critical thinking that reexamines whether society’s nuclear optimism is warranted . This handout is a critical thinking exercise .
 BP’s 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill demonstrates why nuclear optimism would require much more evidence than the absence of world war in the last 66 years .
 Five months later, BP’s drilling rig exploded, killing 11 workers, creating an environmental catastrophe . The explosion proved that 50 years of success was inadequate evidence for complacency .
 The Gulf of Mexico will eventually recover from the BP oil spill, but not the same cannot be said for extrapolating 66 years without a nuclear exchange into the indefinite future .
 Where nuclear weapons are concerned, we cannot afford to wait for disaster to strike before realizing that complacency was unwarranted . We need to wait until disaster strikes before realizing we are complacent, he says .
 quantitative risk analysis or QRA 2 can illuminate the danger by gleaning more information from the available data than might first appear possible . The risk analysis is a discipline known as quantitative risk .
 Each year since 1945 since 1945 as a coin toss with a heavily weighted coin, so that tails shows much more frequently than heads . Start by thinking of each year . Since 1945, tails show much more often than heads.
 Nuclear optimism’s evidence corresponds to noting that the last 66 years produced 66 tails in a row . Tails means that a nuclear war did not occur that year, while heads corresponds to a nuclear catastrophe .
 Risk analysis reclaims valuable information by looking not only at whether each coin showed heads or tails, but also at how the coin behaved during the toss . Risk analysis is based on whether each toss showed heads, tails, or heads, and how each coin behaved .
 If all 66 tosses immediately landed tails without any hesitation, that would be evidence that the coin was more strongly weighted in favor of tails . That would provide additional evidence that nuclear optimism is possible in the world .
 If any of the tosses teetered on edge, leaning first one way and then the other, before finally showing tails, would be on shaky ground . Conversely, if any of this is the case, it would be a sign of hope .
 This incident occurred at an extremely tense time, just two months after a Korean airliner had been shot down after it strayed into Soviet airspace . Less than eight months after President Ronald Reagan’s ‘Star Wars’ speech .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2011-12 . Hellman: Attack as a military exercise. Hellman’s ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope’
 Able Archer simulates the coordinated release of all NATO nuclear weapons . Able Archer was just such an exercise, simulating the release of nuclear weapons in a coordinated release .
 Yeltsin made the right decision and this false alarm did not occur during a crisis, such as the 2008 Georgian War, when it would have been more likely mistaken for the real thing . Fortunately Yeltsins' decision was not made in a crisis such as 2008 Georgian war, when
 The Russian Air Force had scheduled an exercise that day, in which strategic bombers were to be flown toward the United States . In a dangerous coincidence, the exercise was to be held in the U.S.
 Russia learned of the terrorist attack in time to ground their bombers . Fortunately, the Russians learned about the bombing, and ground the bombers .
 Most Americans are unaware that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame . The danger is compounded because most Americans don't know that the first shot was fired by Georgia .
 Sarah Palin has said that the U.S. should be ready to go to war with Russia should that occur . Ongoing tensions could well produce a rematch of the Cold War .
 The majority of the above incidents occurred post-Cold War, challenging the widespread belief that the nuclear threat ended with the fall of the Berlin Wall .
 India suffered a major attack on Mumbai by Pakistani-based terrorists in November 2008 . Mumbai was attacked by a group of terrorists in 2008 .
 In October 2009, internal terrorists attacked Pakistan’s Army General Headquarters . Nine soldiers and two civilians were killed in the attack, including nine soldiers .
 Khan is believed to have sold Pakistani nuclear know-how to North Korea, Iran, and Libya . Khan is sometimes called “the father of the Islamic bomb”
 In November 2007, two armed teams circumvented a 10,000 volt fence and other security measures . Two armed teams, probably with internal collusion, circumvented the fence and security measures in 2007 .
 These incidents show that the nuclear coin has teetered on edge far too often, yet society’s lack of concern and resultant inaction demonstrate that nuclear optimism is a widespread illusion .
 A prerequisite for defusing the nuclear threat is to make society aware of the risk that it bears before catastrophe strikes . A prerequisite is to defusing a nuclear threat, says David Frum .
 Risk analysis is the kind of task for which risk analysis was developed . That is precisely the sort of task that risk analysis is developed to assess risk risk .
 HEU bomb dropped on Hiroshima was never tested before hand . HEU bombs were never tested in Japan .
 Quantitative risk analysis also has been applied to the risk of nuclear proliferation9 and nuclear terrorism . Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories have performed such analysis for various aspects of the country’s nuclear programs .
 It is surprising that the applicability of quantitative risk analysis to estimating and reducing the failure rate of nuclear deterrence has only recently been recognized, and its serious employment is yet to be accomplished .
 State diagram introduced in Handout #1 and reproduced below depicts how quantitative risk analysis decomposes a catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence into a sequence of smaller, partial failures . The state diagram is based on state of state diagram .
 The next section spotlights modern day analogs that came close to repeating 1962’s errors in July 2008, and still retain that potential . The following section then spotlights some of the best analogs .
 More recent events did not produce a fullblown crisis, most people are unaware that they occurred . Because those more recent events didn't produce fullblown crises, they are not aware of them .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2011-12, from the Russian perspective . Hellman: Nuclear weapons, risk and hope are at risk from Russian perspective.
 Fyodr Burlatsky was one of Khrushchev's speechwriters . He was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement . He is a former Soviet reform leader .
 It was the Americans themselves who pushed him in the direction of the Soviet Union . The Americans themselves pushed him to the Soviet Russia .
 He needed economic and political support and weapons, and he found all three in Moscow, Russia . "He needed economic, political and weapons support and support," he says .
 The Bay of Pigs defeat strained anti-Cuban feelings in America to the limit . In April 1961 the Americans supported a raid by Cuban emigrees . The U.S. supported the raid in April 1961 in Cuba .
 Calls were made in Congress and in the press for a direct invasion of Cuba . Calls for an invasion of the island nation were made by the Cuban government .
 In a matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in the Ukraine . Even the names used here and in Russia are indicative of our very different perspectives .
 The Russians usually call it the Caribbean crisis, because they see it in a larger context, including the Bay of Pigs invasion the year before and the United States deploying similar missiles in Turkey . The U.S. also deployed similar missiles to Turkey in the same year .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2011-12, and southern Russia. Hellman . Hellman: ‘Nuclear weapons, risk and hope.’ Hellman’
 Khrushchev realized that America would find his deployment unacceptable and therefore did so secretly, disguising the missiles and expecting to confront the United States with a fait accompli . In spite of the similarity between the Cuban and Turkish missiles,
 Once the missiles were operational, America could not attack them or Cuba without inviting a horrific nuclear retaliation . America would not attack either Cuba or the U.S. without inviting an attack . America could attack Cuba or Cuba with a nuclear strike .
 An opponent is deterred from threatening, or even pressuring, an allied nation out of fear for the consequences . The U.S. is deterring from threatening or pressuring allied nations . An opponent would be deterred by the consequences of the actions .
 How much risk is involved in threatening nuclear war over much more minor acts? But that begs the question, addressed here, of how much risk there is .
 As the name “nuclear trip wire” so presciently implies, it is possible for the opponent to accidentally trip and spring the trap, except this trap destroys the trapper as well as the trapped .
 Khrushchev did not envision what would happen if he was caught before completing his missile deployment – which was exactly what happened . Kennedy did not think through likely Soviet responses to our Turkish missile deployment . Kennedy didn't think through how likely Soviet response would have been .
 Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status; . 3. the Berlin Crisis; . 4. the Bay of Pigs invasion; . 5. the American deployment of ballistic missiles in Turkey; . 6. the U.S. sending ballistic missiles to Turkey;
 The actors involved in each step did not perceive their behavior as overly risky . The actors said they did not think their behavior was too risky .
 The steps taken by the U.S. brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster . But compounded and viewed from their opponent’s perspective, those steps brought the . world to . brink of a nuclear disaster, experts say .
 During the crisis, there were additional, fortunately unvisited states that would have made World War III even more likely . The U.S. did not visit any of these states .
 Burlatsky noted pressure to correct the Bay of Pigs fiasco intensified after Khrushchev’s Cuban missiles were discovered . The strong pressure to remove Castro with a powerful American invasion force intensified in 1962 .
 Those arguing in favor of invasion were ignorant of the fact, not learned in the West until many years later, that the Soviets had battlefield battlefields . Prof. Peter Bergen: "Those who argued for invasion ignored the fact that the Russians had battlefields"
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, page 7 of 16 nuclear weapons on Cuba designed to be used against just such an American invasion . Hellman: "Nuclear weapons, Risk
 A Soviet submarine that was “hunted” and forced to surface by American destroyers as it approached Cuba carried a nuclear torpedo that its captain considered using against his American attackers . Also unknown to the American participants, a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear bomb was considered to be used against
 This section shows that in July 2008, we came perilously close to repeating that sequence of mistakes, and that those conditions continue to persist today . Contrary to conventional wisdom, the Cold War and nuclear threat are ghosts of the past, this section shows .
 The 2008 Cuban Bomber Crisis stopped just short of becoming a full-blown crisis . Most people are unaware of the crisis, most of them unaware of it .
 We came within perhaps “half a step” of once again staring at the nuclear abyss and wondering how we got there . But, as shown below, we came within . perhaps perhaps ‘half a . step’ of once . again staring . at nuclear abyss .
 Cuba still is an emotional land mine for Americans, with an economic embargo still in place . Step #1: Conflict between America and Castro’s Cuba is still an emotional issue for Americans .
 In July 2008, when word reached Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz that the Russians might deploy nuclear capable bombers to Cuba, he said that would cross “a red line” even though that threatened move was in response to American actions seen as equally provocative by the Russians .
 Russia is demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status . The same is true today. Russia is being denied the status of an equal military force .
 Coleman argues that the possibility of Soviet tactical nukes was considered by some . Coleman: D-Day ceremonies repeatedly give the impression that the West won World War II, overlooking the 12 .
 President Mikhail Gorbachev on the nuclear age and Russia’s future,” Harvard Political Review, January 13, 2008 . Gorbachachev: “The nuclear age is the future of Russia .
 The link given in ‘2008 interview’ will take you to a collection of articles, where you can search on Tatsis to find the beginning of this article . The link to the 2008 interview is given in "2008 interview"
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2011-12 . Hellman: The Soviet contribution in the victory over Nazism was a contribution to the victory of the Soviet Union .
 Other irritants, such as the JacksonVanik Amendment discussed in Handout #5, are more minor, but add fuel for a potential fire . The JacksonVik Amendment is also a potential irritant .
 Several hotspots test Russian-U.S. relations in ways that are similar to Berlin forty years ago .
 The 2008 Georgian war is almost a mirror image of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . The Georgian war was almost an almost identical to the 1961 invasion of the Soviet Union .
 In 1961, Kennedy was humiliated and therefore looking for ways to regain his manhood, both in the eyes of the Soviets and the U.S. electorate . In 1961 he was humiliated, therefore looking to regain manhood .
 In 2008, Georgia’s President Mikheil Saakashvili was soundly whipped by the Russians after his attempt to regain South Ossetia and Abkhazia by force by force .
 Saakashvili has taken actions that could result in a rematch with Kennedy . Pushed by some of the same motivations that drove Kennedy to a rematch . The Georgian president has taken action against Kennedy .
 Most Americans mistakenly believe that Russia’s invasion of Georgia was totally unprovoked . The danger is increased because most Americans mistakenly think it was an invasion . Most Americans believe that the invasion was an attack on Georgia .
 Sarah Palin said in September 2008 that we should be prepared to go to war with Russia if it invaded Georgia again . Many Americans, including President Obama, still support NATO membership for Georgia .
 The missile defense system President George W Bush planned for Eastern Europe, with American missiles in Poland, bears an ominous similarity to the Turkish missiles . The American deployment of ballistic missiles in Turkey is similar .
 The Russians see the missiles as offensive and part of an American military encirclement . The missiles are seen as defensive and non-issue in the United States .
 Russia's fears are exacerbated by Poland’s seeing the system as protecting it against Russia . Poland has seen it as protecting itself against Russia. Russia's fear is exacerbated by the Polish system protecting it from Russia .
 President Obama’s September 2009 decision to emphasize options that are less threatening to the Russians has partly defused the danger . But basing part of the system in Romania still leaves the issue far from resolved .
 A future American president could reactivate Bush’s original plan, further adding to the danger . Future U.S. presidents could react to the original plan .
 Khrushchev’s deployment of ballistic missiles in Cuba is not yet a modern day analog of this complete step . Serious warning tremors occurred in July 2008 .
 Izvestia, a Russian newspaper often used for strategic leaks, reported that, if we proceeded with our Eastern European missile defense, we would be at risk of being attacked .
 Then nuclear-armed Russian bombers would be deployed to Cuba, then nuclear-army bombers would go to Cuba .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry later dismissed Izvestia’s report as unfounded . Some elements within the Russian Defense Ministry appear to be in a similar state of mind to the one that prompted Khrushchev to deploy his Cuban missiles .
 Strategic rocket carriers Ty-160 and Ty-95MC can be sent to air bases in Latin America and Africa at any moment, says The Defense Ministry .
 Cuba, Algeria and Venezuela are at risk, says President Obama . "We are talking not only about Cuba, but Venezuela and Algeria," he says . "Venezuela and Algeria are also at risk"
 Venezuela’s President Hugo Chavez, having been on a visit to Moscow last Tuesday, said that Caracas would be happy to accept the Russian military . Hugo Chavez has said Caracas is willing to accept Russia's military .
 Russian bombers visited Venezuela in September 2008 . Two months later, Russian bombers also visited Venezuela . Russia bombed Venezuela in 2008 .
 Neither operation nor the above reported landings on Cuba received much public attention in the United States . The crisis died down before reaching full blown proportions . Fortunately, neither that operation nor those landings were ever reported .
 In terms of assessing future risks, consider whether the risk would have been greater if Obama, rather than Bush, had been president when the bombers made those 2008 flights .
 Obama's political opponents are more likely to use such an event to tar him as soft on national defense . That would be the case if Obama’s political opponents were using such a event to attack him as a soft leader .
 President Obama is under pressure to act aggressively on the immigration issue . The risk of inaction on the issue is greater than ever before, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Obama's actions would put pressure on the president to take action .
 Both Kennedy and McNamara agreed that the Cuban missiles did not upset the strategic balance, but were heavily influenced by domestic politics to counter the move with a strong response .
 In some ways, these incidents in July 2008 stopped half a step short of a full-blown crisis, but that is little cause for comfort . In some . ways, the incidents in . 2008 stopped . half a . step before a full .blown crisis . But that's little cause
 We were – and still are – at a very dangerous point in the process of the process 14 . This translation is courtesy of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter: We were at a dangerous point at the time .
 Inna Sayfer, who also assisted with ensuring the accuracy of English language reports of Russian language news articles, helped ensure accuracy .
 Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, 2011-12, and need to recognize complacency as our true enemy . Hellman: “We need to be careful of the dangers of nuclear weapons and
 It is essential that we start paying greater attention to these early warning signs of a potential disaster . It's essential to pay more attention to this early warning sign of a disaster .
 A Positive Role for Risk Analysis is to illuminate the risk posed by our nuclear weapons strategy . A positive role for risk analysis is to identify the risks posed by nuclear weapons strategies .
 Risk analysis allows us to focus remedial efforts where they will be most effective . By identifying the most likely failure mechanisms, such as a crisis involving Cuba, risk analysis can be used to improve the situation .
 The six steps that led to the 1962 Cuban crisis might tell us about the Cuban crisis . One approach is to revisit the modern day analogs of the six steps leading to the crisis .
 The risk would be greatly reduced if we reacted more rationally to events surrounding that island nation, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 We should reexamine why we have such an emotional response to events in Cuba . Cuba poses little or no threat to our national security, author says .
 This step also shows the danger of drawing “red lines” in Russian-American confrontations, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 1962, both Kennedy and Khrushchev became haunted by similar “red lines” they had drawn, but that were crossed . In 1962 both men were haunted by what they had crossed .
 They faced the dilemma of either admitting that they had been bluffing, thereby losing all future credibility in nuclear standoffs, or following through with actions that would have risked hundreds of millions of lives .
 The president had issued a public statement on September 4 warning the Soviets that “the gravest issues would arise” if they developed “a significant offensive capability” in Cuba . President Obama had been criticized for his passivity over Cuba .
 He had planted a marker in the sand, and was now committed to defending it . He said: "I'm not going to let it happen. I'm going to defend it"
 Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status . Russia is demanding that the U.S. military is treated as an equal and not an equal .
 This risk would be reduced by reassessing the limits of U.S. military power and the extent of Russian military power, says Julian Zelizer .
 As demonstrated by the Russian reaction to President Obama’s 2009 D-Day speech, it would not take much to diminish tensions . As demonstrated, Russia reacted strongly to the president's 2009 speech, Obama has been criticized .
 It's the tale of the British people whose courage during the Blitz forced Hitler to call off the invasion of England . The Russians, who sustained some of the war’s heaviest casualties on the Eastern front; and all those French men and women who would rather have died resisting tyranny than
 Russia protested that its role in defeating Nazi Germany in World War II had gone unrecognized at this month’s D-Day ceremonies . Russia says its role was unrecognized by the ceremonies .
 Not a single word was said by Sarkozy, Brown or Harper about the decisive role in the victory of the Soviet Union . Only U.S. President Barack Obama mentioned Soviet Union’s contribution to defeating fascism and its horrendous losses .
 Nine out of every ten Wehrmacht personnel killed in battle were killed on the Eastern Front . The war was one of the deadliest in the history of the German army .
 Modern day, hotspots such as Chechnya, Georgia, Estonia, Cuba and Venezuela, test Russian-American relations in ways similar to Berlin forty years ago .
 The risk can be reduced by re-examining our perspective on each of those hotspots and rooting out any mistaken assumptions . We need to re-evaluate each of the hotspots to reduce the risk of terrorism .
 Having one of the players behave more rationally is better than none . While ideally, ideally, the other nations involved would do the same .
 Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1987, page 112 . Richard Betts wrote a book on nuclear blackmail and nuclear power .
 As an example, it would reduce the risk if Americans were to recognize that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia not solely to blame .
 The 2008 Georgian war is almost a mirror image of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion . The invasion of Georgia was the first invasion of the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The best way to reduce the risk of this step is to reexamine our perspective on Georgia to produce a more accurate picture of the state, says Georgia .
 America's plans for missile defense in Europe bear an ominous similarity to the Turkish missiles we deployed in 1961-62 . America’s plans to defend Europe bear a similar similarity to that of the Turkish missile defense we deployed .
 This risk can be reduced by trying to put ourselves in the Russian’s shoes and see how our actions might make them respond . This risk is reduced by putting ourselves in our shoes and seeing how we might respond to them .
 Some far-sighted individuals did that both before our 1960’s Turkish deployment and while our more recent Eastern European missile defense system was debated . Surprisingly, some far-sight individuals .
 These individuals were not heeded – sometimes by themselves, as we will see in the first example . Unfortunately, these individuals have been ignored by the government .
 President Barack Obama is moving toward an agreement with Turkey to take some Jupiters . Such thinking, however, did not block his administration’s movement toward the agreement .
 Bernstein cites another instance of this ability to see the danger of our Turkish deployment . Bernstein: "The danger of this deployment is that the U.S. will not be able to do so again."
 While Castro’s revolution had taken control of Cuba the preceding winter, Castro was not yet a Communist . Castro was still not a Communist when he died .
 As noted in earlier references to Burlatsky’s book on Khrushchev, “At that time Castro was neither a Communist nor a Marxist.” ‘At that . time Castro . was neither Communist nor Marxist. He was neither Marxist nor Communist .
 President Reagan’s March 23, 1983, ‘Star Wars’ speech proposed missile defense as a solution to the nuclear dilemma . President Reagan's speech proposed a missile defense solution .
 “If paired with offensive systems, they can be viewed as fostering an aggressive policy,” he said . “We seek neither military superiority nor political advantage.” But recognizing that, “if paired with . offensive systems,. they can . be viewed . as fostering
 The work was done in secret, with the promise to share the technology with the Soviets to be fulfilled at some indefinite future time . In spite of that pledge, the work was kept in secret .
 I think we ought to work on these military technologies ONLY openly and jointly . I think that we should work on this military technology ONLY openly .
 "I think we shouldn’t work on them unless we are willing that the Soviet Union have them as well. And I go farther than Edward , … because I think we . shouldn't . work on it unless we . are willing to have them . as well as the Soviet
 We would not have done that with MIRV we would not be in the present situation where we feel our land-based forces are vulnerable. Had we done that, we would have been in the current situation, we wouldn't have felt that way .
 A test of whether the government regards this as truly stabilizing or just states that its stabilizing in order to sell the program. That’s really a test of . whether the . government regards it as truly . stabilizing, or just stating that . its stabilising in order
 If it is stabilizing for both sides, let’s give it to the Soviet Union, let's get the advantage of getting something in return – some access to their programs if possible .
 President Ronald Reagan laid out a vision for the U.S. military two decades ago . The vision is surprisingly similar to the vision he laid out more than 20 years ago . President Reagan's vision is similar to that laid out by Ronald Reagan .
 They might also consider joint threat assessments, as well as bilateral discussions on options for missile defense cooperation . The U.S. and South Korea are also considering joint threat assessment .
 Russian liaison officers at U.S. missile defense tracking sites in exchange for United States officers in Russian strategic command centers . United States may also place liaison officers with Russian officials at missile defense sites . The United States might also consider placing liaison officers in Russia's strategic commands .
 The transparency gained from such steps would be useful in offering reassurances that these radars are not meant for spying on Russia . It would also be useful to offer reassurances the radars were not meant to spy on Russia.
 Should we ever find ourselves this close to the nuclear threshold, we still can reduce the risk by responding more rationally, Hellman Hellman says . Hellman: We can reduce our risk by reacting rationally and acting rationally .
 Kennedy and his advisors regarded the downing of an American U-2 as a major provocation even though it had violated Cuban airspace . For example, in the 1962 crisis, Kennedy believed the U.2 downing was a provocation .
 Given that Hillel had spent his whole life studying the Torah, this was an insult and a joke . Given that this was a joke, it was a mockery of the Torah and a insult .
 Many of the recommendations for reducing the risk of a nuclear disaster are just applications of the Golden Rule . This story is highly relevant to defusing the nuclear threat because many of the above recommendations are applications of Golden Rule.
 Newsweek compared the Russian invasion of Georgia to Hitler’s takeover of Czechoslovakia in 1938, even though that it has been determined that Georgia fired the first shots and bears some of the blame .
 These are just two examples where recommendations for reducing nuclear risk are special cases of the Golden Rule . I would not be surprised if moving away from dangerous double standards were all that is needed to start solving this problem .
 In the shortened version which started this section, I left out two points. In the shorter version, I also left out a point or two points . In this version of this article, please share your comments with us .
 First, Hillel’s inquisitor is a Gentile, so the story is a Jewish put down of Gentiles . The story is about a Jewish persecution of Gentile Jews . The book was published in 1897 .
 Jews would be offended if the story were reversed, with a Jew asking a Christian saint to teach him the Gospels while he stood on one foot . Jews are offended by the story being reversed, and would be outraged by the idea .
 The inquisitor first goes to Hillel’s major competitor, a Jewish sage named Shammai . Second, in the full story, he goes to the Jewish leader, a major rival . Hillelel was a Jewish leader in the Jewish community .
 Shammai is understandably insulted by the challenge and angrily shoos the man away . The incident happened in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Talmud doesn’t tell us, but I am sure this story was created by followers of Hillel, not Shammai . While the Talmud says this is not true, it is thought to be a story from followers of the Holel .
 Hillel's followers would have been angry if Shammai’s students had created its mirror image . Under that assumption, this story violates the Golden Rule a second time, in that story violates Golden Rule .
 Even when trying to teach the Golden Rule, it is all too easy to violate it . This goes to show that, even when . trying to . teach it, it goes too easily to . violate it, even though .
 Constant vigilance, critical thinking, and critical self-examination are needed . Constant vigilance and critical thinking are needed in the United States .
 We need to carefully reexamine our thoughts and deeds to ensure that we are seeing ourselves and the world as clearly as possible, so that we can be as consistent as possible with our stated ideals .