 President Kennedy assembled a group of high-level personnel to discuss the crisis . President Kennedy met with Soviet ships headed toward Cuba with missiles on board .
 On October 22, he addressed the nation to explain what the government would do in the crisis . He said the government will do what it would do to deal with it .
 On October 28, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev backed down and the ships turned around and headed back to the Soviet Union . The ships were headed to the USSR, but turned back to Russia .
 The United States and the Soviet Union had stood on the brink of nuclear war . The U.S. and Soviet Union were at risk of a nuclear war.
 President Obama has directed "continued and increased close surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup," he says .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . Third, it shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile fired from Cuba . The U.S
 President Obama reinforced our base at Guantanamo, evacuated today the dependents of our personnel there, and ordered additional military units to be on a standby alert basis . Guantanamo has been reinforced as a precaution .
 We are calling for an immediate meeting of the Organ of Consultation, under the Organization of American States, to consider this threat to hemisphere security and invoke Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty . Fifth .
 We are asking for an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convoked without delay to take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace . Sixth, under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking tonight .
 UN resolution calls for the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba . UN observers will be required before the quarantine can be lifted, UN says .
 I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace and to stable relations between our two nations . Seventh and finally, I call on Chairman Khruschev to eliminate this .
 "I speak to you as a friend, as one who know of your deep attachment to your fatherland," he says . "I share your aspirations for liberty and justice for all," he adds . "You are a man of honour and dignity," he writes .
 Most Cubans today look forward to the time when they will be truly free from foreign domination . And I have no doubt that most Cubans are looking forward to freedom, says President Obama .