 We hope that both the Symposium and this volume will help fill the large gaps in information previously available on the role of intelligence in this crisis .
 The volume and Symposium are both products of CIA's new program of openness . Robert Gates, Director of Central Intelligence, announced in his speech to the Oklahoma Press Association .
 The Center now includes the CIA History Staff, first formed in 1951, and a new Historical Review Group . DCI William Casey established the Center in 1985 . The Center has increased the scope and pace of the program to declassify historical records .
 Mary S McAuliffe, Deputy Chief of the History Staff, has located and compiled the documents in this collection . She has compiled the collection .
 McAuliffe selected, using new guidelines prepared by a special CIA task force and approved by the DCI .
 We are especially grateful to the principal reviewer who handled this difficult process with great skill and dispatch . The principal reviewer handled the difficult process, including coordination with other departments .
 "We should also acknowledge the invaluable help of our History Assistant, Ms. Ms. Jennifer, who assisted us in this essay . We should also be thankful for the help of the History Assistant .
 Intelligence staff prepared and produced this book with remarkable speed and virtuosity . Diane Marvin, Diane Marvin and the members of the Directorate of Intelligence's Design Center and Publication Center .
 Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone sent to Headquarters from France a month before the missile crisis . McCone's notes taken during National Security Council Executive Committee meetings at the height of the crisis .
 It also includes intelligence memorandums and estimates, briefing papers, Cuban refugee reports, and memorandum on Operation MONGOOSE, the clandestine program aimed at destabilizing Castro regime .
 Many of the evaluations of the missile threat contained here draw upon IRONBARK material, whose source was Soviet Col. Col. Gen. Vladimir Kuznkov .
 Documents in this volume are organized according to the date of subject matter . A February 1963 document discussing a September 1962 event will appear among September 1962 documents . To the degree possible, this volume is organized .
 In general, support documents follow documents that summarize a sequence of events . Support documents are followed by documents that summarise events in the event .
 To conserve space and speed declassification, excerpts have been taken from some of the lengthier entries . Some of the entries have been redacted to speed up declassification .
 In some cases, the summary or conclusion section of a document has been excerpted . In others, material on topics unrelated to Cuba or missile crisis has been omitted .
 All such instances have been noted in the Contents list and in the documents* headings . The documents* list is a list of the most recent documents published in this article .
 All the documents in this volume have been subject to declassification review . Some of the documents have been deleted for security reasons .
 DCI McCone was frequently out of town in the weeks leading up to the missile crisis .
 McCone was away from Washington on his honeymoon in France from the evening of 23 August through 23 September 1962 . McCone's honeymoon was in France during the night of September 23 September .
 He left for Los Angeles on the evening of 1 1 October 1962, coming back late on 14 October . He returned to Los Angeles late that night .
 He returned to the West Coast on the afternoon of 15 October, immediately following news of the death of his stepson .
 It should be noted that these documents, many of them written hastily during a time of national emergency, contain occasional errors .
 Much has been written on the missile crisis during the 30 years that have elapsed since those 13 days in October . But the unavailability of classified material has left many questions still unanswered .
 The CIA History Staff hopes that the publication of this volume, and the further releases that follow, will make possible a more complete understanding of this complex and deeply troubling event .
 Adm. Acheson, Dean Alsop, Joseph Alsops, Stewart Anderson and Stewart Anderson were mentioned in the 1962 book .
 George W M Jr. Jr., USN Ball, USS Ball, George W Bohlen, Charles E Bowlen, Chester Bundy, McGeorge Cannon . Chester Bundy was killed in the sinking of the Little Pine Island . Lt. George W W. Ball was the last person to
 Lyndon B. Johnson, Clarence Johnson, Lyndon B, LBJ, Carl Keating, Senator Kenneth B Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Robert F Kent, Sherman Khrushchev, Nikita S Killian, James R. Killian and others .
 Lyman L., USA Lovett, Robert A Lundahl, Arthur C Mansfield, Mike Martin, Edwin M McCloy, John J McCone, John A McNamara, John S Miskovsky, M, C Norstad, Gen. Gen. Norstad .
 Senator George A Sorensen, Theodore Stevenson, Adlai E Sweeney, Gen. Smathers, Sen. George A. Smithers, Adr. Adm. Sweeney, and Sen. Theodore Stevenson . Sen. Sweeney was a member of the Republican Party .
 National Intelligence Estimate 85-2-62, ""The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,"" 1 August 1962 9 4. 4. 9 . 9 4 . 9 . 4. 5 .
 V^al LCI iU IVXvVV^UilC', V^-aUIC, 1*+ OCpLt/lllUw 17U+ 17U^ . JDAV'CLptJ / j 28. V^Al LC
 Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 91 . ""The Military Buildup m Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 34. "Cuba" was Cuba's military buildup .
 Construction begins on SAM sites at Matanzas, Havana, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Santa Lucia, San Julian, & La Coloma . SAM sites include Matanza, Havana and Mariel; Santa Lucia .
 Upsurge of Soviet arms shipments begins arriving in central Cuban ports . Cuba has been hit by a surge in arms sales to the Soviet Union .
 Construction begins on SAM sites at Sagua la Grande, Caibarien, St. Sancti Spiritus . SAM sites are located in the region of St. Sasma la Grande .
 Soviet armored group arrives at Remedios . OfrC RET T Date Western Cuba . Central Cuba Central Cuba Eastern Cuba . Eastern Cuba 5-10 September .
 National Intelligence Estimate 85-2-62, ""The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,"" 1 August 1962 . "To analyze the situation in Cuba and to estimate the prospects over the next year or so"
 By force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming more deeply committed to preserving and strengthening the Castro regime . B By force, the Soviet Union is becoming increasingly committed to preserve and strengthen the regime, says the author . B
 The USSR has avoided any formal commitment to protect and defend the regime in all contingencies . The USSR, however, has not committed a formal commitment .
 The Cuban armed forces are loyal to the personal leadership of the Castro brothers . C.C. C. C is the Cuban government's most powerful military force .
 Their capabilities have been and are being greatly enhanced by the Soviet Bloc's provision of military equipment and instruction . Their capabilities are being . enhanced by . the Soviet . Bloc provided . military equipment . and instruction.
 The background information contained in that document remains generally valid . It is generally considered to be an important part of the story .
 The Cuban armed forces are well able to intimidate the general population and to suppress any popular insurrection likely to develop in present circumstances . D. D. The Cuban Armed Forces are well capable of intimidating the general .
 They are probably capable of containing and controlling any threat to the regime through guerrilla action . They are capable of repelling any invasion short of a direct U.S. military intervention in strength .
 The Cuban economy is in deep trouble, in part because of the U.S. embargo and a shortage of convertible foreign exchange . Agricultural and industrial mismanagement is key to Cuba's economic woes, says K. K.
 Despite remedial measures, it is unlikely that agricultural and industrial production can be significantly increased in the next year or so . The UK is unlikely to significantly increase production within the next few years .
 The expected increase in capital imports from the Bloc is unlikely to produce a net growth of the economy before the end of 1963 .
 The Castro regime retains the positive support of about 20 percent of the population, but disaffection is increasing . Fierce opposition to the Castro regime is increasing in Cuba .
 Few dare to accept the risks of organized active resistance in present circumstances, for fear of the regime's massive apparatus for surveillance and repression . This trend is manifested in growing passive resistance and in occasional open demonstrations of resentment .
 If arms and supplies became available and if confidence was created in the likelihood of outside support for a major Cuban uprising, resistance activity and potential would increase . G. G
 It is unlikely that the regime could be overthrown unless events had already shaken the regime and brought into doubt its capacity for survival, and unless substantial outside support for the insurgents were forthcoming . Even so it is unlikely it could overthrow the regime unless events have already shaken it .
 Castro regime still seeks to lead the 'inevitable' revolution throughout Latin America . Castro regime's preoccupation with domestic problems tends to limit its activity in this respect .
 In Latin America there is widespread disillusionment regarding the Cuban revolution . The revolution was a major success in Cuba .
 Cuban subversive activity could prove effective in certain unstable situations, e.g., in Guatemala or Venezuela . Nevertheless, militant pro-Castro groups exist in several countries .
 The appeal of the Cuban example will increase in Latin America if reform lags there and hopes and promises remain unfulfilled . The appeal will increase if reform is not achieved, says CNN's John Sutter .
 McCone reported on the sodden importation of materiel — at that time the characteristic; of which was unidentified — and Soviet personnel . He speculated that this could be electronic equipment for use against Canavarel and/or military equipment including medium range ballistic missiles .
 McCone reported definite information on surface to air missiles and speculated on the probability of medium range ballistic missiles* 3* On August 22nd McCone gave the same informa t i o n to the President, adding certain details concerning the number of Soviet a nd China m pers on
 On August 23rd in a meeting with the President, Busk, McNamara, Gilpatric, General Taylor, Bundy and others, McCone again reviewed the situation and questioned the need for the extensive SAM installations . The same reasoning was applied in discussions with Senator Rue sell's Sub
 Soviet shortrange surface-to-surface missiles of portable type in Cuba could command important targets of southeast United States and possibly latin American Caribbean areas .
 'Possible measures now being taken are for purpose of insuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMs to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed'
 Suggests BNE sfcdy motives behind these defensive measures which even seem to exceed those provided most satellites*"" 9.9.9 . Suggests that the BNE may have been trying to protect itself from satellite interference .
 On September 13th McCone received communication from Carter stating that the BNE continued to feel that the installation of SA 2a is most reasonably explained by other than a desire to hide MRBM build-up .
 I vouM like to talk with you onP from Norstad's headquarter* to the Whit* House or Pentagon situation room tonight between 1700 and 1800 your time . I would rather talk about the Pentagon situation .
 CIA and community must keep government informed of danger of surprise and also that detection of preparatory steps possibly beyond our capability . Do not wish to be overly alarming this matter but believe CIA and . community must be aware of danger .
 I recognise Cuban policy decisions most delicate and beyond Agency or my competence . Thrust of press reports reaching me is that there exists a clear demarcation between defensive and offensive preparations .
 On 19 September Carter communicated the summary of the conclusions of Cuban SNEE of that date, paragraph D stating that in the opinion of the BNE, establishment of the MKBMi in Cuba would be 3 15 4 . U.S. President George W. Carter: "In the
 It is reported that during McCone' s absence* Acting DCI proposed an overflight which would cover the entire north and south perimeter of Cuba east of Havana and out to the eastern tip of Orient* Province except for an area in the immediate vicinity of Santa Clara .
 The purpose of this flight was to make a final determination as to how many SAM sites existed or were under construction . The mission was to determine if SAM sites exist or are under construction in the U.S.
 It is reported that because of Rusk's concern for the safety of the U~2 in view of the Sakolin violation on 7 September and the ChiNat loss on 10 September, the sense of the meeting that CZA be permitted to make 4 flights again** Cuba, two peripheral
 On the 14th of September the meeting of the Special Group, JCS representative outlined capabilities for low level coverage . The meeting was attended by JCS representatives .
 Secretary of Defense indicated he did not wish this operation considered until the results of CIA reconnaissance were obtained from CIA reconnaissance as approved on September 11th . The operation was approved by the Defense Department .
 On October 4th McCone noted to the Special Group that there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba and more particularly the entire western end of the Island for over a month . All flights since S Sejrtember had been either peripheral or limited and therefore CIA did not know
 DCI objected strenuously to the limitations which had been . placed on overflights . There arose a considerable discussion (with some heat) as to whether limita tions had or not been placed on CIA by the Special Group .
 On October 15th at a Special Meeting (and prior to receipt of the results of the October 14th flight), two additional XJ-2 ^<m^* to cover all of Cuba were approved . This was concurred in by higher authority .
 CIA has received approximately 60 reports on increased activity; 40 out of Opa Locka, and the balance from controlled sources considered dependable . CIA says it has received about 60 reports of increased activity in recent weeks .
 It appears that between 4000 and 6000 Soviet/ Bloc personnel have arrived in Cuba since 1 July . Between 4000 and 6,000 Soviet/Bloc personnel are believed to be in Cuba .
 Many are known to be technicians, some are suspected to be military personnel . There is no evidence of organized Soviet military units, as such, being included .
 A great many of the arriving Soviet/ Bloc personnel are isolated from the Cuban population . The Cuban population is isolated from their homeland .
 The unloading of most ships takes place under maximum security, with the Cuban population excluded from the port areas . Cuban population is excluded from ports areas .
 Large crates have been observed, which could contain airplane fuselages or missile components . Large equipment is noticeable; large crates have also been observed .
 In some instances trucks or trailers have been lowered into ships holds, loaded, covered with tarpaulins and removed bodily . Truck or trailer has been placed in ships holds and loaded into ships .
 Increased technical assistance to Cuban industry and agriculture and/or the Cuban Armed Forces . Increased assistance to Cuba industry, agriculture and the Cuban armed forces .
 Possible establishment of Soviet COMINT-ELINT facilities targetted against Canaveral and other important U.S. installations . U. S. installations may be targetted by the Soviet Union .
 The timing of this buildup coincides with Raoul Castro's trip to Moscow . This may in itself be significant .
 McCone stated that the purpose of the meeting was to again review the situation in Cuba in light of the most recent intelligence findings . Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Alexis Johnson, the Attorney General, DCI, General Taylor, General Lemnitzer and Mc George Bundy .
 DCI recalled that in the August 10th Meeting he had reported such information as was then available on the accelerated Soviet supply of personnel and materiel to Cuba . DCI said he had been briefed on increased Soviet supply to Cuba in August .
 INT and possible electro -counter measure efforts or missile sites . Ground-to-air missile sites, probably ground to-air missiles .
 DCI that continuing Soviet aid and technical assistance will present the United States with a more formidable problem than it now confronts or has confronted in the past .
 There was general agreement that the situation was critical and that the most dynamic action was indicated . There was also agreement that there was a need to be 'dynamic action'
 There was discussion of various courses of action open to us in case the Soviets place MRBM missiles on Cuban territory . There was also discussion of how to deal with the situation in the event of an attack .
 There was also discussion of blockades of Soviet and Bloc shipping into Cuba or alternatively a total blockade of Cuba . There were also discussions of a possible total blockade .
 There is a very definite inter-relationship between Cuba and other trouble spots, such as Berlin, says Bundy .
 Sabotage activities were planned on a priority basis and in all probability, we would witness more failures than successes . Sabotages were planned for a number of days before the attack, officials said . "Sabotage operations were planned to be on priority basis," they said .
 To date we had experienced a very tight internal security situation . To date, probably this would become more so in the future .
 Attorney General questioned the feasibility of provoking an action against Guantanazno which would permit us to retaliate, or involving a third country in some way . EYCG G^lV'
 All overt actions would involve serious consequences throughout the world, Bundy said . Bundy's opinion that all overt actions involved serious consequences . Bundy: "We should expect a high degree of atribution"
 The meeting was inconclusive with respect to any particular course of action . It was felt that the President should be informed on the evolving situation and the DCI agreed to brief him at the Meeting on Wednesday, August 22nd at 6pm .
 We further agreed that the entire matter should be reviewed with the F resident by Rusk, McNamara, Bundy and McCone . We also agreed that Rusk and McNamara should review the matter .
 Mr Bundy undertook to arrange for this meeting following the Special Meeting scheduled for ten o 1 clock on Thursday, August 23rd . The meeting will take place at 10 a.m. on August 23 .
 DCI's memorandum to Rusk and the Attorney General covered Donovan matter . Donovan matter covered in DCI memorandum . Following this discussion, there was a brief discussion .
 It was agreed that Mr Hurwitz would meet with the Attorney General to determine the extent of the commitment we would make for the government which would permit Mr Donovan to engage in prisoner release negotiations .
 DCI made it abundantly clear that the existing commitments to Committees of the Congress prevented CIA from using covert resources for this purpose .
 McCone stated that in view of these commitments to the Congress he did not feel that he should meet with Mr Donovan . McCone said he would not meet with Donovan .
 The Committees of Congress would change the view expressed a year ago at the time of the tractor negotiation . McCone said he felt that if a reasonable deal could be made for the release of the prisoners, it would change his view .
 The following points were covered: •es eves only 25 1. fflfi; CYCS ONL Y 3. ffli; . CYCS onL Y; . General Taylor . The following point was covered: .
 McCone reviewed all of the substance of the August 21st briefing of the Secretary of State, Defense and others as reported and recorded .
 The President expressed concern, but agreed with General Taylor andDCI that any policy matters would be discussed at the forthcoming meeting of the Principals to be held at the White House on August 23rd . ie^an^b^ad^^on^^
 The President acknowledged receipt of McCone' s personal letter concerning his personal plans . The President indicated approval of approval thereof and stated that he had responded in writing to the letter .
 This point not cleared and should be pursued as strongly opposed by Chiefs . Chiefs should be strongly opposed to Chiefs. Chiefs should not be allowed to back down .
 The president requested a continuing analysis of the number of Soviet and Oriental personnel imported into Cuba; quantity and type of equipment and its probable use . All SAM sites might differ from the ground sites, he said .
 McNamara observed portable ground missiles could not be located under any circumstances . McNamara said portable ground missile missiles were impossible to locate under the circumstances .
 DDCI should have Board of National Estimates working continuously on this analysis . Board of national estimates should be working continuously, DDC says .
 President requested analysis of the danger to the U.S. and the effect on Latin America of missile installations . President Obama requested analysis .
 President raised the question of whether we should make a statement in advance of our position, should the Soviets install missiles and the alternative actions open to us in such event . Mr. Obama said the U.S. should make such a statement .
 In the course of the discussion, apparent many in the room related action in Cuba to Soviet actions in Turkey, Greece, Berlin, Far East and elsewhere .
 McNamara agreed they were useless but difficult politically to remove them from the White House . McNamara said it was a waste of time to have them removed from the country .
 President raised question of what we could do against Soviet missile sites in Cuba . President raised questions about what could be done to counter Soviet missile attacks .
 Could we take them out by air or would a ground offensive be necessary? Or alternatively could they be destroyed by a substantial guerrilla effort? "Could we take out them by air? Or would they be able to destroy them by a guerrilla effort?"
 President raised question of what we should do in Cuba if Soviets precipated a Berlin crisis . President raises question about what we would do if we were in Cuba in Berlin .
 This is the alternative to the proposition of what Soviets would do m Berlin if we moved in Cuba . This is an alternative to what they would do if they moved into Cuba .
 During the conversation I raised substance of my plan of action as outlined in the attached paper . During the . conversation I . raised substance of my plan to . action . I raised the substance of the . plan to action .
 We should not start the political action and propaganda effort now until we had decided on the policy of following through to the complete solution of the Cuban problem .
 In a private conversation with Kenned v. Kenned, Kenned said Cuba was our most serious or obi em; also added that in his opinion, Cuba was the key to all of Latin America; if Cuba succeeds, we can expect -erii of Latin American to fall
 Arrival of many ship loads or equipment and materiel curing July and August . Arrival is expected to last several months .
 The conclusion that stepped up plan will not, in the opinion of the National Board of Estimates, accomplish the stated purpose of overthrowing Castro from within, and will be attributable to the United States and cause loss of face .
 The above all lead to the conclusion that with the passage of time, it is possible there will evolve in Cuba a stronger rather than a weaker Castro dominated communist state . Cuba could serve on the one hand as a model for similar actions by disciplined groups throughout Latin America, and on the other
 Cuba would also serve as a possible location for MRBMs, for COMINT and ELINT facilities targetted against U.S. activities, most particularly Canaveral, and finally as an ECM station which might adversely affect our soace and missile work .
 The instanteous commitment of sufficient armed forces to occupy the country, destroy the regime, free the people, and establish in Cuba a peaceful country . Cuba will be a member of the community of American states, says President Obama .
 Actions under above might cause internal strife of sufficient proportion to prompt the action outlined under above with no further provocation . Alternatively, actions under above could prompt internal strife sufficient to prompt an action outlined above .
 All recipients of these copies to be advised that there is to be no further dissemination except on a minimum need-to-know basis . No actions were to be taken on the basis of the information . No further dissemination was to be disseminated on a need to know basis .
 U-2 photograjfay of 29 August confirms extensive Soviet nUitary deliveries to Cube, in recent veefcs . Cube is a U.S. bi-engineered bi-laboratory facility .
 Surfacetoair zdssile sites, guided zdsaile teats, sad additional land arpazjents wen c observed* 2.2.3.5.4.5 . The site is located in a state of unknown origin .
 SAM equipment has been located at one additional site . One probable assembly area has been identified and SAM equipment is located at another site . SAM equipment will be located at an additional site, officials say .
 A* The saall amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed of the work indicate the p r ogr aa is proceeding on a crash basis .
 Soviet personnel have been at the sites for at least 9 to IS months . Cubans are being 3.5 years old . Soviet personnel are expected to stay at the site for at most of the time .
 SAM activity in Ctrlente province probably will be followed by several others In the vicinity . Ihe one area of SAM activity will probably be followed up by several other areas .
 Defector and clandestine reports from Las villas province indicate that at least two sites will be located there . No confirmation or definite locations thus far .
 B* Uie pattern nov emerging suggests as many as 2k sites may eventually ""be set up" — enough to ""blanket the entire Island* fc. Fc. B*Uie pattern .
 At least 8 Kbmrclass missile boats have been delivered to Cuba in recent weeks . At least eight KBMrclass missiles have been brought to Cuba .
 Ebese PT-like boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and IT miles . A* Ebese boats carry a radar-guided missile that can be fired at targets .
 Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known if this included Komar training . B Some Cuban personnel have also received training from the USSR .
 C OJiese boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year . The boats are the latest in a long line of vessels from the USSR .
 Die photography shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land a rm ent s, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns .
 B Dae photography of 29 August turned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted . Some 37 aircraft were captured, some 37 of which were captured .
 Total mrnher of military or allltaryrelated ahipaents -to Cuba since the current deliveries bega n in zaio-July nay be as high as 65* 2.5% of the total deliveries to Cuba since July will be up to 65*
 Routine Soviet deliveries of econcnic aid and trade goods are being zaade largely an Vestem ships .
 At least 1,700 Soviet nilitary technicians arrived in Cuba in late July and early August in connection with military activities . At least 2,000 Soviet military personnel were sent to Cuba in July and August .
 At least 1,300 oare Soviets are arriving unannounced unannounced this week . No reports of their activities so far .
 Action Generated by Dd Cable s^pNjg^^fc on ceriiing Cuban Low-Level Photography . a5au5ensrve Weapons 1.0 .
 General Carter asked General Lemnitzer on 27 August about the possibility of low-level photography using RF-101 or F8U aircraft . General Carter said he wanted to photograph Cuba .
 At that time General Lemnitzer indicated that something probably could be dug up . At that point General Lemmitzer indicated he probably could dig up something .
 General Carter informed USIB at the 29 August meeting of his conversation with General Lemnitzer . General Carter told USIB of his conversations with Lemnitz . USIB was informed by General Carter of the conversation .
 Use of RF -101 or F8U aircraft flown by United States pilots would be feasible from the military point of view . General Lemnitzer raised the issue at the Special Group Meeting the following day .
 General Carter said other photography did not give sufficient detail and precise identification of certain types of equipment . General Carter pressed the point by indicating that other types of photography didn't give enough detail .
 After some discussion, the Group agreed to take cognizance of this matter and requested it be reopened at an appropriate time when specific targets and information needs could be identified .
 This freeze continued until Saturday, 1 September, when the information was extended slightly further to the working analysts . This freeze was extended until Saturday 1 September .
 General Carter informed Secretary Gilpatric on 1 September that the General and&ari Kaysen agreed a full readout was necessary and that some low-altitude flights were needed to pinpoint the sites .
 Not until Tuesday, 4 September, did the President announce the presence of a missile defense system in Cuba . The system was announced by President Obama on 4 September .
 USIB was brought up to date in executive session at its 7 September meeting on information concerning the SA-2 sites . ahcl also discussed the freezing atmosphere of the White House .
 General Carter requested all members to advise their principals and asked also to be alerted immediately if NSA came up with further information . General Carter asked that all members of Congress be informed .
 Soviet short-range surfaceto-surface missiles of portable types in Cuba could command important targets in Southeast U.S. and possibly Latin America .
 General Carter, as related above and follows, had already urged use of RF-101's relative to your ""hunch"" about missiles . General Carter had already told you to look for missiles in advance .
 General Carter recollects showing your cable to Mr Bundy the following day, Saturday afternoon . General Carter remembers showing the cable to Bundy the next day . The cable was shown to Bundy on Saturday afternoon.
 There is no evidence that the information was passed outside of the Agency, presumably because it was a reaffirmation of the position you had already taken .
 General Carter instructed Mr Reber to check with Colonel Steakley to determine when JRC would seek Special Group approval . On 8 September, upon learning COMOR made Cuba targets available to JRC for possible RF-101 coverage, General Carter told Mr Reiber he would seek approval .
 Measures now being taken are for purpose of ensuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBM's to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed .
 BNE study motives behind these defensive measures which even seem to exceed those provided most satellites . Suggest BNE find out why these measures are being used .
 General Carter sent an action memorandum on 10 September to the DD/I quoting this passage . General Carter asked the BNE to undertake the necessary analysis . The BNE has been tasked with the analysis .
 The response said BNE was "convinced that costly crash operation to install SA-2's is reasonably explained by other than desire to hide later build-up"
 The events of 10 September have already been chronicled in a separate memorandum . The events were already chronicled by the Prime Minister .
 General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense calling for further need to conduct tactical reconnaissance of Cuba, particularly the facility near Banes . The site would require photography of a larger scale than acquired by a .
 On 13 September you cable < ^^ ^^^^^^ views of the importance of going ahead with s ecur ing ' r eiea s eof Cuban prisoners . On 13 Sept. you cable .
 Colonel Steakley outlined capabilities for low-level coverage of certain targets in Cuba . The following day, at the Special Group meeting, he outlined capabilities . The meeting was held in Cuba, Cuba .
 It was noted that the Secretary of Defense did not wish this operation considered further until the results of Agency reconnaissance in the same area were available . It was said to be possible that this operation could be considered further .
 General Carter pushed hard to keep the Group disposed toward a favorable consideration later . Further conclusion was thus deferred until the next week's meeting .
 On 16 September you again cabled extensive comments on the Cuban situation making the point that we must carefully study the prospect of MRBM's in Cuba .
 The DD/I's response, contained in a cable to you on 18 September, stated that an introduction of MRBM's was unlikely because of the risk of U.S. intervention .
 General Carter stated a d e s i r eto u sgS^~ * 0 1 1 s over Cuba . General Carter said a complete SA-2 defense would make use of the U-2 extremely hazardous if not impossible .
 He also said that he thought use of a . ^^ ^drone over Cuba could be justified to the Special Group . The President would never know when the point of decision was reached .
 General Carter uxged its possible use against Cuba and State appeared enthusiastic . After its use over Kamchatka, was disapprove of its use .
 CIA also CIA responsiiS^en^recoSSssance operations against Cuban targets, 11 17. Ti^m to the DD/B^as signing them respon sibility within CIA .
 During this period, poor weather resulted in no exploitable take from U-2 operations . The Agency had made an operational determination that none of the four flights which evolved from the 10 September meeting would be made unless weather was less than 25% overcast .
 The first of the four flights was made on 26 September; the last on 7 October . The first flight was made in September and the last was in October .
 The peripheral flights turned up additional SAM sites and coastal defense cruise -missile sites, but that's about all . The peripheral flight turned up more SAM sites .
 Conclusions of the Cuban SNIE, approved by USIB on 19 September, were cabled to you that day . USIB cabled you the next day .
 It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in U.S.-Soviet relations than the Soviet Union has displayed thus far, and consequently would have important policy implications with respect to other areas .
 The following day, 20 September, you cabled I suggesting a most careful consideration of the conclusion introduction of offensive missiles was unlikely . The next day, you sent a message to the U.S. suggesting it was unlikely they would introduce offensive missiles .
 It had already been endorsed by the Intelligence Community and released . It was already endorsed and released by the intelligence community .
 S SEPTEMBER 1962 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE C ""PAGE i cr 5 TOUTING TO il CCNFt DIRECTOR CCI 1-2 4 S/C >4 EYES ONLY 1 3| ' ~r'J ROUTINE CXJT
 The following is a reconstruction of the reasons for the meeting at the White House in Mr Mc George Buddy's office on 10 September 1962 at approximately 5:45m .
 This memorandum is based upon discus sio with Mr Parrott of th e White House , General Carter, Dr. Dr. Carter, and Dr. George W. Carter .
 BBBB recor< * s that at approximately 10:00 on the morning of 10 bepr he received a telephone call from Mr Parrott passing on a request made by Mr Bundy on behalf of the Secretary of State .
 Mr Bundy desired an answer within a half hour, Mr Parrott indicated . Mr Bundy indicated that he wished to know if Mr Bundy had been found guilty .
 Mr McMahon immediately contacted zhe Cn air man of COMOR which was in session at that moment, and they agreed to provide a response as quickly as possible . Mr McMahon then contacted the airman of the COMOR .
 Mr Parrott called a secon time to advise Mr McMahon that Mr Roger Kilsman had advised that 61 21. would accept the responsibility for providing the answers to the Secretary of State, and that he had scheduled a meeting that afternoon with Mr James Reber, the Chairman of
 Mr Rusk asserted that although the information was needed, everything should be done to minimize the risk element .
 He urged that the routes be so designed as to have the U-2 f s over the Island the minimum possible time . There was general discussion on the desirability of avoiding SAM sites .
 The Secretary of State also made the point that he did not wish to have overflights mixed with peripheral flights . He wished to maintain the right to fly over international waters .
 He raised the question as to whether some of the needed coverage couldn l t be obtained from peripheral flights with oblique photography . He said he wanted to know if it could be possible to get the coverage on the plane .
 CIA representatives showed the members of the group a map of Cuba and the planned routes . The CIA representatives also showed them a map showing the Cuban routes .
 The SAM sites which had already been identified were pointed out . The routes planned would avoid these sites . It was noted that the routes planned for these sites were avoided .
 It was noted that there could be new sites which had not yet been identified along planned routes .
 CIA representatives stressed importance of intelligence requirements . CIA representatives also stressed the importance of the intelligence requirements for the program .
 Bundy and Rusk indicated that the group would not object to the overflights provided there were no incidents . The routes taken over the land mass of Cuba were the shortest possible and avoided the surface-to-air missile sites .
 Minutes of this meeting were prepared on the next day by Mr Tom Parrott who did not attend the meeting .
 WfOt Director DC1 1-2 S/C 3 -* HRITY EYES ONL ROUTING DEFERRED ROUTINE SIS CEN PRIORITY . DiR 357^ 1.5 cm DiR357^ 1-1 . Wf
 To the White House or PENTAGON SITUATION ROOM -TONIGHT "" • BETWEEN 1700 AND 1800. TO THE WHITE HOUSE OR PENTEGON SITTUATION . TO THE White House OR Pentagon SITuation . To the
 A review of all available evidence leads us to conclude it is highly likely that the suspect missile site near Banes, Cuba is a facility for launching cruise missiles against ship targets at fairly close ranges .
 It consists of two 30 foot rail launchers in revetments, each connected by cable to a Soviet Whiff tracking radar . Each of the launchers is connected by a cable to the tracking radar, each is fitted with a tracking device .
 Ground support equipment consists of eight canvas-covered, missile-type trailers, two probable generators and electronic vans, and other general purpose vehicles . The U.S. is sending a small group of African Union troops to the Africa-Africa mission .
 Our knowledge of Soviet cruise missiles is incomplete, we know of three systems which could fit i those facilities observed at Banes . The systems could fit the facilities observed in Banes, Russia, according to our knowledge .
 He have eliminated ; other operational Soviet cruise missile systems, with ranges from 1000 to 4000 nn, because their missiles probably would probably be too large for the Banes facility .
 SS-N-2-a Komar class patrol craftlaunched cruise anti-ship homing missile, launched from inclined rails 25 to 30 feet long . With the Komar radar, the effective system range is 10 to 15 nm .
 SS-C-1-the ""missile-in-a-bottle" was first shown in the 1961 Moscow 7 November parade . SS- C-1 was the first Soviet missile to be shown in a Moscow parade .
 This missile is launched from an inclined ramp within a tube mounted on a large four axle truck . The missile was launched from a ramp in a tube attached to a large 4-wheeler .
 Whiff radar seen at the ; site has not been noted with known cruise missile systems but could be used for target acquisition in this installation . The site is not known with known missile systems, but could have been used in target acquisition .
 The site is near the coast suggests that the range of its missile is short . Otherwise it could be located inland in a less vulnerable area . The fact that the missile range is short suggests that it is likely short .
 Short-range missiles could defend against seaborne assault on deep water ports in Nipe Bay south of Banes . It is located where short-range missile missiles could be located .
 Neither the SS-N-1 nor SS-C-1 has sufficient range to hit any target in the United States . Such missiles would fit this policy pat* tern. Because neither the SS .N.1 nor the .SS-N .1 has enough range to .
 If the Banes missile site is a coastal defense installation, it would follow that similar facilities may be set up at a number of other locations favorable for protecting beaches .
 We doubt that Cubans have been given sufficient training in the use of such missiles to allow them to have operational control over the sites . We doubt they have sufficient training to be able to control such sites .
 It seems likely that Soviet technical training personnel would be needed for some time to come and would be available for operating the installation in time of crisis .
 Their output is being sent to the Soviet Bloc and is equivalent to 20 percent of Soviet production . They are being sent as part of a trade embargo with the Soviet Union .
 The more important of these two plants is on the bay protected by the Banes site . The site is also protected by a UNESCO World Heritage Foundation .
 U.S. and U.K. military bases in the region are located in the Gulf of the Arab Spring . The Gulf of Arab Spring is a key ally in the Middle East .
 IKUJ1KC OfflCfl.'COOIOINAIIXC otucit' Re-produced 3Y other than the ISSUING 0.5% of the product .
 VZSSAGZ Reverse Blank Blank Blank 79 29. 29. We must give those making decisions our best estimate of possible developments . We must also give them our best possible scenario .
 AS 50TED IH 85-2 , EOEEVBB, PHWfflT, PHwfftT SEATS OF COBAK XOCSQKT XS TEST BAD AHD EDBSTAffHAL UHUHM WILL BS ISSL
 SHIS 85-3 K^g-yfB XE&S *™>g XS A HUEEE C30CHD IH W HI CH MBilV S OR CgF SSI TC — CEAHAC3XB Or BDCC
 'Gw'no. REPRODUCTION BY other THAN THE ISSUJNG""OFFICE IS PROHIBITED? .•• ■>'gw"no. Re-production by other than the author of the book .
 Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 ""The Military Buildup in Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 . To assess the strategic and political significance of the recent military buildup .
 We believe the USSR values its position in Cuba primarily for the political advantages to be derived from it . We believe that the main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there .
 The development of an offensive military base in Cuba might provoke U.S. military intervention and thus defeat their present purpose . At the same time, they evidently recognize that they . recognize that the development . might provoke United States military intervention, they .
 The statement is likely to be regarded as ensuring the continuation of the Castro regime in power, with consequent discouragement to the opposition at home and in exile .
 The threat inherent in these developments is that to the extent that the Castro regime thereby gains a sense of security at home, -SECRET 1 92 33, will be emboldened to become more aggressive in fomenting revolutionary activity in Latin America .
 The USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba . A decision to provide such weapons will continue to depend heavily on the Soviet estimate as to whether they could be introduced without provoking a U.S. military reaction .
 It would indi cat e a far greater wilhTifmess tn increase the level qfrisk inJJg^oviet relations than the _US g3 h** di^ Wy^^i£J^r^smd consequently _ would have importantj)olicy
 Many Latin Americans will fear and resent a Soviet military intrusion into the Hemisphere, but will regard the problem as one to be met by the United States and not their responsibility . The U.S. will not be responsible for the problem, but it is not their own responsibility .
 The chances are better now than they were at Punta del Este to obtain the necessary two-thirds OAS majority for sanctions and other steps short of direct military action aimed at Cuba . We estimate the chances are now better now .
 If it became clear that the USSR was establishing an ""offensive"" base in Cuba, most Latin American governments would expect the U.S. to eliminate it, by whatever means were necessary . But many of them would still seek to avoid direct involvement .
 The agents reported this information as soon as they were able, but in most cases had to depend on secret writing for communication . The agents had to use secret writing to communicate .
 There was a lag of several days before the information became available . Hence, there was a time before their information was available .
 Refugee reports were delayed considerably longer for other, and uncontrollable, reasons . The report was delayed for other reasons .
 Many of then, because of the tine-lags noted above, did not arrive in Washington until after 14 October, and some are still coning in . Many of those who arrived in D.C. are still in the process .
 By about 1 October, the San Cristobal area had been pinpointed as a suspect MRBM site and photographic confirmation had been requested . Nevertheless, by about 1 . October, it was confirmed that the area was a suspect site .
 This represents a considerable technical achievements . To understand why, it is again necessary to backtrack in time. This is why it is important to understand why .
 Intelligence Community had been flooded with reports of Soviet weapons shipments and missile installations in Cuba . Intelligence Community was flooded with Soviet weapons and missile shipments .
 There were several hundred reports, claiming the presence of everything from -small arms to ICBils, before August 1960, i.e., before the USSR had supplied Cuba with any weapons at all . There were hundreds of such reports .
 On 15 February 1962 an interagency -interrogation ""center was established by CIA at Opa Locka, near Miami, to handle Cuban refugees and improve the quality of intelligence collected from them .
 Opa Locka reporting rose rapidly during the .defensive phase of the Soviet buildup began, and provided good information on the types of equipment coming in, on the use of Soviet personnel and on the security precautions imposed by the Soviets .
 NPIC either lacked the ""necessary coverage or made a negative finding" in all cases . NPIC: In all cases, NPIC failed to provide the necessary coverage .
 An example of its procedures is the handling of targets in the Sagua La Grande v . area .
 Readout of the 29 August coverage showed an SA-2 site near Sagua La Grande which apparently was the basis for the reported activity there . The target card was changed to show a confirmed SA-1 site .
 It should be noted that knowledge that this site was in the area could have led analysts to misinterpret any subsequent reports of MRBM activity as part of the SAH development . No such reports were received .
 The CIA analytic"" apparatus recognized and correlated the first authentic reports of MHBil equipment ever to be received in Washington, and took action upon them .
 This report, which was disseminated by CIA on 21 September, contained sufficient accurate detail to alert intelligence analysts . f .f An observation on 17 September ox a convoy moving toward the San Cristobal area . The convoy was moving toward a convoy .
 Tnis information, received on 27 September, dovetailed in many respects with the earlier report, it says .
 The arrival of the second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the sane convoy . CIA analysts concluded that there was a possibility of the SS-4 identification, being genuine .
 OXTKO. th;j is UN EVALUATED . The content is not definitive, appsaisal of content is tentative .
 Itocrihle Kissilc Site in Havana . September 1962 . eL COUSTTf Caha . e . Caha. September 1962. eL .
 I observed and courted 20 Soviet trunks tcviss 20 Ions trailers going vsst cn Avenida 23~e truck convey vas preceded oy a Jeep containing ailitianenen . £s tresis vera driven try Soviets la civilian »k£hes —
 As the track convey seared its destination at Csnpo l£bertad, the rrfHtln. rfHtls. was the first to arrive at the site of the crash . The crash was caused by the explosion of a train carrying passengers .
 Jeep vas vaved off, eni . eni the Soviet tracks end trailers proceeded into Cerpo libcrtad . The Soviet track ends ended up in Cerpo .
 Ihc trucks appeared to oe described these ""boxes contained. 6x5, 7i»ir-157j canvas -covered • atified then fron photogrs^is I Tn the fccika .
 The trailers, the longest I have ever seen in Cuba, verc tvo-oodo, four-reeled. I do not knowi&at h* The trailers are the longest in Cuba .
 Tza the tr.ll era of the r-iecile it locked as if the hottcn and tvo sides of the nissile had a vooden franc, niri tko entire riftr*!vas canvas -covered.vas .
 Tie canvas silhouetted the tvo top firs of the fcr fins of the Kiasile . It locked as if the tail era of tie canvas was the end of the era .
 The canvas-covered nissile vas taller than the top of the trcck-tcvins it. She tcp cf the canvas -covered nessile .
 Since it vas dark, I could not sec -who the drivers of the truclto vere vere were . The driver of the car was killed in the crash .
 She trucks vere followed ""by citfit Soviet-cuilt flatbed-type trailers 1 epproydEatcly 22 feet lone"
 AG took sharp exception stating the Special Group had not withheld approval on any specified actions to his knowledge, but to the contrary had urged and insisted upon action by the Lansdale operating organization . AG said he did not approve of any specific actions he knew of .
 There followed a sharp exchange which finally was clarifying inasmuch as it resulted in a reaffirmation of a determination to move forward .
 In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two in 41. as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be reconsidered . Actions'which could be attributed to indigenous Cubans would not
 General Lansdale instructed to give consideration to new and more dynamic approaches . Lansdale was instructed to consider the possibility of capturing Castro forces for interrogation should be studied .
 With respect to overflights, were instructed to prepare and present to the Special Group on next Tuesday at a special meeting alternate recommendations for overflights . The Special Group will consider alternate recommendations next Tuesday .
 Use of U-2s on complete sweeps (as contrasted with peripheral or limited missions) may include the use of firefly drones . Use of 101s or other reconnaissance planes onx low level, intermediate level, and high level missions .
 Consideration was given to stating publicly that we propose to overfly Cuba in the interest of our own security and the security of the Western Hemisphere, and then to proceed even though doing so involved risk. Consideration .
 It was the consensus that we could not accept restrictions which would foreclose gaining all reasonable knowledge of military installations in Cuba . The consensus was that we couldn't accept restrictions that foreclosed gaining access to military installations .
 During the meeting McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General kansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clarified General Lansdale's authority over the entire MONGOOSE operation .
 The August 1st guidelines for phase two were in« adequate and new guidelines must be considered . Consideration was given to the existing guidelines and it was the consensus that the guidelines were in the best place to go .
 Me Cone reviewed detail* of the Donovan negotiation*. discussions with the President, Attorney General* Eisenhower, the decisions not to approach Congressional leadership, the discussion with Senator Jayits, and the final report from Donovan . Cone also reviewed the decision to not approach Congressional leaders .
 McCone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy"" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone was gone . McCone said the amount of 'noise' from minor incidents had led to this conclusion .
 The U.S. Intelligence Community could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Cuba, it says . More importantly, the decisions to restrict U-2 flight* had placed the United States Intelligence .
 McCone stated he thought this a probability rather than a mere possibility . Bundy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisfied mat no offensive capability would be installed . Bundy said he was relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information
 McCone said the Bundy 4* viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but he just did not agree . He said he did not think the United States could afford to take such a risk .
 Bundy then philosophized on Cuba stating that he felt that our policy was not clear, our objectives were not determined and therefore our efforts were not productive . Bundy then said that the U.S. policy on Cuba is not clear and that our objectives are not determined . Bundy said that he
 Bundy was not critical of either or of the TansrUU operations'* It was obvious that he was not m sympathy with a more active role such as those discussed at 5412 on Thursday as he felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would they particularly enhance XL S position
 McCono la reporting on Thursday's discussions at Thursday's 5412 moating repeated the views of tha President and expressed by tha Attorney General it waa agreed that tha whole Government policy with reference to Cuba must be resolved promptly .
 We should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or learn to live with Castro* and his Cuba and adjust our policies accordingly . Bandy 1 a views ware that wa should either .
 Bundy stated that Adenauer did not express the concern of the U.S. policy reflected by Eisenhower and reported in the memorandum . Bundy said Adenauer didn't express the concerns of the policy reflected in the memo . Bundy also said that Adamaama didn't agree with Eisenhower's memorandum
 Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organise his Government aa he desires . Bundy said that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration . Bundy also rejected the notion of regular meetings with the NSC .
 It waa agreed that we would have a fartheT discussion over tha waskand . It was agreed that it would be a discussion over the issue of the 'waskand'
 The President's announcement would be condemned by the Soviets and the Cubans as an intention to commit acts of international aggression . Thereafter the U.S. would conduct overhead reconnaissance of Cuba .
 The weight of publicly expressed opinion in the free world would probably condemn the announcement as threatening a marked increase in international tensions .
 International law on their side, they would hope to achieve a UN condemnation of the United States for acts threatening peace . Having international law on its side, the U.S. should be condemned, they say .
 The UN situation would be complicated, and it's possible that in one way or another the United States could avert a formal resolution . The U.S. has been criticized for its stance on the issue .
 U.S. unlikely to find much support among assembled nations . Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that the United States would find support among the assembled nations.
 The USSR would not consider that the U.S. announcement created such, a dangerous situation as to require it to reduce its support of Castro . The USSR did not consider the United States announcement created .
 It would judge that, in political terms, it could ill afford to make any reduction at such a time . Moreover, it would judge it would be a waste of time to make such a reduction .
 The announcement, or succeeding overflights, would not cause the USSR to alter its Cuban policy in a direction which eased the provocation offered to the US, e.g., the provision of mediumrange missile bases . On the other hand, we do not believe that the announcement or overflights
 In reacting publicly, the Soviets would probably reaffirm their commitment to Cuba's defense, though they would probably not make the commitment more specific or binding . In reacting to the situation, the Soviet Union would likely reaffirm its commitment .
 We think it unlikely that the Soviets would retaliate directly with any major moves against the Western position in Berlin . The Soviets are unlikely to respond directly to any major U.S. moves in Berlin, say experts .
 In confronting the Allies with local crises which raise the level of risk in Berlin, they generally prefer to choose a time when United States opinion is not highly agitated over other EastWe st issues .
 The Soviets and Cubans would make every effort to shoot down any reconnaissance vehicle that came over Cuba . The Soviet-Cuban government would shoot down the vehicles . The aircraft was shot down by the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 If they succeeded in doing so, the tensions would be somewhat increased . The international political effects of the shootdown would not in themselves be as great as if it had occurred without the prior Presidential announcement .
 I went to the White Houae and explained to the Preeident and McGeorge Bundy the position* taken by Ford and Mahon . The President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations , recognizing there would be some political cons eons nee .
 President requested that such information be withheld at least until after elections as if the Information got into the press, a new and more violent Cuban issue would be injected into the campaign .
 McCone stated that these particular photographs could not be restricted as they had been disseminated to the Intelligence Community and several Joint and specified commands, such as CINCLANT, SAC, NORAD, and others .
 The President requested that the report be worded to indicate a probability rather than an actuality because In the final analysis we Only saw crates, not the bombers themselves. The President then requested that . The report was worded out to indicate that the . report was a probability of an actual
 The President has requested that all future information be suppressed . The President further requested that the information was suppressed .
 It was agreed that future information would be disseminated to members of USIB . Only those responsible for giving the President advice will be given the information .
 USXB members instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices . Chiefs of Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and the Secretary of Defense* Similar strictive action would be taken in State.
 All those involved in ""giving advice to the President"" would be fully informed . Therefore all those involved would be aware of the President's decision .
 Operational divisions and the joint and specified commands would not be informed at this time, except at the direction of the above people who are receiving the information .
 McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline* who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon who agreed to prepare a procedure for review on Thursday morning . The President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba""
 McCone then called the Attorney General and advised him of his talk with the Cannon Committee* Tne Attorney General had no particular comment on the matter .
 McCone received a report from Houston that Donovan had gone into a meeting at five o'clock . Donovan had been in a meeting with the Texas Rangers at the time .
 At 11(15(15) General Eisenhower called McCone stating he was sorry a meeting could not be arranged, he was leaving very early the following morning for Gettysburg . McCone reported that negotiations were in progress and he also reported objections stated by members of Congress .
 Positive action might be indicated and then he said there had been two instances where action was warranted but had not been taken . Positive action was indicated but not indicated, he said . He said there were two instances in which action was not taken .
 Eisenhower did not elaborate; however, he feels that when Castro embraced Communism publicly and announced publicly his allegiance to Moscow, we had then a reason to act militarily . Such action would have been defendable, Eisenhower said .
 On Thursday morning McCone reported by telephone to Kennedy, reviewing the Eisenhower discussion . McCone said he was concerned over Donovan's safety in view of the rash of publicity, most particularly the Herald Tribune article .
 McCone stated he was not so sure and that he decided to bring Donovan out unless things were going well . McCone said he did not think Donovan would be brought out unless he was in good health .
 McCone led that he had told the President and the AG that he would take all, or his full share, responsibility . McCone said he wished ths AG to bear this in mind as the position taken in this respect still stood .
 U-2 Overflights of Cuba, 29 August through 14 October 1962 . The August 29th flight flew over most of the island and photographed much of it .
 The photography revealed that eight SAM sites were under construction in the western half of the island . Eight SAM sites are under construction .
 The flight also discovered an installation at Banes in the eastern end of the island that was not familiar to the interpreters .
 By September 14th, interpreters had identified the installation as a cruise missile site . Subsequent research by the interpreters, comparing the August 29th photography with that of two similar installations recently noted elsewhere, had enabled them to identify the installation .
 The finding of SA-2's in Cuba on the August 29th flight presented us with a new problem in planning U-2 fbghts over Cuba . The finding was presented by the U.2 in Cuba .
 There is general acceptance of the fact that we are carrying out overhead reconnaissance of Cuba and that we will continue to do so as long as our national security requires it . The U.S. has been conducting overhead reconnaissance missions to Cuba for decades .
 This almost universal approval of U-2 flights over Cuba is only since the middle of last October . The U.2 has been allowed to fly over Cuba since October .
 In Cuba, quite a different public attitude existed. Pr*or to the finding of offensive ballistic missiles in Cuba . Pr* or to the find of offensive missile missiles .
 In the event of a mishap we would have to be able to explain, convincingly and in detail, the justification for having undertaken the mission . It was always at the backs of our minds the knowledge .
 There are serious reservations regarding the use of the U-2 . Elsewhere in Government and among persons whose stated views strongly influence public opinion there were serious reservations about the use .
 There were expressions of extreme concern from some pubi c leaders over the increase in tension that might result from overflights . Others voiced the opinion that such flights were illegal or immoral . Some expressed concern that overflights might increase tension .
 The vulnerability of the U-2 to Soviet SA-2 systems and the discovery of those systems in Cuba contributed further complicating factors in weighing risks against the need for hard intelligence, officials say .
 The situation as of September 1962 must be viewed against this background of universal repugnance, or, at the very least, extreme uneasiness regarding overflights . The situation in September 1962 was viewed with universal repulsion .
 The U-2 was used to carry out intelligence missions for the U.S. Air Force in the 1960s and '90s . The U.2 program was designed to provide valuable intelligence to the American intelligence community .
 Each track was drawn to cover high priority targets agreed upon by an inter-agency group known as the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance, a committee of the U.S. Intelligence Board .
 It is designed for one purpose -long flights at very high altitudes and at relatively low speeds . It was designed to be able to fly long flights .
 Before a mission we wanted to be absolutely certain that the intelligence need was great enough to justify the risk of loss of the pilot and aircraft . Therefore, before we committed one to a mission, we would be very careful to consider the risk .
 The Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance was the intelligence community's vehicle for making the target studies . The intelligence community was the vehicle for the studies .
 CIA overflights were programmed through the medium of the CIA Monthly Forecast . All overflights are programmed by the CIA monthly forecast .
 It was practice not to launch a mission unless weather over most of the critical targets was predicted to be less than 25 per cent overcast .
 Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance recommends next mission should cover those areas of the island which were not photographed on the August 29th flight . Attention should be paid to the then unidentified site at Banes .
 It was important to learn whether the Soviets had made a limited deployment of SA-2' s to Cuba or whether an island-wide defense was being built .
 The mission was successfully flown on schedule on September 5th over the eastern and central portions of the island . The next mission will take place over the east and central areas of island .
 SAM sites detected in the central portion of the island . Three additional SAM sites were detected in central part of the country .
 The flight encountered heavy cloud cover over eastern Cuba . Unfortunately, the plane was unable to make it to Cuba .
 Carter requested the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance to consider the kind of information that could be obtained thus . General Carter requested that the information could be used in the U.S.
 The Committee met on September first and third and reported its views on what might be accomplished through low-level flights . The Committee is looking at what might have been achieved by flying through the air .
 The September 5th mission was a result of the heavy cloud cover encountered over eastern Cuba . General Carter addressed a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense on September 10th, 1962, recommending the mission .
 Secretary of State to initiate action to provide for employment of tactical-type reconnaissance against Banes . Banes was still unidentified .
 The Secretary of Defense felt it preferable not to mount a low-level reconnaissance of Banes until the results of CIA high-level . reconnaissance became available . The secretary of defense said it was preferable not .
 By September 14th, research had identified the Banes installation as a cruise missile site . As noted in the first paragraph of this article, continuing research had also identified the site as an installation .
 Secretary of State expressed concern at CIA's planned coverage of Cuba, involving extensive peripheral coverage as well as two legs directly over Cuban air space, all in one flight .
 He said that he had no objection to the peripheral parts and, in fact, thought it was useful to continue to establish our right to fly over international waters .
 He recognized the necessity of obtaining vertical coverage of the Isle of Pines and the eastern portion of Cuba . On the other hand, he recognized the need to obtain vertical coverage .
 He felt it was unwise to combine extensive overflying of international waters with actual overflights . He felt, however, that it was too dangerous to combine international waters and overflights.
 Two flights were to be wholly peripheral, involving no land overflight . The two flights were not overflight, but they were part of a larger flight .
 One was to cover the Isle of Pines, and the other was to overfly the eastern end of the island targeted against Banes and Guantanamo . The two were to fly over the eastern part of the Island .
 There was a three-week period from the 5th to the 26th of September during which only one flight was flown . There was no useable photography during that period .
 We finally acquired a moderately complete mosaic of the SA-2 defense of Cuba by piece-meal photography search carried out in late September and early October .
 The few periods of acceptable weather were so fleeting that they, kad passed before flights could be mounted . The few . periods of . acceptable weather could be so brief that they passed before . flights were mounted .
 The weather was checked for a possible mission every day beginning on September 6th, There was a oneor twoday period around the middle of the month when the forecasts were moderately favorable, A flight to the northeast was scheduled for the 16th .
 It went to the final briefing on the 15th, but was delayed for 24 hours because of weather and was cancelled when the weather continued unfavorable . The final briefing was cancelled due to weather .
 Planning for a flight over the Isle of Pines was under way on September 15th .
 The mission was flown on September 17th, but by then the weather had turned sour and no useable photography was acquired . The weather was bad enough to fly the mission, but the weather was too bad for photography .
 Another mission was under consideration between September 18th and 21st, but the weather was bad and the mission was cancelled . The weather is bad enough to cancel the mission .
 The mission to cover the Guantanamo and Banes areas was under consideration beginning 22 September . The mission would cover Guantanamo and the Banes area .
 Three SAM sites were discovered during the mission to find three SAM sites . The mission was successfully flown on November 4, 2012 .
 One of the four tracks was originally approved to cover only the Isle of Pines . It was originally intended to only cover the Isle Pines, but now covers all four tracks .
 Mr McCone called Mr U Alexis Johnson on September 28th and got approval to include coverage of the Bay of Pigs area . He got approval from Mr Johnson for the coverage .
 The SAM and cruise missile sites at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines were discovered . The missile sites were discovered on the island of the Isimans .
 Two of the three remaining remaining missions for September were considered during the period September 29th through October 2nd . The mission was considered during that period .
 The next flight under consideration was that along the periphery of the southeastern coast . It was scheduled to take off from the coast of Florida .
 It was briefed on October 4th and successfully flew the mission on the 5th . The mission was the first of its kind to fly in the U.S.
 The flight along the northeastern coast of northeastern coast was successfully flown the next day . The flight was the first of its kind .
 The next step was to discover how far advanced the earlier SAM sites were . The first step is to find out how advanced the SAM sites are .
 This information could / be obtained only by taking the risk of overflying an SA-2 site that might be operational . The information could be obtained by flying over-flight to an operational site in the U.S.
 At an interdepartmental group meeting on October 4th, the DCI made a strong representation for extensive overflights of Cuba . The DCI has been in Cuba for over two decades .
 The group requested the CIA and CIA to examine all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back as soon as possible .
 A meeting was called on October 9th to hear this report, and at this meeting the flight was planned which was actually flown on the 14th of October .
 From September 18th through October 2nd, agent and refugee reports dovetailed sufficiently to create a suspicion that there was something of unusual importance going on in a definite area west of Havana and that this unusual activity might be concerned with MRBM's . Additionally, agent reports from September 18
 These reports, however, were not of sufficient credibility to warrant their being used in intelligence publications . These reports were published in intelligence reports .
 On October 12th, operational control of U-2 overflights of Cuba was transferred to the Strategic Air Command of the United States Air Force .
 The mission was successfully flown by SAC on October 14th over the suspect area west of Havana and near the SAM site thought most likely to be operational . SAC successfully flew the mission over the area thought to be the target .
 As of October 16th, blanket authority was given for unrestricted overflights of Cuba . The flight was the first to discover the presence of MRBM's .
 Tab A is a summary of weather forecasts and the status of missions, 5 September through 14 October 1962 . The weather forecast is based on weather conditions and missions .
 IS October late, X wu informed that the latest readout from Cuban U-2 photography indicated Initial deployment of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles* I immediately authoriaed the dissemination of this information on a very limited needto -know basis to USIB members and their immediate commanders .
 On Tuesday morning at 11:45 I attended an NSC Meeting at the White House which included the President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary Ball, Secretary Martin, Secretary McNamaxa, Secretary GUpatric, General Taylor and General Taylor . Mr Lundahl and Mr Graybe
 At the end of the intelligence portion of the briefing, the group went into general discussion .
 Secretary Rusk was greatly disturbed about this new development but pointed out that Mr McCone had predicted such a possibility back in mid-August . Mr Rusk said he was disturbed by this development but that he had predicted it .
 We should try to create maximum confusion and not worry too much about the noise level . We should review our policy on a provisional government and try to get all the various factions working together . We must keep Cuba isolated from the Free World although in doing so we must isolate ourselves* 3.
 In the final analysis Mr* Rusk felt that we had to either make a quick surprise attack and knock out these bases or lay on a heavy propaganda barrage in all areas which might cause a withdrawal .
 Rusk stated that we could not in our thinking separate Berlin and other trouble areas in the world . Rusk: "We could not separate Berlin from other troubles areas in world"
 Mr Bundy pointed out that the Soviet decision must have been made early in the summer . These missiles probably arrived in Cuba at about the time the President was making his policy statements .
 Bundy thought there was a real possibility that Khrushchev may be confused or misled as to the temper of the American people and the intimate concern we all have over Cuba* 5. Bundy thought it was the real possibility . Bundy: "Khrrushchev might be confused ... as to
 Ha authorized ** many many U-2 fltgfrf aa nasded to gat full, complete, 100% coverage of the island . Ha authorized many U.2 flflflflags to be sent to the U.S.
 Ha asked for a report on the latest analysis of just what the *wiTiHTig toward Cuba is ux Latin American countries as wall as NATO as to any action the U S. might take . Some unanswered questions on whether or not to surface the fact that we were making surveillance
 An n a Cheruiauit, widow of lie late General, at klOl Cathedral Avenue, at . kl Ol Cathedral Avenue . Cheruauuiauue .
 CIA officers were alleging that intelligence on offensive nissile bases in Cuba had been available for several days before it was called to the attention of the President . President asked to confirm thaf 1 was responsible for the analysis of this kind of intelligence .
 I told the President that I was responsible in CIA for substantive analysis of intelligence and the dissemination of current intelligence to the President and the National Security Council, he said . "I told the president that I'm responsible in ... intelligence," he added .
 First photography of the }&BU offensive bases was flown on lh October and it took approximately 2k hours for the film to be returned, processed, delivered to the National Photographic Interpretation Center and scanned by PI analysts .
 I said I was sure the technical analysis did not turn up the evidence until late afternoon or early evening of 1$ October, that I myself heard of it first at that time, and that we completed the analysis before passing xhe information formally to the Vihite House onie morning
 President Carter ordered intelligence on new offensive Treasons in Cuba to be analyzed . Intelligence was given to the Director of SPIC to see that intelligence had identified the weapon .
 I spent all afternoon at the ooening session of the Cc^cnwealth-US Intelligence -fethcds Conference . Cm 15 Cctcber .
 "I do not know how long they had been waiting to see nie but it could not have been many minutes or they would have passed a message to me at the Conference Room," she said . "I don't know how many minutes I had to wait for them to see me
 The DCI had gone to the tfest Coast and General Carter was then at an informal reception for Commonwealth conferees in the Executive Dining Room at the Headquarters building in LIcLean .
 I was the host but delayed my arrival until 1815 to study this intelligence . I was a guest at the party in 1815, but delayed his arrival to study intelligence .
 "Upon arrival I called General Carter aside and advised him in broad terms of the intelligence," he said . "I advised him to be cautious about the intelligence"
 I said it would take several hours to wrap up a definitive report with fully considered analysis . "I said it took several hours for several hours, but I said I would wrap up several hours of analysis"
 General Carter said he was going to dinner with General Taylor and General Carroll . General Taylor said he would let them know about the dinner plans . General Carroll and General Taylor agreed to go together .
 McGeorge Bundy for the Wiite House and he said he thought he might be at the dinner and would notify him there . Bundy was invited to the dinner on Nov. 6. Bundy said he was looking forward to the event .
 I assumed General Garter would have alerted the Pentagon adequately via JCS and DIA but that he might have missed the ""flbite House* Accordingly I called LCr. Garter . He said he was concerned that he had missed the "flip" House*
 HcGeorge BunoY, found he had not seen General Carter, and double-talked the information to him in broad terms . He double-tweered the news to him, and said he was going to see General Carter .
 He was very clear as to the import despite being short on facts due to the problem of security over the phone . Despite being short of facts, he was clear of the fact that the import is illegal .
 I then called Roger Hilsman of the State Department and conveyed the same information to him . The State Department also called the White House on the matter .
 I had more difficulty indicating to him that I really meant UEEftPs rather than aircraft or other equipment we had anticipated, he said . The light finally dawned and he called the Secretary of State to pass on the word, she said .
 Early the next morning, 16 October, at about 0830, I talked again on the phone to Mr Bundy . Mr Bundy was the first person to contact Mr Bundy on the night of the incident .
 President Carter had another engagement and instructed me to follow through on the "White House formal notification" of Bundy' s invitation . Bundy: "I went immediately to his office, having cleared this with General Carter"
 If I rezezber correctly, Alex Jc'nnscn also cane in to get the briefing . If I'm correct, the briefing will take place on Monday morning .
 Bundy said that he had arranged an 1100 neeting with the President to fill in and consider tne United States policy problems involved . Bundy said he planned to meet with President to discuss the problems involved in the United States . Bundy also said he had an 1100-person meeting with President Obama
 At 0930 General Carter arrived to meet with bin Graybeal . He shenred bin the nenorandun ire had prepared, discussed the evidence, and adrised bin Gray be fully supported .
 Acting SCI should handle the briefing of the President, with which General Carter agreed . General Carter reluctantly agreed, and that senebedy had better get back to see that the DCI cn the VTest Coast got the word, and continue research .
 At 2:30 this afternoon, Attorney General convened in his office a seating on Operation KO2JG0CS3 . General Lansdale and Colonel Patcbell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State, Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the under
 He indicated that there had been noticeable improvement during the year /^ the collection of intelligence . But other actions had failed to influence significantly the course of events in Cuba .
 He spoke of weekly meetings of top officials on this problem and noted the small accomplishments despite the fact that Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and he personally had all been charged by the President with finding a solution .
 He traced the history of General Lansdale 1 s personal appointment by the President a year ago . Lansdale said he was going to give Operation MONGOOSE more personal attention .
 In order to do this, he will hold a meeting every morning at 0930 with the MONGOOSE operational respresentatives from the various agencies (Lansdale, Harvey, Hurwitch, Ryan, and General Johnson) • 3. He will also hold a morning meeting with the
 He obviously did not like the earlier memorandum, since he felt it showed no n pash a in getting on vith the acts of sabotage, he said . He said he felt the memorandum showed that he felt no nash a .
 Cuban terminology these days means an action which would contribute to the liberation of their country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps in conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out militarily* fly point was specifically echoed by Hewson Byan .
 Attorney General' s rejoinder was a plea for new ideas of things that could be done against Cuba . The Attorney General said there were no new ideas to be done .
 The meeting concluded with the reaffirmation by the Attorney General of his desire to hold a meeting each day, beginning tomorrow .
 Director of Central Intelligence Director., Defense Intelligence Agency . Mission 3101 1.1.2.3.4.5.
 An examination of photography from Mission 3101 dated 14 October 1962 has revealed an MR3M Launch Site and two new military encampments located along the southern edge of the Sierra Del Rosario .
 The Launch Site and one of the encampments contains a total of at least 14 canvas-covered missile trailers . The trailers measure approximately 67 feet in length and 9 feet in width . The launch site is located in an area known as the Launch Site .
 The overall length of the trailers including the tow bar is approximately 80 feet . The trailer trailer is 80 feet long and includes a tow bar .
 The other encampment contains vehicles and tents with no missile trailers observed in search to date . No missile trailers have been found in the encampment .
 The westernmost position has. a missile tractor/trailer aligned with the erector . The western position has . a missile . tractor or truck aligned with an erector.
 Other equipment includes 18 trailers/vans, approximately 60 miscellaneous vehicles, 18 large tents, 22 small tents, 4 ""buildings under construction and open storage"
 Equipment includes at least 6 canvas covered nissile trailers, approximately 75 vehicles, 18 tents and 18 tents . Equipment includes 6 canvas-covered trailers, about 75 vehicles and about 75 tents . About 75 vehicles are on board .
 Amb. Bohlen, Amb. inompson, Amo, ACaeson, oecty. &a±l t Mr Sorenson, Mr Martin, Mr Johnson 9:30m. ET . Mr Bohlen: Amb. Martin: Mr Johnson: Mr Martin
 Meeting at State Department with study group 19 October 1962 Friday 11:00 a.m. meeting . Meeting was held at the State Department .
 Ball seemed to feel military action would throw NATO allies in disarray and allow Britain and France to separate from us on Berlin policy . Ball felt it would throw the NATO allies into disarray .
 Kohl or discuss lone with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba in Cuba . Kohl: "Kirrushchev's actions in Cuba were not in line with the Soviet policy of Cuba" Kohl said he did not want to join forces with the Soviets
 Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimise losses ton the calling of a Summit conference . Suggested giving Khrushvic an
 During the discussion Taylor and Ball speculated as to whether this whole thing was not a ""mock up ft designed to draw out action by us" and that the war heads were not there . The pair speculated that the whole thing may have been a 'mock-up'
 MeNamara urged avoiding taking a position, considering all alternatives, with meetings this afternoon and this evening in preparation of final discussion with President tomorrow .
 There are about 50 or 60 MIG 17s and 19s now in Cuba and these apparently have no offensive capability . Urged exploration of all facts and listed the following; About 50 or . 60 Mig 17s or 19s in Cuba now in . Cuba .
 One MIG 21 has been seen and a number of suspicious crates also seen . We do not know whether the MIG21 has an offensive capability . One of the suspicious crates was also seen indicating some MIGs capability .
 Three MRBM sites under construction and can be ready in two weeks . Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM'i are nuclear or conventional . Unknown if MRBM are nuclear, conventional or nuclear .
 McCone responded by reading numbered paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of attached memorandum dated October 17th . McCone said that McCone was responding to the request for information .
 General Taylor and Thompson discussed political nature of problem including possibility of forcing settlement in Berlin and elsewhere . Khrushchev wished show down on Berlin and this gives a show down issue . General Taylor discussed political nature of the problem including possibility of forcing settlement .
 Khrushchev wants Berlih settlement but on his terms, says Thompson . Believes he would be surprised to find out what we know about MRB . Thompson emphasised Khushchev wants to settle on terms of the settlement .
 President Obama 'denied knowledge of Cuban situation but at any event would / Justify actions because of our missiles in Italy and Turkey,' he said .
 Khrushchev recognises that action by would be devislve among our allies . Also recognises the threat of action by . would be . not only . but also that action would be against us .
 McNamara discussed many operational questions concerning the use of Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba . McNamara also discussed how communications could be arranged; what authority was In the field .
 Thompson believes Soviet nuclear warheads were under very tight control . Thompson believes the warheads were kept under tight control by the Soviets .
 McCone reviewed recent Chlcadee ^/ reports, indicated considerable automony in hands of field commanders much mo re so than we have, he said .
 The establishment of medium range strike capability in Cuba by the Soviets was predicted by me in at least a dozen reports since early August . It's predicted by more than a dozen of reports since August .
 Provide Cuba with an offensive or retaliatory power for use if attacked if attacked .
 Establish a ""hall mark"" of accomplishment by other Latin American countries, most particularly Mexico, and other Central American countries within strike range of the United States . Establish "hall mark" of achievement by other . Latin American . countries .
 The MRBM capability we have witnessed will expand and the defensive establishments to protect this capability likewise will be expanded . The defensive establishments will also be expanded to protect the MRBM capabilities .
 There appears to be no other explanation for the extensive and elaborate air defense establishment, says author .
 In my opinion the missiles are Soviet, they will remain under Soviet operational control . They will be equipped with nuclear warheads under Soviet control . Cubans will supply most of the manpower needs with the Soviets exercising operational command and control .
 There will be a substantial number of Soviets on site at all times . Nevertheless, there will be plenty of Soviet troops .
 The establishment of a ""trading position"" to force removal of United States overseas baaes^du^' T^l-J^% To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage against the American Imperialist .
 This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against U.S. foreign mi litary installations . This will undoubtedly result retaliation against United States foreign military installations where substantial United States casualties would result .
 U.S. should not act without warning and thus be forced to live with a ""Pearl Harbor indictment" for the indefinite future . The situation cannot be tolerated, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Give them 24 hours to commence dismantling and re* moval of MRBMs, coastal defense missiles, surface to air missiles, ILZEs and ILZE missiles, including MIG 21s .
 Whether .nilitary action should be taken prior to a warning to, or discussions with, Khrushchev and Castro . Whether to take military action prior to warning, or discuss with, the Soviet Union in the future .
 U.S. President Barack Obama made the decision to make changes to the White House . The move was made in consultation with allies, including NATO, OAS and others .
 Effect on the ''balance of nuclear power equation* 1 of the MRBM installations in Cuba . Effect of the nuclear energy equation is based on the balance of power equation .
 Three principal courses of action are open to us, and of course there are variations of each . Three of the main courses are open-ended, and there are many possibilities of each one .
 It was pointed out that Western Europe, Greece, Turkey, and other countries had lived under the Soviet MRBMs for years . Therefore, why should the U.S. be so concerned? The United States should not be concerned .
 Resort to an all-out blockade would probably require a declaration of war . To be effective would mean the interruption of all incoming shipping .
 Strafing MRBM installations and air fields with MIGs . and plus all SAM sites and coastal missile sites . None of which were identified .
 If the response is unsatisfactory, pursuing a course of military action is possible . The U.S. military has been criticized for not responding to the situation .
 If the response is unsatisfactory, refer to the OAS and the United Nations prior to taking military action . If the U.S. does not respond to the response, refer it to the United States and OAS before taking action .
 Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if the response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade . U.S. could blockade the Soviet Union in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 Strike militarily with no warning, the level of the military effort being dependent upon evolving circumstances . Strike will be dependent on evolving circumstances, such as evolving circumstances in the U.S.
 In all probability this type of action would escalate into invasion * * * ^cupation, although th« meeting was not agreed on this point . In the future, the situation would become more serious .
 Blockade with no warning and no advance notice such as a declaration of war, with the President depending upon existing Congressional resolutions for authority . Blockade without warning or advance notice of war .
 McCone memorandum, ""Brief Discussion with the President— 9:30m. 17 October 1962" Confirmed the situation and explored possible actions . Confirmed that the situation was under control .
 McCone referred to but did not recommend warnings as outlined in paragraph 7 of paragraph 7 . McCone refers to but does not recommend warning .
 President seemed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targeting on MRBM's and possibly airfields . President seemed to be inclined to strike without warning .
 Stated Congressional Resolution gave him all authority he needed and this was confirmed by Bundy, said Bundy . Bundy seemed inclined to act. Stated that this was all he needed .
 At President Kennedy's request I called on General Eisenhower today at 12:00 o'clock . President Kennedy asked General Eisenhower to meet with him .
 President Kennedy asked that I carefully avoid indicating any particular line of action as none had been agreed upon, and this was observed . President Kennedy had asked that . I carefully avoided indicating any specific line-of-action as . none had agreed upon . This was observed.
 I briefed Eisenhower on aspects of the recent Cuban-Soviet build-up . I showed him the U-2 pictures of three MRBM missile sites under development . I also showed him pictures of 3 MRBM sites .
 Eisenhower expressed no particular surprise indicating that he felt this offensive build-up would probably occur . Eisenhower said he felt it would be likely that the U.S. military would launch an offensive offensive .
 He then expressed criticism of the Bay of Pigs failure and also of the fact that we did not respond more energetically when Castro publicly embraced Communism .
 Eisenhower felt that the current situation would prove to be intolerable, that its purposes can not be clearly defined, and that it can't be defined . Eisenhower felt it would prove that it would be intolerable if it were not defined .
 In discussing blockades, he mentioned the difficulty of type of action we would take if and when a Soviet ship, laden with military hardware and personnel, is stopped on the high seas . He also mentioned the difficulties of taking action against the Soviet ship .
 Eisenhower questioned limited military action as being indecisive, irritating world opinion, creating fear in all areas where the Soviets could retaliate with limited action . He recalled that when President Truman ordered limited air support in the first two or three days of the Korean war, he, Eisenhower, told the President
 Throughout the conversation Eisenhower seemed to lean toward military action which would cut off Havana and therefore take over the heart of the government . Eisenhower seems to lean towards military action that would cut Havana off .
 He thought this might be done by airborne divisions but was not familiar with the size of the Cuban forces in the immediate area, nor the equipment . He said he was not sure how much Cuban forces would need to do this .
 Eisenhower seemed to feel that such a plan would be more decisive, would mean less bloodshed . Eisenhower felt it would be better than a landing and a conventional type of slow invasion .
 I told Eisenhower that I did not expect an answer but both the President and I wished him to be fully informed . I would like to consult with him from time to time. I told General Eisenhower that he would not expect a answer . I told him that both the president and the President
 The 4:00 o'clock meeting adjourned at about 7:00, and reassembled at 10:00m., in Secretary Ball's conference room, adjourning at 11:45m. Meeting adjourned about 7 a.m.
 At 9:30m^DCI went to see the President, then went to Gettysburg to see General Eisenhower . At 9.30m ^DCI visited General Eisenhower at Gettysburg .
 The purpose of the discussion was to develop a plan of action in connection with Cuba, and the alternatives are summarized in my memorandum of October 18th addressed to USTB, copy of which is attached .
 This memorandum will record views as they are expressed and developed throughout the meetings . It will record the views of the meeting as they develop .
 Ambassador Bohlen warned against any action against Cuba, particularly an air strike without warning, stating such would be divisive with all Allies and subject us to criticism throughout the world .
 He advocated writing both Khrushchev and Castro . If their response was negative or unsatisfactory then we should plan action . We should advise our principal allies, seek a two-thirds vote from the OAS and then act .
 The Attorney General and Bohlen exchanged views as to just what type of an answer we could expect from Khrushchev and what he might do if we threatened an attack . Bohlen: "The Attorney General exchanged views" as to what might be the answer we might expect .
 Secretary Rusk seemed to favor asking Congress for a declaration of a state of war against Cuba . Rusk seems to favor OAS, NATO, etc., but always preserve flexibility as to the type of action .
 Bohlen warned world opinion would be against us if we carried out a military strike . Bohlen consistently warned that world opinion was against us. Bohlen also warned that .
 This point was discussed back and forth by various people throughout both days of discussion . This point of discussion was discussed throughout both sides of the debate .
 "We should proceed at once with the necessary military actions and should do no talking. We should proceed immediately," he said .
 We should have no consultations with Khrushchev, Castro, or our allies, but should fully alert our allies in the most persuasive manner by high level people . We should not consult with the Soviet Union or its allies, writes David Frum .
 The President should forget about the elections and should cancel all future campaign speeches . President should cancel his campaign speeches and cancel them, says CNN.com .
 As an alternate to military action, a plan was discussed involving a declaration of war and the creation of an all-out blockade . The plan was also discussed as an alternative to a possible military action .
 General Taylor at this point indicated that he favored a blockade . General Taylor seemed inclined towards a military strike. General Taylor later indicated he was open to a blockade of Syria .
 MeCone gave an intelligence estimate on the effects of a blockade, indicating its seriousness would depend upon how hard a blockade it turned out to be . He said the main objective of taking Cuba away from Castro had been lost and we have been overly consumed with the missile problem .
 McCone stated that we must all bear in mind that we have two objectives, one, disposing of the missile sites, and the other, getting rid of Castro's communism in the Western Hemisphere . McCone said that we need to get rid of the communist in the West .
 The meeting adjourned for dinner and in the evening Secretary Rusk came forward with the following plan . The meeting was adjourned after dinner .
 On September 5th and 13th the President has in effect warned both Khrushchev and Castro . Soviet bases and offensive weapons in the Western Hemisphere would raise serious problems .
 Rusk continued that more talks with Khrushchev /in extended parlays and therefore he recommended against such an approach . Rusk advised against such a approach .
 "On Wednesday, we strike with missiles and simultaneously send a message to Khrushchev, NATO, OAS, etc. etc. On Wednesday," Putin said . Putin: On Wednesday, "We strike ... with missiles"
 We should be alert for an attack on Turkey and be prepared for the consequences in Berlin, Quemoy, Matsu, Korea, etc. etc. We should also be alert to the consequences of the attack, writes CNN.com correspondent .
 Rusk made the estimate that world opinion would go along with 42 allies and some neutrals would be favorable . Rusk estimates world opinion will go along, 42 allies would also go along and some neutralrals would also agree .
 Latin Americans must be told that we are acting in the interests of the Western Hemisphere. Latin Americans should be told of the importance of the region, says the president . Latin Americans need to be told, he says .
 Rusk advocated that we take out the missiles and thus remove the immediate problem of the establishment of an offensive capability, but that we be prepared for subsequent steps . Rusk: "The first step we take is to remove the missiles, thus removing the problem of an immediate problem"
 He emphasized the U.S. cannot accept missiles in our security interests . He emphasized that the United States can't accept missiles .
 Bohlen continued to persist for diplomatic approach but Rusk and several others were not persuaded . Bohlen and Rusk were not at this point persuaded by Bohlen's efforts to reach an agreement .
 McNamara raised iimumerable questions concerning military operations . How the manner in which the strike could be properly covered with protective air and how it might be restricted . Also raised questions about the advisability of case one, as contrasted with case one .
 Both Ambassador Thompson and Secretary Martin in discussing the Rusk proposal favored a blockade, coupled with a declaration of war . The proposal was discussed in a meeting with Secretary Martin .
 These were all referred to as State papers and some were revised the following day . Political actions in support of major military action were considered to be State papers .
 Proposed letter to Khrushchev was tabled, paper dealing with probable Castro response to U.S. appeal and a proposed letter to Fidel Castro, marked ""To Mr F C"""", all included in State papers . Also included in papers were proposed letters from Khrush
 At the conclusion of the meetings which served the purpose of airing the views of all parties responsible for giving advice to the President, the alternatives open to us were summarized by the Attorney General and are covered in my memorandum to USIB, dated October 18th. 3 pages .
 The third site rould be the location -3177 IRONS ARK of this unit . Kuw^ver, 5uch regirz^nts u&'jally include a technical sinjc^jc^ > T and the third site is the location of the third
 The possibility that launch siv*3 :T\n ;>s relr^sated must not be overlooked . The possibility of relaunch is also being considered .
 Fencing of two areas is evident on ""jic :ocond day, and substantial progress is being made on crecA'ag * emporaTy buildings . Fencing is evident in two areas of the capital's capital .
 Savors the 1020 nm missile system, and indicate .i ta&t Shis system will be some operational in a maftfcer o£ days . Savors 1020nm missile system .
 Secretary McNamara called Mr Mc Cone at his residence expressing great concern over the reports from N3pIC as a result of their examination of the two flights run on October'Vgth. 1962 .
 State tabled revisions in their papers on covering a limited one-time strike and blockade, most of which are dated 10/18 11:00m.m. Most of the papers are dated October 18, 2018 .
 President questioned Lundahl further if the uninitiated could be persuaded that the photographs presented offensive MRBM missiles . Lundahl also asked Lundahl if he could convince them that the photos presented offensive missiles . President. President. Lundahl. President .
 Secretary Rusk then stated that developments in the last 24 hours had substantially changed his thinking . Rusk said that developments had substantially . changed his . thinking .
 Cuba can become a formidable military threat, says President Obama . He says it is necessary to move against Cuba, even though it is not necessary to do so .
 He indicated a feeling that if no action was taken, we would free the Soviets to act any place they wished and at their own will, he said . He also referred to the President's recent public statements .
 Rusk stated the failure on our part to act would make our situation unmanageable elsewhere in the world . Rusk also stated that the failure of action would make the situation in the Middle East unmanagedable elsewhere .
 He indicated that this would be an indication of weakness which would have serious effect on our Allies . He also indicated that it would be a serious sign of weakness to our Allies. He furthermore indicated that . this would . have serious . effect on the Allies .
 Secretary pointed out to the President that action would involve risks . Secretary of State Secretary said it would be 'risky' to take action . President Obama has been criticized for not taking action .
 President must expect action in Berlin, Korea and possibly against the U.S. itself . The President should expect action against the United States itself .
 He raised the question of solidarity of the Alliance and seemed to dismiss this question, feeling that the Alliance would hold together . He said he felt that the alliance would hold on .
 Rusk stated that if we enter upon positive action, we can not say for sure what the final Soviet response will be . Rusk said that if . we enter on positive action we can't say what . the final response . will be and therefore what the . final outcome will be
 American people will accept danger and suffering if they are convinced doing so is necessary and that they ha%-e a clear conscience . However he felt that the American people would accept danger if necessary .
 The Secretary reviewed the circumstances surrounding the outbreak of World War I, World War II, and the Korean war . The Secretary of State said the Secretary of Defense had been briefed on the situation .
 Rusk expressed himself in favor of leaning upon the Rio pact, but does not dismiss the alternative of a unilateral declaration of war as the ultimate action we must take .
 Ambassador Bohlen strongly advocated diplomatic effort and stated that military action prior to this would be wrong . The alternate is a quick strike, which would be a diplomatic effort, he said .
 AlBO stated that limited quick military action was an illusion and that any military action would rapidly escalate into an invasion . He alBO said that any action would quickly escalate into a invasion .
 McNamara at this point presented the alternatives referred to the previous day, stating that alternatives one and two were not conclusive and that we would have to resort to alternative 3 . This would lead us ultimately into an invasion, McNamara said .
 General Taylor reviewed the situation stating that the Chiefs looked upon Cuba as a forward base of serious proportions, that it cannot be taken out totally by air . The military operation would be sizeable, nevertheless necessary, according to General Taylor .
 Ambassador Thompson urged that any action be preceeded by a declaration of war . He strongly advocated that we institute a blockade and not resort to military action .
 Secretary Dillon questioned what would be accomplished by talking to Khrushchev . Secretary Dillon said it would not be possible to talk to the Soviet Union leader .
 He pointed out that we would probably become engaged in discussions from which we could not extract ourselves and therefore our freedom of action would be frustrated . He said it would be a waste of time and frustration if we were engaged in such discussions .
 President Kennedy was non-committal on whether Khrushchev would reduce his efforts . Rusk seemed to disagree indicating there was a possibility that he might step them up as a result of discussions .
 Raised the question whether we should not move the missiles out of Turkey . Raised . the question . whether we s/"" • should not . should . not move missiles .
 All readily agreed they were not much use but a political question was involved . "All readily agreed it was not much useful but the political question is involved," said one .
 Buridy thought this a good idea either under conditions of a strike or during a ' preliminary talk' Buridy said: 'I think this is good idea. Buridy thinks it would be good idea under conditions .
 McNamara agreed that we could move out of Turkey and Italy; pointed out the political complications . McNamara seemed to be reconsidering his prior position of advocating military action .
 President Kennedy said he thought Khrushchev would say that if we made a move against Cuba, he would take Berlin . President Kennedy then said that he thought he thought that he would say he would do so . Kennedy said that if a move was made against Cuba against Russia, Khrush
 McNamara surmised perhaps that was the price we must pay and perhaps we'd lose Berlin anyway . McNamara: "Perhaps we'd lost Berlin anyway. Perhaps we'd have to pay that."
 There followed an exchange of view on the possibility of the Soviets taking Berlin and our prospect of retaining it . There followed a exchange of views on the prospect of the Soviet takeover of Berlin .
 President Kennedy summed up the dilemma stating that action of a type contemplated would be opposed by the alliance . On the other hand, lack of action will create disunity and disintegration of our several alliances and friendly relations .
 There followed a long discussion of the possibilities of a blockade, the advantages of it, and the manner in which it would be carried out, etc. As a result of discussions of the ""price 11 of a strike, there followed long discussion of a blockade of the possibilities .
 There seemed to be differences of opinion as to whether the blockade should be total, or should only involve military equipment .
 There were continued references to blockading ships carrying offensive weapons . There seemed to be a differentiation in the minds of some in the policy of blockading offensive weapons as contrasted to blocking all weapons . Also there was a differentiation between blocking offensive weapons and blockading all weapons.
 There followed discussion as to policies the President should follow with respect to calling Congress into session, asking for a declaration of war, advising the country and authorizing action .
 There was a discussion concerning the President's meeting with Gromyko and the position he should take should the Cuban question come up . There was also a discussion about the position the President should take if the question comes up .
 The President was advised to draw Gromyko out and it was indicated he probably would receive a flat denial that there were any offensive weapons in Cuba . The President also was advised that there was no offensive weapons there .
 Meeting adjourned with the President requesting that we organize into two groups . Meeting was adjourned . President asked us to organize into groups of groups .
 One to study the advantages of what might be called a slow course of action which would involve a blockade to be followed by such further actions as appeared necessary as the situation evolved .
 At least one Soviet regiment consisting of eight launchers and sixteen 1020-nm medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba at two launch sites . At least eight launchers, 16 missiles and 16 missiles are deployed in Cuba .
 These sites currently contain unrevetted, field-type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment . These sites presently contain . unreveiled, field type launchers .
 These missiles were probably those reported moving into this area during September . These missiles are believed to be those reported to have been launched in September .
 These mobile missiles must be considered operational now and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch . A refire from each launcher could be accomplished within 5 hours after firing .
 Fixed, soft sites which could achieve initial operational capability during December 1962 are now being developed near Havana* We believe that the 2200-nm intermediate range ballistic missile is probably intended for these sites . We believe .
 Photography of these sites show eight, fixed launch pads under construction . The sites are likely to have eight ready missiles and eight for refire . This could equate to an additional missile regiment .
 All of these offensive missile systems are Soviet manned and controlled . All of the systems are controlled by Soviet commanders .
 We believe that offensive action by these systems would be commanded from the Soviet Union but have not yet found the command and control communication links . We believe offensive action would be ordered by the Soviets .
 There is no positive evidence of the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba, nor have weapons storage facilities of the standard, highly secure Soviet type been identified . No positive evidence has been found of the Cuban nuclear warheads .
 Cuba has 1 storage areas south of Havana which could be converted to Soviet needs in a relatively short time . The Soviet Union could use these storage areas as well as other storage areas .
 Temporary storage could be provided in ships or field sites which might not be identified . Temporary storage is possible in ships, field sites or ships which might be identified.
 One must assume that nuclear warheads could now be available in Cuba to support the offensive missile capability as it becomes operational .
 The warheads expected for these missiles weigh approximately 3,000 pounds and have yields in the low megaton range . The warheads are expected to have a range of yields of about 3 megaton .
 Cruise missiles can be fired in about 10 minutes, with subsequent firings from each launcher at 5 minute intervals . In an alert status, these cruise missiles can't be fired for 10 minutes . The missiles are capable of firing at 5 minutes intervals .
 There are now 22 surface-to-air missiles sites located in Cuba . Nine of which are believed to be individually operational at the present time .
 Each site contains six missiles with six additional missiles in an adjacent hold area . Each missile has six missiles, with six more in adjacent hold areas .
 Initial firing can take place anytime after an alert, providing the site has reached readiness . The initial firing can be carried out anytime after the alert, with the site being ready .
 There are now at least 16 1 020nm Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba which are in such a state of readiness that they could be fired within 18 hours .
 It is likely that other installations now being examined in photography will raise the number to 32 . All of the installations could be ready in the next week .
 8 launchers with 16 2200-nm missiles will probably be operational in Cuba during December 1962 . Furthermore, eight launchers with sixteen 2200 nukes are probably operational in December 1962.
 "We must emphasize that this is the visible threat, and that additional missiles may be discovered as additional photography is analyzed," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . "This is a visible threat," says Putin .
 Offensive missiles systems are being introduced into Cuba primarily through the Port of Mariel . 10* offensive missiles systems will be introduced in Cuba .
 Central missile checkout, storage and repair bases have been tentatively located at Soroa near the western deployment sites and at Managua south of Havana . Possible central missile checkout and storage bases are located in Soroa .
 All three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba (SS~4, SS-5, SA-2) probably use red fuming nitric acid as an oxidizer . The common propellant supply and storage could be used .
 The magnitude of the total Soviet missile force being deployed indicates that the USSR intends to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base, rather than as a token show of strength, 12 missiles are deployed .
 SA-2 deployment in Cuba is protected by an extensive SA-1 deployment in the country . This overseas strategic force is protected from the threat of an attack on Cuba .
 USSR is making a major military investment in Cuba with some of their most effective guided missile systems . The USSR is investing heavily in Cuba, Cuba, with the most effective missiles .
 The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago and put into motion last spring, officials say . The planning was put in motion in the spring of this year and last spring .
 This site is in a | more advanced state of readiness and could have the essential features I for an operational capability within one month . This site could be in a state of . readiness within a month . The site is now in a more advanced . state of ready . readiness .
 The other site is similar to the fieldtype installation described in paragraph 1 of this article .
 A discussion among the principals on October ;1 8th indicated a probable decision, if any action is taken against Cuba, to initiate a limited blockade . The blockade would be designed to prevent the importation into Cuba of additional arms .
 The U.S. would make such statements concerning a condition of war as necessary to meet the legal requirements of such a blockade, but a formal ""declaration of war against Cuba"" would be avoided if possible and resorted to only if absolutely necessary .
 The blockade could be extended at our discretion to include POL and possibly a total 1 blockade"" if Castro persisted in the offensive build-up. The blockade was possible to include Pol Poland and possibly 1 blockade, if Castro persists in the .
 Continued surveillance would go ""forward 30 that we would know of the siutation within Cuba as it evolved," says the Cuban government . Continued surveillance of Cuba would go forward 30 years .
 The blockade would start possibly on Monday, following a public announcement by the President which would include a display of photographic intelligence, persuasive notification to our Allies among the Soviets and the Cubans .
 More extreme steps such as limited air strike, comprehensive air strike or military invasion would be withheld awaiting developments .
 Tht* argument in favor of the blockade was principally that it initiated a positive action which could be intensified at our will or relaxed depending upon evolving circumstances . Soviet reactions are expected to be severe and veryprobably involve a blockade of Berlin and widespread propaganda effort .
 The opinions range from doing nothing on the one hand/ to immediate military action on the other . Differences exist concerning the intensity of the blockade with some advocating a more comprehensive blockade which would include POL at the very start .
 October 1962 Cctcber 19, 1362 3bcfs wttcb woaid asaka a& strito mora actigp ta hl* to M^drtde grsop* L Prior astlc* to STrnytrbFT by a
 Kocaoftfcexa aaa* spall oat oar propoart action, to sbaofal Indicate It wttt fa* atnotbf aertowv) ' tmjatnreaawl la aer pesiifca
 Ho attack oaBagaaa to aroid fciUteg feral^ <flptort at* aad > aarorcring ps&Uc oplidoa against a . In those cocstrfea. Ho attack . Ho attack on a .roid
 It is possible that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use them in bargaining for U.S. concessions elsewhere .
 The public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in relations with Castro . It would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere .
 If the U.S. accepts the strategic missile buildup in Cuba, the Soviets would continue the buildup of strategic weapons in Cuba* We have no basis for estimating the force level which they would wish to reach, but it seems clear already that they intend to go beyond token capability .
 We consider the possible effects of a missile buildup in Cuba on the overall relationship of strategic military power . We consider in Annex B the possible effect of a Cuban missile buildup .
 U.S. acceptance of the strategic missile buildup would provide strong encouragement to Communist a , pro-Communist s, and the more anti-American sectors of opinion in Latin America and elsewhere .
 It seems clear that, especially over the long run, there vculd be a less confidence in IS pever erd determination and a serious decline of IS influence generally* EFFECT CF KAEKIKG 5.5 .
 If the U.S. confronts Khrushchev vith its incvledge of the hPSM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, ve do not believe the Soviets vould halt the deployment .
 They would propose negotiations on the general question of foreign bases . Claim equal right to establish Soviet bases and assuring the U.S. of tight control over missiles .
 They would probably link Cuba with the Berlin situation and emphasize their patience and preference for negotiations . Berlin was held hostage to the U.S. actions in Cuba, 6.6.7.7 .
 This vculd he true vbether the action vas United to neutralize tte strategic nissiles, cr these dssiles plus airfields, surface-tc-air nissile sites, cr . airfields and surface-to-air airfields . The action
 The Soviets have no public treaty vith Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island . We cust of course recognize the possibility that the Soviets, under pressure to respond, vould again miscalculate and respond in a vay vhich .
 At least one Soviet regiment of 1020-nm ^SS-4) medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba . At least two launch sites near San Cristobal are located .
 Kach of these sites presently contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, fieldtype launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment . Kach is one of Russia's most active military bases in the world .
 Although there is continuing improvement of these sites, this regiment must be considered operational now. Although there are continuing improvement, there is still a long way to go, the regiment must now be operational .
 The presence of eight missiles at each site indicates a refire capability from each of the four launchers . This indicates that the missiles can be refried from each launcher .
 A third facility in this area, previously identified as Launch Site 3, could be either a technical support area for this regiment or a third launch site . However, the early stage of development precludes a positive identification of this activity .
 An additional regiment of Soviet 1020nm missiles are now deployed at two sites east of Havana in the Sagua La Grande area, nine miles apart .
 These sites closely resemble the sites at San Cristobal but appear to be more permanent in nature . These sites are more likely to be permanent than the ones at the site of San Cristabal .
 Terrain features have dictated considerable clearing and grading for deployment of the system . Terrain feature features dictated considerable clear and grading .
 There are permanent structures at the launch pad areas which are not found at the San Cristobal sites . Also, there is a permanent structure at launch pad sites which is not found in the sites .
 There are four launch positions at each site and we estimate an operational capability for each site within one week . We estimate that each site will be operational capability within a week .
 The sizes of the missiles, associated equipment, and buildings found at the San Cristobal and Sagua La Grande sites are almost identical and are compatible with the 1020-nm MRBM system . The size of missiles and associated equipment is almost identical .
 Two fixed sites are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana . The sites are being used to build new homes in Cuba .
 Four launchers, two blockhouses, and underground propellant storage are being built at each site . Four launchers are planned for each site, with underground storage being underground .
 Site 1 is considered to be in a mid-to late-stage of construction and should be operational within six weeks . Site 1 should be in mid-late-stage construction and expected to be operational in six weeks.
 Site 2 is in an earlier stage of construction and couid be operational between 15 and 30 December 1962 . Site 2 will be operational from 15 December 1962 to 30 December 1963 .
 There are no missiles or support equipment detectable within the Guanajay Area at the present time . Command and Control 4.2: No missiles, support equipment detected in the area at the moment .
 All of the offensive missile systems in Cuba are Soviet manned and controlled by the Soviet Union . All of Cuba's missile systems are Soviet-controlled .
 We believe that offensive action by these systems would be commanded from the Soviet Union, but have not yet identified the communication link .
 This site could become operational at about the same time as the associated Launch Site 1 . The site could be operational within months of the launch of the Mars Mars Curiosity rover .
 Similar facilities have not yet been identified at other sites . Construction of similar facilities is not yet identified .
 There is still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba . There are still no . currently . operational nuclear facilities .
 One must assume that nuclear weapons could now be in Cuba to support the operational missile capability as it becomes available . Nevertheless, one must assume .
 The 1020-nm missiles would probably be equipped with nuclear warheads yielding 2 to 3 megatons . The missiles would have nuclear warheads that could be capable of reaching 3 megatonons .
 There are now at least two regiments equipped with 1020-nm MRBM's in Cuba . We believe that there are now . two . regiments in Cuba equipped with MRBM .
 One is located din the San Cristobal area and the Sagua La Grande area . The other is located in the Sagura La Grande region . The two are located in two areas .
 In addition, we believe a regiment equipped with 2200-nm lRBM's is being deployed to the Guanajay area . In addition to the two-year-old regiment, a regiment is believed to be being deployed with lBM's .
 When operational, present MRBM and IRBM units will have an aggregate total of 24 launchers . The IRBM and MRBM units are expected to have 24 launchers when they are operational .
 Offensive missile systems are being introduced into Cuba, probably through the Port of Mariel . It is thought to be the first of the missile systems being introduced .
 A new Soviet ship, the Poltava, possibly designed as a ballistic missile transport, has been noted making frequent trips between the USSR and Cuba . It is thought to have been designed to transport ballistic missiles .
 This ship has made two trips to Cuba since 17 July . It is next estimated to arrive in Cuba on or about 2 November 1962 .
 It is significant that three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use red fuming nitric acid as the oxidizer . The missiles are likely to have a common system for propellant supply .
 These cruise missiles have a range of 35 to 40 miles and are probably derived from the AS-i. missiles . The cruise missiles are thought to be derived from a Russian-made missile system .
 They can be fired in about 10 minutes in an alert status, with subsequent firings from each launcher at 5 minute intervals . Each launcher can also be fired at 5 minutes intervals . The missiles can be launched in 10 minutes .
 There are now 26 surface-to-air missile sites located in Cuba, two of which appear to be alternate sites . Two of the sites are believed to be in Cuba .
 16 of these are believed to be individually operational at the present time . Of these, 16 are thought to be operational in the UK .
 Initial firing can take place anytime after an alert, providing the site has reached readiness status . The initial firing can be carried out anytime after a alert, with the initial firing taking place after the alert .
 There arc several refugee reports indicating the presence of tactical ^FROG) missiles in Cuba, although there is no photographic confirmation thus far .
 Some of the deployment characteristics include permanent elements which suggests that provision is being made for a Soviet presence of long duration . The deployment of permanent elements suggests that the Soviet presence will be long lasting .
 The rate of deployment to date, as well as the speed and variety of construction, indicates that the Soviet military build up in Cuba is being carried out on an urgent basis . Cuba's military build-up in Cuba has been described as 'urgent'
 This build-up has proceeded by deploying defensive weapons first, followed by deployment of offensive weapons . This build up has proceeded to deploy offensive weapons first .
 The pattern of missile deployment appears calculated to achieve quick operational status and then to complete site construction . The pattern appears to be designed to achieve quickly operational status before construction .
 By deploying stockpiled MRBMTRBMs at overseas bases, Soviet Union will supplement its 1CBM home force .
 This same offensive force also poses a common threat to the United States and a large portion of Latin America for the first time . The U.S. and Latin America are at risk of being overtaken by the same force .
 To estimate the major consequences of certain U.S. courses of action with respect to Cuba . CERTAHi United States COBSES CP ACTICH CH CUBA TEE PRCBI£M .
 Firm evidence indicates the presence in Cuba of four KRBM and two IRBM launch sites in various stages of construction and organizes into at least three regiments . Firm evidence suggests the presence of 4 KRBM, 2 IRBM launches sites and 4 IRBM launchers .
 Two regiments of eight launchers each are mobile and designed to launch KIBMs with a range of about 1,100m . One regiment of eig ht fixed la unchers^ pa y be designed for IRBMs with about 2,200m .
 We have no direct evidence that nuclear weapons are now present in Cuba, says CNN.com . It is unlikely that we would be able to obtain such evidence .
 The construction of a probable nuclear storage facility is a strong indication of the Soviet intent to provide nuclear warheads . However, the construction of at least one possible nuclear storage facilities is not a good indication .
 It is prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available* These could be brought in by air, submarine or surface ship .
 After IRBM sites are completed and ^missiles are on launcher, a state of readiness of five hours may be maintained . After the IRBM site is completed and . missiles are on launchers, a . state of . readiness of 5 hours may also be maintained.
 Both systems are believed to be provided with two missiles per launcher, providing a refire capability from each launcher . MRBMs are expected to have about four to six additional hours for each launcher and IRBMs for about six to eight hours per launcher . Both systems believed to have two
 Cuban-based MRBMs and IRBMs with nuclear warheads would augment the present limited Soviet ICBM capability by virtue of their ability to strike at similar targets .
 Soviet gross capabilities for attack on IK military and civilian targets can be increased considerably by Cuban-based nissiles . In the near future, therefore, Soviet gross . capabilities for . Initial attack on . IK . targets can . be increased significantly by . Cuban-born niss
 If the missile buildup in Cuba continues, the Soviet capability to blunt a retaliatory attack will be progressively enhanced . The missile buildup will continue to grow .
 A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is to demonstrate that the world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the United States can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet ofi 1 — ■ 1 "" ■ i i 1 1 1 , ‘jj fensive
 In this connection, they assume, of course, that these deployments sooner or later will become publicly known .
 Cuban missile forces expected to contribute to Cuba's 'total str ategic capability vis-a-vis the US. i 8.8.8 .
 It is unlikely that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use thera in bargaining for U.S. concessions elsewhere .
 The withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR 1 s relations with Castro . It would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere .
 If the U.S. acquiesces to the presence of strategic nissiles in Cuba, ve believe that the Soviets will continue the buildup . Ui TES BUILDUP 9* .
 It seems entirely clear now that they are going veil beyond a token capability . Ve have no basis for esticating the force level vhich they vould vish to reach, but it seems that they will .
 This course of U.S. action would provide strong encourage osrrt to Communists, pro-Connunists, and the more anti -American sectors of opinion .
 We believe that, especially over the long run, there vould be loss of confidence in United States power and determination and a serious decline of U.S. influence, particularly in latin America .
 The Soviets vould feel free to establish bases in the country in question if they chose .
 A major immediate consequence vould be that the Soviets vould probably estimate risks in pressing the U.S. hard in other confrontations, such as Berlin . A major consequence will be that they will probably estimate the risks of pressing the United States hard in Berlin .
 They would probably link Cuba with the Berlin situation and emphasize their patience and preference for negotiations . Berlin was held hostage to U.S. actions in Cuba, they said .
 There is some slight chance that a warning to Castro might make a difference, since the Soviets could regard this as a chance to stand aside . But it also would give time for offers to negotiate, continued buildup, and counterpressures, and the result in the end would be the same
 We believe that even under a total blockade individual aircraft and submarines might get through to deliver vital military items, e. g., nuclear warheads . We believe even under the blockade individual planes and submarines could get through the blockade .
 If U.S. enforce rent of the blockade involved use of force by the US, the Soviets night respond en an equivalent level, but would, seek to avoid escalation . If United States enforce . of the . blockade involved . use of . force by . the US . If .
 Any blockade situation would place the Soviets under no imediate pressure to cheese a response vith force* They cculd rely on political oeans to cccpel the to desist, and reserve a resort to force until the United States had actually used force .
 They estimate that the inherent difficulties of enforcing the blockade and the generally adverse reactions, including those of United States allies to it, would result in enormous pressures on the U.S. to desist .
 They could heighten these pressures by threatening retaliation in Berlin or actually undertaking major harass cents on the access routes, vhich could become tantamount to a blockade, and vould probably do so .
 We do not believe that even a severe blockade, of itself, would bring down the Cuban regime* Castro vould tighten internal security and, unless action against the regice developed on Cuban soil, the Cuban population would be increasingly reluctant to oppose the regime .
 In the case of U.S. use of force against Cuban territory, the likelihood of a Soviet response by force would be greater than in case of blockade . The likelihood of Soviet retaliation by force by force, either locally or for retaliation elsewhere, would he greater .
 U ll-B-T would be under pressure to respond in ways which, if they could not save Cuba, would inflict an offsetting injury to U.S. interests* This would be true whether the action was limited to an effort to neutralize missiles, or these missiles plus
 The possibility that the Soviets, under pressure to respond, would again miscalculate and respond in a way which, through a series of actions and reactions, could escalate to general war . We must of course recognize the possibility .
 The Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island* This situation provides them with a pretext for treating United States military action against Cuba as, an affair which does not directly involve them, and thereby avoiding the risks of a strong response .
 The most likely location for broad retaliation outside Cuba appears to be Berlin . Berlin is likely to be the most likely place for retaliation outside Havana .
 'They vould probably react here vith major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade, vith or without the signing of a separate peace treaty,' he says . 'They could probably react vith harassments ... or even blockade,' he adds .
 Retaliation against sorne United States installation overseas is possible but unlikely, says CNN.com . U.S. government officials say it is unlikely to take action against the installation .
 We believe that there vould probably be a difference between Soviet reaction to all-out invasion and limited U.S. use of force against selected objectives .
 We believe that the Soviets would be less likely to retaliate with military force in areas outside Cuba in response to speedy, effective invasion . We think that the Soviet Union would be more likely to respond to more limited forms of military action .
 Do not rule out the possibility of Soviet retaliation outside Cuba in case of invasion . Ve recognize that such an estimate cannot be made with very great assurance .
 A rapid occupation of Cuba would be more likely to make the Soviets pause in opening new . theaters of conflict than limited action which drags out . But we believe that a rapid occupation would make the . Soviets pause .
 Soviet weapons systems were deployed to Cuba by Soviet troops in 1960s . Soviet weapons system was deployed in Cuba in the 1960s and 1980s .
 One of these sites appears to be in a stage of construction that indicates operational readiness six weeks from now, i.e. about 1 December . The other is in a phase indicating operational readiness between 15 December and the end of the year .
 We have found what appears to be a nuclear warhead storage facility at one of the IRBM sites . We have not seen nuclear warheads for any of these missiles .
 "They could be in temporary storage prior to completion of the storage facility we have, seen," says CNN.com.com .
 U October 1962 Mission 3101 IS Odooer 1962 Mission* 3102 & 3103 17 Octoier 1962 Missions 3104. 3105, 3106, 3107, 3108, end 3109; end preliminary caelyiisof 13 October 1962 Minion 3111
 WARNING: This supplement up-dates and amplifies the content of this supplement . It was published in 1962 .
 An emergency operational capability to launch some of the missiles on hand within about 8 hours could now exist at the four MRBM sites . An emergency launch capability could be possible within 8 hours .
 They appear to be pursuing an urgent but systematic plan to achieve an operational capability which will maximize the effectiveness of the missile regiments . The plan appears to be a systematic but systematic effort to achieve operational capability .
 "Within the sites the steps necessary to achieve an immediate operational capability have not occurred," the Pentagon says .
 At San Cristobal Site 2 the three launchers and five missiles present continue to be bunched together in a field . For example, at San Cristabal Site 2 there are three launchers, five missiles and five launchers present .
 Were an immediate launch capability intended one would expect deployment of the launcher to the vicinity of the intended launch positions . The launch capability would be used to launch satellites .
 Activity in Site 1 and Site 2 continues to indicate an urgent effort to achieve full operational readiness . Activity in Sites 1 and Sites 2 indicates a need to be fully operational ready for operations .
 The launch crews, missiles and associated equipment are in the immediate area . Launch crews, missile crews and equipment are also in the area .
 By full operational readiness we mean the ability to launch in salvo four missiles per site with a refire capability of four missile per site within 4 to 6 hours . By the end of the day we would be able to launch salvo missiles in four to six hours . We will be
 The MRBM sites at Sagua La Grande were first identified on 17 October and were covered by photography twice that day . They were covered twice by photography .
 The status of preparation at the two sites on 17 October was approximately the same . The status was about the same as the 17 October .
 35 vehicles arrived in support area at Site 1 within the 1 3/4 hour period between two photographic coverages . It is believed that the missile regiment was moving into the area on 17 October .
 Construction activity and random location of missile support equipment indicate that development of the area was not complete . Construction activity indicates that development is not complete.
 The presence of missiles and launchers indicates that the sites have an emergency operational capability, the U.S. State Department says . The U.N. has not confirmed the existence of the sites .
 The regiment could reach full operational readiness at these sites by 1 November . However, the regiment could still be ready for operations by November .
 A detailed reexamination of the evidence available available at this time indicates that the operational date for these launch sites may be somewhat earlier than our previous estimate . The launch date for the launch sites could be earlier than previously thought .
 Construction activity appears to be progressing at a more rapid pace than that observed in the USSR at similar facilities . Construction activity is more rapid than that seen in similar facilities in USSR .
 Several features of the sites such as the control bunkers, excavations for fuel tanks, and blast w^alls for component protection are several days more advanced than previously determined . Several features such as control bunker excavations are several more advanced .
 Mission 3111 on 18 October indicates that concrete is being installed at all four pads at Site 1 . Site 1 is being built on top of the four pads on the site .
 A curved-roof building similar to that at Guanajay Site 1, but only about 35 by 67 feet has been observed at the newly identified possible misj sile site near Remedios . A curved roof of a building is about 35 to 67 feet tall .
 Foundations of structures which might be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and at Sagua La Grande Site 1 .
 The appearance of concrete arches nearby indicates that these buildings will be earth-covered . Concrete arches near the buildings indicate that they will be covered in earth-coated .
 Tank trailers observed in the quay area of the Punta Gerardo port facility are similar to those seen in 22 May 1962 photography taken before security fences were erected . The tank trailers were seen in the same area as those seen at the port facility in 1962 .
 Search of major airfields in Cuba has not as yet revealed any structures that can be identified as intended for nuclear storage . Search of the major air fields in Cuba is not yet revealing any structures .
 There are now 24 primary surface-to-air missile sites located in Cuba . Two of these sites, Santa Lucia and Deleite, each have alternate sites located 3 to 5 nautical miles from the primary site .
 alternate sites are pre-surveyed, have no equipment and could possibly be used for mobility training exercises . These alternate sites have been used in mobility training exercise exercises .
 Of the 24 primary sites, 20 are individually operational at the present time . 20 of the 24 main sites are currently operational .
 The remaining primary SA-2 sites could be operational sites in approximately one week . The remaining sites could become operational sites within one week of the mission .
 Photography shows large quantities of surface-to-air missile cannisters and missile transporters . Photography shows . surface to-air missiles cannisters .
 Each KOMAR craft carries two homing missiles which have an effective range of 10 to 15 nm and carry 2000 pound HE warheads . Each missile carries two missiles with a range of 15 nm .
 The KOMARs have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships, two and four per shipload . They were transported in Soviet ships on Soviet vessels .
 First KOMARs probably took several weeks to establish base and logistic support . Additional units can probably become operational within one week after offloading. Additional units could be operational within a week .
 The apparent Soviet objective is to rapidly achieve full operational status for thei* MRBM and IRBM regiments rather than to achieve an imme^^ capability at each site as missiles and equipment arrive, may be very significant to the planners judging various Soviet courses of action .
 It consists of 4 large excavations in a symmetrical pattern; however, their function cannot be determined at this time . Their function is unknown .
 This installation is, however, considered to be a suspected surface-to-surface missile site . The installation is believed to have been built in the 1980s .
 The Members of the U.S. Intelligence Board have been briefed on Cuba's threat to Cuba . The Board has been tasked with evaluating the threat of an offensive offensive threat .
 The attached copy of the subject intelligence memorandum is forwarded for your information, guidance, and appropriate action . It is sent to the U.S. National Security Council .
 As agreed by the USIB it is to be used as background material for oral briefings to authorized personnel only .
 Requests for additional copies or for initial distribution from offices not under your immediate control, but in your department of the Government, will be referred to you for action .
 A significant deployment of guided missiles to Cuba is already well advanced . Cuba has proceeded by first deploying a large force of defensive weapons, followed by long-range offensive missiles and aircraft .
 A mixed force of 1000and 2200-nm ballistic missiles in Cuba' provides for the first time a significant strategic strike capability against almost all targets in the U.S. and a large portion of Canada and Latin America .
 The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago . The actual deployment itself began last spring, and the planning for the operation began last year .
 The equipment for 1000-nm ballistic missiles is now being deployed in Western Cuba . The equipment is being deployed at four launch sites near San Cristobal, Cuba .
 Two of these are now operational and the other two are proceeding to this status on an accelerated basis . The other two will be operational on the accelerated basis of the project .
 The missiles were probably those reported moving into this area during September . The missiles are believed to be those reported to have been moved into the area .
 Each of the four sites contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, field type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment . Each site has eight missiles, four launchers and four unvetted launchers .
 Other 1000-nm ballistic missiles are also deployed at two sites nine miles apart in the Sagua La Grande area .
 There are permanent structures at the launch positions at each site . We estimate an operational capability for each site within one week. Also, there are permanent .
 Two fixed sites for 2200-nm, ballistic missiles are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana . The sites will be located near Havana, Cuba, near Havana.
 Site 2 is in an earlier stage of construction and could be operational between 15 and 30 December 1962 . Site 2 could also be operational from 15 December 1962 to 30 December 1963 . Site 1 is in the early stages of construction .
 There are no missiles or support equipment detectable within the Guanajay Area at the present time . No missiles or equipment detected within the area at the moment .
 An additional fixed site has been observed at Remedies in Eastern Cuba which is similar to those at Guanajay . The site is located in eastern Cuba and is located near the Cuban border .
 Tnis is probably a valid indicator of deployment of a second grouping of 2200-nm ballistic missiles . Tnis probably is probably an indicator of deploying a second group of missiles . The missile deployment is likely to be a result of the deployment of Tnis .
 Approximately 22 of these bombers, most still in crates, are now present in the U.S. Air Force base .
 A nuclear warhead storage site is believed to be under construction near Guanajay . The site is thought to be next to the more complete of the fixed missile launch sites . A nuclear weapon storage site may be nearby .
 A curvedroof building similar to that at Guanajay Site 1, but only about 35 by 67 feet has been observed at the newly identified possible missile site near Remedios .
 Foundations of structures which may be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and Sagua La Grande Site 1 .
 Search of major airfields in Cuba has not as yet revealed any structures that can be identified as intended for nuclear storage . There is still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba . Nevertheless, one must assume that nuclear weapons could now be in Cuba to support the operational missile capability
 Offensive missile systems are being introduced into Cuba through the Port of Mariel and perhaps other ports . The Cuban government is considering introducing offensive missile systems into Cuba .
 Central missile checkout, storage, and repair bases have been located at Soroa, between the two eastern deployment areas, and at Managua, south of Havana . Possible central missile checkout bases have also been located in Soroa .
 It is significant that all of the ballistic and air defense missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use a common oxidizer . All of the missiles probably use the same oxidizer, allowing for exploitation of a common system for propellant supply and storage .
 The remaining primary surface-to-air missile sites could be operational in approximately one week . The remaining sites are expected to be operational within one week, officials say .
 Each craft carries. two homing missiles which have an effective range of 10 to 15 nm and carry 2000-pound, high-explosive warheads . The missiles have a range of . 10 to . 15nm and have a homing range of 15nm .
 They must return to base or to a tender for reloading . The tenders for these craft have not yet been identified in Cuba .
 All of these missile launching patrol craft in Cuba are considered to be operational . All of the missile launches are considered operational .
 All have been recently observed operating in the Mariel area, but it is not known whether they are based there or were operating from other bases . It is unclear whether they were based in Mariel, but they are believed to be based in the area .
 General Sweeney reviewed in considerable detail the plans for an air strike against the missile bases, the air fields, and a few SAM sites in critical locations . General Sweeney also reviewed the plans to invade the Philippines .
 It was decided that at a minimum an air strike must include both the missile sites and the air fields and such SAM sites as necessary . General Taylor was instructed to plan accordingly .
 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor told the President that an air strike could not provide absolute assurance that all missiles were destroyed . They indicated a 90 per cent probability that the missiles would be destroyed, they said .
 Any warning would very possibly cause the movement of missiles to obscure unknown locations from which they could become operational, they said . They also stated that any warning of missiles could cause movement from unknown locations .
 General Taylor recommends an air strike be conducted immediately, suggesting tomorrow morning, and that it be without warning . General Taylor therefore recommended* on the basis of military grounds, that the air strike .
 Secretary McNamara confirmed the military appraisal expressed above but made no recommendation as to policy . McNamara made no recommendations for policy on the war .
 In response to direct questioning from the President, the Attorney General and McCone advised against surprise attack for the reasons discussed at previous meetings . Attorney General McCone and Attorney General said they would not attack .
 The meeting adjourned to be reconvened at 2:30, with additional principals in attendance . McCone urged on the other hand that the President in a public statement indicate an intention to remove missiles and other potential weapons by means and at a time of his own choosing .
 October 21, 1962: "On my report of my discussion with General Eisenhower at my residence this morning, the following information was given later"
 Any military action would be inconclusive, therefore inadvisable, unless it employed invasion and occupation of Cuba . The U.S. should not engage in any military action against Cuba .
 Eisenhower gave this opinion on a basis of his experience in war in countless examples of air strikes which though most effective, were never completely conclusive . 2. Eisenhower said that the most effective air strikes were not always completely conclusive and that air strikes never proved successful .
 From a military point of view a surprise attack would be most effective and most desirable if followed in a minimum time by invasion . A surprise attack is most effective, most desirable to be followed by invasion, he says . The U.S. should not be surprised, he adds .
 He opposed surprise attack because of the indictment, resulting tensions, and the resulting tensions . Such action would license other countries to resort to violent military action without notice, he said .
 Eisenhower would accept the handicaps from a military point of view, of warning or notice . Eisenhower would follow the suggested plan of initiating a blockade, conducting intense surveillance, and announcing the intention of taking military action .
 Eisenhower emphasized he was giving his opinion based solely on intelligence and without the benefit of a study of the war plans or the most recent diplomatic exchanges with Castro, Khrushchev .
 It seemed fair to conclude that his views as expressed above represent a flash judgment rather than a considered judgment arrived at with all facets of the problem laid before .
 On Sunday night, October 21 at 8:30 I briefed Vice President Lyndon Johnson at the request of the President, conveyed through MCGeorge Bundy . The briefing involved a review of photography by Lundahl paralleling briefings given to General Eisenhower and others . We then discussed policy and details of the
 There seemed to be mounting pressure in the U.S. for intervention . The situation has been described as a humanitarian crisis .
 Significantly expand Soviet capabilities for initial attack on U.S. targets; 3« Thus weaken Western resolve and unity in countering Soviet moves in the East-West global contest, particularly over Berlin and Germany . Significantly . expand Soviet capability for initial . attack on . United States targets;
 A firm knowledge, developed from many sources over the years, of Soviet military doctrine and practice; D Interrogation in detail of the 1,500-2,000 refugees a week coming into Florida from Cuba; E* Agent operations .
 The first indication that the USSR had taken a decision on Cuba came in late July . The decision was made by the Soviet Union in July .
 At that time, 4 Soviet passenger ships after a voyage under secrecy conditions arrived at the western Cuban naval base, Kariel . A Soviet passenger ship made its way to the base in Cuba .
 In early August, dry cargo vessels began arriving in unprecedented numbers . Dry cargo vessels have arrived in unprecedented amounts of cargo in recent months .
 Of these, only about 15 were clearly not involved in delivering military cargo .
 Most of the Bloc cargoes supporting the Cuban civilian economy are now moving in Western flag vessels . The Cuban civilian industry now requires assistance from baby food and grain to machinery parts .
 One MIG-21 was seen, as were eight Koaarclass missile boats and one land-based antishipping cruise missile site . One of the missiles was seen in the area .
 In early September, we had ample evidence of a significant buildup, D. D . D. "In early September," D. J. Smith says, "there was ample evidence that there was significant buildup"
 All confirmed deliveries fitted into a pattern of weapons which are essentially defensive in design and in normal operational employment . The weapons have been fitted to a pattern which is essentially defensive .
 President issued statements of 4 and 13 September that Soviet activity in Cuba was defensive in nature . On basis of such evidence President issued his statements of . 4 and . 13 September . President issued statement of 4, 13 September saying Soviet activity was defensive .
 17 sites appeared — in photography — to have both missiles on launchers and the essential radar in position . Only one has emplaced around it the radar-controlled guns which normally are installed to provide some defense .
 C-band radar is the latest Soviet model now being widely deployed in the USSR and East Germany . However, at least one site has the latest model of the radar .
 About 60 15 f s, 17' s and 19* s arrived prior to 1 January f 62 . There are now at least 39 MIG-21s .
 Standard Soviet GCI units (one identified this far through photography) will control these fighters . Standard SovietGCI units will control them .
 Soviet diplomacy and pronouncements have been carefully geared to military build-up; amounts to well-thought-out deception plan . Soviet diplomacy is carefully geared towards military build up, says author .
 In early October we obtained our first hard information on the delivery of Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba . The weapons are believed to have been delivered to Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 We photographed 10 crates on a ship bound for Cuba of a kind especially designed to contain the fuselage of an IL-28 jet light bomber . The crates were intended to contain a kind of fuselage .
 21 crates were later photographed at San Julian airfield in the extreme west of Cuba .
 The observation of IL-28 crates led us to mount an intensive reconnaissance effort, beginning on 15 October . The photography showed, for the first time, the deployment of surface-to-surface ballistic missile systems . The photo was taken by a team of Russian military personnel .
 We have identified four and possibly six sites for the l,10G-n.m. missile and two fixed sites for 2,200-n.,m. missiles . A. A. has identified four or possibly six . sites . We have also identified possible sites for l,
 Each launcher in turn normally has two missiles assigned it, all 16 of which we have identified at the site . Each launcher is normally assigned with two missiles .
 We have identified six of the eight launchers and seven of the sixteen missiles . Another two sites are near Sagua La Grande just east of Havana, Cuba .
 Preliminary evidence of two additional sites near San Cristobal . C There is preliminary evidence that there are two more sites near the city .
 The keys to these identifications are the size of the missile body, the unique erectorlauncher equipment, and the position and spacing of equipment . D . D
 It has an autonomous guidance system giving a CEP of 1, to 1 1/2 nautical miles . It carries a warhead of 2,500-3,500 pounds, yielding 2-3 megatons . It also carries an autonomous navigation system .
 Photographs alone cannot permit us to be very precise about the operational readiness of these missiles . F Photography alone cannot allow us to . to be . precise about . operational readiness .
 We know less about the 2,200-mile missile, but believe it to be also single-stage, using s tor able liquid fuels and with an autonomous guidance system . The missile is believed to be able to travel 2,000 miles .
 We have no direct evidence that nuclear weapons are now in Cuba — and we're not likely to get any . No direct evidence of the presence of nuclear weapons in Cuba . No evidence that the U.S. has nukes are in Cuba, but it's unlikely they are .
 At least 8,000 Soviet military and about 3,000 nonmilitary personnel are now in Cuba, A . This matches fairly well with our estimate that the Soviets would need about 10,000 military for the assembly activity now going on .
 We think this total will rise to about 14,000 when all weapons systems now in Cuba are operational . B. B. We think that number will rise when all systems are now operational .
 C Sites now identified trill, when completed, give Soviets total of 36 launchers and 72 missiles . When completed, C Sites will have 36 launchers, 72 missiles and 36 missiles .
 U October 1962 Mission 3101 ISOciefcer 1962 Missions 3102 & 3103 17 O^toWr . 1962 missions 3104, 3105, 3104 and 3105 . Mission 31 October 1962 .
 An Emergency Operational Capability exists when a site could launch some missiles should a decision be made to do so . An Emergency Operation Capability can be used to launch missiles if a decision is made by a site is made .
 A Full Operational Capability is achieved when a site has reached a steady state of readiness with the ability to salvo its first missile load within about 6 to 8 hours . The ability to refire within 4 to 6 hours is achieved at a site with a full readiness state .
 The Soviet objective in Cuba is to attain full operational capability at all sites as soon as possible, rather than to prepare each site for an emergency launch capability . The comparative photographic coverage indicates that while an emergency operational capability could exist at several offensive missile sites .
 This will represent a first salvo potential of 40 missiles with a refire capability of an additional 40 missiles . This will include 40 missiles, with the possibility of a further 40 missiles being refited .
 Director of Central Intelligence i Director, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency 1. 1. 2. 3111 and 3H3: Mission 3111 . Mission 3.3: Additional Information Missions .
 A newly identified confirmed confirmed MRBM launch site has been located on Mission 3H3 . Mission is located on the mission to launch a new MRBM rocket . The launch will take place on the launchpad of the rocket .
 The newly identified unimproved field type MRBM launch site is located 2. nm NNW of Candelaria at 22° 47' 45 ""N 82°58'40""W in the San Cristobal area .
 The site contains two tent areas totalling 26 tents and at least 60 vehicles . Two tent areas contain 26 tents, at least two vehicles .
 Seven missile trailers and two missile erectors were identified at the site . The site was also identified as a missile base .
 At three of the four excavations there are 10 to 12 precast hollow concrete objects . The excavations are expected to take place in the next few years .
 The seven canvas covered missiles are now draped with netting . Three of the four erectors are canvas covered . The seven missiles are draped with nets .
 Six missiles and three erectors are parked in a common area . The missiles and erectors were parked in the common area of MR Site 2 .
 Cloud cover prevents a complete analysis; however, one erector and possibly two others were observed . One erector was observed at MR Site 3 .
 MR Site 4 consists of four launch positions, two containing erectors and six canvas covered missiles on trailers . MR Site 5 consists of . four erectors on pads and four canvas covered . missiles on . trailers and MR Site .
 Construction activity continues on IR sites 1 and 2 in the Guana jay area . Construction activity is ongoing in the area .
 They have been sent to all Chiefs of Stations with some minor variations to cover local conditions . They are sent out to all chiefs of stations .
 It is expected that the chief of mission will receive FRCM communications . It is also expected that your area will receive communications from the top of your organization .
 The Soviet decision to embark on the cur\ rent military buildup in Cuba probably was nade in j April 1962 .
 The decision paralleled political and economic moves which greatly strengthened the Sovieti Cuban relationship . The decision was made during the Soviet-Cuban era .
 The program probably was planned I and set in motion during the period April through | June . The program was probably planned and set to be set up during the spring and summer .
 In the second week of July the first shipments of materiel began to leave Soviet ports, accompanied | by passenger ships carrying military personnel .
 USSR's policy toward Castro's self-proclaimed adherence to Communism was still unclear . The USSR's support of Cuba was within the bounds of ""normal" Soviet trade and aid policy, e., ties governed by longterm credit agreements .
 Moscow chose to acquiesce in Castro's assertion of his authority over the so-called ""old Communists"" and to acknowledge the ""socialist"" character of the Cuban regime . In early April, Moscow agreed to accept Castro's claim of authority .
 In May agreements were signed for the bloc to provide additional amounts of foodstuffs, consumer goods, raw materials, and other badly needed imports . Shortly thereafter, negotiations for Cuba's faltering economy were initiated .
 A decision to undertake the current military buildup probably was made along with these economic and political moves . A decision was likely made in the wake of these economic, political moves, CNN's John Sutter says .
 Agreement was reached for stationing Soviet strategic forces on the island . In return, agreement was reached to station Soviet military forces there .
 The buildup in Cuba has been taking place in stages which can be distinguished reasonably well . The first deliveries of men and equipment arrived in late July . They appear to have been primarily of equipment for SAM and coastal defense missile installations .
 Available information suggests work on the first site began about 29 August and the first missiles of this kind probably arrived in the first half of September . Two top-level meetings between the Cubans and Khrushchev were held in this period .
 Since early September, military shipments probably have included equipment for all the missile installations as well as aircraft and land armaments . Military shipments probably include equipment for missile installations .
 Two shipments of IL-28 bombers appear to have arrived in late September . Third shipment may be en route . Most of the 39 or more MIG-21S arrived during the first week of September*
 Soviet vessels are en route with probable military cargoes, and one or two are leaving Soviet ports almost daily* - 2270 79.7% .
 Tte 3 sites still sees likely to reach full operational readiness in December . Tte sites still see likely to be fully operational ready in December, says Tte .
 Emergency operational readiness of some of the JK3*s night could be reached somewhat earlier . Emergency readiness can be reached earlier in the night than usual, say officials .
 Of the 2^ primary surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba, ve believe i 22 are nov operational . The Soviet fleet support vessel, lEESS, is nov in the Atlantic on a i t high-speed run .
 Leadership meeting on October 22nd at 5:00 ATTended by: The Leadership, except for Senator Hayden . Leadership meeting will be held at 5 p.m.
 The Freiident, Rusk* McNaxnara, McCone and Ambassador Thompson McCone read a summary of the situation, copy of which is attached .
 This statement had been discussed with the President, Attorney General and Bundy and had been modified to conform to their views . This statement was originally written by Bundy, Bundy and Bundy .
 Hickenlooper asks when missiles will be in operational status . Hickenloper: "There were a few questions of a substantive nature"
 McCone replied with the existing figures as reported in the morning report . McCone said the figures were the same as the previous day .
 Hickenlooper then asked if the Cuban situation is tied in to the China/ India confrontation . Hickenloper then said the situation was tied to the situation in Cuba .
 Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union indicating there had been some radical moves within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line . Thompson then said it was more probable that Cuba may force a showdown on Berlin*
 It appeared the hard-liners are coming in to ascendency and the soft co-existent line seems to be disappearing . Hard-liners seem to be coming into the ascendency .
 The President concluded whatever we do involves a risk; however we must make careful calculations and take a chance* To do nothing would be a great mistake, he said .
 The blockade of Cuba on the importation of offensive weapons was to be undertaken . *U ships would be stopped and those containing offensive weapons would not be permitted to proceed .
 We have no idea how the Bloc will react but the indications are, from unconfirmed sources, they will attempt to run the blockade . Unconfirmed sources say they will try to run a blockade of the city .
 We are taking all military preparations for either an air strike or an invasion . We are preparing for either a strike or a military invasion, says President Obama .
 It was the President's considered judgment that if we have to resort to active military action* then this would involve an invasion, he said .
 Rusk then stated that our proposed action gave the other side a chance to pause . Rusk said that the proposed action was given a pause by the opposition .
 They may pull back or intensify the entire situation existing between the Soviet Union and the United States. The situation may rapidly intensify the situation between the U.S. and the USSR .
 Senator Russell then demanded stronger steps, stated he did not think we needed time to pause . Senator Russell said he does not think he needed to pause. Senator Russell: "I don't think we need to pause"
 The President had warned them in September and no further warning was necessary . President had already warned them that no more was needed .
 Khrushchev has once again rattled his missiles; he can become firmer and firmer, and we must react . We must not take a gamble and must not temporise, says David Cameron . The world has been rattled by the missile threat, says Cameron .
 If we delay* if we give notification, if we telegraph our punches, the result will be more a difficult military action and more American lives will be sacrificed . The U.S. should not telegraph its punches, it will be harder to get ahead of a military action,
 The thrust of Senator Russell's remarks were to demand military action . Senator Russell said the thrust of his speech was to demand the use of military force .
 tMi might load to some form of military action; that there would be many altarnativa courses ope n to us . Indicating that tMi may load to military action, tMi. might load .
 Vinson then asked if Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion . The President then reviewed in some detail time r equir edff^lcl^'
 The plans had been developed over a 10-month period and had been submitted to the President by the JCS on a number of occasions . The JCS had submitted the plans to the president on numerous occasions .
 This question did not*refer to whether the JCS did or did not approve the proposed actions of blockade against Cuba .
 The President then reviewed matters again, read an intelligence note from a United Nations source which indicated Soviet intention to grab Berlin . He then read a note from the U.N. source that indicated Soviet intentions to grab the city .
 Halle ck questioned whether we were sure we were absolutely sure these weapons were offensive . Hallecke questioned whether it was absolutely sure it was offensive .
 He said, "One might question whether the missiles are or are not offensive"
 He then read the message received from the Prime Minister which in effect agreed to support us in the United Nations . He then raised many warnings including the dangers to Berlin, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran, etc., etc. etc. He said the dangers of Berlin, Germany, Pakistan and Iran
 A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OAS . Sena cor Saltonstaii brought up the question of the legality, of the blockade .
 Saltonstaii then asked whether a blockade would be legal if the OAS did not support it* The President answered that it probably would not; however we would proceed anyway . Salton Staii then said that it would probably not be legal to blockade if the U.S.
 Fulb right then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite eifront to Russia . The moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognise or respect the blockade we would be at
 Fulbright said it would be far better to launch an attack and to take out the bases from Cuba . Fulbright then repeated his position and said it was better to attack Cuba .
 McNamara stated that this would involve the spilling of Russian blood since there were so many thousand Russians manning these bases . McNamara: "This would involve a lot of blood" McNamara said .
 Fulbright responded that this made no difference because they were there in Cuba to help on Cuban bases . Fulbright: "I'm not sure if this makes no difference"
 He felt the Soviets would not react if some Russians got killed in Cuba . Therefore he felt that some Russians would not be killed if some of them got killed . He felt that the Soviets wouldn't react to the deaths of some Russians .
 The time has come for an invasion under the President's statement of February 13th, Fulbright repeated that an act on Russian ships is an act of war against Russia . On the other hand, an attack or an invasion of Cuba was an act against Cuba, not Russia . An attack
 Fulbright expressed reservations about the possible OAS action . Fulbright also expressed reservations concerning the possible action .
 The President took issue with Fulbright, stating that he felt that an attack on these bases, which we knew were manned by Soviet personnel, would involve large numbers of Soviet casualities .
 Senator Hickenlooper expressed himself as opposed to the action and in favor of direct military action . During this meeting he expressed his support for direct action .
 U Ocio^r 1552 Mission 3101 15 Ocic^er 7962 Mission* 31D2 & 3103 17 OctCB-cr 1552 .wijiio-ii 3SCJ, 3IC5. U OCio-i-ii
 Readiness status of the offensive missiles in Cuba continues . Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status .
 This report is based on photographic coverage through Mission 3117 of 20 October 1962 . This report was published on October 20, 1962 .
 There are no changes in the estimates of operational readiness for the nine offensive missile sites . The sites are expected to be operational ready for operational readiness .
 Three additional MRBMs and four additional MRBM launchers raise the total to 33 missiles and 23 launchers . The total now stands at 33 missiles, 23 launchers and two additional launchers .
 One additional SAM site is now considered operational . 23 of the 24 active SAM sites so far identified so far .
 No new intelligence information has been received which modifies the nuclear storage situation since the last joint supplement . No new information was received by the U.S. government since the supplement .
 Tarrwlahl displayed the most recent photograph* end a map showing 97 per cent coverage of the Island . The most recent photo was taken at the end of the map .
 Robert Kennedy stated that the question had been raised as to why the situation was not reported earlier, what was wrong with our Intelligence* It was agreed that the rapidity with which the MRBM site construction took place, and other events accounted for the suddenness of the findings .
 DC1 was requested to contact Eulbright, Russell, Vinson, HaUeck, Dirksen and Hickenlooper, and for the press, Alsop, Krock and Lawrence .
 McNamara discussed plans for intercept of the first ship which would be the Xlmovsk . McNamara said that if OAS acted on Tuesday, the proclamation would be iesued, effective Wednesday morning* October 24 .
 The President discussed the program, defending the steps taken, stated earlier action would not have been supported . Earlier action would have not have shut off the possibility of missile* emp has ised that mobile missiles ca come in at any time and be set up rapidly .
 McKtnar* then raised question of reaction to reaction to firing on a tj~2, indicated pilot* instructed to take evasive action . Pilot* instructed pilot* to fire on tj ~2, said pilot* was told to fire .
 Taylor reported eight attack aircraft are maintained in hot alert and can destroy SAM sites within two hours . The decision for retaliation would then be made by the President .
 McNamara would have authority to act if President was not available . McNamara was given authority to take action .
 CIA request that our representatives be stationed with JCS planning staff and in the Flag Plot . General Taylor agreed that he would take up the CIA request .
 If there is any delay on this please inform me so that I can again communicate with Taylor . Please inform me if there is a delay in this article .
 McNamara noted that they had no air intercept capability and would not attempt at this time to develop their plan of air intercept . McNamara said they would not try to develop a plan of intercept .
 It was requested that CIA and Defense carefully analyse air traffic and report currently so that if there is a marked build-up, the Committee will be advised and appropriate action can be taken .
 Six flights were approved and General Taylor ordered them off immediately . General Taylor then ordered them to be pulled from the air .
 It was presumed that they will return not later than 1:00 o'clock today . It is presumed that the police will return later today .
 KP1C and DCI's office receive p riivU at mllMt mcmtat DDQ to follow . It la vary important that KP1c and DCi's office get p rivu at mmmtmcmt at DDQ
 Almo imp rtint thAt tf photography is productive of new and mora convincing information, prints prints sh ould bo ant to Governor Stmm<a at once . Almoimp rtints thAttf photography is .
 After a brief discussion of comm uai eatlo ns B toady stated that subject under study by Dr. Dr. B was under study . Dr. A toady said that subject is subject of Dr. E. B's study .
 State* Defense and CIA communications specialists are urged to contact Wiesner . Wieaner is a former CIA director of operations in Washington .
 McCone, Wieaner, Smith and Edwards met and reviewed the CZA Latin American ^gmrr^Trf^rt^m system .
 CIA is following up energetically by CIA with Wiesner and all appropriate actions taken . This whole c o m m muni ca ti on problem is to be followed up by CIA . CIA: "This is a very serious problem"
 Secretary Ball reported Governor Stevenson and Mr McGoy felt they did not have enough information to make a convincing cue before the UN Security Council . Secretary Ball said Governor Stevenson did not believe enough information could be presented before the council .
 A large map marked in color, showing the actual locations of a few of the sites, possibly one MKBM site, one IRBM site and one or two air fields . A pre-May 1, i960 U-2 picture of the Soviet MRBM/ERBM site to
 Bundy explained idea of creating a staff to support the Committee indicating each member should have a working staff member, details to be worked out later . Bundy said each member of the committee would have to have a staff member . Bundy also said the committee will have to work out details later .
 DDd should consider appropriate assignment after conferring with State and Defense and determining their nominees . DDd. should consider . appropriate assignment . State, Defense and Defense should confer on appropriate assignment.
 This will be more or less full time and this staff man can handle Agency representation and also support me . This will also be a staff man who can handle agency representation .
 At 12:40 Mr Arthur Krock called at my office at my invitation* I reviewed the situation generally with him. answering question* concerning the background of the decision*. The arguments in favor of the course of action versus a blockade coupled with the political debate on the one hand and surprise
 At 5:00 o'clock at my invitation Mr David Lawrence and Mr Scon called at my office and reviewed the situation with them . Mr Lawrence and Ms Lawrence were invited to meet with Mr Lawrence at 5:30 p.m.
 They questioned me concerning the evidence and I showed them several pictures which they accepted as convincing evidence . I showed several pictures of the evidence which I showed to them . They accepted that they were convincing evidence, and they accepted it .
 "They questioned me in considerable detail as to why we did not know this sooner, how Keating got his information and the penetration of intelligence activities during the months of August and September* I explained the situation substantially aft outlined to the leadership at their meeting. They questioned me .
 X felt that neither was convinced and that both attached some ""other motive "" to the timing of the timing . X said that neither of the characters was convinced .
 MRBM sites can be installed quickly and with very little advanced preparation which can be detected which can't be detected . However, they did recognise that MRBM . sites can also be installed with little advance preparation .
 Administration spokesmen spoke ao categorically that the build-up was purely defensive and that no offensive capability was being installed . Both gentlemen Questioned me at considerable length as to why . Administration . spokesmen said that no . offensive capabilities was being built .
 They were concerned about repeated statements by the President, Chester Bowies, the Vice Fresident and other Administration spokesmen . The State Department briefing held on Thursday, October 18th, which was two or three days after the original data was in our hands, was 2 or 3 days after
 H They said they thought this briefing was a deceptive mistake and wondered why the briefing was carried on . H They thought they thought it was a deception mistake .
 He said, "We're going to have to blow you out of this for not reorganising your estimating processes, most particularly your Board of National Estimates"
 CIA estimating processes were not objective and served special interests, says CIA official . He said this was just another example of how the CIA estimating process was not objective . CIA official: This is another example how the agency's estimating processes are not objective, serve special interests .
 He said they were going to prepare an article and expose the whole situation to the public .
 Scott apparently has read the latest Cuban estimate published about' Septembe r 20th, which contains wording as quoted above . Scott apparently reads the latest estimate published by the Cuban government .
 I feel Grogan should talk with him and perhaps 1 should talk to him also . Perhaps 1 should also talk with one of the players . Grogan is not a fan of Grogan's .
 Congressional and 'Press, I have been forced to defend the Executive Branch of the Government and CIA against the questions why did we not know about this sooner and did we . not estimate or forecast this eventuality .
 Meetings with Senator Russell, Senator Kickeruocpei and Chairman Vinson 1. Meetings were held in honor of the deceased .
 At the President's request I contacted several members of the leadership of the Congress with the following results . The results are the result of a meeting with the President of the United States .
 Senator Russell indicated a less critical attitude toward Administration policy than was evident at the leadership meeting the night before . Russell indicated he was less critical of Administration policy .
 He expressed concern over the Soviet/ United States confrontation which would result from the blockade . Accepted the course of action only I because it would lead to the next phase which would be that of taking missiles and offensive weapons out of Cuba at a time and by means of our own determination .
 Russell favored more positive action against Cuba which would involve not only air strike but invasion . Russell favored air strike and invasion of Cuba, but favored invasion .
 In the initial part of the discussion he felt the President's speech had not established a clear-cut right for military action . However, by careful reference to the speech, he agreed that the wording did give the President right of action without further notification .
 Russell's attitude was considerably different than the leadership meeting and might be summed up as reserved approval . Russell: "In general, Russell's attitudes were considerably different."
 I outlined my feelings that our | purposes must be to remove the missiles and also to remove j Castro as is outlined in a separate memorandum, | 2 . During the conversation, I outlined his feelings that . Our | purposes are to remove missiles, as is that of Castro as outlined in
 Senator Hickenlooper approved the speech, the action, and the anticipated further action without reservation . The speech was approved without reservation by the governor .
 Senator Russell expressed confidence in the President as did Senator Russell but serious reservations concerning some of the Presidents advisors . He felt they would influence the President to follow a very weak and compromising line .
 Hickenlooper was relieved by the speech and more satisfied with our Cuban policy than was evident at the leadership meeting . However, it appeared to be that Hickenloper was greatly relieved .
 He approved it but he had concluded that military action would be necessary and this he heartily approved . He said: "He approved it ... but he said it was necessary and that this would be needed"
 Vinson feels that we must dispose of the Castro problem as well as the missiles . Vinson: "I feel that we need to dispose of that problem and dispose of it as well."
 I outlined my feelings as covered by separate memorandum . In this regard, I outlined myself as covered in a separate memorandum. In the . separate memorandum, I outline my feelings in separate memo .
 Vinson tended to review the activities of the Navy with Admiral Anderson and others, insisting that we must be sure that we are going to do enough . If we invade, we must invade with great force, an assured victory, quick victory, otherwise Cuban resistance will be rallied .
 Both Vinson and Russell were very inquisitive as to the position of the Joint Chiefs . The Joint Chiefs were also inquiring about the Joint Chief's position .
 Taylor: Civilians with broader responsibilities, i.e. military and political as well, necessarily had to moderate the JCS view . I explained this as expressed by Taylor, pointing out that their position of a sudden unannounced military strike was reasonable .
 I stated that I felt the JCS view would insure the most successful military operations with the least American losses . But that I opposed it and felt that the military handicaps resulting from our course of action must be reverted to, can be overcome by increase in the weight of the military operation
 None of the three felt that we should have undertaken a surprise attack . Russell in particular felt that a warning and a military operation might have been preferable to the blockade .
 Russell agreed that action could be taken now n at a time of our own choosing . Russell agreed this was correct. I pointed out that the warning now had been given and action was possible .
 Defense Department X Committee reviewed the blockade proclamation and approved iU Uvu signed by the President at 6:00m. All members of the committee were present at the time .
 GUpatric reported that this would have little or no effect on the U.S. economy . The report said it would have no impact on the economy .
 McCone questioned Gilpatric's findings, however GilPatric said that this had been thoroughly studied and McCone v s concerns as expressed at the morning meeting were unfounded . McCone said that McCone's concerns were unfounded.
 Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so commingled that they really must be held by one ™»™ Taylor raised question that if this was done it would hart Lemnitser's prestige . Bundy said it would be complicated as this is so comm
 The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable that he would take the risk of NATO country criti cisms . He did not tb i nxer that Lemnitxer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain .
 The President seemed particularly concerned over the situation if we should enrich attacks which might result in four or five missiles being delivered on the United States . The President seems particularly concerned .
 Many arrangements could be made without too much publicity, such as repositioning food, actually obtaining space, putting up ehelter eigne , etc.
 X got the conclusion that not very much could or would be done; that whatever was done would involve a great deal of publicity and public alarm . X concluded that nothing could be done .
 McCone stated to the President that he felt certain intelligence should be reported to the meeting prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara as some items observed by the Intelligence .
 Some of Mission 5002, the low altitude photographic coverage of 23 October 1962, arrived during the preparation of this report . Preliminary comments have been incorporated in the discussion of the GuanajaylRBM sites .
 There are two changes in the estimated dates of full operational capability . There have been two changes to the estimated date of full capability .
 San Cristobal MRBM Site 2 and Sagua La Grande MRBM site 1 are now estimated to achieve this status on 25 October instead of 22 October as previously estimated . The two sites are expected to reach this status sooner than previously thought and earlier this month .
 Seven Soviet ships with cargo hatch openings of 75 feet or longer have been identified as possible ballistic missile carriers . The ships are believed to be capable of carrying ballistic missiles .
 They have made 13 trips to Cuba to date, and three are currently enroute to Cuba . Three of them are currently in Cuba .
 No new intelligence information has been received which modifies the nuclear storage situation . No new information was received by the U.S. government .
 Communist reaction to the U.S. quarantine action against Cuba has not gone beyond the highly critical statement issued yesterday by the Soviet government .
 Of these 22, nine are in positions which would permit arrival by the end of October . Of these nine, nine would be in positions that would allow arrival by October .
 McCone gave a brief intelligence summary, copy attached . The President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone and McNamara attended the meeting .
 Secretary Rusk reported on the United Nations, stated there was no confirmed Soviet reaction or statement of intentions but discussed exchange with Bertrand Russell and dismissed this as unofficial .
 The President categorically stated there was no formal or informal direct approach for a Kennedy/Khrushchev meeting . The President said there had been no negotiations toward that end .
 McNamara reported on military operations, stated that as of this hour there had been ""no interceptions of Soviet ships; none were necessary" McNamara said .
 Mansfield spoke of the importance of the confidential nature of the meeting, referring to Roland Evans 1 article in the Herald Tribune which summarised in accurate detail views of all who attended the prior meeting .
 It was the consensus that the discussions at leaderI ship meetings must be kept most confidential . The consensus was that discussions were kept confidential . It was a consensus that discussions must be confidential .
 Rusk then reported that Secretary General U Thant would issue a statement calling for a twoweek moratorium . Rusk also reported that the Secretary General would call for a ban on twoweeks .
 Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status, or changes therein, of the offensive missiles in Cuba .
 The quality of the recent, low-altitude photography permits positive identification of many types of missile associated equipment . The quality . of the . recent . low altitude photography . permits positive . identification of several types of missiles associated equipment.
 As yet there is no evidence of change in the pace of construction activities . As yet, there has been no evidence that there will be change in pace of work .
 There is increasing evidence of the use of camouflage at several sites . There is also increasing evidence that camouflage has been used in the past .
 We have analyzed the capability of the Soviets to transport nuclear warheads for these missiles from the USSR to Cuba using submarines and aircraft . The Soviets were able to transport the warheads from the Soviet Union to Cuba, the author says .
 A TU-114 can fly non-stop from Ollenya in the Soviet Union to Cuba with up to 10 nuclear warheads on an approximate great circle route . The route would not pass over any other country . It would be the first time such a plane has flown non-st
 Low-altitude photography of 23 October confirms previous estimates of the general characteristics and rate of construction of the probable nuclear warhead bunkers at several sites . New, low-altitudes photography of the 23 October .
 Cuban armed forces continue their alert, .with military aircraft on stand down since the morning of 23 October . Cuban military aircraft have been on stand-down since morning of October 23 .
 There are indications that known and suspected dissidents are being rounded up . There is also indications that they will be rounded up by government officials .
 As of 0600 EDT at least 14 of the 22 Soviet ships which were known to be en route to Cuba had turned back . At least 14 Soviet ships known to have turned back turned back at least .
 Two dry cargo ships not known to have reversed course may be carrying non-miljLtarv cargo . The BELOVODSK M^V has 12 HOUND helicopaanges in course"" ""appear to have been executed in midday on 23 October, before the President signed
 We still see no signs of any crash procedure in measures to increase the readiness of Soviet armed forces . Ill Ill* We are concerned about the situation in the Soviet Union .
 Attention is centered on neutralist efforts in the UN to find machinery for easing tension . Attention remains centered on efforts to find a way to ease tension .
 Latin American countries are beginning to offer military units for the quarantine . There is generally little adverse reaction in the hemisphere . Latin American nations are beginning .
 McCone reported on intelligence, reviewing summary of 25 October, including penciled memo randoms as indicated . Cline memorandum of 25 Oct. on talks with Sir Kenneth Strong, and the Watch Report of same date .
 I called special attention to the BELOVODSX and reported on Page II -5 and the searching of the Cubana airplane by Canadians as reported on page IV-2. I called . The BelovodSX was reported to have been searched by Canadian agents .
 McNamara reported that at 7:00 o 1 clock a destroyer intercepted the tanker BUCHAREST which responded destination was Havana . The BU CHAREST was permitted to proceed under surveillance . McNamara said the BU CHARSTEST was allowed to proceed to Havana .
 He recommended orders be issued to immediately board Bloc ships and then the BUCHAREST be boarded . The BU CHAREST was then boarded .
 Decision was reached that Navy be instructed to board the next Soviet ship contacted which would be the GROZNY, a tanker but which was carrying a deck load which might be missile field tanks . Decision was made that the next Russian ship contacted would be a tanker carrying a cargo of missiles
 Contact was to be made with the GROZNY as early as possible and that was estimated to be about 8:00 o'clock in the evening, Friday, October 26th . Contact was expected to be between 8:30 and 9:30 p.m. Friday,
 McCone noted the number of ships in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Baltic and Mediterranean which had turned back . McCone then noted that many of the ships turned back in the eastern Atlantic .
 The President asked whether Soviet ships bound elsewhere than Cuba had changed course . Dillon asked about ships in the Pacific, The President said they were bound elsewhere .
 There was a further discussion of the policy of stopping or hailing non-Bloc ships . There was also a discussion of a possible ban on non-bloc ships hailing .
 Draft of United States reply to U Thant letter approved with modifications . Draft of U.S. reply to the U.K. letter to U.Thant letter was approved with modification .
 It was agreed at the meeting that we must insist upon the removal of missiles from Cuba in addition to demands that construction be stopped and UN inspectors be permitted at once .
 Bundy reviewed Khrushchev letter to the President of the 24th of October and the Kennedy reply . Bundy reviewed the letter and Kennedy reply to the letter . Bundy also reviewed the Kennedy response to the request .
 McCone gave intelligence briefing covered by Situation Report of 10/25 and followed with resume of Bloc shipping . Also referred briefly to reaction to Soviet government statement . All, MEMBERS PRESENT .
 The meeting considered three drafts of scenarios of three possible courses of action* that is, air strike, the political path and progressive economic blockade, all of which are attached .
 Yon asked me to give you a paper by 5:00m. today on the San Roman/ Attorney General /Harvey /Lansdale/MonGC OSS problem in connection with submarines and the 50 -Cuban project .
 I have talked only to Bill Harvey but in the light of my prior knowledge of Special Group/ MONGOOSE /Lans dale /voice level, etc., it is my clear opinion that this whole problem is centered around jurisdictional bureaucracy not unlike the tangle I had with Gil
 Lansdale feels badly cut out of the picture and appears to be seeking to reconstitute the MONGOOSE Special Group operations during this period of impending crisis . Lansdale says he is looking for a way to get back into the organization .
 I need not tell you that Lansdale 's organization and the MONGOOSE concept of clearing actions through Special Group is an impossible procedure under current circumstances .
 Harvey rightly realized that intelligence collection was essential and that it should be geared to a turnover of the assets to the military in place in the event military operations took place .
 The Cubans were required to be part of the U.S. Navy . Submarine submarines are required to carry out the mission . Submarines are needed in order to protect the Cuban people .
 General Johnson of the JCS Staff was knowledgeable . General Lansdale was subsequently informed and assisted in obtaining the submarines . General Johnson was knowledgeable and informed .
 The detailed planning is still going on but cannot be firm until subi marine commanders are available . Submarine commanders will not be available until the end of the year .
 The Cubans are not owned by San Roman but have been recruited and checked out by CIA and in a number of cases have been CIA agents for a long time . San Roman says the Cubans have been checked-out by the CIA .
 "This is pure intelligence collection and the establishment of intelligence assets in place," says President Obama . "It's not just intelligence collection," says Obama's spokesman . "We're not going to be surprised at the level of intelligence collection"
 Lansdale knows about it. Lansdale is being closely coordinated with the JCS Planning Staff . Lansdale says he is aware of Lansdale's involvement in the project .
 It obviously cannot be planned, controlled, and operated through the cumbersome procedures of MONGOOSE . Therefore it is not in MONGOose channels, therefore it cannot be used in the process .
 Supplement 6 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 26 October 1962 . Excerpts from the document .
 This supplement updates and amplifies previous reports . Emphasis is placed on the READINESS status, construction pace and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites .
 The 25 October photography of four MRBM sites shows continued rapid construction activity at each site .
 This activity apparently continues to be directed toward achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible . This activity continues to focus on achieving a fully operational capability .
 Camouflage and canvas covering of critical equipment is also continuing . The U.S. military says it will continue to use camouflage and canvas .
 As yet there is no evidence indicating any intention to move or dismantle these sites, 2.2.3 . As yet, there are no plans to move these sites or dismantle .
 No new missile sites have been identified, although previous photography has revealed some improvement in the Remedios area which is considered indicative of plans for the second IRBM site .
 Only two Soviet freighters — and five tankers — still are headed for Cuba . One of them is already past the quarantine line .
 The PUGACHEV appears to have slowed or stopped several days west of the Panama Canal . The BELOVODSK, with twelve MI-4 helicopters, is inthe North Atlantic . The Pugachev appears to be slowing or stopping .
 A total of 16 dry cargo ships now are carried as having turned back toward the USSR on 23 October . 16 ships now carry a record number of Soviet Union-bound ships .
 Two Soviet civil air flights are scheduled for Havana with passengers; cargo, if any, is not known . Cargo is unknown; cargo is unknown .
 Two areas along the West German border have been closed off for exercises . No fffifYi Qr depi nvTn^r>+-g:_K^nia , alert in East Germany .
 Khrushchev * s acceptance of U Thant's appeal in a bid to start USSoviet negotiations . Moscow: "Khrrushchev's appeal was accepted by the U.S. State of the Soviet Union"
 Peiping, however, is irritated that the Soviet response to the U.S. action is not stronger . Peiping is annoyed that the response to United States action has not been stronger .
 There is no major change or significant new development in non-bloc reaction to the crisis . There are no major new developments or major changes in reaction to crisis .
 NATO members have agreed with minor reservations to deny landing and overflight rights to Soviet planes bound for Cuba ' sites . Most of the OAS nations have offered to participate in some form in the quarantine .
 CIA plan to have ten teams go into Cuba by submarine to gather intelligence on missile bases and other points of interest . CIA also plans to send teams to Cuba by sub-sea to gather information .
 McCone stated there was an organizational problem with Lansdale iinde-r current conditions and a meeting was called for this afternoon to resolve this problem .
 President suggested Lansdale organization might serve as a Subcommittee of the NSC Executive Committee . President suggested it might be used as a subcommittee .
 McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, Johnson, Martin, Don Wilson, McCone, Lansdale, Harvey, and Parrott .
 Lansdale felt himself lacking authority and not in channel of either operations or information with JCS or SecDef 's office . Lansdale said he felt lacking authority . He said Lansdale was not in the right channel of information with the JCS .
 There was considerable criticism by innuendo of the CIA/Lansdale relationship . The CIA and Lansdale relationship has been heavily criticized .
 McCone stated that he understood the MONGOOSE goal was to encourage the Cuban people to take Cuba away from Castro and to set up a proper form of government . McCone: "I understand the goal is to encourage [Cubans] to take [Castro's] away from
 CIA had, and would continue to support Lansdale, CIA said . CIA said it recognized Lansdale as the director of this operation . Lansdale was the CIA's director of operations in the 1990s .
 He felt that any indication that CIA was not affording such support to Lansdale was completely erroneous . Lansdale felt the CIA was supporting Lansdale . He felt any indication of CIA's support was erroneous .
 CIA by long-standing arrangements, details of which were most recently confirmed, are obligated to support the military to the extent desired by the JCS in any combat theatre . Lansdale may have misjudged some CIA moves made for the purpose of meeting this objective .
 Cuban political office to plan for postinvasion government of Cuba would be secretly set up by the State Department . It was decided that a new political office would be set up in Cuba . The State Department set up the office to help plan for the new government .
 The group reaffirmed Lansdale is to be in charge of the MONGOOSE operations which will cover all covert activities of any department of government, including State, CIA, USIA, etc. The group also reaffirmed that Lansdale was in charge, of the operations .
 General Lansdale is then to determine /assets available in the government can produce the information desired by Defense and State, and then program a procedure to be followed . Lansdale will then be able to program a program to follow .
 Lansdale will make these determinations at the earliest moment and confer further with the co mm ittee or individual representative s thereof . Lansdale is expected to make the decision at an earliest moment .
 Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status, pace of construction and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites in Cuba . The Cuban missile sites are located in Cuba, Cuba, the U.S. government says .
 This report is based primarily upon detailed analysis of the 25 October low-altitude coverage . It is based on detailed analysis . This report was based on analysis of coverage of 25 October .
 Detailed analysis confirms the rapid pace of construction reported in our last supplement . Detailed . analysis confirms . the rapid . pace of . construction .
 As of 25 October there was no evidence indicating any intention to halt construction, dismantle or move these sites .
 There are no changes in the dates of estimated operational capability for the MRBM and IRBM sites . No changes have been made to the dates in the future .
 This means a capability to launch up to 24 MRBM missiles within 6 to 8 hours of a decision to do so, andarefire capability of up to . 24 additional . additional MRBMs within 4 to 6 hours . within 3.5 days of the decision to launch . within
 No IRBM missiles, missile transporters, erectors or associated equipment have been observed to date . No IRB missiles have been seen to date in the region .
 There has been no K^^S^^j^ ev idence of attempts at interdiction of United States reconnaissancance . U.S. has not attempted to interdict the drug .
 Despite Krushchev's statement to Mr Knox of 24 October, we still lack evidence that nuclear weapons are deployed in Cuba . We still lack positive evidence that .
 Based on the latest low-level reconnissance mission, three of the four MRBM sites at San Cristobal and two sites at Sagua La Grande appear to be fully operational .
 They remain under orders not to take any hostile action unless attacked . However, they are still under orders to not take hostile action .
 Steps toward establishing an integrated air defense system are under way . Air defense system is under way in the U.S.
 Cuban representatives are trying to plant the idea that Havana would be receptive to UN mediation . Cuban representatives say they are receptive to the idea of UN mediation in the region .
 A prerequisite must be proof that the United States does not intend to attack Cuba, the U.S. says . They indicate, however, that a prerequisite is that a . prerequisite is proof . that the . United States doesn't intend to . attack Cuba .
 Khrushchev's declaration to U Thant that Soviet ships would temporarily avoid quarantine area has not yet been changed course . Six Soviet and three satellite ships en route have changed course, but no information as yet .
 Swedish vessel, believed to be under charter to the USSR, refused to stop yesterday when intercepted by a U.S. destroyer .
 No significant redeployment of Soviet ground, air or naval forces have been noted . The Soviet Union did not redeploy any significant forces .
 There are continuing indications of increased readiness among some units . However, there are still indications that some units are ready for deployment .
 ThreeFclass submarines have been identified on the surface inside or near the quarantine line . ThreeF-class submarines are believed to be inside or around quarantine line.
 In Western Europe, further support for the U.S. has come from several quarters, including several quarters of Western Europe . The United States is seen as a major factor in Europe's support for its policies .
 Official London seems intent on checking premature optmism which is showing up in widely scattered parts of the world, particularly among the neutrals . Official London appears to be trying to check premature opt-ism .
 There are reports that anti-US demonstrations have broken out in several Latin American capitals, including Buenos Aires, Caracas, and La Paz . Anti-US protests are reported in Buenos Aires and Caracas .
 This report does not attempt to estimate Soviet intent to attack the U.S. It is based on the fact that the Soviet Union did not attack the United States .
 We still have no direct knowledge of thermonuclear warheads in Cuba, but believe it prudent to assume that the Soviet missile force there is so armed . The Cuban missile force is believed to be so armed.
 We estimate that all 24 MR BM launchers are now fully operational, representing a capability to salvo 24 1000-mile missiles within 6 to 8 hours of a decision to launch .
 No new MRBM or IRBM sites have been detected in the past day . No high-altitude coverage appropriate for search since 23 October 1962 .
 Construction at the Soviet IRBM sites in Cuba continues at a rapid pace . Missile support equipment is now being moved to the vicinity of Guana jay Site 1 .
 The entire missile -launching force at the Soviet MRBM sites in Cuba is being checked out on a rapid basis . It is believed that the entire missile-launch force is at risk of being destroyed .
 Automatic anti-aircraft weapons and personnel trenches for protection against air attack are now evident at many of the MRBM sites . Automatic anti aircraft weapons, personnel trenches are also evident at some of the sites .
 The weapons have been introduced in the last few days and probably account for the ground fire now being noted on photographic missions .
 Camouflage against aerial photography is being extended at the missile sites and becoming more effective . The missile sites are being extended to avoid aerial photography .
 A missile propellant offloading and transhipping facility has been identified at the double -fenced area at Punta Gerada in Bahia Honda .
 This was suspected formerly of being a port of entry for nuclear weapons . It is believed to have been used as a place of entry to nuclear arms .
 The loss of the U-2 over Banes was probably caused by intercept by an SA-2 from the Banes site, orpilot hypoxia, with the former appearing more likely .
 High frequency radio is also indicated by the presence of high frequency antennae at Sagua La Grande sites 1 and 2 . However, the use of such antennae is not indicated in the area .
 Construction of probable nuclear storage facilities was continuing on 26 and 27 October . Construction of possible storage facilities continued on 26 October .
 None of the bunkers observed at probable nuclear £221 SUeS beUeVed t0 be in ° peration althou S b tha < * f Guanajay fKBM Site Mo. Mo. is essentially complete . Mo.
 Each launch site is probably intended to have individual, permanent nuclear storage . The existence of a second, probable nuclear storage area at the Sagua La Grande launch complex indicates that each launch site has individual nuclear storage.
 Surveillance of 26 October and preliminary analysis of yesterday's coverage shows that the development of both IRBM and MRBM sites in Cuba continues its rapid pace .
 U Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba . The visit could go as early as Tuesday, and could happen as early Tuesday .
 Site # 1 { N22-57-25 W82-36-55 ) C PROBABLE NUCLEAR STORAGE INSTILLATIONS 1 . REMEDIOS SITE # 1 is N22.57-57,25 .
 It was decided to use RB-66's which are now in Florida with UN observers aboard if arrangements can be made by the UN in time . It is now decided to fly them in with observers aboard .
 The DCI has been authorized to release to General Rickhye all information on the buildup in Cuba, protecting only intelligence a sourcesf BH1 I Therefore, the portfolios can be released .
 A draft reply to Khrushchev is to be written by Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson in Alexis Johnson's office . The draft reply will be written in the Ambassador's Office .
 Cline was instructed to support the DCI's position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro's a sanctuary . DD/I is to insure that the CIA input is taken account of* Cline .
 October 1962 ( Excerpt j SUPPLEMENT 9 TO JOINT EVALUATION OF SOVIET MISSILE THREAT IN CUBA PREPARED BY Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee . National Photographic Interpretation Center .
 Activity was continuing at all the MRBM and IRBM missile sites covered on Saturday, 27 October .
 Camouflage and covering with canvas and natural concealment was continuing at the MRBM sites and becoming more effective . The MRB sites are becoming more camouflaged and camouflaged .
 We have identified oxidizer trailers and possible fuel transporters among the support equipment near Guanajay IRBM Site 1. However, we have identified .
 These fuel transporters are larger in size than similar MRBM sites . These fuel transporters are larger than similar fuel Transporters at MRBM site .
 No new MRBM or IRBM sites have been detected; however, we have had no high altitude coverage appropriate for search since October 1962 .
 The enclosed table includes a list of Soviet offensive aissile weapons and associated equi^aent in Cuba* 2. Soviet Offensive Weapons in Cuba are included .
 Very little equipnent has been observed at the three IRSM sites in Cuba* The only cquipnent identified has been two possible fuel trucks and two possible oxidant trucks . IRBMs are probably in an unlocated facility between the port of Maricl and the
 A study of Soviet sea shipments to Cuba indicates that it is unlikely that aaay IRBMs had reached Cuba prior to the institution of the Quarantine .
 There are, however, nuclear weapon storage bunkers under construction at each of the MRBM and 1RBM sites .
 If nuclear weapons are in Cuba they are probably in an unioaated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites . The Cuban government has been accused of trying to destroy nuclear weapons .
 IL-2S aircraft are at San Julian in western Cuba; three or four appear to have been assembled . IL-S aircraft were built in the 1950s .
 An additional 23 or 24 aircraft in crates have also been observed at this airfield . 23 or more aircraft were also observed at the airfield in crates .
 Each disasseebied aircraft consists of 1 fuselage crate 60X8X10 feet; 2 win* cratos 9X40X8 feet; and 2 engine crates 9X30X 8 feet . Each crate contains a win* crate of 60X 8X10X10
 There are also numerous general purpose support equipment associated with MRBM/IRBM units, such as trucks, vehicles etc.
 Implied numbers are those ve estimate to be organic with Soviet MRBM/IRBM units or represent the highest number observed . Implied number is those of those estimated to have been organic with .
 On 23 October you gave a brief intelligence report saying that construction at the sites was continuing . The DulSCTor says that construction is continuing in the area .
 On 25 October, you told the Group there had been no ch ange in the construction pace; you covered the Watch . On . 25 October you told . the . Group there was no change in the . construction pace .
 Soviet armed forces were increasing simi^mmimmtim state of readiness; you described the Soviet ships ^^i^route to Cuba carrying; helicopters;*^ covered the departure of a Cubans, plane from Can a d a to Havana . Also briefed on the turn-around
 At an evening meeting status of Soviet shipping f roxL briefed in detail on the 4.4.2 billion ton of cargo .
 Watch Co mmi ttee report concluded that Soviet armed forces had completed measures for an alert but there were no significant deployments . On 26 October, which was attended by Stevenson, you covered the report .
 You mentioned the point that press stories based on special intelligence must be prevented* After the meeting you talked with the President and Secretary Rusk emphasizing that Castro <#e4fc£T remain in Cuba with a greater security and this is the situation we must be careful of .
 On 30 October you told the Group available data does not indicate preparation for dismantling and noted continued construction of nuclear storage bunkers . The Group said available data doesn't indicate preparations for dismantling .
 Many of the mis sile£ erectors had been removed and are no longer visible . Many of these erectors have been removed from the site .
 Committee Report concluded that Soviet armed forces remain on alert . Reviewed current developments in South Vietnam, South Vietnam and India, n Soviet nuclear subs, and Soviet nuclear tests .
 On 31 October you told the Group that there was continued evidence of construction and conceal alm ent but noted that evidence that some of the launchers had been moved from the MRBM sites might have been moved . The first step at dismantling was the first step to dismantle the system, says
 You further pointed out that photos^compared with those taken on Saturday and order^S^to cease were probably not issued until S unday night or Monday morning .
 There was discussion of the ""intelligence gap"" and you reviewed the Cuban SNIE of 19 September, noting that it failed to fully appraise^oS^eports available . There was also discussion of a "intelligence gap"
 On 1 November you briefed on details concerning U Thant's mission to Havana . U. Thant was briefed about the mission to Cuba .
 Cuba probably would engage in reconnaissance with anti-aircraft fire since they had developed a pattern of reconnaissance. You pointed out that Cuba probably . probably would . engage in . reconnaissance with . anti aircraft fire .
 You noted there had been no reconnaissance in Eastern Cuba since 23 October . You noted that reconnaissance had not been conducted since that date .
 Decision was made at this meeting to cover I«ieE2&, }L~ 1 $ t&>< ^ Sih Julian and MRBM sites . Decision was also made to cover the MRBM site . Decision to cover both sites will be made .
 On 2 November you told the Group there was evidence that the Soviets were dismantling missiles, but the assembly of I a le 28 bombers was continuing . The assembly was continuing, the Group said .
 This memorandum assesses the number of Soviet missiles deployed to and subsequently withdrawn from Cuba . The chances that Soviet missiles remain in Cuba, and the situation and outlook with respect to rates of withdrawal of IL-28s and other significant Soviet weapons in Cuba .
 Available evidence warrants the conclusion that the Soviets are preparing to withdraw the IL-28s . We cannot exclude the possibility that more ■ ■ ■■ -actually arrived/ and that some therefore remain .
 The Soviets normally provide two missiles for every HRBM and IRBM launcher and, since several of the launchers already had two, we believe that they intended to provide two each for the others, or a total of 72 for the 36 launchers identified .
 Evidence suggests that the Soviets planned a third deploynent area, in eastern Cuba, to follow upon those in the western and central parts of the country .
 Analysis indicates missiles were shipped in one piece — less only warheads — on the transporter in a package about 68 feet long as hold cargo . Of the Soviet dry cargo ships involved in the Cuban arms buildup, only seven ships have hatches which would allow stowage of this missile package .
 Most probable load was six to seven missiles per ship . More would have required extensive shoring between decks . We have reasonably good data on the size of these ships .
 The Soviet claim of 42 is consistent with our evidence, but we -2358 110.00 - but we don't believe it .
 The analy\ sis of these thirteen voyages in Annex B inclines » t us to accept a figure not much higher than the 36 we can account for . The analyzes of these 13 voyages will be analyzed by the team .
 Such a renewed crisis would find the Soviets in i an even more disadvantageous position than before . The Soviets would have to protect their interests or avoid humiliation .
 Photography of 25 November indicates that 20 IL-28 fuselage crates remained unopened at San Julian air base . Some of the remaining 13 which had previously been partially or fully assembled were being dismantled .
 "We express our deep appreciation of the cooperation and assistance which vras . . . freely and promptly given," officials say .
 Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board reviews actions taken by foreign intelligence agencies . Report to the Nation on October 22, 1962* concerning the USSR's establishment of offensive missile sites in Cuba .
 In our reconstruction of intelligence coverage of Soviet . activities on the island of Cuba, it is noted that two principal, consecutive phases were involved . In . Our reconstruction of . activities in Cuba .
 The second"" phase consisted of a rauch briefer period beginning on Octoberi-r and culminating with the Presidential, announcement on October 22 concerning measures for meeting the Soviet offensive threat in Cuba . The event, which provided a demarcation of these two • phases was the acquisition
 As to the pre -October 14 period s we con clude that our fo reigr, j^teljjjj^nc^effort_should . should . Ji^Jbeer^orvjz ffectiv e^in obtaihTng^o
 The Secretary of State objected to this combining of an actual overflight with the over-, fly ins of international waters . The secretary of state objected to the idea .
 V'e also feel that the Special Group should be possessed/ of a mechanise which would automatically pick up such omissions of reporting . V’e also feels that the special group should have a mechanised mechanise to pick up these omissions .
 An important cautionary statement appeared in a discussion paragraph, namely that the contingency of' such a development should be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy . Cuba .
 Tailed to get across to key Government fofficials the most accurate possible picture of nha; the Soviets October 14.cz in the analysis of intelligence .
 Neither you nor your principal policy advisers were . provided . appropriate intervals with meaningful, cumulative assessments of . available intelligence indicators, the president said .
 Icy -level consideration of developments . in Cuba end of /alternative courses of action as required . Had the intelligence community . systematically prepared and periodically presented compilations of accumulated indicators, this . ivould have permitted appropriate appropriate appropriate action .
 We believe a further and exhaustive examination, not,*' limited to Cuba, should be raado by the intelligence community of the complex analytic process employed throughout the community in assessing intelligence indicators .
 We base this belief on the nature of the indicatortype data which our review -discloses was available during the period from May to October 1962 . We believe this is true .
 Thirty five examples of such available indicators are set forth in Annex A to this report . Thirty-five examples of available indicators set forth by this report.
 In cataloging such examples we appreciate fully that we have the benefit of a perspective which was not then possessed by the intelligence community. We appreciate fully . We appreciate .
 We are aware that the illustrations listed are but a small number taken from the great volume of reports v/hich were received and which included some demonstrably erroneous information . We are also aware of the fact that some of these illustrations were taken from some of the greatest volume of information received
 We urge that the annexed illustrations be read not only for their individual content but also for the purpose of noting the cumulative significance of the information being received . The annexed illustrations should be read for their own purpose .
 Intelligence Reporting Oar review of the intelligence reporting process reveals limitations placed on the publication and dissemination of reports and information concerning the situation in Cuba were either misinterpreted or misan^lied . The report was published by the U.S. State Department .
 CIA • analysts to check out with National Photographic Interpretation Center any report that was susceptible of photographic verification . CIA analysts instructed to check report with NPC for photographic verification.
 The purpose was to establish by all available means the authenticity of refugee and agent reports . The purpose of this is to establish the authenticity and accuracy of reports .
 CIA did not publish information on the offensive build-up in Cuba during the pre-October 14 period . CIA even published information in President T s Intelligence Checklist .
 The President has placed limitations on the publication of reports on weaoons which might be offensive, pending receipt of further information concerning a suspected missile installation at Banes .
 President emphasised the importance of maintaining the tightest possible control of all information relating to offensive weapons .
 The President's directive restricting the publication of intelligence on offensive weapons was clearly wise, necessary, and essential to the national interest . The directive is clearly wise and necessary .
 Hie misinterpretations of this directive endangered the necessary flow of information and serve as a warning that in future situations requiring such restrictions attention must be given to establishing secure channels for transmission of vital information .
 The Cuba experience points up the need for advance planning to ensure that our human and material intelligence resources are sufficient, and are adequately organised, to meet the demands of an emergency .
 President found it necessary to restrict the publication of information on offensive missiles in Cuba and to confine such information to designated categories of recipients . The intelligence community did not have in readiness a plan to meet the reporting requirements of such an emergency .
 Defense Intelligence Agency from' disseminating outsidethe Washington area intelligence publications on the developing Cuba situation . D.C. intelligence publications have been removed from Washington area publications .
 In the absence of a central processing facility for developing photographic fiin in quantity, under appropriate security safeguards, it is necessary to use naita use of z~iini laboratories at scattered locations considerably removed from Washington, D.C.
 The Whit* Houm I am returning the report of the President . Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board dated Fcbru arj^ jth commenting on the intelligence community .
 I will not attempt to comment on the specifics of the report* It is my understanding that the Board will make recommendations to you for cor* recti ve measures which they feel should be taken .
 This . same attitude apparently dictated the Secretary of State's action in revising a C2A -proposed flight at the Special Group meeting held in Mr Bundy's office .
 It was the same attitude that caused the Special Group in considering my request on October 4th for extensive Cuban reconnaissance to ask pg$gg| JCS, and CIA to study all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back on October 9th .
 In retrospect, it might be contended that there was a failure to exercise sufficient urgency in proposing U-2 reconnaissance missions . However, I am inclined to believe that any one reaching such a conclusion must first carefully weigh the serious considerations that enter into a decision to overfly denied territory .
 More emphasis should have been placed on certain of the ""Intelligence Indicators" attached as Annex A to the Board report . Nevertheless, one can now readily conclude that greater emphasis should be placed .
 I have examined this performance personally and in depth, and Incidentally with a critical eye. Incidentally, I'm not a fan of this performance. I'm a fan .
 I believe that the conclusions reached from my study made for the Board at your request reflect a more reasonable judgment of the performance of the intelligence community in the six months' period prior to the October crisis, he says .
 DCI Chrono of offensive missiles to Cuba sent to Cuba . DCI White House .
 A relatively short period of time ensued between the introduction of strategic weapons into Cuba, particularly strategic missiles, and the flow of tangible reports of their presences . The intelligence cycle did move with extraordinary rapidity through the stages of collection, analysis, targeting for verification, and positive identification .
 Aerial photography was very effective and our best means of establishing hard intelligence . Aerial photography is very effective, says the U.S. government .
 The 19 September estimate, while indicating the improbability that the Soviet Union would place MKBM 1 * and IRBM's in Cuba, did state that ""this contingency must be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy" The estimate gave great weight to the