 U.S. relations with the Soviet Union were declining, and the world seemed to be proceeding deeper into crisis and conflict . United States relations with Soviet Union was declining .
 Kennedy addressed the nation via television on October 22, 1962 . A prime example of this was displayed on the evening of that night .
 The president had undisputable evidence that Soviet-built nuclear missiles capable of reaching the U.S. and many Latin American countries were in place in Cuba, he says .
 In late October 1962, the world was indeed at the brink of a nuclear holocaust . In the following decades, especially during the 1990s as Soviet documents became available, records revealed that in October 1962 .
 U.S. President George W. Bush and Cuban leader Fidel Castro Ruz were born in 1961 . Castro was the first Cuban leader to take over the island of Cuba . Ruz was born in 1959 in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro was born in Mayarí, Cuba, in 1926 . Castro grew up in a solidly middle-class home . Castro was a child of Cuban parents .
 During most of Castro's early years, Fulgencio Batista y Zaldívar was an oppressive dictator . Castro's father, Fidel Castro, was a dictator who ruled Cuba during his early years .
 Batista had been in complete control of the island since 1933, either directly or through other presidents . Batista was in control of Cuba since 1933 .
 Batista's economic policies helped establish light industries, such as canneries . Foreign companies, many from the United States, built their businesses in Cuba in Cuba .
 U.S. corporations dominated the sugar industry, oil production and other key aspects of the island's economy . United States corporations dominated sugar industry and oil production .
 Most of Cuba's wealth was owned by a tiny percentage of the population . Most Cuban citizens lived in dire poverty . Most of the Cuban population was living in poverty .
 Cuba was ripe for revolution, and Castro proved to be a charismatic leader . Castro was the handsome, intense young lawyer . Castro proved the handsome and intense lawyer, a charismatic young man .
 After his release in 1955, Castro went to Mexico and immediately gathered rebels together . Castro was released from prison in 1953 . Castro is known for his role in the Cuban revolution .
 In December 1956, Castro and his men landed in Cuba and carried on guerrilla, or irregular and independent, attacks against Batista's army . Castro's men carried out guerrilla attacks against the Batista army for the next few years .
 The people of Cuba, especially the many who lived in poverty, increasingly supported the young revolutionaries, or those seeking radical change . Cuba's people are increasingly supported by the young people, especially those who live in poverty .
 Initially, the United States supported Castro, who was not a communist at the time . The U.S. supported Castro in the 1960s .
 Communists believe that the best economic system is one that eliminates private ownership of property . Communists want to eliminate the idea of private property ownership .
 The goods produced and the wealth accumulated are, in theory, shared equally by all . Under this system, the goods produced are, for example, shared equal by all.
 Communism is in direct contrast with the values of democratic, capitalist countries such as the U.S. Communism is a direct contrast to the values in democratic countries like the United States, the author says .
 A democratic government system requires government leaders and others who hold public office to be elected by the citizens in general elections . A democratic system requires the people to elect their leaders, the country's leaders .
 Candidates represent different political parties, and ultimately, all the people who vote for them . Candidates representing different parties represent different parties, but ultimately, they represent their voters .
 Capitalist economic systems allow private ownership of property and businesses . Capitalist economies allow private owners to own property, businesses .
 Competition in a free, or open, market determines prices, production, and distribution of goods . Competition in an open market determines price, production and distribution, and prices .
 The U.S. media hailed Castro as an educated, daring, determined soldier . Life and Reader's Digest magazines praised Castro as a daring soldier .
 He cut rents, proposed improved education and health care, and instituted farming reform, or dramatic change . He also proposed improved health and education .
 He broke up large estates into smaller parcels for common citizens to farm . He made farms available to common citizens for free farming .
 Castro made no movement toward setting up free elections, which he had earlier promised to do . Castro also promised to set up elections in Cuba, but made no move toward that .
 Many middle-class and wealthy Cubans fled to the United States. Appalled at Castro's actions, many left Cuba to escape the Castro regime .
 They began an anti-Castro campaign aimed at influencing the Cubans who stayed behind . From there, they began to try to influence the Cuban people who stayed with .
 To Castro's dismay, the U.S. did nothing to stop the anti-Castro effort . The United States did not stop the effort . Castro was dismayed by the lack of support from the United States .
 Castro sought aid for his reforms from the United States . Castro was refused aid from the U.S. when he sought it . Castro's reforms were largely due to his government's refusal to accept aid .
 Cuba's relations with the United States rapidly slid downhill in 1960s . Cuba's relationship with the U.S. has been described as one of the worst in decades .
 The Soviet Union was ready to step in, signing a trade agreement with Castro in February 1960 . Castro signed the deal with the Soviet Union in March 1960 .
 Castro nationalized or took control of a billion dollars' worth of U.S. businesses in Cuba in mid-1960 . American oil refineries and banks were among those nationalized by Castro . Castro took control and ownership of, or took over, the majority of the businesses .
 Eisenhower halted U.S. importation of Cuban sugar, but the Soviet Union quickly agreed to buy the surplus . In response, United States president Dwight D Eisenhower halted United States importation . The Soviet Union bought the surplus of sugar .
 Khrushchev warmly received Castro and privately gloated that communism had its first toehold in the Americas . The Cuban leader was assassinated in 1961 .
 On January 3, 1961, the U.S. and Cuba broke all diplomatic ties . Cuba broke diplomatic ties with the United States in 1961 . The United States and Cuba were the last two countries to have diplomatic relations .
 For the most part, the American populace of the early 1960s believed that no leader would voluntarily turn toward communism . They figured that the Soviets must have been behind Castro all along . The U.S. citizens of the 1960s thought that Castro would turn to communism .
 Eisenhower authorized use of $13 million to train Cuban exiles to carry out an invasion of Cuba and oust Castro . President Eisenhower suspected that Castro would take Cuba down the communist path .
 The top-secret training took place in the Central American countries of Guatemala and Nicaragua .
 President Kennedy inherited the Cuban problem when he took office . The Bay Of Pigs Fiasco was the result of the Bay of Pigs .
 He had been briefed by Eisenhower's administration about the plans to remove Castro .
 Kennedy allowed the CIA and the Cuban exiles to proceed . Kennedy allowed them to proceed, but was surprised by the results .
 The U.S. would not be allowed to provide cover for the invasion of the tiny island . However, knowing that it would look bad for a powerful nation to invade, he refused to involve the American military .
 Kennedy hoped it would appear that the United States had played no part in the tragedy . Kennedy hoped that the U.S. had played little part in it . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 The CIA and the fifteen hundred exiles, sure that the Cuban people would rise up and aid their effort against Castro, went ahead with their invasion on April 17, 1961, at a swampy beach area known as the Bay of Pigs .
 Castro had gotten word of the planned invasion through informants who knew some of the exiles . Castro had his army ready with Soviet-made tanks .
 The band of exiles could have never become so organized or bold otherwise . It was clear the failed invasion was backed by the U.S. The band was backed up by the United States .
 He vowed that in the future he would consider more carefully the advice he received from those surrounding him .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion seemed to increase their support of Castro . Instead, it seemed to have increased their support for Castro .
 Castro now firmly in the communist camp, Castro railed against American imperialism . Now firmly in Castro's camp, he has long been critical of U.S. imperialism .
 He always dressed in a military uniform, he had a scruffy beard, and his cigar seemed to be permanently attached to his mouth . He also had a beard and a cigar .
 President Kennedy ordered Operation Mongoose, a top-secret plan to oust Castro . President Kennedy was convinced that Castro was a serious threat to the U.S. He ordered the operation to oust him .
 Operation Mongoose encompassed various plots, from placing hallucinatory drugs in Castro's drinking water to assassinating him . The plot was part of an attempt to assassinate Castro, but it was ultimately unsuccessful .
 Khrushchev was eager to maintain the forward progress of communism in the Western Hemisphere . He wanted to keep the progress in the West .
 By the spring of 1962, he had already sent advisors and arms to Cuba . He had sent many advisors, arms to the island nation .
 Cuba's location was a logistic dream for Khrushchev and a nightmare for the U.S. The U.K. went to Cuba in the 1950s and '60s . Cuba was a dream for the United States.
 Khrushchev fumed over the fact that U.S. missiles with nuclear warheads were openly located in Turkey, Italy, and the United Kingdom . The missiles were within easy striking distance of the Soviet Union, within easy strike distance .
 The Soviets had never placed nuclear weapons outside their country's boundaries . The weapons positioned inside the Soviet Union had the capability of annihilating Western Europe and reaching the United States .
 Khrushchev knew that if he stationed nuclear weapons in Cuba, only 90 miles from the U.S. coastline, it would cause Americans a great deal of anxiety . Nevertheless, the Cuban government knew that it was a mistake .
 When approached with the idea, Castro was not convinced that he wanted his island to be an outpost of Soviet nuclear weapons . Castro did not want to be seen as a Soviet outpost of Cuba .
 The Cuban president agreed, but he soon agreed, and sent his brother Raúl and a military delegation to Moscow to work out the details . He sent the delegation to Russia to discuss the talks .
 Castro wanted missiles openly placed on Cuba, with the full knowledge of the international community . Castro wanted the missiles to be openly placed in Cuba, the Cuban leader said .
 Khrushchev insisted on secrecy; he believed that once the missiles were in place, the U.S. could not act without the possibility of provoking war . He believed that the United States couldn't act without provoking war.
 In secrecy the Soviets planned to install forty missile launchers in Cuba . So in secrecy, they installed forty missiles in Cuba in secrecy .
 Of the forty, twenty-four would be SS-5 medium-range ballistic missile launchers, each armed with two missiles . Twenty-four of the forty launchers would be armed with missiles .
 The other sixteen missile launchers would be long-range, capable of sending missiles northward to Canada and south into Latin America . The other 16 launchers would also be long range, capable .
 Calculations showed that only major U.S. city they could not reach was Seattle, Washington . Calculations show that the only major United States city they can't reach is Seattle .
 In July 1962, Soviet ships sailed toward Cuba with their cargo of missile equipment . The Soviet Union sent the missiles to Cuba in July 1962 .
 Also headed for Cuba was the latest Soviet military equipment plus over forty thousand Soviet troops . Over forty thousand troops were also en route to the island .
 Soviet fighter planes known as MiG's, some bombers to be assembled in Cuba, and surface-to-air missiles to protect nuclear missile sites all moved across the Atlantic Ocean to Cuba .
 The Soviet government consistently assured the U.S. that the arms buildup in Cuba was purely defensive in nature . The Soviet Union had no need to station missiles outside its own territory, the government said .
 Alarming intelligence reports from the National Security Agency began late in 1960 and continued in 1961 . Revelations of October 14, 1962 .
 The NSA was America's prime intelligence organization that listened to and analyzed foreign communications . The agency is now known as the National Security Council .
 Through intercepted messages, the NSA determined that Cuba was significantly building up its weapons, with the Soviet Union's help . The Soviet Union was helping build up Cuba's weapons, according to the NSA .
 The NSA heard Spanish being spoken on a surveillance tape from Czechoslovakia, an Eastern European nation under Soviet control . It turned out that Cuban fighter pilots were being trained by the Soviet military . The NSA also heard Cuban fighters being trained in the country .
 The NSA intercepted messages that indicated that Soviet ships headed for Havana, Cuba, had no cargo listed . The messages were a quiet method of concealing the equipment they carried, the NSA says .
 The NSA reported on construction of SAM sites and new radar installations of air defense systems in Cuba . The NSA also reported on the construction of missile sites and radar installations .
 U.S. officials in Washington D.C. grew increasingly worried about the situation . United States officials say the situation is under way now .
 Soviet authorities continued to insist that everything they provided to Cuba was purely defensive . Nevertheless, all these systems could be categorized as defensive systems .
 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, secret planes that gathered information, flew at high altitudes over Cuba . Pictures they brought back did not indicate any offensive weapons sites .
 On October 14, 1962, a U-2 mission returned with chilling photographs of the U.2 mission . The mission was a U.S. mission on a mission to take photos of the Soviet Union's most dangerous submarine .
 The photos show the first clear evidence of medium-range ballistic missiles at construction sites in an area known as San Cristóbal . The photos were processed and analyzed on October 15 .
 The photographs arrived on the desk of the president's national security advisor, McGeorge Bundy, on the evening of October 15 . The photographs were sent to Bundy on the night of that night .
 MRBM installation appeared almost complete; the longer-range equipment looked as if it would not be ready until the end of the year . The MRBM is expected to be installed in the fall of 2014 .
 Bundy decided to let the president sleep that night . Knowing that sleep would be hard to come by for a while, a grim Bundy decided not to take action .
 At 9m. the next morning, Bundy showed and explained the photographs to President Kennedy . Bundy showed the photographs and explained them to the president the next day . Bundy later showed the photos to the White House .
 Kennedy immediately called together a small group of senior cabinet members, security officials, and military leaders to assess the situation and advise him . Kennedy: "The situation is very serious"
 The group became known as Ex-Comm, short for Executive Committee of the National Security Council . The group stayed almost continuously in session for the next two weeks .
 Kennedy secretly had all the brainstorming discussions of Ex-Comm tape-recorded . With an eye cast toward historical documentation, Kennedy secretly recorded them .
 The following days brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war . U.S. and Soviet Union were on brink of war .
 One more command or one slight move on either country's part could have unleashed a nuclear holocaust . When the Ex-Comm tapes became available in the 1990s at the close of the Cold War .
 On October 16, 17, and 18 Ex-Comm discussions included a variety of proposals, from doing nothing, at least not immediately, to staging an invasion of Cuba .
 Hawks favored immediate military strikes to take out the missiles and Castro's communist government . Hawks favored military strikes against Castro's government in Cuba .
 Key hawks were General Maxwell Taylor , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other military leaders at the Pentagon . Key hawkks were . Maxwell Taylor, chairman of Joint Chiefs .
 Doves, fearing massive casualties, favored a strategy of diplomacy and less aggressive tactics . Doves feared massive casualties and favored diplomacy .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy joined the Joint Chiefs of Staff in supporting an invasion or a surprise air strike . At the outset, Attorney General . Robert F. Kennedy was the president's brother .
 U.S. President Barack Obama decided not to strike in Syria . Air strike was not in the best interests of the United States, he said .
 Many Ex-Comm members changed their minds as ideas were discussed . In fact, many members of the committee changed their views as they discussed ideas .
 President Kennedy and Ex-Comm could not permit this armed Soviet intrusion into the Americas, within easy reach of North, Central, and South America . President Kennedy would not allow this armed invasion into the U.S.
 Committee: Khrushchev would push for more communist influence in the region . Committee: This would undermine U.S. leadership in the Western Hemisphere and cause a massive negative reaction among the American public. Committee: If the United States .
 Kennedy's political future would be in doubt, and fear of eventually being surrounded by Soviet-controlled communist states would increase . Kennedy would be surrounded by communist states .
 Intelligence reports indicated that medium-range missiles were almost ready, capable of being launched from Cuba in about eighteen hours . Intelligence reports given to Ex-Comm indicated that .
 Soviet foreign minister Andrey Gromyko met with President Kennedy at the White House . President Kennedy was in the U.S. for a United Nations meeting at the time .
 Gromyko still insisted that Soviet military assistance for Cuba was only defensive . He insisted that it was only a defensive move .
 Late that night, Ex-Comm decided against immediate invasion of Cuba and settled tentatively on a more cautious plan . A naval blockade around Cuba would prevent any additional Soviet ships and their military cargo from reaching Cuba .
 As plans favoring the blockade firmed up, he cancelled the rest of his campaign appearances . The blockade is expected to be the focus of the campaign .
 Kennedy thought the blockade most likely would not trigger immediate war . Kennedy thought it would not be the first time a blockade would trigger war .
 The U.S. response gave Khrushchev a way out and time to withdraw from the situation . The United States showed that the United States would not tolerate the missiles .
 Blockades were against international law, using the term "quarantine" instead of blockades . Blockades are illegal under international law .
 Kennedy requested that the television networks clear out a prime-time evening slot on Monday, October 22, for an urgent address to the nation . Kennedy asked that the networks clear a prime time slot for the address to be made .
 Anatoly Dobrynin knew nothing of the offensive missiles . The Soviet ambassador to the United States was handed the text of Kennedy's speech shortly before airtime .
 Ambassador to Moscow: Kennedy's message to Moscow's leaders . He quietly went back and sat in his embassy office, attempting to gather himself before relaying the message .
 President Kennedy explained the situation fully . Addressing the American people, President Kennedy explains the situation . President Kennedy said the situation was a mystery to the American public .
 Kennedy called for immediate meetings of the Organization of American States and the United Nations Security Council . Kennedy called on the OAS and U.N. Security Council to meet .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff put the level of U.S. military alert worldwide at DEFCON 3, heightened state of preparedness for nuclear war . The level of United States military alert is currently at DEFON 3 .
 For the first time in history, all planes of the U.S. air defense system were armed with nuclear weapons . The first time all planes had nuclear weapons in the air force were armed . The United States was attacked by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 United States nuclear submarines took up assigned positions, and nuclear missiles located in the United States were readied for firing . The U.S. nuclear missiles were also readied .
 On October 23, Khrushchev denounced the quarantine as a violation of international law . On October 25, Khrrushchev said the quarantine was an international violation of law . The quarantine was the first to be quarantined in the world .
 Khrushchev vowed that his ships would continue on course, that any American ship trying to stop them would be fired on by Soviet submarines stationed around Cuba .
 Soviet submarines were each armed with a nuclear warhead, and their crew members had orders to fire if provoked . Those Soviet submarines had each been armed with nuclear warheads .
 The secretary general of the United Nations issued a plea to the U.S. and the Soviet Union . He asked them not to push the world into war . The U.N. secretary general issued the plea .
 On October 24, the United States quarantine went into place . The United States military went to DEFCON 2, the last level before nuclear war . The U.S. military has been in full control of the situation .
 He relayed a message to President Kennedy calling the quarantine an aggressive act . The missiles already in Cuba remained in Cuba .
 On October 25, Soviet vessels carrying military equipment turned around . However, they were still carrying military supplies .
 Those with no military equipment proceeded; they were searched and then allowed to go on to Havana . Those without military equipment were allowed to continue to Cuba .
 Robert Kennedy was having secret meetings with Soviet ambassador Dobrynin . Meantime, at President Kennedy's request, Robert Kennedy had secret ""backdoor"" meetings .
 Khrushchev offered to remove missiles from Cuba if the U.S. vowed not to invade Cuba . The letter was signed by the Soviet Union on October 26, 1962 .
 Dobrynin brought up the offensive U.S. missiles located in Turkey . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Dobrynins and Robert Kennedy met .
 The next morning, October 27, before President Kennedy could respond to Khrushchev's first letter, he demanded that the U.S. agree to remove the missiles in Turkey if the Soviets agreed to remove them . The next day, he wrote a second letter demanding that the United States
 Black Saturday was known as Black Saturday because many felt it was the day the world came closest to annihilation . Events that Saturday turned even uglier that day .
 A U.S. U-2 flight over Alaska drifted into Soviet airspace . The Soviets regarded it as a test of their defense system .
 The U-2 drifted out of Soviet airspace without incident, but it caused much tension among Soviet leaders . The U.2 simply drifted out without incident .
 Another U-2 was spotted and brought down with a surface-to-air missile in Cuba . The U.2 was also brought down in Cuba with a missile strike .
 The U.S. military command was clamoring for a fight in Syria . The United States military command is clamoring to a fight .
 McNamara walked out of the White House that evening into the open air . McNamara thought he would never live to see another Saturday .
 Robert Kennedy advised the president to simply ignore Khrushchev's demands in the second letter and accept the terms of the first letter . Robert Kennedy said the president should simply ignore the president's demands .
 Robert Kennedy then met with Dobrynin and informed him that the U.S. would halt the quarantine and not invade Cuba if the Soviets pulled out the missiles . Kennedy then told him that he would stop the quarantine if the Soviet pulled out missiles .
 When Dobrynin asked about the missiles in Turkey, Kennedy assured him that those missiles would be removed after the crisis was over . Kennedy: "Those missiles are in Turkey. They will be removed from Turkey"
 Kennedy insisted that this agreement be kept secret, because the U.S. could not appear to withdraw protection for Western Europe for its own purposes . The agreement was kept secret because of the United States' need to protect Western Europe .
 Soviet leaders did not realize that the U.S. considered the missiles in Turkey outdated and had intended to remove them soon anyway . The missiles were intended to be removed anyway .
 The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . The next day, the missiles were removed from Cuba, the next morning .
 Khrushchev proceeded to bring the Soviet missiles back to the Soviet Union . The Soviet missiles were brought back to Russia in the 1960s .
 Both Khrushchev and Kennedy could claim their diplomacy halted the crisis when it appeared to be spiraling out of control . Both could claim to have stopped the situation when it was spiraling .
 Castro was angered because he was totally left out of the negotiations by Krushchev and not even consulted about their removal, but he could do nothing about it . Castro, on the other hand, gained no advantage from their agreement; he was outraged .
 Despite the appearance of defeat, Khrushchev's main goal was to keep Cuba communist . Cuba remained a communist country in the early twenty-first century . Despite the defeat, Cuba remained communist .
 By the spring of 1963, the United States had removed all its missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed all the missiles from the country .
 Few people knew that the missiles in Turkey had been replaced by much more effective missiles on a Polaris submarine . The missiles were replaced by missiles on the Polaris submarine.
 The world had been to the brink of nuclear war, but at that point, having scared themselves mightily, the super-powers compromised . The world's greatest fear of war was that the world would not be able to go nuclear .
 Leaders in Washington, D.C., and Moscow began serious talks to start the process of bringing nuclear weapons under control with a test-ban treaty .
 In June 1963, a direct hot line was set up between Washington, D.C., and Moscow to help reduce the chance of nuclear war . The line was designed to reduce the risk of a miscalculation or misunderstanding .
 Fidel Castro Ruz was born in Mayarí, Cuba, in 1926 . Castro grew up in a solidly middle-class home . He was born into a middle-income family .
 In 1953, Castro attempted to overthrow Batista and was sent to prison . Under these circumstances, Cuba was ripe for revolution . Castro proved to be a charismatic leader .
 Initially, the U.S. supported Castro, who was not a communist at the time . Within weeks, Castro established himself as premier .
 Life and Reader's Digest magazines hailed Castro as an educated, daring, determined soldier . The American media hails Castro as a daring and daring soldier .
 President Eisenhower secretly authorized use of $13 million to train Cuban exiles to carry out an invasion of Cuba and oust Castro . Eisenhower had early on suspected that Castro would take Cuba down the communist path .
 The top-secret training took place in the Central American countries of Guatemala and Nicaragua . The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a major embarrassment for President Kennedy .
 The CIA and the fifteen hundred exiles went ahead with their invasion on April 17, 1961, at a swampy beach area known as the Bay of Pigs . Castro had gotten word of the planned invasion through informants who knew some of the exiles .
 The Cuban people had not risen up to overthrow Castro as expected . He vowed that in the future he would consider more carefully the advice of those surrounding him .
 Operation Mongoose never materialized . The Soviet Union was eager to maintain the forward progress of communism in the Western Hemisphere . The operation was never completed .
 Khrushchev knew that if he stationed nuclear weapons in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States coastline, it would cause Americans a great deal of anxiety . Castro was not convinced that he wanted his island to be an outpost of Soviet nuclear weapons .
 In July 1962, Soviet ships sailed toward Cuba with their cargo of missile equipment . Calculations showed that Seattle, Washington, could not be reached .
 Alarming intelligence reports from the National Security Agency began late in 1960 and continued in 1961 . These assurances would soon prove to be lies .
 The NSA heard Spanish being spoken on a surveillance tape from Czechoslovakia, an Eastern European nation under Soviet control . It turned out that Cuban fighter pilots were being trained by the Soviet military . Cuba was significantly building up its weapons .
 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, secret planes that gathered information, flew at high altitudes over Cuba . Pictures they brought back did not indicate offensive weapons sites in Cuba .
 At 9m. the next morning, Bundy showed and explained the photographs to Kennedy . Knowing that sleep would be hard to come by for a while, Bundy decided to let the president sleep that night .
 Kennedy secretly had all the brainstorming discussions of Ex-Comm tape-recorded . The following days brought the U.S. and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war .
 Intelligence reports indicated that medium-range missiles were almost ready, capable of being launched from Cuba in about eighteen hours . Kennedy's political future would be in doubt, and fear of eventually being surrounded by communist states would increase .
 Kennedy requested that the television networks clear out a prime-time evening slot on Monday, October 22, for an urgent address to the nation . Because blockades were against international law, the term ""quarantine"" was used instead .
 President Kennedy explained the situation fully to the American people . The embassy official was stunned and went back to his embassy office to gather himself .
 Khrushchev denounced the quarantine as a violation of international law . United States nuclear submarines took up assigned positions, and nuclear missiles located in the United States were readied .
 The secretary general of the United Nations issued a plea to the United States and the Soviet Union, asking them not to push the world into war . The United States went to DEFCON 2, the last level before nuclear war, on October 24 .
 President Kennedy was having secret meetings with Soviet ambassador Dobrynin . Those with no military equipment proceeded; they were searched and then allowed to go on to Havana .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara walked out of the White House that evening into the open air and thought he would never live to see another Saturday . Robert Kennedy advised the president to simply ignore Khrushchev's demands in the second letter .
 Khrushchev proceeded to bring the Soviet missiles back to the Soviet Union . President Kennedy could claim their diplomacy halted the crisis when it appeared to be spiraling .
 By the spring of 1963, the United States had removed all its missiles from Turkey . Despite the appearance of defeat, Khrushchev's main goal was to keep Cuba communist .
 Press reports never mentioned that their removal had anything to do with the Cuban MissileCrisis . Press reports said they were removed from the Cuban missile crisis .
 The world had been to the brink of nuclear war, but at that point, having scared themselves mightily, the super-powers compromised . Few people knew that the missiles in Turkey had been replaced by much more effective missiles .
 John F Kennedy, Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President, 1963 . 1963 . Kennedy . Containing a collection of public messages, speeches and statements . 1963.
 The Presidential Portfolio—History as Told through the John F Kennedy Library and Museum . John F. Kennedy Library is housed in the Kennedy Museum .
 Failed U.S.-backed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs by fifteen hundred Cuban exiles opposed to Fidel Castro, on April 17, 1961 . U.N. forces failed to defeat Castro's regime in 1961 .
 An economic system in which property and businesses are privately owned . Property and businesses were privately owned in the United States .
 A system of government in which the nation's leaders are selected by a single political party controls all aspects of society . A single party controls the country's political system . A political party that controls most of society controls the nation .
 Private ownership of property is eliminated and government directs all economic production . Private ownership is eliminated in the process of economic production in China .
 The goods produced and accumulated wealth are, in theory, shared relatively equally by all . In theory, they are, for example, by sharing relatively equally among all .
 A showdown in October 1962 brought the Soviet Union and the U.S. close to war over the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The United States and Russia were at odds for decades over Cuban nuclear missiles .
 President Kennedy's favorite spy photograph was a photograph of a Cuban launch site for Soviet SAMs, surface-to-air missiles .
 The picture clearly shows roads in a six-pointed star pattern connecting the launch sites . Roads in the star pattern are clearly visible in the picture .
 Kennedy liked the photograph because of the clarity of the geometric design of the missile installations . Kennedy liked it because it was clear of geometric design .
 Three groups played key roles in providing information from surveillance and reconnaissance missions . Three groups provided information for surveillance missions .
 NSA is America's premier organization assigned to protect U.S. information systems and listen in on and analyze foreign intelligence information . NSA is the nation's premier intelligence agency .
 In World War II SIGINT broke the codes of the Japanese military, helping bring an end to the war . SIGINT helped bring the end of the war to Japan .
 SIGINT monitored the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba at its earliest stages in mid-1960s .
 SIGINT listened in on and analyzed Soviet communications discussing the operation to supply Cuba with weapons . SIGINT also heard messages from Soviet ships headed for Havana .
 SIGINT intercepted Cuban discussions about the arrival of ""Russian equipment"" at the unloading docks . SIGINT listened to radio chatter from Cuba about special ship cargo .
 SIGINT picked up information that SAMs, surface-to-air missiles, had arrived on the island in August and September 1962 . SAMs were believed to have arrived in September and August .
 It reported that fifteen SAMs were operational, most likely in position to protect secret operations . Subsequently it reported that 15 SAMs had been operational . The SAMs are most likely to protect secrets .
 SAMs were in position to shoot down U.S. Air Force reconnaissance flights in Cuba . U-2 aircraft were used to photograph various portions of Cuba .
 In October 1962, photographs taken on U-2 missions revealed definite construction of bases for intermediate-range ballistic missiles only 90 miles from the United States coastline . The Tactical Air Command used the RF-101C aircraft to take low-level photographs of Cuban missile sites .
 SIGINT provided round-the-clock information to senior military and political leaders . On October 27, one U-2 was lost over Cuba when it was shot down by a SAM .
 She and Lieutenant General Gordon Blake took the responsibility of overseeing the staff of the command center and getting information to the White House . She and Lt. Gordon Blake were tasked with overseeing staff of command center .
 It was SIGINT, through interception of radio messages from Soviet vessels, that first notified President Kennedy on October 24 that the ""quarantine"" appeared to be working .
 U-2 and RF-101C aircraft continued surveillance and reconnaissance as the Cuban missiles were dismantled and shipped back to the Soviet Union . SIGINT confirmed that the ships appeared to be stopped in the water outside the ring of American ships .
 Cold War Reference Library . Pick a style below the style below, and copy the text for your bibliography .
 Pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style . Use the "Cite this article" tool to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates . Each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time . Not all information is available for every reference entry or article .
 This information is not available for most of the content of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates . Refer to the style's convention for page numbers .
 In addition to MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations . Citing citations may be required by schools, universities and publications .
 The outcome of the crisis has been linked to the development of a direct Teletype ‘hotline’ between Moscow and Washington, D.C., the initial stages of superpower détente and the ratification of a bilateral atmospheric testing ban on nuclear weapons .
 In November 1961, Kennedy initiated Operation Mongoose, a covert operations plan designed to incite dissident Cubans against Castro . In November 1963, President Kennedy initiated the plan to incite dissidents against Castro in Cuba .
 A U2 spy plane snapped a series of photographs that became the first direct evidence of Soviet medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba . The photos were taken in October 1962 .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy presented a detailed analysis of the photographic evidence to Kennedy at an Oval Office briefing . Bundy: These missiles clearly constituted an offensive weapons buildup on the island .
 Just before noon, Kennedy convened the first meeting of his administration officials and advisers . Kennedy convened a meeting of 14 administration officials, advisers .
 The group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm . ExComm is the group of members of the Cabinet .
 ExComm members received estimates that the Soviet missiles could be at full operation within 14 days . Individual missiles readied within eighteen hours under a crash program . ExComm: Soviet missiles were expected to be ready within fourteen days .
 This placed major American cities, including Dallas and Washington, D.C., within range of a strike . Major American cities such as Washington and Dallas could be at risk of strike .
 Several SS-5s, with a range of 2,200 nautical miles, were also included in the Soviet arms shipments . ExComm debated the merits of three general approaches to the developing crisis .
 The first was a surgical airstrike targeting as many missile sites as possible . The first strike targeted as many of the missile sites in the region .
 The second was an air strike followed by a U.S. military invasion of Cuba . The first was a strike on Cuba followed by an invasion on Cuba .
 Joint chiefs of staff placed United States military forces worldwide on DEFCON 3 alert . U.S. military forces were placed on alert in anticipation of a Cuban and/or Soviet reaction to quarantine .
 At five that afternoon, Kennedy met with seventeen congressional leaders from both major parties to discuss the situation . Kennedy also met with 17 congressional leaders, both Democrats and Republicans .
 The president received some support for the quarantine, but notable exceptions included Senators J William Fulbright and Richard Russell, both believed that the strategy would not compel the Soviets to abandon their missiles .
 At seven, Kennedy addressed the American public in a seventeen-minute speech . Kennedy was seven years old at the time .
 Nikita Khrushchev's reply to Kennedy’s speech arrived on the morning of October 23 . His major objective was to outline the United States response to the Soviet missile threat .
 Khrushchev’s letter insisted that the Soviet missiles in Cuba were defensive in nature . Kennedy was concerned that Berlin, which was divided into segments of East and West at the end of World War II, would become a focal point for Soviet retaliation .
 JFK directed the Central Intelligence Agency to develop plans for protecting Berlin in the event the Soviets mounted a quarantine around the city .
 Earlier in the day, the CIA began tracking several Soviet submarines unexpectedly moving toward Cuba . The CIA says it is tracking several submarines in Cuba .
 The Organization of American States quarantines the Soviet Union . The quarantine went into effect at 10:00m. on October 24 . This made the Navy's job of conducting the quarantine more complicated .
 Early morning intelligence suggested that sixteen of the nineteen Soviet cargo ships identified as Cuban bound were reversing course . The ships were believed to have been headed to Cuba .
 The remaining three, however, are nearing the quarantine line, including the Gagarin and Komiles . Komiles is the only one of the remaining three people in quarantine .
 Naval intelligence reported that one of the Soviet subs had taken a position between the two ships . Naval intelligence said the move was made by a Soviet sub .
 Kennedy authorized the aircraft carrier USS Essex to take whatever defensive measures were necessary against the submarine . Kennedy, though wishing to avoid conflict with the sub, ordered the carrier to take any defensive measures .
 This was perhaps the most dangerous moment of the cold war, as both superpowers were armed and mere moments from turning the war hot . The Cold War ended in a stalemate between the two superpowers .
 Kennedy and senior ExComm advisers began to consider offering the Soviets a missile trade . Just prior to any armed hostilities, however, both Soviet ships stopped dead in the water .
 If Khrushchev pulled his missiles out of Cuba, the U.S. would dismantle and remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey . The United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, publicly confronted the Soviet ambassador in front of the United .
 The Soviet Union had, until this date, denied that offensive Soviet missiles were in Cuba . The U.S. had denied the existence of the missiles .
 At this point, Stevenson showed the council, and the world, several reconnaissance photographs of the Cuban missiles . This triumph was short-lived.
 CIA director John McCone reported to ExComm that some of the Cuban missiles were now operational . Kennedy was convinced that only an invasion of Cuba could succeed .
 ExComm initiated preliminary civil defense measures for the American Southeast . State Department began to devise plans for establishing a new civil government in the wake of Castro's deposing .
 By that afternoon, the United States military was poised to conduct a land invasion . The U.S. military plans to conduct an invasion of Iraq .
 Khruschev proposed that the U.S. declare it would not invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviets dismantling missiles . Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara advised Kennedy to expect heavy American casualties in the campaign .
 Later that evening, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the president’s closest adviser and brother, held another in a series of private meetings with Dobrynin .
 Any positive momentum from this meeting stalled on the morning of October 27 . It was at this meeting that Kennedy, with the president’s approval, began to discuss the option of a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade .
 A second letter from Khruschev arrived at the State Department around 11 a.m. ET . The letter was sent to the U.S. State Department from Moscow .
 This letter replaced the noninvasion pledge with the requirement of a complete removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey . The letter was replaced with a requirement that the United States remove missiles from the country .
 Any public agreement on Jupiter missiles would appear as a quid pro quo . The U2, piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson, was shot down over Cuba around noon . This raised the stakes for the Kennedy administration . The situation deteriorated even further when a U2 shot down .
 Sensing that he was losing control of the crisis, Kennedy decided not to retaliate against the anti-aircraft site that fired on Anderson, much to the consternation of his military leaders .
 Robert Kennedy was sent to discuss the terms with Dobrynin, which included an agreement not to publicly disclose the Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade . President Kennedy activated twenty-four Air Force units in preparation for a Cuban invasion to occur no later than October 29 .
 CIA update in early morning of October 28 claimed all MRBM sites in Cuba were now operational . CIA update: MRBM site in Cuba is now operational. CIA: All MRBM facilities in Cuba are now operational now .
 Khrushchev’s reply to Dobrynin was broadcast at 9 a.m. on Radio Moscow . The Soviet Union agreed to the terms outlined in the night before . The two nations agreed to an immediate ceasefire, ending the war .
 In it, Khruschev stated that all Soviet missiles in Cuba would be dismantled and crated . In the letter, he said that the missiles would be removed from Cuba .
 This volume has perhaps the greatest continuing impact for scholars and other interested persons alike . This volume is perhaps the most continuing impact of scholars and others alike .
 Model One assesses foreign policy from the rational actor approach, which considers each state as an individual or person, and attempts to understand actor behavior according to specified risks and payoffs . Model One is based on a model of state's behavior, rather than individual individuals .
 Model Two examines the crisis from the vantage point of the individual agencies involved . Model Three attempts to capture the individual interests and proclivities of the major players involved . Allison and Zelikow suggest that the models are incompatible in understanding the strategic calculus between states .
 It's not clear that there is much true difference between the models, especially two and three, as all three are steeped in the rational choice tradition . At the same time, it is not clear how much difference there is in the models .
 Brian Robert Calfano International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences . International Encyclopedia .
 Washington and Moscow each recognized a need for diffusing their mutual tensions in the wake of the crisis . The roots of this conflict lay in long-standing Soviet and United States antagonism and insecurities . European and Asian counterparts developed a greater desire for an alternative to seemingly moribund
 Castro's threats to nationalize foreign property on the island might seem a dangerous example to revolutionary groups throughout a region long considered a United States sphere of influence . Cuba was simply too close for comfort for U.S. leaders ever vigilant against communist outposts, they reasoned .
 The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 proved one of Kennedy's greatest fiascos . Plans for a U.S.-supported invasion by Cuban exiles were already advanced, and the new president approved the operation .
 Cuba's affect on U.S. security and prestige, the president believed, threatened to tilt the Cold War's delicate balance in communism's favor . The Soviets embraced the move, believing the U.N. leaders sought his fall from power .
 Soviet ships halted just short of the quarantine line two days later . Each side continued to prepare for war in Cuba .
 Only Castro seemed displeased by the peaceful conclusion of the crisis . Only Castro seems displeased with the peaceful end of the conflict .
 The ramifications of this near brush with disaster dramatically changed the course of the Cold War . It would take several years and millions in aid before the Soviets would trust again .
 In areas such as Southeast Asia and Central America, subsequent U.S. policy makers would put this ""flexible response"" strategy to the test without fear of a nuclear exchange . Soviet leaders drew similar and different conclusions from the conflict, shaped by their perception that they had lost the confrontation
 Europe Since 1914: Encyclopedia of the Age of War and Reconstruction . Cite this article in the style below, and copy the text for your bibliography .
 The United States demanded that the Soviet Union remove these missiles and imposed a naval blockade on Cuba . The U.S. threatened to sink any Soviet ships that approached the island without permitting their cargoes to be inspected .
 Eventually, the Soviet Union announced that it would remove the missiles, and the crisis ended . The Soviet Union said it would removed the missiles .
 The roots of the Cuban missile crisis go back, part of an earlier crisis . The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba by Cuban expatriates trained, supplied, and directed by the United States Central Intelligence Agency .
 The purpose of the failed invasion was to overthrow Fidel Castro's leftist rule of Cuba, but had two unintended effects . The failed invasion of Cuba had unintended effects on the island .
 First, it frightened Castro, causing him to make concessions to the U.S.R, which wanted to place military bases on the island of Cuba, in exchange for protection against further United States invasion attempts . Castro made concessions in return for protection from further invasion attempts in Cuba .
 Khrushchev read U.S. weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco . He blustered publicly that he might retaliate by driving the United States out of West Berlin . The Soviet leader read United States weakness in Bay of Pics fiasco .
 President Kennedy said the U.S. would consider striking first with them if it ever found itself at a military disadvantage . United States President Kennedy, in return, openly said the United States possessed many more nuclear missiles and warheads than the United Kingdom .
 Kennedy's claim was true; in 1962, the U.S. had at most 20 or 30 functional, deployed intercontinental ballistic missiles . The United States had several hundred such missiles .
 A missile gap did exist, as Kennedy knew, but in reverse; it had always been the United States that was far ahead of the U.S.R. in such weapons . Kennedy knew that in reverse, the gap had always existed in the missile gap .
 Once in office, Kennedy dropped the old story about the ""missile gap" and brandished the United States's nuclear superiority openly . Khrushchev's response was to secretly build missile bases on Cuban soil to compensate for Soviet inferiority .
 From Cuba could reach the entire continental United States except its northwest corner . These missiles were medium-range and intermediate-range, not intercontinental, rather than intercontinental .
 Similar missiles had been by stationed the United States for years in Turkey, which borders southern Russia . Similar missiles were stationed in Turkey for years .
 Castro gave permission to the Soviets to build Cuban missile bases in trade for a promise of protection against United States invasion and for cancellation of Cuban monetary debts . Construction of the Cuban bases proceeded throughout the summer of 1962 .
 The U.S. did not realize intermediate-range nuclear weapons were part of the plan . The United States was aware, from various intelligence sources, that the Soviets were building up military forces on the island .
 Kennedy issued warnings to Khrushchev that the United States would not tolerate a major military buildup in Cuba, but would do ""whatever must be done"" to guarantee U.S. security . Kennedy and his advisors were aware that the US had never yet placed nuclear weapons outside Russian territory .
 U-2 spy planes were making regular flights over Cuba, observing the military buildup . Nevertheless, they were. Nevertheless, the U.S. military buildup continued .
 On October 14, a U-2 spy plane photographed an area near San Cristóbal, Cuba, revealing launch pads, missile erectors, and transport trucks for medium-range missiles . The U.2 plane photographed the area near the Cuban city .
 Khrushchev's claims to have no desire to base missiles in Cuba proved to be untrue . Kennedy administration's claims during the Bay of Pigs crisis that the U.S. had no illegal intentions in Cuba were untrue .
 Immediate attack on Soviet missiles sites in Cuba, followed by a full invasion of the island using 180,000 United States troops . Immediate U.S. attack on the Soviet missiles in Cuba followed by an invasion of Cuba .
 A naval blockade of Cuba, to be lifted only if the Soviets removed its missiles, would be lifted if it was removed from Cuba . The Soviet Union would have to remove its missiles to lift its naval blockade .
 On October 22, 1962, Kennedy addressed the American people by television . If the blockade did not work, it was a risky plan, as such a blockade is, by international law, an act of war .
 A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated . The quarantine will halt the offensive buildup .
 Several Soviet vessels carrying missiles were turned back by United States naval vessels . Over the next four days, ships carrying Russian goods were searched at sea . Several Soviet ships carrying missiles turned back .
 The U.S. Strategic Air Command placed all its B-52 intercontinental bombers on 15-minute takeoff alert on October 20 . On October 22, it placed them on a revolving airborne alert, with a percentage of bombers airborne at all times .
 ICBM crews were also placed on highest alert, ready to launch, and nuclear-armed Polaris submarines moved to their pre-assigned war stations .
 The Soviet Union already had 45,000 of its own troops on Cuba armed with 90 shortrange nuclear warheads that would have been used against a U.S. invasion force .
 A U.S. invasion of Cuba, had it occurred, could have escalated rapidly to nuclear war, first in Cuba and then globally . A United States invasion could have led to a nuclear war in Cuba .
 The entire world, including Kennedy and Khrushchev and their advisors, feared throughout the crisis that global nuclear war was extremely probable . The world feared for the duration of the crisis .
 If nuclear war had occurred, it could have caused hundreds of millions of deaths . Khrushchev sent a private message to Kennedy indicating that he would be willing to remove the missiles if the U.S. promised not to invade Cuba .
 The Soviet Union would remove its missiles only if the U.S. removed its Jupiter-class intermediate-range missiles from Turkey . The following day, a more formal message said that the United States would remove the missiles . The United States did not remove its Jupiter class missiles .
 The United States did promise not to invade Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles . The U.S. did not promise to remove its missiles from Turkey . In secret negotiations between Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy .
 These missiles were considered largely symbolic by United States strategists, and were technically unreliable and obsolete . They were considered symbolic by the U.S. strategists .
 The threat to the U.S.R. could have been replaced by deployment of a Poseidon submarine carrying nuclear missiles to the eastern Mediterranean . Additionally, the threat could have also been replaced .
 Kennedy seriously considered trading missiles in Turkey for missiles in Cuba, although in public he refused to do . In secret, therefore, he seriously considered the deal . In public, Kennedy refused to trade the missiles for Cuba missiles .
 On October 28, the Soviets stated that they would remove their missiles from Cuba . The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff urged by the Joint chiefs of Staff for launching a Cuban invasion . The Soviets said they would be removing their missiles .
 Historians have viewed Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis as a masterpiece of statesmanship . The crisis abated .
 The Soviet Union backed down; its missiles were removed . U.S. goals were fully met; American geomilitary prestige was preserved . The United States was fully met and its goals were met .
 Other historians argue that the Kennedy administration was not as deft in reality as it seemed publicly . The Kennedy administration has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy .
 Kennedy and his advisors were badly frightened . Secretary of State Dean Rusk began to weep when told, at the height of the crisis, that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy were both willing to risk global nuclear war for dubious gains . Robert Kennedy said later that his brother had put events in motion that he could not control .
 The Soviets were soon to achieve strategic nuclear parity with the U.S. simply by building more and better ICBMs . Any strategic advantage to be gained by placing missiles in Cuba would, therefore, be short-term .
 No long-term U.S. interests were at stake in the deployment of Soviet intermediate-range missiles to Cuba . By the same token, there were no U.K. interests at stake . Within a few years every city in the continental United States would be vulnerable to Soviet IC
 Kennedy was willing to gamble the world's future not to save the U.S. from an imminent military threat, but because to tolerate the Soviet buildup in Cuba would, in his words, ""have politically changed the balance of power," he said . Kennedy was thus willing to bet the
 The United States emerged from the Cuban missile crisis with greatly expanded confidence in its own geopolitical skill . The U.S. emerged from this crisis with much more confidence in itself .
 U.S. policymakers had verified, as they believed, that ""showing resolve"" was more effective than diplomacy, the U.N. or international law . The proviso was that the United States should be more willing to commit conventional military forces in a crisis, in order to
 Historians argue that U.S. willingness to invade Vietnam is directly attributable to its success during the Cuban missile crisis . Today, many historians argue that the success of the Cuban crisis is directly to the invasion of Vietnam .
 See ALSOBay of Pigs Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence, and Security . Pick a style below to copy the text for your bibliography .
 On 15 October, 1962, United States intelligence discovered Soviet strategic nuclear missile bases under construction in Cuba, leading to the most dramatic and dangerous crisis of the nuclear age . The U.S. intelligence found the bases in Cuba .
 President Kennedy imposed a naval ‘quarantine’ on shipments of “offensive” weapons to Cuba . After a week of secret deliberation with a group of advisers, President Kennedy demanded that the missiles be withdrawn .
 Kennedy ordered a massive redeployment of United States forces to the Caribbean and placed the Strategic Air Command on heightened alert . Khrushchev was furious at what he considered Kennedy's interference in Soviet‐Cuban affairs and his violation of freedom of navigation .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships not to challenge the blockade . The quarantine took effect on the morning of 24 October . The Organization of American States approved the quarantine .
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev wanted to risk nuclear war over the issue . Both became increasingly concerned that an accident or accidental military action might trigger escalation .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . In a rambling, emotional letter, he wrote to the United States that the missiles would not be withdrawn .
 Most of Kennedy's advisers argued strongly against this, on the ground that it would be interpreted by the Soviets as evidence of American weakness, and by NATO as betrayal of an ally . The Soviets would have interpreted the move as a sign of weakness .
 Kennedy decided to ignore Khrushchev's latest demand and accept his earlier offer . As the ExComm deliberated on 27 October, word reached the White House that an American U‐2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba .
 The United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey “within a few months” as a private quid pro quo to a UN‐verified withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . Ignoring the ExComm's advice, he secretly agreed that the U.S. would withdraw .
 Khrushchev accepted, and on 28 October the acute phase of the crisis came to an end . The crisis was an acute period of instability in the Soviet Union .
 Castro refused to allow United Nations inspectors on Cuban soil to verify the withdrawal . Castro felt betrayed by his Soviet patron, refusing to allow U.N. inspectors to verify withdrawal .
 Kennedy issued a proclamation terminating the quarantine on 21 November . He was satisfied by aerial photography that the Soviets had withdrawn the weapons the U.S. considered offensive .
 Khrushchev conceived the deployment in the late spring of 1962, after a hasty and uncritical decision-making process involving only a small group of advisers, he says . The deployment of the Soviet Union's most powerful weapons system was created in 1962 .
 The crisis provides textbook illustrations of important misperceptions and miscalculations, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: It was intended to deter a feared U.S. invasion of Cuba and redress the U.K.'s massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. calculated that the Soviet Union would not deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba because such a move would be inconsistent with past Soviet behavior . The move seemed obvious that it would trigger a major confrontation . The United States had calculated that such a nuclear move would not happen .
 The Kennedy administration failed to appreciate the extent to which the public demolition of the missile gap myth heightened the Soviets' sense of vulnerability . Kennedy administration also failed to realize the strength of Soviet and Cuban fears of a U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy failed to deter the move in a timely fashion, issuing stern warnings against it only in September 1962, when the secret deployment was well underway . Khrushchev grossly overestimated the willingness of Kennedy and the American people to tolerate a major disruption in the status quo .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev prevented the conflict from escalating while they sought and found a mutually satisfactory solution . The two leaders were able to avoid further escalation of the conflict .
 They avoided irreversible steps, curtailing unwarranted bluster, and avoiding backing each other into a corner . They did so by avoiding irreversible steps and curbing unwarranted .
 Scholars have criticized the handling of the crisis as being too timid or too reckless . Other scholars have also criticized the response to the crisis .
 Kennedy's critics on the right lament his unwillingness to seize the opportunity to destroy Castro . Critics on the other side of the spectrum condemn his willingness to risk nuclear war merely to delay the inevitable—the vulnerability of the American homeland to Soviet nuclear weapons .
 Hardliners in the Soviet military criticized Khrushchev for yielding to U.S. pressure . Hardliners were critical of his decision to take action .
 A series of agreements intended to restrain the arms race and improve crisis stability followed, most notably the Hot‐Line Agreement and Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 . The agreements were meant to restrain an arms race . The Hot-Line Agreement was signed by the United States in 1963 .
 Richard Ned Lebow and and Janice Gross Stein , We All Lost the Cold War, 1994 . Richard Ned . Lebow . Janice . Gross Stein . We All lost the . Cold War .
 David A Welch The Oxford Companion to American Military History John Whiteclay Chambers II . John White Clambers II .
 The crisis began on October 14, 1962, when American U-2 spy planes flying over Cuba brought back photographs revealing that sites for mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles were under construction .
 Cuban missiles posed a serious strategic problem for President John F Kennedy . They were capable of hitting targets deep within United States territory . President Kennedy was forced to take action against the missiles .
 The missiles also posed a political dilemma for the president because of his campaign promises to contain Communism aggressively . The missiles were also posed by the president .
 Kennedy believed that American voters would see any decision that allowed offensive weapons to remain only ninety miles from U.S. soil as a sign of weakness .
 Some have speculated that the Communist leaders saw the missiles as a way to defend Cuba from another U.S. invasion .
 Khrushchev saw the missiles as a way to alter the strategic balance of power in the Cold War . Others say he wanted to create the impression that the U.S. lacked the resolve to confront Communism .
 Kennedy convened an executive committee of the National Security Council to address the threat posed to U.S. interests by the Cuban missiles . It also seems possible that the Soviet leader saw the missiles as diplomatic bargaining chips .
 EXCOMM consisted of thirteen advisers, including Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, CIA Director John McCone, CIA director John McCones, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, and Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen .
 EXCOMM met in secret to plan the United States response to missile removal . The United States had to take some action that would remove missiles from Cuba .
 Among the proposals discussed was a preemptive air strike to destroy the missile bases before they became operational . The proposals were discussed in a proposal to destroy missile bases .
 Kennedy rejected this plan when the U.S. Air Force could not guarantee that all missile sites would be destroyed . Kennedy rejected the idea when the United States Air Force couldn't guarantee that missile sites were destroyed . The plan was rejected by Kennedy when he was president .
 The EXCOMM also discussed a land invasion of Cuba that would destroy all offensive weapons and remove Castro from power . The land invasion would destroy the weapons and take Castro out of power .
 The president was worried that this strategy would provoke a Soviet retaliation against West Berlin or lead to general war . The president also rejected this plan .
 EXCOMM agreed to impose a ""quarantine"" of Cuba, blocking all shipments of weapons to Cuba . In the end, the exCOMM imposed a 'quarantine' of Cuba .
 The quarantine of Cuba began on the morning of October 22 . Kennedy believed that this option would demonstrate the U.S. resolve to prevent the missiles from becoming operational .
 Kennedy revealed to the American people for the first time the existence of the Cuban missiles and the plan for their removal . Later that evening, in a televised address, Kennedy revealed the plan to remove them .
 For the next several days Cold War tensions reached their zenith as the world waited for the Soviet response . For the rest of the day the world was waiting for the response .
 The first Soviet ships bound for Cuba reversed course to avoid the U.S. blockade . The first part of that answer came two days later when the Soviet ships reversed course .
 On October 26 Khrushchev sent two cable messages to Kennedy that provided the second part of the Soviet response . The messages were sent to Kennedy in response to the October 26, 1962, message .
 In the first message the Soviet leader offered to remove the missiles in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The first message was the first Soviet leader's offer to remove missiles in exchange for a United States.
 Khrushchev demanded that until the United States pledged not to invade Cuba and dismantled its Jupiter missiles in Turkey, the Soviet offensive weapons would remain on the Caribbean island . The U.S. agreed to the deal, but the Soviet weapons would stay in Cuba .
 The United States had already decided to remove the Jupiter missiles because they were obsolete . The president refused to include them in any settlement for fear that it would appear that his administration had been forced to make concessions to the Soviets .
 Robert Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, on October 27 . On the advice of Robert Kennedy, the president accepted the terms of the first letter he had received from Khrushchev .
 At the same meeting, the president's brother made clear that the United States was willing to remove all the Jupiter missiles from Turkey in the near future . The U.S. insisted that their removal could not be part of the public settlement reached by the two Cold War adversaries .
 The realization that any slight miscalculation during the crisis could have triggered a nuclear war led both nations to establish a ""hot line" providing rapid, direct communications between Washington and Moscow .
 The crisis also encouraged Khrushchev to soften his rhetoric against the U.S. The crisis helped him to emphasize the importance of ""peaceful coexistence"" with the United States . The crisis was also apparently encouraged by the crisis .
 President Kennedy initiated negotiations with the Soviets for nuclear arms reduction in 1961 . Kennedy initiated talks with the Soviet Union the following year to reduce nuclear arms .
 The product of this effort was the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, signed on July 25, 1963, which ended atomic tests in the air and underwater . The treaty was signed in 1963 .
 Americans at War . Pick a style below the style below, and copy the text for your bibliographies .
 The Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 was a culmination of several Cold War tensions that had been building for some time . Often regarded as the most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age, the crisis was the culmination of a growing Cold War tension . The crisis occurred in October 1962 .
 U.S.-Cuban relations were openly hostile by 1962 after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 . Fidel Castro's turn toward Soviet-style communism in the early 1960s was a major turning point in Cuban politics . The Bay of Pics invasion of April 1961 was a failed
 In April and May 1962, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were just ninety miles from Florida .
 Refugee reports also suggested that Soviet ballistic missiles were on the island . Refugee reports said Soviet missiles were also believed to have been on island .
 Critics of President John F Kennedy's administration used them in political attacks during the lead-up to the November congressional elections . U.S. intelligence could not confirm these reports, but critics used them as political attacks .
 On 14 October, a U-2 aerial reconnaissance flight over Cuba returned photographs of long, canvas-covered objects . The U.2 aircraft returned photos of the objects, which are covered in canvas .
 The president was informed of the discovery on the morning of 16 October and immediately convened a White House meeting of his top national security advisers . The meeting became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 Kennedy decided not to confront the Soviets until he and the ExComm could consider and prepare courses of action . Kennedy decided to take action against the Soviets .
 Several courses of action were considered, ranging from direct military strikes on missile sites, a full-scale invasion of Cuba, a quid pro quo removal of American Jupiter missiles in Turkey .
 Kennedy settled upon a blockade of Cuba in tandem with an ultimatum to the Soviets to remove the missiles . Both to be announced during a special national broadcast on television during the evening of 22 October .
 Kennedy declared that a naval quarantine of Cuba would go into effect on the morning of 24 October . The quarantine would not be lifted until all offensive weapons had been removed from Cuba .
 On 24 October, U.S. strategic nuclear forces were placed on DEFCON 2, the highest alert status below actual nuclear war . The world waited anxiously for the Soviet response to the quarantine .
 Several Soviet-chartered ships either changed course or stopped short of quarantine line . Despite some tense moments, the deadline passed without serious incident .
 U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai E Stevenson, famously confronted his Soviet counterpart, Valerian Zorin, with photographic evidence and said he would ""wait until hell freezes over"" for a Soviet explanation .
 The Organization of the American States officially condemned the Soviet-Cuban action . U.S. intelligence reported that there were also intermediate-range ballistic missiles and tactical nuclear weapons on the island .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's secret meetings with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States, and Georgi Bolshakov, the intelligence chief at the Soviet embassy . On Saturday, 27 October, the crisis was at its peak .
 Reports came in of an American U-2 being shot down over Cuba by a surface-to-air missile . The U.S. military says it was shot down by a missile over Cuba .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that they were ready to launch an invasion of Cuba within twenty-four hours . Joint chiefs of Staff said they were prepared to attack Cuba within 24 hours .
 Khrushchev capitulated by agreeing to dismantle missiles and ship them back to the Soviet Union . In communications on 27 and 28 October, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles .
 Kennedy pledged to provide a noninvasion guarantee to Cuba conditional on the removal of offensive weapons and the implementation of effective international verification . In turn, Kennedy publicly announced that he had pledged to give the Cuban government the guarantee . The guarantee was conditional on removing offensive weapons from Cuba and effective verification
 The crisis had been largely defused peacefully, but it was not over . Secretly, he also agreed to remove the American Jupiter missiles from Turkey .
 Castro refused to allow UN inspectors onto Cuban sovereign territory . Khrushchev initially refused to accept that the Soviet IL-28 Beagle bombers were offensive weapons . Castro refused the UN inspectors on Cuban territory .
 Khrushchev agreed on 20 November to remove the bombers in exchange for lifting of naval quarantine . The crisis demonstrated the dangers of the nuclear age .
 A telephone hotline was established linking the White House and the Kremlin to secure arms control agreements and détente agreements .
 Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography. Use the style below to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 The crisis also illustrated the limitations of international law, as the U.S. relied on military actions and threats to accomplish its goal . The crisis grew out of political changes in Cuba .
 At first, the United States supported the Castro government . Castro became premier of the new government . The Castro government was overthrown .
 In 1960, Castro openly embraced communism and signed Cuba's first trade agreement with the Soviet Union . Many Cubans had left the island of Cuba for the U.S. following the revolution .
 Castro asked Nikita Khrushchev, of the Soviet Union, for nuclear missiles . The exile army was captured . Castro's exile army captured .
 Military officials advocated bombing the missile sites or invading Cuba . Attorney General robert kennedy served on Ex Com and became key adviser to President Kennedy during the crisis .
 Kennedy went on national television on October 22 to tell the U.S. of the missile sites and the naval blockade . Bypassing private, diplomatic procedures, Kennedy informed the United States of the sites .
 During the crisis, the united nations was not used as a vehicle for negotiation or mediation . If that happened, nuclear war seemed probable .
 On October 24, 12 Soviet ships on their way to Cuba were, on orders from Moscow, diverted or halted . U.S. Ambassador adlai stevenson presented photographs of missile sites to back up United States claims .
 On October 28, the Soviets announced on Radio Moscow that the missile sites were being dismantled . Some historians maintain that President Kennedy acted heroically to meet a threat to the security of the United States .
 Most agree that the crisis was probably the closest the Soviet Union and the United States ever got to nuclear war . The significance of the crisis to international law and the management of international crises has led to many books, articles and conferences .
 Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, is based in Washington, DC, D.C.
 West's Encyclopedia of American Law . Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography .
 Raul Castro and Che Guevara traveled to Moscow in early July to formalize the agreement . Castro and Gueverara met in Moscow in July and signed the deal .
 Nuclear missiles began arriving in Cuba secretly under a Moscow project code-named Operation Anadyr . Several post-crisis accounts cite fears in both Moscow and Havana of a United States invasion of Cuba .
 Rumors swirled for weeks of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but confirmation did not come until October 14, 1962 . They were provoked by U.S. activities surrounding Operation Mongoose, a post-Bay of Pigs covert effort by Washington aimed at removing Fidel Castro .
 Khrushchev called for the dismantling of U.S. missile bases in Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Soviet premier Nikita Khrushche responded on October 27 in a message broadcast by Radio Moscow .
 Khrushchev letter to Kennedy arrived at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow with essentially the same message . The basic agreement resolving the crisis called for removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba under U.N. supervision .
 The Jupiter missiles were not a quid pro quo for withdrawing the Soviet missiles from Cuba . The move was part of the discussions for settlement of the missile crisis .
 A new message from Khrushchev, broadcast over Radio Moscow on October 28, effectively terminated the crisis . The settlement made no mention of withdrawal of U.S. missiles from Turkey . The missiles were withdrawn within six months .
 Nixon reaffirmed the no-invasion pledge in the early 1970s when it appeared the Soviets might be building a submarine base at Cienfuegos, on Cuba's south coast .
 Michael A Palushin Don Bohning Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture . Pick a style below, copy the text for your bibliography .
 Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba promising to restore the liberal 1940 constitution . Many believed that war might break out between the U.S. and the Soviet Union over the latter's basing of nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba .
 In June, Khrushchev promised to defend Cuba with Soviet nuclear arms . In turn, the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushche, promised in June to defend the country with arms .
 In early 1961, the United States broke relations with Havana, and in April it helped thousands of Cuban exiles stage an abortive uprising at the Bay of Pigs . Khrushchev believed that Castro's defeat would be a fatal blow to his own leadership .
 He decided to base missiles in Cuba would deter the U.S. from a strike against the Castro regime . He decided that the United States would not strike against him .
 The Cuba-based medium-range missiles would compensate for the USSR's marked inferiority to America's ICBM capabilities, says President Eisenhower .
 Khrushchev raised the possibility of basing Soviet missiles in Cuba with his defense minister, Rodion Malinovsky, in 1962 . A successful showdown with Washington might improve Moscow's deteriorating relations with China .
 He hoped to deploy the missiles by October and then inform Kennedy after the congressional elections in November . He hoped the missiles would be deployed by October .
 He apparently expected the Americans to accept the deployment of the Soviet missiles as calmly as the Kremlin had accepted the basing of the U.S. missiles in Turkey .
 Foreign minister Andrei Gromyko flatly told Khrushchev that Soviet missiles in Cuba would ""cause a political explosion"" in the United States, but the premier was unmoved .
 In late April, a Soviet delegation met with Khrushchev before departing for Cuba . The Soviet delegation left for Cuba in late April .
 Khrushchev believed that the deployment of sixty missiles with forty launchers, not the support personnel and equipment, could be done secretly . Later the Presidium voted unanimously to approve the move .
 General Anatoly Gribkov warned that the installation process in Cuba could not be concealed . He said installation process was not concealed and the installation will not be hidden .
 In July 1962, the American government learned that the USSR had started missile deliveries to Cuba . The U.S. government learned in July 1962 that the Soviet Union had begun to send missiles to Cuba.
 By the end of August, U.S. intelligence reported that Soviet technicians were in Cuba supervising new military construction . American intelligence said they were supervising military construction in Cuba .
 U.S. aerial reconnaissance discovered a medium-range ballistic missile mounted on a launching site . Rather than calling a halt to the operation, Khrushchev ordered it to accelerate .
 Such a missile could hit the eastern U.S. in a matter of minutes, experts say . It could be a missile capable of hitting the eastern United States .
 On October 16, Kennedy and his closest advisers met to discuss the crisis and immediately agreed that the missile must be removed . Kennedy: "The missile was removed from the U.S.
 On October 22, Kennedy announced a ""quarantine"" around Cuba, much to Khrushchev's delight . Kennedy announced the 'quarantine' around Cuba .
 Khrushchev fired off a letter to Kennedy accusing him of interfering in Cuban affairs and threatening world peace . Despite his apparent satisfaction, the letter was not signed by Kennedy .
 The turning point came on October 24, when Attorney General Robert Kennedy told the Soviet ambassador that the U.S. would stop the Soviet ships . He then went to the opera .
 Khrushchev reacted angrily, but a letter from President Kennedy on October 25 pushed the premier toward compromise . President Kennedy's letter pushed the prime minister to compromise, but he reacted angrily .
 With this letter, Khrushchev realized that the crisis was not worth the gamble and began to back down . The letter was the first attempt to end the crisis .
 Another war scare occurred on the twenty-seventh with the downing of a U-2 over Cuba . By this point both leaders were ready and even anxious to end the crisis .
 On October 29, the premier informed Kennedy that the missiles and offensive weapons in Cuba would be removed . The missiles and weapons were removed .
 This humiliation, combined with failures in domestic policies, cost him his job in 1964 . This humiliation was combined with the failure of domestic policies .
 Hugh Phillips Encyclopedia of Russian History . Macmillan. MacMillan.
 Thompson, Llewellyn E. E. Jr., Jr. is author of National Security in the Nuclear Age . Thompson: "National Security is a matter matter of national security"