 Robert Frost delivered a poem to open the inauguration . Frost was the nation's most famous poet . Frost's poem opened the inauguration of President Obama .
 JFK delivered what is still regarded as one of the finest inaugural addresses ever . JFK followed by delivering what is considered one of America's greatest inaugural addresses .
 JFK's Cabinet was balanced ideologically, reflecting the closeness of the election . It included two Republicans, one as Secretary of the Treasury and the other, Robert McNamara, as secretary of defense .
 Most controversial was the president's decision to pick his younger brother, Robert F Kennedy, as Attorney General . Most controversial decision was the choice of Robert F. Kennedy's younger brother .
 JFK faced his first serious crisis just four months after being inaugurated in January 1961 . JFK faced a crisis four months before he was inaugurated .
 In 1959, a guerrilla leader named Fidel Castro toppled the Batista dictatorship and made himself ruler of Cuba . The island nation just south of Florida was ruled by the Castro regime .
 Castro began to move toward a Communist-style government, while seeking aid from the Soviet Union . Over the next two years, to Washington's alarm, Castro began moving toward a communist government . Castro's government began to look more like a Communist government .
 Under Eisenhower, the U.S. had formulated a plan to topple the Cuban dictator, using a force of C.I.A.-trained anti-Castro Cubans . The plan was to topple Castro Castro with the help of the CIA .
 JFK allowed the plan to go forward in April of 1961, but tried to reduce U.S. involvement . JFK allowed it to go ahead in April 1961 . The plan was approved by the U.N. in March 1961 .
 The result was a fiasco, as the invasion force was slaughtered and the survivors taken prisoner, while American warships watched, helpless, from a few miles out to sea . The result of the failed invasion was a disaster for the U.S.
 The Bay of Pigs disaster was a black eye for the U.S.'s image overseas . It emboldened the Soviet Union, and it emboldened them .
 JFK took ""sole responsibility"" for what happened, and leaders of both parties rallied around him . JFK took 'sole responsibility' for the tragedy . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Nikita Khrushchev saw JFK as a weak, inexperienced figure whom the U.S. could easily bully . In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, JFK was seen as weak and inexperienced . JFK was assassinated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 In June 1961, the two world leaders met at a summit in the Austrian capital of Vienna . In June of 1961, they met at the summit in Vienna .
 The city as a whole lay in Communist East Germany . The Communists were constantly threatening to cut off access to West Berlin . West Berlin was under the thumb of the U.S. and the West .
 In Vienna, Khrushchev suggested that the Soviet Union might sign a treaty with East Germany that would cut off all access by western nations to West Berlin . The treaty would also cut off access by the West Berlin to East Berlin . In Vienna in 1953, the Soviets agreed to sign a
 JFK stood firm, and the promised blockade never materialized . East Germans did throw up an ugly concrete and barb-wired wall between East and West Berlin, to prevent their own people leaving for the West .
 Berlin Wall became a symbol of the Cold War, one that would endure until 1989 . The Berlin Wall was the symbol of a Cold War that ended in 1989 .
 Khrushchev authorized the construction of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, from which the entire U.S. could be threatened with nuclear attack . The bases were built in Cuba to protect the entire United States from attack .
 JFK's military advisers handed him aerial reconnaissance photographs showing missile emplacements . JFK's photo was taken on October 16, 1962, by military advisers .
 JFK held out hope for a peaceful settlement in Cuba . Many of the president's generals urged an immediate invasion of Cuba, but JFK held hope for peace .
 On October 22, he announced that a United States naval and air quarantine would go into effect, preventing any further missile shipments from Russia to Cuba . The U.S. has been following a similar quarantine since October 22 .
 He also demanded that the Soviets remove any and all nuclear weapons already in place . The Soviet Union should also remove any of its nuclear weapons from place .
 As Russian ships steamed closer to the blockade cordon, a flurry of telegrams shot back and forth between Washington and Moscow . The blockade is expected to last several days .
 Khrushchev suggested that the missiles might be removed if the United States dismantled its own Jupiter missiles in Turkey, just across the Black Sea from the Soviet Union . He claimed that he was only trying to protect Castro's government from a U.S. invasion .
 Khrushchev would remove the missiles from Cuba in return for JFK's public pledge that the U.S. would cease trying to undermine Castro's government . JFK also pledged to dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in return .
 In a sense, the Soviets were winners, since they could claim to have protected their client state in Cuba and forced the U.S. to remove its missiles from Turkey . The Soviets were also winners in Cuba, as they could have protected its client state and forced its removal .
 In the court of world opinion, it looked as if the Kennedy administration had called the Soviet Union's bluff . The Kennedy administration called it a bluff .
 JFK's skillful and judicious diplomacy had managed to protect American interests and stave off the terrifying and very real threat of nuclear annihilation . More importantly, JFK's skills had protected U.S. interests .
 The world may never have been closer to nuclear war than in October 1963 . JFK's credit that such a war never came, JFK's defense is to JFK's to JFK .