 The United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union stopped testing in 1961, but in 1961 France started . Now with the breakup of the . Soviet Union into a loose Commonwealthno one is ex-testrusted .
 The way in which Kennedy is perceived as a hero will affect the way he is perceived . Kennedy's legacy will be affected by his legacy, whether or not he was a hero .
 The crisis ended with Khrushchev surrendering to the demands of U.S. president John F Kennedy . The crisis was the end of the Cold War .
 This was the closest the world has ever come to being blown apart by the peopl ... ave all missiles removed . The world has never been blown apart .
 The American desire of removal of all missiles had the Soviets fearful of Cuban invasion and threatened with nuclear weapons . The U.S. wanted to remove all missiles from the Soviet Union .
 World War II produced two distinct idealogical blocs, the capitalist western blocs . The capitalist western bloasts of its' foreign policies created hostility and suspicion between the two .
 62 was just one of the results of the result of this hostility . The arms race was the first arms race in the United States. 62 was the result .
 America was holding their breath as the possibility of a nuclear grew greater as the Soviet Union continued to supply Cuban with thermonuclear weapons . America held their breath in anticipation of a possible nuclear strike .
 In 1961 the United States sent a group of Cuban exiles on a CIA operation known as the Bay of Pigs to overthrow the communist government . President Kennedy had some gains and loses from the Cuban missile crisis . In 1961, the U.S. sent a . group of . Cuban ex
 Louis Nowra Lewis' interest in aliens and the Cuban missile crisis help to illuminate the themes of the play . The play is set in the summer of 1962 .
 Lewis' interest in aliens and the Cuban missile crisis help to illuminate the themes of the play . The play is set in New York, New York .
 In Summer of the Aliens, Louis Nowra uses a lot of symbolism and subtext . Nowra, the author of the book, is known for his use of symbolism .
 Independent themes and ideas, like the Cuban missile crisis and alien fascination, are often interconnected with the main storyline . "He moved on from the idea of aliens. ... he moved on," says Lewis .
 The United States armed for ... ever, was averted due to the bravery, intelligence, and wits of a man known as John F Kennedy . The U.S. armed for ever, averted .
 Kennedy's first test on foreign affairs was a trial by fire . Despite the glorified image of ... of Latin America, Asia, and Africa, Kennedy's foreign policy was a disaster .