 At no other spot on the globe are forces of the U.S. in such close and potentially hostile proximity to the Soviet Union, the author says . The United States and Russia joined over an issue of such overriding national interest to both states .
 Even the recent contact of NATO and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean Sea provides greater latitude of political-military maneuverability for Western policy makers .
 As the decade of the 1970’ s begins, the question of how best to lengthen the Berlin fuse is again being discussed . The question of the future is still being asked: How best to prolong the Berlin furore?
 The first is a review of Berlin’s significance to U.S. foreign policy during the period 1961-1971 .
 I have purposely limited this part of the paper to Berlin’s role as seen by the President, since the President is the individual charged with the responsibility of determining U.S. foreign policy . The President is charged with determining America's foreign policy.
 The second context in which the Berlin question is examined is its relationship to the relatively recent foreign policy emphasis of the Federal Republic of Germany to seek detente with its East European neighbors . The Berlin question will be examined in the context of Germany's recent emphasis on detente .
 The success or failure of Ostpolitik is inextricably linked to a solution of the Berlin question . The policy, known as 'Oostpolitik', has produced some dramatic developments within the period 1969-1971 .
 Khrushchev threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany if the remaining abnormality of World War II, the occupation status of Berlin, could not be resolved within six months . The crisis which was in its waning days had begun officially on November 27, 1958, when Khrush
 This was not a particularly new threat; not new, that is, until the six-month ultimatum was inserted . This is not the first time the U.S. government has issued such a threat to the West .
 78,406 applied for emergency admission to the Federal Republic of Germany in 1959 . In 1959, 78,000 people applied to be admitted to the German republic .
 During the first seven months of 1961, 63,061 were processed through the refugee center in Berlin-Narienfelde . During the same period, the center processed more than 63,000 refugees .
 In August 1961, 47,433 reached refugee camps in West Berlin, Ulzen, and 2 Giessen . In August, 1961, the refugees reached West Berlin and Ulzen camps .
 Total figures are impossible to obtain since many refugees never checked through one of the receiving stations . Total figures for those seeking a new home in the West are impossible .
 Estimates run close to the four million mark for the period 1945-1961 . Two and one-half million of those escaping during the 3 twelve years prior to the erection of the Wall .
 The situation was rife with instability, and the East German regime, following directives from Moscow,""* took the steps necessary to protect its self interest — the Wall was built," the former president says .
 Only a handful of refugees have managed to escape since the end of August, 1961 . The effects were dramatic, immediate, and lasting; only a handful have escaped since .
 Only Presidents Kennedy and Nixon have had to deal with the Berlin question . Political analysts of mass communications speculate on the direction of the policy .
 The Administration of Lyndon Baines Johnson was able to deal with the Berlin question in a very low profile manner . The Berlin question is still a mystery .
 If one were to attempt some form of graphic presentation of this phenomenon, using as a measure of public interest such things as Presidential utterances, government publications, and newspaper editorials, the result would be a slightly distended, inverted bell curve . The result of such a presentation would be
 The curve would drop sharply in early 1962, and begin a recovery climb at the end of 1968 . The curve began to rise in 1968, but began to decline in 1962 .
 The conclusions drawn may be more apparent than real as a result of the better than even chance that significant data which could alter the conclusions is not available for reasons of national security or the personal preference of individuals in possession of such data . The study examines a period of contemporary history .
 Even before his election, Kennedy’s policy inclination on Berlin was quite clear . Even before he was elected, Kennedy's policy inclination was clear, he said .
 Soviet Premier’s remarks were made during the last days of the Eisenhower Presidency . Little doubt that they were intended for consumption by the incoming American Chief Executive .
 Kennedy moved to assess more fully the Western commitments to Berlin and the wherewithal to carry through on them . Once in office, Kennedy sought to assess the Western commitment to Berlin .
 The initial steps involved a request for an appraisal of the situation in Berlin from former Secretary of State Dean Acheson . A review of defense capabilities by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was also requested .
 The results which could be expected if the Berlin crisis deepened would be an exchange of nuclear weapons . Within a few months, it became apparent that the Acheson report and McNamara findings dovetailed neatly .
 The Acheson memorandum opted for a nocompromise, no-negotiation, f ight-if-we-have-to posture . The memorandum was signed by the British House of Representatives in 1945 .
 The McNamara findings indicated that the majority of the Western military eggs were in the nuclear basket . McNamara found that the vast majority of Western military assets were nuclear .
 Contingency plans for a military confrontation with the Soviets over Berlin provided for almost no intermediate steps between declaration of emergency and Presidential authorization for nuclear delivery . Contingencies plan for a confrontation with Soviets provided for little intermediate steps .
 On October 16, 1959, in Lake Charles, Louisiana, Kennedy spoke of the need for conventional 4 weapons and a limited, non-nuclear war capability in the atomic age .
 Even before Kennedy’s meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna in June, 1961, the President had begun the process of shifting the emphasis of American military power away from an undue reliance on nuclear deterrence .
 The Berlin crisis provided a real-life situation to dramatize the necessity for a nation’s possession of a flexible response capability .
 If the crisis in Berlin were to deteriorate into a shooting war, all of the elements of the President’s program for shifting away from an all-or-nothing strategy would play significant roles .
 The U.S. has shifted its defense posture in response to the threat in Berlin . The shift in defense posture has been linked to the rise in defense spending in Germany .
 The new defense program was not tailored exclusively to the Berlin situation, but rather provided the President with a greater range of military alternatives to meet crises anywhere in the world .
 The United States was already committed to the defense of Berlin . Berlin's defense was a lever for adoption of the new defense program .
 The idea was implicit in discussions concerning the power of forces in Europe should the Soviet Union launch a concerted conventional weapons offensive . The Soviet Union did not explicitly pursue the idea .
 The Administration’s carefully orchestrated campaign to win support for a flexible response military inventory was not Machiavellian in nature . The Administration's carefully orchestrated public support for the flexible military inventory .
 That so many of the attributes of the Berlin crisis dovetailed neatly into the campaign was no mere coincidence . That is not a mere coincidence, it was a result of the crisis in Berlin, says David Cameron .
 Berlin was the point at which U.S. and Soviet armed forces stood muzzle-to-muzzle . Berlin was therefore the place where military confrontation could most logically be expected to occur .
 With a military plan which leapfrogged from provocation to nuclear exchange, the results would be disastrous . The plan would leapfrog the provocation to a nuclear exchange .
 Sorensen contends that the President did not finalize plans for dealing with renewed Soviet pressure on Berlin until after the Vienna meeting . Neither Laos nor Cuba, in 1961, could claim so many positive attributes for adoption of a flexible response capability .
 The Acheson paper advised against suggesting negotiations on the Berlin question . The second was the most effective method of employing flexible military response to future hostile Soviet initiatives .
 Both issues were resolved at a meeting of the National Security Council on July 19th . Both issues have been resolved .
 The President chose to reject Acheson f s recommendation against negotiations, asserting that the U.S. should take the lead in suggesting a negotiated settlement .
 Such a move would gain a propaganda advantage, and soften the rather harsh tone of the President's upcoming television address on the subject of Berlin . The move would also soften the tone of President's forthcoming television address .
 President would dispatch additional troops to Germany, transit rights into West Berlin would be tested by sending re-enforcements to the Berlin garrison . If necessary, the President would not shrink from the use of nuclear weapons to defend Western interests in West Berlin .
 It is essential to this analysis to enumerate Western interests in West Berlin, and to determine whether or not the Kennedy Administration . Sorensen, op. cit . , 590.
 U.S. presence in West Berlin, access to West Berlin and freedom of West Berliners to choose their own political system . United States presence in the West Berlin was a key component of the U.K. policy .
 The July 25th speech was geared specifically to American rights with respect to Berlin . Perhaps because of the speech, the rights of German civilian traffic into and throughout Berlin were not stressed .
 Eisenhower-Dulles response to the Soviet initiative of November, 1958, was Kennedy’s stronger emphasis on the word West in West Berlin . The only hint of change in emphasis in the Kennedy approach as compared to that of the Eisenhower and Dulles response was Kennedy's stronger emphasis
 This factor is noteworthy, however, in view of the U.S. response to the building of the Wall, which argued that the Wall was not a cause for war since rights of the Western allies were not infringed upon .
 As a policy issue, German civilian access to West Berlin did not appear again to any significant degree until Richard Nixon became President . Richard Nixon was President .
 With the construction of the Wall underway (the move which caught 9 Washington by surprise) Kennedy tested Soviet intentions by dispatching fifteen hundred United States troops .
 Kennedy sent Vice-President Johnson and General Clay to Berlin as his personal representatives . The President’s 8.94. , 594. In order to bolster sagging West Berlin morale, Kennedy called upon world public opinion .
 Berlin is not less dangerous as a potential for confrontation . However, that did not make Berlin any less dangerous . Berlin has a history of violence, but it is still dangerous .
 President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev both had an opportunity to get the measure of their opposite number’s tolerance level for swift shifts of balance in international power politics . President Kennedy had a chance to see the test of his opposite number's tolerance level .
 It is difficult to over-estimate the importance which this factor played in the decisions made during the Cuban missile crisis of October, 1962 .
 The Berlin crisis must have added further to the conviction on the President’s part of the need for rapid communication equipment between the White House and the Kremlin. Second, the Berlin crisis .
 Sorensen makes it clear that discussions on such equipment had been in progress since the first 12 months of the Kennedy Administration . The ""hot line"" was not installed until after the Cuban crisis .
 A similar exchange occurred during 14 the heigh th of tension during the Cuban crisis of 1962 .
 If the Berlin crisis of 1958-1961 had spin-offs of positive value, it also produced some negative results from Washington’s point of view . The crisis of the 1950s and 1960s also produced negative results for Washington .
 NATO partners are critical of the President’s formula for settlement of the immediate crisis, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: NATO's attitude to the U.S. is disturbing .
 Kennedy had based his solution on a combination of military preparedness and negotiation . Kennedy's solution was to solve the problem of the Korean peninsula .
 The issue of negotiations with the Russians presented a serious threat to the unanimity of the NATO voice . None of the Alliance partners in Europe followed the American lead in conventional forces build-up to the extent which Washington considered adequate .
 The seeds of dissent within the Atlantic Alliance were present long before 1961, and the subsequent Cuban crisis of 1962 did more to polarize points of view within NATO than did Berlin* The Berlin crisis of 1958-1961 ushered in a watershed in American foreign policy .
 The decisions made and the plans implemented during the latter phases of that crisis set the tone for the conduct of U.S. affairs abroad for nearly a decade .
 Prior to 1961, positions of power between the U.S. and the Soviet Union were frozen in a mold which allowed little or no room for maneuver . The condition defied change without war .
 Only once during the five-year period of the Johnson Administration did anything remotely approaching crisis proportions occur in Berlin . Only once in five years of Johnson Administration there was a crisis in Berlin that occurred .
 From April until July, 1965, East German and Soviet military units conducted sporadic harassment of air corridor and Autobahn traffic between West Berlin and the Federal Republic . The incidents occurred between April and July .
 Moscow’s treatment of the situation generally sought to minimize speculation that a general Berlin crisis was in the making . Moscow's Pravda comment that the measures taken were only meant to serve notice of protest against meetings of the West German Bundestag in West Berlin .
 The question of why Berlin became a sort of cold storage issue from 1963 until 1968 has two answers . The question is why Berlin had a cold storage problem from 1963 to 1968 .
 The modus vivendi worked out by Kennedy and Khrushchev as a result of the 1958-1961 crisis proved satisfactory even after the sudden changes in political leadership in both the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union were forced to turn their attention to crises in the Far East, an occurrence contrary to the historic dynamics of both countries . Second, both the U.S. and Soviet Union turned their attention away from crises in Far East .
 President usually linked Berlin with the importance of NATO, the search for detente between East and West in Europe, and the solution of the German question . These few utterances by the President usually link Berlin with NATO and detente .
 The specific issues involved in each of these areas of American concern are in many ways quite separate from each other . The issues involved are not related to each other, but are very different .
 As the time line following the 1961 Berlin crisis lengthened, the air of urgency concerning future crises in the city decreased . Dearth of presidential comment on the status of the city reflected by dearth of comment on status .
 President Johnson’s public remarks in the period 1963-1968 . The dual trend is linking Berlin with the overall U.S. commitment to European security, and the decline in crisis atmosphere .
 In December, 1965, the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Ludwig Erhard, visited the White House . The visit was part of a tour of the U.S. by the President of Germany .
 President stressed the link between freedom of Berlin, resolution of the German question as a whole, strength of NATO, and the need for a general detente in Eastern Europe .
 Only on one occasion during that visit did the President speak directly to the Berlin issue .
 At the State Dinner he asked and answered the question of America’s commitment to the freedom of West Berlin by saying that if the word was no good on Viet Nam, how could it be trusted .
 His answer was that we would remain steadfast on both 15 15 20 fronts . His answer, of course, was that he would continue to work on both fronts .
 Both of these anniversaries were possible because of the existence of a strong North Atlantic Treaty Organization, President Obama said . The President said both were possible due to the existence .
 Chancellor Kurt Kiesinger visited Washington on August 15 and 16, 1967 . Chancellor Kurt visited Washington for two weeks .
 In all of the communications resulting from that meeting, mention of NATO was 22 much in evidence, but the Berlin topic did not appear once once .
 No major conference of Foreign Ministers or summit meeting of Heads of State convened to discuss the Berlin issue during the Johnson Administration . Both Johnson and the Soviet leadership were content to leave Berlin on a back burner at low heat for unspecified length of time .
 President Nixon began a trip to Europe to emphasize America* s faith in the purposes and strengths of the Atlantic Alliance . The trip was Nixon's first trip since taking office .
 On February 27, 1969, President Nixson arrived at Templehof Air Force Base in West Berlin . The president arrived in the country's first major air base .
 I 16 U.S. garrison in Berlin was the first unit of American Armed Forces stationed abroad which he reviewed in his role as Commander In Chief .
 Nixon played on an old and crucial theme, the importance of the courage and tenacity of West Berliners in the maintenance of a free Berlin . Nixon also played on a crucial theme: the courage of the brave and tenacious Berliners .
 At the Charlottenburg Palace, for official welcoming ceremonies with city officials, Nixon stressed the solidarity of the American government with the aspirations of West Berliners to remain free .
 President Obama issued a warning to any aggressors who might have plans for undoing the U.S. policy of protecting West Berlin .
 In the same speech, he stressed the point that the status quo in Berlin was not a desirable end in itself . He stressed the same point that he stressed that Berlin's status quo was not the end itself .
 In a short departure speech at Tegel airport, Nixon repeated something which he had said in Bonn the day before his Berlin visit . Nixon repeated the words in a short speech at the airport .
 He emphasized that West Berlin was an important part of West Germany . He also emphasized that Berlin was a West Berlin part of the West .
 The Bulletin a weekly survey of German affairs published by the Press and Information Office of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, especially Volume 17 .
 President Nixon stressed no new additions to Western policy regarding Berlin . None of the points which he stressed were new additions of Western policy .
 The issue of Berlins political ties with the Federal Republic had not been addressed by an American President during the decade of the Sixties .
 For Ulbricht f s regime, the political ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic had always been the most repugnant of the unsettled issues concerning the city . The former regime's political ties with Berlin have always been a problem for the regime .
 Nixon f s announced resolve on that issue meant two things for the leadership in East Berlin . Nixon's announcement of resolution on the East Berlin issue meant a lot for East Berlin's leadership .
 The West was not going to brook continued harassment of Federal Republic political delegations traveling to and from Berlin . First, the West would not tolerate continued harassment . The West will not tolerate harassment of German delegations .
 Western occupation forces could not stop such harassment, but diplomatic pressure could and would be applied on the Soviet Union to control Ulbricht . Western forces would not be able to stop the harassment .
 Presidential action reintroduced the issue of West German civilian transit rights to and from Berlin . The issue had not been raised to such prominence since the period preceding the 1958-1961 crisis .
 The East Berlin regime would be forced to deal with Bonn on a political basis if there was to be any hope of a settlement of the Berlin problem . East Berlin would have to make a political deal with the Bonn-Bonn .
 For the Federal Republic, the President's messages carried the assurance that Bonn’s interests in Berlin would not be shuffled aside or held . 25 The Bulletin ,  The Bulletin . , Volume 17, Number 8.
 Volume 5, Number 10 . 18 was used as a bargaining tool if the Soviet Union decided to enter into negotiations on the status of Berlin at some future date .
 When the Presidents several speeches were viewed as a package, a definite shift in policy emphasis — not content — could be discerned . President Obama's speeches are often viewed as packages .
 This shift dealt with the German question as a whole, and was reflective of changes which had occurred within the Federal Republic . This shift was reflected in the changes that had occurred in the German Republic .
 With the retirement of Konrad Adenauer, the original cold warrior of West Germany, from active political life, the Federal Republic began seeking detente with Eastern Europe . The Federal Republic sought detente in the 1980s .
 The United States gave quiet approval to the shift in the Federal Republic's foreign policy . The U.S. has been critical of the changes in foreign policy since the fall of communism .
 No immediate gains were expected to result from the West German policy shift, and indeed, none occurred . West Germany's policy shift was expected to lead to immediate gains .
 Willy Brandt, Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic during the early period of the Ostpolitik approach, admitted that the West Germans had an awesome international public relations chore ahead of them if the new policy were to succeed .
 A move of this sort could have the effect of getting the East Germans started on the road to talks with Bonn . It could ease both the pressures on Berlin and the tension between East and West .
 President Nixon's inaugural address stressed the need for an era of negotiation instead of confrontation . Nixon said in his inaugural address, given only a month before the European junket, that a new era of negotiations is needed .
 In the two years since the President visited the Federal Republic, the developments resulting from Ostpolitik have been breathtaking . In the past two years, President Obama has visited the country .
 The U.S. gave hearty praise to the efforts of Willy Brandt when he became involved in the wider ramifications of Ostpolitik . Berlin was the focus of the Four Power discussions on the future status of Berlin .
 Administration has remained relatively quiet on its feelings concerning the rapidity of Ostpolitik developments since March of 1970 .
 Speculation from the quasi-private sector has not been lacking . Speculation has been rife on Facebook, Twitter and Facebook .
 The Ball reply correctly pointed out that the Soviet Union was intelligent enough to know that private citizens, regardless of stature, did not speak for the U.S. government . The reply was correct .
 Ball denegrated Qstpolitik as reckless and too hasty . Ball preferred to wait and see what results came out of the Four Power talks on Berlin’s future status .
 The reasons for this executive silence could have been many and varied . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of the situation .
 George Ball and his colleagues were voicing sentiments which the President agreed with . Perhaps, as Arthur Goldberg might suggest, perhaps, George Ball was voicing sentiments . The President's words were voiced by George Ball in a letter to George Ball .
 Perhaps the Four Power talks on Berlin had reached a critical stage which required no rocking of the boat . Perhaps the talks on the Berlin summit had reached an even more critical stage .
 Perhaps the President, knowing that the Soviet Union does not consider the words of private citizens to be definitive statements of government policy, simply chose to ignore the Goldberg-Ball exchange .
 The White House did not comment on the Ball-Goldberg exchange . There were indications that some reappraisal of U.S. support for Brandt’s Qstpolitik may be in the offing .
 Henry Kissinger expressed reserva30 tions about Brandt’s policy to visiting diplomats and newsmen . Kissinger expressed personal reserva 30 tions on Brandt's policy to journalists and diplomats .
 When he left, West German expressed confidence that everything was again in order .
 What was said during the German envoy’s visit to the White House is not known .
 Administration’s massive efforts to squelch passage of the Mansfield troop reduction amendment may give some clue as to why . However, the Administration is still trying to keep it from passing .
 The thrust of the Nixon Administration’s argument against the Mansfield amendment was the danger inherent in a unilateral relaxation of vigalence vis-a-vis the still present Communist threat to Western Europe — and the West .
 Troop reductions without similar moves by the Soviet Union would have meant several things, including troop reductions . Troops reductions would have been significant for the U.S. military .
 First, military readiness within NATO would have been reduced to an intolerable level . First, it would have reduced to a intolerable level of readiness within the organization .
 One of the most effective bargaining chips in the search for East-West detente would have been lost . Second, one of the key bargaining chips would be lost . The U.S. and China have been at odds with each other for decades .
 Third, and most importantly, unilateral troop withdrawals would have dealt a severe blow to the credibility of America’s commitment to European security .
 Nixon Administration used a host of ’’Europe Firsters” to lobby the measure into defeat . It is no wonder then that the Nixon Administration mounted such an overwhelming offensive against passage .
 Dean Acheson, Lucius Clay, John McCloy, and Goerge Ball among notables . The appearance of such notables as much for the reassurance of jittery Europeans as for the actual lobbying task .
 While Ostpolitik is essentially a unilateral move on the part of the Federal Republic, the ramifications of the policy impact a much larger geographical and political area than just that of West Germany .
 U.S. and West European security is inextricable relationship, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the relationship is critical to the U.K. and Europe's security .
 In the same way that President Nixon attacked domestic threats to that relationship, it could be expected that he would work as hard for the continuance of that relationship when even the remotest hints of a crack in solidarity appeared .
 The Nixon Administration is urging Congress and its European allies to do likewise . But not at a reckless pace, it confuses the 31 wish with the fact that the U.S. wants detente .
 As of June, 1971, President Nixon is content to wait for Berlin negotiations to demonstrate whether detente is, in fact, a wish or a fact . President Nixon was in office in June 1971, when negotiations began .
 Western resolve to maintain a presence in the city has been the object of periodic probes by the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic . Western resolve has been repeatedly rebuffed by the two countries .
 Berlin's defensive posture has even been borne out in the terminology used to describe Berlin’s role within the framework of international power politics . This defensive posture is even shown in terms of Berlin's role in the world of power politics, say experts .
 Phrases such as ""outpost of freedom, M ""glass window, 11 ""tripwire,"" and others reflect the fact that attempts to affect a change in the status of Berlin have meant programs of reaction vice initiative .
 In 1970, a shift occurred which balanced the old, but still valid, defensive posture with an element of offense . The shift occurred in 1970, when the U.S. became a dominant force in the world .
 This chapter will investigate the origins, development, and implications of these two causal factors . The first chapter will focus on the origins and development of these factors . This chapter includes the first chapter of a new chapter of the book .
 Ostpolitik did not gain currency until Willy Brandt became Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1966 . Brandt was Brandt's first Foreign Minister in the German Federal Republic .
 The Hallstein Doctrine was created during the heyday of the Cold War . It stated the Federal Republic’s intention to sever diplomatic ties with any state 2 that recognized the regime in East Germany .
 In March, 1966, the Erhard government offered to enter negotiations with the Warsaw Pact countries on an agreement for the mutual renunciation of force in the conduct of international affairs . In March 1966, 1966 . The Erhard . government offered . to enter . negotiations with Warsaw . Pact countries
 That exchange of notes was the last on the subject of detente until the Grand Coalition of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats came to power in West Germany in December, 1966 .
 On December 13, 1966, the new Chancellor, Kurt Kiesinger, renewed the offer to negotiate on the renunciation of force agreement, and included in the statement an unprecedented offer .
 If one had to date the birth of the new era of Ostpolitik, it would have to be this offer to converse on the sacrosanct issue of the existence of two Germanies .
 The Federal Republic was not giving up its claim to be the only legitimate representative of the German people . But it demonstrated a clear willingness to bend, if not break, the Hallstein Doctrine .
 The Warsaw Pact rejected the West German initiative . In spring of 1967, the Eastern bloc proclaimed its own version of the Hallstein Doctrine .
 This citation and other German press citings are taken from The German Tribune , a weekly review of the German press, Friedrich Reinecke .
 Brandt says quantum jumps in a search for detente with Eastern Europe were unrealistic . Brandt defended the need for a policy of reconciliation with the region .
 The voice of the electrorate seemed to support Brandt’s willingness to more actively pursue a relaxation of tensions with the East . Brandt seemed to be more actively pursuing a relaxation .
 The new offer was identical to the one issued by Kiesinger in December, 1966 . The offer is identical to that issued in December 1966 .
 Brandt met with U.S. Secretary of State William Rogers less than a week before talks with Moscow began . Brandt received strong encouragement to reach an agreement with the Soviets from Hess, Herbert, op. cit . .
 The Secretary of State announced in Bonn that the three Western powers who maintained occupation garrisons in Berlin would soon propose to the Soviet Union that negotiations be started to improve the status of Berlin .
 The East would have to negotiate simultaneous solutions to the problems of Berlin’s future and European security . The statements of Brandt and the Western allies provided unmistakable evidence that the East would need to .
 In other words, the Soviet Union would not be able to realize a treaty with the Federal Republic without demonstrating good faith on the Berlin issue . The Soviet Union was not able to agree to a treaty without showing good faith .
 Work began on the draft of a renunciation of force treaty on January 27, 1970 . Egon Bahr, Federal Republic State Secretary, departed for Moscow .
 Within six weeks, the Soviet Union also agreed to enter into negotiations with the United States, Great Britain, and France on the Berlin question . The Soviet Union agreed to negotiate with the U.S. and Great Britain on the issue .
 Bonn and East Berlin governments held the first top-echelon discussions since the division of Germany in 1970 . Talks with the Soviet Union progressed through the spring of 1970, but ended in July .
 Willy Brandt presented a twenty-point basis for discussion of a treaty to normalize relations with *o The Bulletin , . Volume 17, Number 44 .
 Bonn's conditions set down by Bonn constituted a highly sophisticated formula for d<e facto recognition of the East German regime . Bonn set up conditions for recognition of East Germany's regime .
 East German Premier Willi Stoph refused to consider the Bonn proposal and took an all-or-nothing stand on the issue of diplomatic recognition . Stoph, East German premier, refused to accept Bonn's proposal and said it was all or nothing .
 Obervers in West Germany say the meetings proved that the German Democratic Republic still took its orders directly from the Kremlin . This conclusion was based on the quick trip by GDR leadership to Moscow on 12 the eve of the Kassel conference .
 That was interpreted as meaning that the talks had come to an indefinite halt, an interpretation which proved to be correct . The talks had been supposed to have ended in a stand-off .
 The talks between the two Germanies foundered and the Four Power talks demonstrated no breakthroughs . The negotiations in Moscow on a treaty of nonaggression also proceeded fitfully .
 In August, 1970, the West Germans and the Russians reached a formula acceptable to both sides . The West German-Russian formula was agreed in August 1970 . In August 1970, West Germany and Russia reached an agreement to avoid war .
 The treaty was signed in Moscow by Chancellor Brandt and Soviet Prime Minister Alexei Kosygin on August 12 .
 The Federal Republic advised the Soviets on four occasions that the Bundestag would not be asked to ratify the document until the Four Power talks on Berlin reached satisfactory conclusions on the future of the city .
 The Russians had tried to dodge the issue, but did not call the talks to a halt over the Federal Republic’s resolve . The Russian government did not want to halt talks over the issue .
 Shortly after the treaty with Bonn was signed, the Warsaw Pact held a summit conference in Moscow . The treaty was signed in 1961 .
 Walter Ulbricht was in a panic over what could be interpreted by East Berlin as a sellout to Bonn by Moscow . The U.S. government was worried about what could have been interpreted as a deal between Berlin and Moscow .
 The Bonn-Warsaw treaty declared the acceptance by the Federal Republic of the inviolability of the Oder-Neisse Line, a topic which was not even considered negotiable in 16 Bonn during the Adenauer era . The treaty was declared the . acceptance of the
 The use of Berlin as a lever in the Polish treaty was significant . Poland was in no way responsible for the division of the city or the hardships of the West Berliners which resulted from that division .
 Poland was not a participant in the Four Power talks concerning Berlin . Neither was Poland nor Poland participated in the talks . The talks were held in Berlin .
 Bonn (and the West in general) would muster support wherever it could be found within the Warsaw Pact to exact concessions from the East Berlin regime . The implication was clear that Bonn and the West would support East Berlin .
 As of June, 1971, the situation vis-a-vis the Four Power talks and ratification of the treaties with Moscow and Warsaw has reached a point of apparent stagnation . The situation has reached an apparent stagnation.
 The Soviet Union still maintains that transit agreements across East German territory will have to be legitimized by a treaty between the Western powers and the German Democratic Republic . The Soviets still maintain that transit deals across East Germany must be validated .
 The Soviet demand means that the West will be obliged to grant East Berlin diplomatic recognition . The West will have to grant the recognition of the East Berlin city .
 The West appears to be prepared to go as far as to grant de facto recognition based on Brandt’s twenty-point proposal, but that is the limit of Western flexibility . Brandt's proposal is not only possible, but it is also possible to grant the West de facto
 There is evidence to suggest that, in fact, the leverage has worked in reverse . There is also evidence that, as a result, the use of leverage has been used in the past .
 East Germans have increased Autobahn slow-downs during the past eighteen months . West Berliners are among those who feel it most . East Berliners feel the slow-down most .
 President Nixon referred to West Berlin as the Fifth Power in February, 1969 . West Berlin morale has suffered since then, and has since suffered accordingly .
 There is a very real fear that Bonn may be willing to leave West Berlin to its own devices if the Soviets push hard enough for ratification of the Bonn-Moscow treaty .
 Willy Brandt, the West Berlin mayor during the 1961 crisis, received only 50. percent of the votes cast in the 1971 Berlin city elections . The Social Democrats (Brandt is the party’s leader) received only . percent of votes cast .
 This was a drop of over six percent since the elections of four years ago . This was the drop of more than six percent in the polls .
 Berlin's leverage potential is still real, but there is evidence to indicate that it's still real . On the other hand, there is also evidence that there is still the leverage potential of Berlin .
 The Soviet Union has demonstrated that it is serious about wanting ratification of the treaty with Bonn. Bonn says . The treaty will be ratified by the end of the year .
 Opposition to the treaty was evident in the Soviet Union, particularly in the military press, right up to the day of signing .
 November 12, 1970, 3. 32 the Chinese Communist challenge to the advisability of the treat . The Chinese Communist Party challenged the use of LSD in the 1970s .
 The speculation as to what that end may be covers a number of fronts, all or none of which may be correct . The speculation is that the end of the end is not the end .
 In discussing the significance of the treaty, Brezhnev stressed the link between the agreement and a European 19 Security Conference . In discussing its significance, he stressed the importance of the agreement . The treaty was signed by Soviet President Mikhail Gorchnev .
 The Soviet Union has been calling for such a conference for a long time . The results of this could be the eventual diso20 lution of NATO and the solidification of Soviet hegemony over Eastern 21 Europe .
 Moscow could realize additional potential benefits when the treaty is ratified . There are also potential benefits which could be realized when it's ratified .
 Moscow would gain more latitude to deal with the Chinese and Middle East problems . Moscow would also gain more time to handle Chinese and Mideast problems .
 The Soviet economy, known to be suffering, could use the transfusion of German trade and technical expertise to quite the clamor for consumer goods .
 The question of whether or not the Soviet Union is ready to make con cessions on Berlin to get ratification of the Bonn-Moscow agreement has yet to be answered . The Soviet Union has not yet answered whether it will make concessions to Berlin .
 If the Administration in Washington ordered sizeable reductions in troop strength in Europe as a part of President Nixon's program, the Kremlin’s perception of the need for a security conference would pale, for it would have gotten all it could have achieved at such a conference .
 With the defeat of the Mansfield amendment, unilateral troop withdrawals have been precluded for the time being . However, the defeat means unilateral troop withdrawal is not possible .
 The search for East-West detente in Europe can only be described as incredibly complex . It is incredibly complex, and the search for detente is incredibly difficult .
 Berlin is the geographical and political center of the search in Berlin . However, when all is said to have been said to be in Berlin, the search is still ongoing .
 The Four Power talks have continued on a regular basis for more than a year . Both sides consider it to their advantage to maintain political contact even though a solution to the Berlin question may not occur within the foreseeable future .
 There they sit, the Americans, the Russians, the British and French too, and the Germans, hating each other’s guts, playing poker with the Eastern policy as though they were gathered together in a back room saloon .
 The stakes are high, the game — which no longer warrants the name — is risky . It's high stakes and the game is risky, but it's not worth the name of the game .
 West Berlin, half a city, is at stake and no one has all the aces in his hand . West Berlin's fate is in the balance of balance .
 On September 3, 1971, the United States, France, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed an agreement designed to ease tensions in Berlin . The agreement eased tensions between the U.S., France and Britain .
 This agreement was the first instrument of diplomacy concerning the status of Berlin signed by the Four Powers since the agreement reached in 1949 lifted the Soviet blockade of the city . The agreement was first to be used as a diplomatic instrument in Berlin .
 Transit traffic of civilians and goods across the German Democratic Republic between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin is to be unimpeded and facilitated so as to take place in the most simple and expeditious manner .
 Individual travelers using individual vehicles exempt from search or detention except for suspected misuse of through transit . Individual vehicles are exempt from searches or detentions .
 The Western powers commit themselves in exercising their rights in West Berlin to maintain and develop ties between those sectors and the Federal Republic of Germany . West Berlin is not part of the German Federal Republic and not governed by it .
 Communication between West Berlin and areas of East Berlin and the German Democratic Republic will be improved . West Berlin will also be able to communicate with East Berlin areas of Germany .
 The right of the three Western powers to represent the interests of West Berlin abroad is reaffirmed . West Berlin is represented by West Berlin at the request of the West Berliners .
 Federal Republic of Germany may perform services for residents of West Berlin in international organizations and conferences . The Federal Republic may represent the interests of residents of Berlin in such a manner not to prejudice the rights of the Western powers .
 Specific arrangements for implementation of the first three were to be worked out by representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic .
 Negotiations of this type are in progress as of October, 1971, however no draft protocol has yet been presented for approval by the signatories of the basic agreement . No draft protocol is yet to be presented to approval by signatories .
 It is too early to forecast with any assurance the final outcome of this diplomatic endeavor . It's too early for any assurance of the outcome of the diplomatic endeavor, CNN.com says .
 The many things which hang on successful conclusion of an agreement on Berlin necessarily dictate a slow and careful negotiating process for both the East and the West .
 It would not be surprising if the talks between representatives of the GDR take at least as long as they did in the 1960s .
 Dean Acheson counseled caution against overly hasty celebration of a breakthrough in East-West relations . In one of his last published commentaries, he counseled against celebrating a breakthrough .
 Berlin agreement is no gift; nevertheless, suspect those bearing it . The Berlin agreement was no gift, but nevertheless, it's no gift to the world .
 Paul H. Johnstone, Paul H American Policy-Making Practices and the Origins of the United States Commitment to the West Berlin Enclave . Johnstone: U.S. policy-making practices and the origins of the U.K. commitment to West Berlin are key to the
 Planch, Charles R The Changing Status of German Reunification in Western Diplomacy , 1955-1966. Planch . Planch. Charles R . The changing status of German reunification . in Western diplomacy .
 The Federal Ministry for All-German Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany.64.64 .
 The Bulletin is a weekly survey of German affairs . It is published by the Press and Information Office of the Government of Germany .
 Moessner The Berlin question, I96I June 1971. Thes i $ M653 Hoessner ^^^6 93 Sq r I i n 1S . Thes I $ M658 Moesser The Berlin Question .