 A Referee B Combine A Amateur C Reveal B Directive B Directive D Encircle C Conspiracy D Odyssey . Odyssey 6. A. B Combine B A. C Combine A. Amateur C Confusion A. Confusion B Confusion C Conspiracy A. Conspiracy B. B.
 For questions 7 to 11, choose the 3rd question . A Fertile A Trickery B Corrupt B Rumor C Rubble B Rubble D Bright D Shortcoming . For more questions, visit the end of the question .
 Mr Emerson rebuffed his B Mistrustful coworker by refusing all C Earnest offers of assistance . Mr Emerson refused all offers of help from the coworker .
 Salvation Army has C Adaptable many services to help the D Forthright city’s indigent population . The Salvation Army is based in D.C.
 It didn't take long for the A Lavish malcontent factory workers B Gradual to voice their anger over the new rules .
 Quitting his job with no C Arrange prospects for new D Stretch employment left Joseph in a precarious position . Joseph left his job without a permanent replacement for the job .
 Although not a single Castro of an attack missile was launched, the crisis is C . The situation had been war made public . The crisis is a C .
 After the failed attempt in 1961 by Cuban exiles to invade Cuba, Fidel 2.2 was Fidel 2 . Fidel 2 was Fidel Castro's second Cuban president . Fidel was assassinated in 1968 .
 Castro asked Khrushchev for over Soviet Missiles in military aid in 1962 . Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union, asked for the aid to help defend his country .
 These missiles could easily reach American soil . An agreement between U.S. and North Korea reached an agreement between the two countries .
 In October of 1962, the United Nikita Khrushchev States discovered the Cuban missile ended the Cuban bases . The United States ended Cuban bases in October of that month .
 Kennedy met with government C. The Cuban Missile officials and for seven days debated the situation . Kennedy met government officials and debated the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The world waited blockade around Cuba to prevent nervously as tensions further shipment from the Soviet built up between the Soviet Union to Cuba . The blockade was imposed by President Eisenhower . He decided to impose a D.C. blockade .
 The situation was United States and the made public and the American Soviet Union people waited tensely . The situation in the U.S. made public .
 Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove US missiles from Turkey . Kennedy agreed to remove missiles and remove them from Turkey in exchange for Cuban invasion .
 A The Soviet Union was A Kennedy Imposes a falling behind in the Blockade around Cuba arms race B USSR Agrees to B The world is a much Remove Missiles from safer place after end of Cuba the Cuban Missile C United States and the Soviet Crisis Union Secretly C President Kennedy
 Read the passage below and anyone. answer questions 7 to 11 . Use the questions to test your knowledge of events leading up to the end of the passage .
 A topic of debate among drivers is the car is more or less dangerous frequently whether a motorcycle is than the other is . It is the attitude of more dangerous that an automobile that creates the operators that creates . Most experienced drivers would danger, death, and dismemberment .
 The critical A Riding a motorcycle concept to be understood is not B Driving a car exhilaration, but C Sledding downhill how the exhilaration comes about . Parachuting and is a cause of serious injury and death of motorcycle riders .
 Unsafe exhilaration is a state of being over-stimulated, frightened, or over-frightened . Exhilaration leads to careless driving, which is usually the consequence of reckless thrill seeking .
 Without an operator, both vehicles are metal entities, sitting in space, neither threatening nor harmful to 10 . "Without an operator," both vehicles sit in space without a need to be seen by a human operator .
 Mr Vlasic needs to buy 2 C Exhilaration pens each for the 17 . The attitude of the students in his class is a D D .
 At the end of the morning Dana has filled 3/20 of the envelopes . Megan has 8 envelopes and Dana has 8 . D. 45: Dana fills the envelope and Megan fills 8 .
 A bag contains 6 black cups of flour to bake 2 marbles and 4 white cakes . A bag of flour can be used to bake marbles or cakes .
 B 5 inches C 6 inches A $12.60 D 7 inches B $11.50 C $10.70 D $10 .50 12 inches . B 5 inch C 6 inch B $12 $12 .
 On the throw of a six-sided die, what is the probability that you will roll a number 15? What do you know about the probability you roll a 15?
 A –2 B 2 A A A right angle 1 B An acute angle C −3 C An obtuse angle 2 D An exterior angle 1 D 3 4 11. 11.
 The scale is used to measure near the fire and the lid how acidic or alkaline a loosens . The scale was used for measuring the pH of a fire and lid .
 Jupiter is: Pressure A A large crater B Temperature B A vast desert B Humidity C Humidity A Very High D Wind speed temperature D A giant storm .
 A Has never erupted A Primary producer B Is capable of erupting B Detrivore C Will never erupt again C Herbivore D Is currently erupting D Sunlight 11.
 A Barometer A Crustaceans B Micrometer B Worms C Seismograph C Insects D Chronograph D Arachnids 16. The Arachmids are the world's oldest species .
 A A, B, C, D, and D B A, A, AB, and O C A, BC, CD, and DA Mechanical Comprehension 3. A. D AB, BC and BC, and A D D AB is a B, B and O .
 The bar shown in the A Change the direction of diagram below pivots about a force point P Forces F1 and F2 B Reduce the effort are applied at the points needed to lift a heavy shown . The bar is shown in a diagram .
 An effort of 2 lbs is A F1 exerts a greater applied on one side of the torque on the bar than fulcrum to lift a load of 8 lbs . F2. on the other side of a B F2 exerts greater torque . F1. on one
 For the same force, the needle applies greater A first class lever pressure on the paper B Second class lever D The needle is longer C Third class lever and applies force for a D Fourth class lever longer duration 6.5 .
 Levers and wheel and axle A lever and an inclined B Parking ramp plane C Moving walkway C Fixed and moveable D Ladder pulleys D A pulley and a lever 12. 12.
 B Changes the direction of linear motion A Lever C Changes rotational B Inclined plane motion into linear C Wheel and axle motion D Screw Reverses direction of rotation 13.
 A Magnify force B Store energy C Change direction of rotation D Change speed of movement 15. A Magnified force is used to store energy .
 A Pascal’s principle B Archimedes’ principle C Bernoulli's principle D Boyle’�s law 16. 16. The law is based on the fact that the law states that a person can only be found in a state of knowledge .
 A It is transmitted undiminished in all directions . B It is reduced by the time it reaches the other parts . C It increases as it moves through the fluid . D It is not transmitted to any other part .
 A circuit segment contains A Magnetic only two capacitors of equal B Nonmagnetic value, connected in parallel . The circuit segment is A Magnetic . A circuit segments contain A Magnetic, B Magnetic, A Magnetic and A Magnetic.
 A Light A Radiant energy to B Sound electrical energy . C Magnetism B Electrical energy to D Heat radiant energy . Mechanical energy to electrical energy. D Energy to D Electrical energy .
 Capacitance B Resistance C Luminance 9. D Electrical energy to mechanical energy 9. A Capacitive B Resistance 9.
 Mechanical energy to electrical energy is mechanical energy . VLF mechanical energy to mechanical energy is a form of electrical energy . A ULF D electrical energy to B is a type of mechanical energy that is not mechanical .
 The longer the handle, the greater the force, the shorter the handle . B Gouge C Slip roll is a slip roll . The longer a handle, D Band saw is a band saw .
 Kayla measures the length C Skew chisel of a piece of wood with a D Gouge tape measure . Kayla measured the length of the chisel with a Skew Chisel .
 A 39 feet 25 inches A Caliper B is a Caliper . C is 3 feet 9.25 inches . Wrench is a level . A level D is a Lathe .
 A pipe wrench B B Adjustable-end wrench A Every one month or C Socket wrench 1,000 miles D Combination wrench B Every five months or 5,000 months . According to the 9.7-year-old, the wrench is a pipe wrench .
 A Directional tires can’t be rotated B The clutch plate be rotated C The valve body B Side to side D The flywheel C Front to back, across D Front to Back, same side . A
 A In the exhaust gas recirculation valve A To hold the axle to the B As part of the muffler wheel C In the water pump B To hold . the rim to the D As . part of a strut hub C To hold axle in the transmission 6 .
 Engine coolant is typically down and up made from propylene B . Amount of air in glycol is used to cool down engine coolant down and down .
 For each pair of labeled shapes in questions 1 to 8, choose the figure that shows the shapes connected correctly . A Cooling system B Emissions system C Emissions System C Electrical system D Air conditioning system .
 For each set of shapes in questions 9 to 16, choose the figure that shows the shapes assembled into an object . A B C D is the answer to each of these questions . The answer is A B D .
 ASVAB Extra Sample Test 1 Answer Key . WK PC AR MK GS MC EI SI AI AO 1. 1. A B C D . A B B C C D. A O 1. B C 1. C 1 . C A B D . C 1
 ASVAB Extra Sample Test 1 with Rationales Word Knowledge 1. C C B B B A A A D . C C A D C C C D C . C A B D C A C D A D A C .
 The word collusion has nearly the same meaning as the word conspiracy . A Amateur B Directive B Directive C Conspiracy D Odyssey Answer: C Conspiracy .
 The word foible has nearly the same meaning as the word shortcoming . A Trickery B Rumor C Rubble . Rubble D Shortcoming. Rubble.
 The word repugnant has nearly the same meaning as the word revolting . Confident answer: A Revolting B Mistrustful C Earnest D Confident .
 The word malleable has nearly the same meaning as the word adaptable . A Rowdy B Hateful C Adaptable D Forthright Answer: "I'm not a bad guy"
 Both mean capable of being shaped or formed; capable of changing or influenced . They both mean able to be shaped or shaped; altered or influenced.
 The word coalesce has nearly the same meaning as the word combine . A Referee B Combine B Combine C Reveal D Encircle Answer: B Combine .
 The word luminous has nearly the same meaning as the word bright . A Fertile B Corrupt C Mild C Mild D Bright . Bright is bright .
 For questions 7 to 11, choose the word that has nearly the same meaning as the underlined word . Choose the word to be the word most commonly used in the question . Choose a word that is the same word as the word you underlined .
 The word rebuffed has nearly the same meaning as the word snubbed . A Snubbed is rebuffed, rebuffed is the same word as snub .
 Salvation Army has many services to help the city’s indigent population . The Salvation Army helps the city's indigent residents .
 The word indigent has nearly the same meaning as the word needy . B Needy is the word of the indigent and the needy .
 It was many years before church members could put the bitter schism behind them and move forward together . The church members were able to put the schism back together .
 It didn’t take long for the malcontent factory workers to voice their anger over the new rules . The new rules have been introduced to the factory .
 The word malcontent has nearly the same meaning as the word dissatisfied . D Dissatisfied is the same word used to refer to a person who is unhappy .
 Quitting his job with no prospects for new employment left Joseph in a precarious position . Joseph says he has no prospects of new employment after quitting .
 The word precarious has nearly the same meaning as the word risky . B Risky is a word that has a strong resemblance to the word precarious .
 The word foray is most opposite in meaning to the word retreat . A Raid is the most opposite to a retreat . Species D Pattern answers: Raid, Raid, Retreat and Species D .
 The word trite is most opposite in meaning to the word original . Trite is the word most opposite to the original .
 The word precipitous is most opposite in meaning to the word gradual . A Lavish B Gradual is the word most opposite to a word that is gradual .
 The word subjugate is most opposite in meaning to the word submit . A Submit B Risk B Risk C Arrange D Stretch Answer: Submit .
 The word brevity is most opposite in meaning to the word length . A Goodness B Ancestry C Ancestry B Length D Support Answer: C Length .
 Read the passage below and answer questions 1 to 6 . Use this article to help students understand the passage .
 The crisis is considered by many to be the closest man has come to a nuclear war . Although not a single missile was launched, the crisis was considered the closest to a nuke war .
 Fidel Castro was certain of another attack by the U.S. after a failed attempt in 1961 by Cuban exiles to invade Cuba . After the failed attempt, Fidel Castro, Cuba’s leader, was certain .
 Castro asked Premier Nikita Khrushchev for military aid to help defend his country . Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union, asked for help to defend himself . Castro was Castro's first president of Cuba .
 In October of 1962, the United States discovered the Cuban missile bases . The U.S. discovered the bases in October of that month .
 President John F Kennedy met with government officials and debated the situation for seven days . Kennedy met government officials to discuss the situation . Kennedy was the first president to meet with the White House .
 President Eisenhower imposed a blockade on Cuba to prevent further shipment from the Soviet Union to Cuba . He decided to impose a blockade around Cuba to stop further shipment .
 Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove U.S. missiles from Turkey . Kennedy agreed to remove missiles from the country from Turkey and remove them from Cuba .
 Choice A and D are actions that take place after Castro believed the U.S. might invade . Castro believed that the United States might invade. Castro believed it might have invaded .
 Castro's belief that the United States might attack is the reason or cause for Castro’s belief . Castro says he believes that the U.S. might attack . Castro: Choice C is the cause or cause of choice C .
 Choices A, B, and D are details within the passage . Choices B and C are details in the passage.
 A Remove missiles from Turkey B Impose a blockade around Cuba C Inform the American people D Support Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba . A, C, and D are details within the passage but they are not Kennedy's first action .
 Choice B is the first action Kennedy took after hearing of the missiles in Cuba . Choice B was Kennedy's first response to the missile threat . Kennedy took the action after learning of the threat .
 Choice B is not the correct answer because the passage does not imply or state the condition of the world after the crisis . Choice B does not state or state how the world will be after crisis, the author says .
 Choice C is incorrect because the evidence in the passage suggests that he was, in fact, an effective leader during the crisis . The evidence suggests that the president was a good leader during that crisis .
 The passage states that this incident was the closest the world has come to a nuclear attack . The passage also states that it was a close-up nuclear attack on the world .
 B Cuba Defends Itself with Soviet Nuclear Weapons Choices A, C, and D are details within the passage . A, B, D, and C are details in the passage of the passage. A, D and B are details .
 A topic of debate among drivers is frequently whether a motorcycle is more dangerous than an automobile . A motorcycle can be dangerous to drive, but not to drive .
 Most experienced drivers would agree that while it is more exhilarating to ride a motorcycle than to drive an automobile, it is illogical to conclude that this exhilaration leads to careless driving . More accidents, deaths, and injuries to motorcycle riders than car drivers, says author .
 The critical concept to be understood here is not exhilaration, but how the exhilaration comes about and is a cause of serious injury and death of motorcycle riders . Motorcyclists need to be aware of how exhilaration is a factor in serious injuries and deaths .
 An example of safe exhilaration is the excitement of sledding downhill, which results in the sled rider feeling stimulated, refreshed, or elated . A safe exhilarating experience can be described as "safe exhilaration"
 Unsafe exhilaration is usually the consequence of reckless thrill seeking . It is therefore a state of being over-stimulated, frightened, and depressed by terror . The state of safe exhilaration can be described as being overstimulated and frightened .
 The answer is that the two forms of exhilaration are the consequences not of the motorcycle or the automobile, per se, but of the operation of the respective vehicles . The answer to the question is that it is not the motorcyclist or the car, but the driver of the vehicle
 Without an operator, both vehicles are metal entities, sitting in space, neither threatening nor harmful to anyone . Both vehicles sit in space without an operator and are not harmful .
 Neither the motorcycle nor the car is more or less dangerous than the other is; it is the attitude of their operators that creates the danger, death, and dismemberment resultant from accidents .
 A Riding a motorcycle B Driving a car C Sledding downhill D Parachuting is the answer to the question . C is the example given by the author in the second paragraph . A riding a motorcycle or driving a car is an example of a motorcycle .
 A It is unsafe to ride a motorcycle B Motorcycles can be safe C Cars are safer than motorcycles . D Exhilaration leads to careless driving . A and C are incorrect .
 The author states that neither the motorcycle nor the car determine safety, rather it is the driver . Neither motorcycle nor car determine the safety of a car, rather the driver.
 The author states that it is illogical to conclude that exhilaration leads to careless driving . The author says that exhilarating driving leads to reckless driving .
 The author states that it is the attitude of the operator that creates the danger . The author says it is not the operator's attitude that creates a danger .
 Both the car and the motorcycle can be safe when the operator is driving with a safe attitude .
 The author presents a logical answer to the question of which is safer, the car or the motorcycle . The car or motorcycle is safer than the motorcycle, the author says .
 A Driving B Reckless thrill seeking C Over stimulation D Elation is incorrect . Elation answers the question: "What do you want to do?"
 Since the pens come in packs of 6, Mr Vlasic must buy at least 6 packs in order to have enough pens for all his students .
 Find out who earns more and by how much, find out each person's hourly wage . B Brandon; $6.25 .
 At the end of the morning Dana has filled 3/20 of the envelopes and Megan has filled 1/4 of them . Megan has also filled 1-4 of those envelopes, Dana filled 2/20 .
 A school garden had been divided into 7/8 square meter plots for students . The garden was divided into seven/8 sq. meters .
 To find the probability, divide the number of acceptable outcomes by the total number of possible outcomes . C 1/3 to find out the probability of a certain outcome . C 2/3 .
 The probability of rolling a number less than 3 is 2/6 which reduces to 1/3 . So the probability is 2-6 . The probability is 1-3 .
 Since Sally has taken out a black marble, the bag now contains 5 black marbles and 4 white marbles . D 5/9 Since Sally took out a white marble, Sally takes out another black marble . The bag now has 5 marbles, 4 marbles.
 Rosita bought the yarn for $12.00 . The length of the yarn is given in yards, so convert the length of yarn into yards .
 To find the average age, add the ages of all the children and divide by the number of children . C 12 to find the age of the average child, divide the age and number of the children .
 A A A right angle B An acute angle C An obtuse angle D An exterior angle . Angles smaller than 90 degrees are called acute angles. Angles between 90 degrees and 90 degrees smaller than that 90 degrees .
 An isosceles triangle, by definition, has two equal sides and two equal angles . A Has no equal sides B Has two equal . angles C Has no acute angles D Has two obtuse angles . Answer: A Has two . equal . sides .
 Since all three sides of an equilateral triangle are equal, its perimeter is three times its side . A 20 cm B 40 cm A 40 cm C 60 cm A 60 cm D 80 cm Answer: C 60cm .
 A pH scale goes from 0 to 14. The pH scale is a scale that measures the strength of a pH scale . A Celsius scale B Celsius scale C Richter scale D dB scale is an answer to the question .
 B Concrete Concrete is a mixture of cement, water, sand, and crushed rock . Concrete mixes cement and water with sand, sand and cement .
 Baking soda is sodium bicarbonate, table salt is sodium chloride, and water is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen . Water is a mixture of water and hydrogen .
 Carbon C is the chemical symbol for carbon, an element that has millions of known compounds . A Calcium B Carbon C Chlorine D Chromium answers the question .
 A Reflection of light B Interference of light C Diffraction of light D Dispersion of light . Dispersion is the separation of white light into its constituent colors . A Reflected of light is a reflection of light and a diffraction .
 A rainbow is formed because light of each color bends at a slightly different angle as it passes through a raindrop . A rainbow formed due to the angle of light passing through the rain .
 A The heated metal lid expands less than the glass jar . B The heated glass jar expands while the metal lid contracts . C The metal lid has a higher coefficient of thermal expansion than glass . D D D C C C .
 The average rate of change is 12 mph per second . Since the velocity change is 60 mph in 5 seconds, the average rate is 12mph per second. The average speed of change in a car is 60mph .
 The seven stars forming the big dipper are the brightest stars of the constellation named the Great Bear or Ursa Major . A Great Bear constellation B Little Bear constellation C Orion constellation D Andromeda constellation .
 A From which no radiation can escape B That does not contain any matter C That is extremely cold D That contains no energy . A black hole is created when a supergiant star implodes . Black hole created by a supergiant star .
 The great red spot on Jupiter is a high pressure storm that people have been observing for hundreds of years . A A large crater B A vast desert C An area of very high temperature D A giant storm is a giant storm .
 A Has never erupted B Is capable of erupting C Will never erupt again D Is currently erupting . The word dormant means sleeping. A dormant is dormant .
 A dormant volcano is currently inactive but may have erupted in the past and is capable of erupting again . It is currently dormant but could erupt again if it erupts .
 A Seismograph is an instrument that is used to detect seismic or earthquake waves . A seismograph is a barometer, a Micrometer, a micrometer and a chronograph . Seismographs are used in earthquakes and earthquakes .
 An occluded front is a front formed when a cold front has caught up to a warm front and has intermingled, usually by sliding under the warmer air . A A A type of cold front B A . type of warm front B C A warm front overrun by a cold
 A Pressure B Temperature B Temperature C Humidity D Wind speed answer: A Pressure . A pressure B is based on a point of equal atmospheric pressure .
 Abiotic components of an ecosystem are the non-living components such as sunlight, water, and soil . Sunlight is the abiotic component of the ecosystem .
 Arthropods, such as spiders and shellfish, have jointed legs, segmented bodies, and hard outer shell or skin . Arthropod, such a spider, has joint legs, segments bodies and a hard shell or shell .
 People with blood group A have A antigens on the surface of their red blood cells . B A, B, AB, and O are B, B B, C, and BA D AB, BC, CD, and DA . People with A have B and B antig
 People with blood group B have B antigens on the surface of their red blood cells . People with A and B B are also people with B B in their blood plasma . Red blood cells are red and plasma cells .
 People with blood group AB have both A and B antigens on the surface of their red blood cells . Red blood cells contain A and A antigene on surface of surface of red red cells .
 People with blood group O have both A and B antigens in their blood plasma . Blood plasma contains A and A antigenants . People with group O also have blood group A or B in plasma .
 Forces F1 and F2 are applied at the points shown in the diagram . The bar shown is shown to be the size of the bar . Forces F2 and F1 are applied to each point in the bar shown .
 Since both forces are equal, the one further away from the pivot point, F2, exerts a greater torque . F2 exerts greater torque than F1 exerts on F1 .
 Pressure is the force exerted on unit area of a surface . C For the same force, the needle applies greater pressure on the paper . Pressure is also the force applied to the needle .
 The same force applied on a smaller area results in greater pressure . So the same force applies on a small area has the same pressure as on a larger area .
 A Change the direction of a force B Reduce the effort needed to lift a heavy load C Transfer a force to a different location D Reduce the amount of energy needed to perform a task . Machines help us do work more easily by reducing effort needed .
 An effort of 2 lbs is applied on one side of the fulcrum to lift a load of 8 lbs on the other side . The effort is applied to lift an 8 lb load on the opposite side . An effort is 2 lbs applied on the one side to lift the other .
 A block and tackle combines two or more pulleys into a system where one block of pulleys is fixed while the other remains moveable . A fixed and moveable pulley is fixed, a fixed or moveable block is fixed . A lever and an inclined plane is a lever and
 A swinging door is a second class lever with the fulcrum at the hinge at one end and the effort applied at the other end . A lever is a lever with a hinge hinge at the end of the hinge and a lever at the opposite end .
 A Spur, bevel, worm, rack and pinion is a gear . A gear is a wheel with teeth on it . C Screw is a screw, screw, worm and a screw .
 These teeth can mesh with teeth on other gears so that when one gear moves, the other one moves as well . The teeth can be used to communicate with other gears in order to communicate .
 The four basic types of gears are spur gears, bevel gears, worm gears, and rack and pinion gears . The four types of gear are spur and bevel gear, worm and rack gears, among others .
 C Moving walkway uses a slope to make it easier for people to climb upwards . The stairs are not shaped like a smooth incline .
 Parking ramps and ladders also use angled surfaces to make it easier to move up . Parking ramps, ladders and parking ladders use an angled surface to make climbing easier .
 The pinion converts the rotational motion of the pinion into a linear motion of a rack . The rack is a combination of pinion and pinion motion .
 A Magnify force B Store energy C Change direction of rotation D Change speed of movement . You can compress or extend a spring to store energy in it . A Magnified force A Store energy .
 According to Bernoulli’s principle, where the velocity of a fluid is high, the pressure is low and vice versa . According to Archimedes’ principle, a fluid velocity is high when it is low . Boyle's law is Boyle's rule .
 Since the upper surface of the airplane wing is more curved, air must flow faster and the pressure is lower above the wing than below the wing . Air pressure is also lower in the air above the plane's upper surface, so air flow is faster .
 Pascal’s principle states that when pressure is applied to a confined fluid it is transmitted undiminished in all directions . A It is reduced by the time it reaches the other parts . C It increases as it moves through the fluid . D It is not transmitted to any other part
 When you press the bottom of a toothpaste tube, the pressure is transmitted to the top and the toothpaste comes out . Pressing the top of the tube sends the pressure to the bottom and the tube comes out.
 A circuit segment contains only two capacitors of equal value, connected in parallel . A circuit segments contain only two capitors of equal value . The circuit segments are connected by parallel capacitors .
 The speed of electricity is almost as fast as the speed of light . Magnetism, magnetism and heat are the key factors in light .
 Dielectric material is nonconductive material, typically used in capacitors . Nonconducted material is often used in the design of capacitors and other types of devices .
 Motors are used to convert electrical energy to mechanical energy . The turning of the wheels on a car can be converted to electrical energy . Electrical energy is used to turn the wheels of a car .
 In an AC circuit, inductive reactance goes up as frequency goes up and down . Inductive reactances go down as frequency increases . Frequency-dependent resistors are frequency-independent resistors .
 D DPDT is an acronym for double-pole, double-throw, also known as a two-way switch . The acronym is D-PDT, or D-DPT, for double pole, double throw .
 Reactance can be capacitive or inductive . A Resistance B Reactance C Impedance D Inductance Answer: "Reactionance" Reactance is a form of resistance .
 A Radiant energy to electrical energy . A solar cell converts light to electricity . A radiant energy to electric energy . B Electrical energy to radiant energy . D Electrical to mechanical energy .
 Iron is the worst electrical conductor; silver is the best . Of the four metals listed, iron is the least conductor of all .
 A 1 A half-wave rectifier is usually made with one diode and one resistor . Half-wave Rectifier is made with a diode or a resistor .
 Most hammers feature a large head area, which adds mass to the tool to aid in the delivery of a forceful impact . A long handle that works as a force multiplier is also a key part of the tool's design .
 The longer the handle, the greater the force multiplier . A The longer a handle, a larger handle, is the greater a force multiplier . A larger handle can be used to increase the force of a person with a large handle .
 There are 12 inches in 1 foot., so begin by dividing 39 by 12 to convert from inches to feet . D 3 feet 3.25 inches is 3.75 inches .
 Phillips screw is an evolved form of the cross slot screw . B Cross slot screws are a Phillips screw . Phillips screw screws are an evolution of the B screw screw .
 It is designed to cam the screwdriver out of the screw when the screw stalls . It prevents damage to the screw head caused by overdriving .
 A lathe is a machine that rotates a piece of material and shapes it . A band saw is a band saw saw . A machine is a tool that turns a piece into shape .
 A skew chisel has an angled cutting blade that is used for finishing work . A butt chisel B Corner chisel C Skew chisel is a corner chisel . A Gouge chisel can be used to cut a piece of wood for finishing purposes .
 A spanner is another name for a wrench . A Caliper is a Caliper . A level D Lathe is a type of machine that can be used to make a lathe .
 It is a tool used to provide mechanical advantage while applying torque . The tool is used in the construction industry to provide a mechanical advantage .
 Adjustable-end wrenches are commonly called Crescent wrenches . They were initially developed by the Crescent Tool and Horseshoe Company .
 Hand wrenches that are used to torque heavy bolts or bolts that are seized often have very long handles or attachable handles known as breaker bars . Wrench wrenches are called screwdrivers or chisels .
 In metalworking, divider calipers are used to measure distance and scribe metal surfaces by scratching them . D Divider caliper is used in metalworking and measuring distance .
 A crocus cloth can be used for extra-fine polishing . Removing paint can be done by removing paint . Applying sealant can be applied by applying paint .
 It is similar to sand paper but uses an applied polishing or lapping compound in place of bonded abrading particles . It is used to polish and lapping compounds .
 Three months or 30,000 miles was the old standard . Changes in manufacture, oil design, and heavy use all determine how often oil should be changed .
 The mass air flow sensor lets the car’s computer know how much air the engine is taking in so it can adjust the fuel and timing . B Measures the amount of air going into the engine .
 The harmonic balancer is mounted on the end of the crank shaft . Radiator is a key to the engine's success . Engine is a good combination of engine and transmission .
 The engine reduces vibration in the engine and serves as a drive pulley for belts . It reduces vibration and serves to reduce vibration in engine .
 The valve body controls the clutches in the transmission by channeling pressurized fluid through a series of valves . It controls the clutch of the vehicle's clutches .
 The dampener spring absorbs the impact of bumps in the road . D As part of a strut, the dampener springs absorb impact of the bumps . Diversion spring is part of the strut .
 In most automotive applications, red wires are connected to the positive side of the battery, and black wires to the negative side . A Positive current B Negative current C Grounded circuits D High voltage Answer: High voltage .
 Directional tires have tread designed to rotate in only one direction, so they cannot be moved from the right to the left . D Front to back, same side, or front to back . Tires have tread which are designed to move only one way .
 The lugs are the threaded rods on which the wheel is mounted . B To hold the rim to the hub to hold the wheel to the wheel rim .
 A Difference in volume between the piston down and up . Compression takes place in the engine as the piston rises and squeezes the air/fuel mixture . C Difference between the engine compression at high and low rpm .
 Chilled refrigerant runs through the evaporator where air is blown over it to cool it for the car’s interior . A Cooling system B Emissions system C Electrical system D Air conditioning system .
 For each pair of labeled shapes in questions 1 to 8, choose the figure that shows the shapes connected correctly . Assembling Objects is a form of assembly that can be completed by hand .
 A For each set of shapes in questions 9 to 16, choose the figure that shows the shapes assembled into an object . Choose the figure to show how the shapes are assembled into objects .