 Upon witnessing the first atomic bomb tests, scientists had mixed reactions . Albert Einstein had a mixed reaction to the first bomb tests .
 A uranium bomb nicknamed ""Little Boy"" (despite weighing in at over four and a half tons) was dropped on Hiroshima August 6, 1945 . The bomb was nicknamed "Little Boy" despite weighing over 4 tons .
 Despite this, great emphasis was put on new weapon systems mobile missile launchers built . Strangelove 17 
 On August 15, 1963, communist authorities begin construction on the Berlin Wall to prevent East Germans fleeing to West Berlin . Nikita Khrushchev, then President of the Soviet Union, was assassinated in March 1968 .
 This was due to the amount of radioactive fallout from atmospheric tests that was being found around the world . The amount of fallout was found in parts of the world due to atmospheric tests being conducted .
 U.S. astronauts and Soviet Cosmonauts docked together in space . Soviet Leader Leonid Brezhnev visits USA in 1975 .
 He initiated dramatic new agreements with the United States, involving unilateral concessions in the armaments race . He initiated unilateral concessions with the U.S.
 The Cold War was the direct result of Stalin's aggressive Soviet expansionism . The Post-1991 school school says the Soviets were to blame for the Cold War .
 When the Cold War ended, we suddenly discovered that Russia was a poor Third World country . Russia is now a poor third World country, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In fact, they were just trying to improve a miserable standard of oppressive living, and couldn’t . In fact they were trying to . improve a . miserable standard . of oppressive . living, they couldn't. It was just trying . to improve .
 Norman Mailer ended the Cold War in case you didn’t notice . Mailer: “It was man who ended Cold War. In case you’d notice. I’m not just a man, I'm a man. I'm not a man who
 It was their emperor, not ours, who had the nerve to mount the rostrum and declare he had no clothes . It was not their emperor who had had the courage to mount a rostrum and declare himself naked, it was the emperor .
 John le Carre: "If the Soviet Union were to sink tomorrow under the waters of the ocean, the American militaryindustrial establishment would have to go on, substantially unchanged"