 President Johnson believed Cuba was responsible for Kennedy's murder . Haig believed that if the evidence came out of a Castro link to the Kennedy murder, it would turn the country to the right politically .
 Shortly after Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, a Cuban connection was investigated .
 Compelling new evidence of a Cuban Communist role in the assassination of former president John F Kennedy has come to light . It comes at a time when there has been renewed interest in the attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II and the alleged Soviet role behind that .
 Most of the reports labeled him as being from the far-right, because for a time he was a member of a militant nationalist group in Turkey . For a time, he was known for his political views .
 At best, reports have said that because of Ali Agca's changing stories, we still don't know who was behind the attempted assassination . But at his trial, the Italian prosecutors made the case that he was in fact carrying out an operation by the Bulgarian secret service .
 If the Bulgarian secret service was involved, it was clearly on behalf of the Soviet Union and its intelligence service, the KGB . The 60 Minutes program presented evidence that the Soviets were ultimately behind the assassination attempt .
 A German TV documentary claims that the Cuban government was behind the assassination of former president John F Kennedy by Lee Harvey Oswald . The Soviets saw the Polish-born Pope as a threat to the survival of the Soviet empire .
 The film is called ""Rendezvous With Death,"" by award winning director Wilfried Huissman . The film was shot in New York City, New York .
 Oscar Marino, a former Cuban intelligence agent, talks on camera . It took five years to make, and reports suggest it makes a compelling case .
 He says that the Cubans wanted Kennedy dead because he had opposed the Cuban revolution, and had tried to have Castro assassinated . Kennedy says he opposed Castro's revolution and tried to kill him .
 Marino told Huissman that he knew for certain that the Cuban secret service G2 had carried out and financed the operation . Marino wouldn't say if Castro had directly ordered the attack . Marino says he knows if Castro ordered it .
 Under Castro's brutal dictatorship, this would have happened without his blessing . But under Castro's dictatorship, it has endured nearly half a century, it's not conceivable that this would happen without him blessing .
 Oswald had lived there for three years after deserting from the U.S. military . He had lived in the compound after leaving the United States military . Oswald had been there three years before his death .
 He was allowed to return to the United States and bring his wife with him . He is allowed to travel to the U.S. with her .
 He continued to call himself a Communist, and demonstrated on behalf of Cuba . He demonstrated against Cuba's government .
 As a Marine, he had been sharpshooter, thus capable of hitting the intended target from the Texas Schoolbook Depository, where he went to work . And as a Marine he was able to hit the target .
 Oswald traveled to Mexico City in September 1963 where he met up with Cuban agents who paid him $6,500 to carry out the assassination . Oswald said he met with agents in Mexico City, where he was paid $5,000 .
 An FBI agent by the name of Laurence Keenan was sent to Mexico City, but he was recalled after only three days . The FBI agent was in Mexico City for three days before being recalled .
 Alexander Haig, then a military adviser to President Johnson, went on camera to say that LBJ believed Cuba was responsible . Haig believed that if the evidence came out of a Castro link to the Kennedy murder, it would turn the country to the right politically, and keep the Democrats
 In this country there were stories in Newsmax.com, The Washington Times, and Miami Herald.com.com .
 A German documentary film claims Lee Harvey Oswald was directed and paid to kill JFK by Cuba's Castro government . The film will be shown on German television on Friday . It claims Oswald was paid for JFK's assassination by Castro's government .
 Filmmaker Wilfried Huismann says Lee Harvey Oswald's killer met Cuban agents weeks before the assassination . Oswald met agents from Cuba's G-2 intelligence service in Mexico City .
 "He was a political fanatic and allowed himself to be used by the Cuban intelligence services to kill John F Kennedy,"" said Huismann .
 Several have said since the Kennedy assassination that Cuban intelligence officials contacted Oswald after he was alerted by the Soviets intelligence agency the KGB in 1962 . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 He returned to the U.S. after living in the Soviet Union for several years . He spent most of his life in Russia .
 After Kennedy's death on Nov. 1963, Lyndon B Johnson found out that the U.S. had a secret, illegal murder program focused on Fidel Castro . "The United States had to kill Fidel Castro"
 Huismann: "As a conservative pragmatist, he decided within a few hours, in agreement with Robert Kennedy, to drop the whole thing and to ban FBI and CIA officials from pursuing the trail leading to Cuba" Huisman: "I decided to drop it and to
 Former Secretary of State Alexander Haig says in the film that President Johnson believed Cuba was to blame and feared a pronounced swing to the right if the truth were known that would keep the Democrats out of power for a long time .
 President Johnson told ABC commentator Howard K Smith, "Kennedy was out to get Castro but Castro got him" President Johnson had told ABC News commentator Howard Smith that Kennedy was out for Castro .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was an ex-Marine sharpshooter who worked in a book depository building that overlooked the assassination site . Keenan: "We missed a moment in history"
 Oswald had a Russian wife, called himself a Communist and agitated on behalf of Castro's Cuba . The film was five years in the making and will be shown on Germany's main ARD public TV station .
 Huismann concluded, ""It's history. It was funded by a series of German public broadcasters as well as Japan's NHK television network" Huisman said, "It's been a very difficult time for a German broadcaster."
 President Johnson appointed a commission headed by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination . The Soviet Union removed some of the missiles even though several people contended that many of those missiles were left behind .
 The Warren report concluded that Oswald was responsible for Kennedy's assassination . One of the commission members was then House Republican Leader and later President Gerald R Ford . The report concluded Oswald was behind the assassination .
 The commission could not find any persuasive evidence of a conspiracy, either domestic or foreign, involving any other persons, groups, or countries .
 The commission released its report in 1964 . It noted that three empty shells were found in the sixth floor sniper's nest in the book depository .
 All commission files were sealed away from public view until 2039 by executive order of President Johnson .
 Cuban secret service agent claims in German film that his colleagues chose Lee Harvey Oswald to assassinate President John F Kennedy in 1963 . Cuban agent claims to have been behind JFK's murder in a German film .
 Germany's leading television broadcaster claims in documentary film that it was the Cuban secret service that organized JFK's assassination .
 The 90-minute film, Rendezvous with Death, features an interview with Oscar Marino, a former agent of the Cuban G2 secret service . Marino says he knew before the assassination that Lee Harvey Oswald -Kennedy's killer -had been picked by his colleagues to do the job .
 Marino claims Oswald, a Communist who lived in the Soviet Union for three years, was identified to Cuba by the Russian KGB secret service . Marino claims that Oswald was identified by the secret service by the KGB .
 A Cuban involvement is one of the dozens of conspiracy theories that have long surrounded the JFK assassination . The JFK assassination took place in 1968 .
 Interview with Marino provided ''decisive new evidence'' beyond existing inquiries, books and films on the subject . Huismann worked on the project with Gus Russo, author of a book on Fidel Castro .
 He admitted many Americans were ''very skeptical'' that he had solved the Kennedy assassination puzzle . He argued that his research focus on Mexico City -which Oswald visited two months before the assassination in Dallas - was his breakthrough .
 Huismann gained exclusive access to parts of the country's secret service archive . He interviewed Marino in the city, Huisman said, and gained access to the archive .
 Marino knew before the killing that Oswald had been recruited in Mexico City in September 1963 to do the killing, the filmmaker says . Marino knew that Oswald was recruited to carry out the killing in Mexico .
 The G2 decided to have Kennedy killed because it believed the U.S. government planned to kill Castro, the film says . Kennedy was killed because the G2 believed the United States government was behind Castro's death .
 Lawrence Keenan, a retired FBI agent, was sent to Mexico after the assassination to investigate Oswald's activities . Keenan says he was withdrawn after only a short time .
 This belatedly made up for the failure of CBS to give this story the attention it deserved when it first surfaced in November 1982 .
 Three Bulgarians were arrested in Italy after Ali Agca, the Turk who shot the Pope, claimed that the Bulgarian Special Services was behind the plot . The Pope was shot by a Turk who claimed to have been shot by the Pope .
 They made the plans, furnished the gun, took him to Saint Peter's Square . They promised to help him escape and paid him three million German marks . They took the man to the Square, promised him help with escape .
 Ali Agca talked after he had been in prison for eighteen months and no effort had been made to free him . Agca was freed after he was imprisoned for 18 months . Ali was released from prison in February .
 Dan Rather reacted in a radio broadcast in which he said that if true, this would be the story of the decade . Dan Rather said if true it would be one of the most significant stories in the history of America .
 Italy made official statements that included calling the Bulgarian actions ""an act of war" The CBS Evening News aired only a 35-second report of the incident .
 Terrorism expert Claire Sterling quoted that statement on ""Nightline,"" the only publicity that it got in our national media at that time . "Nightline" was only publicity for the statement .
 Most media were skittish about covering this story, perhaps because Yuri Andropov, who ran the KGB when the Pope was shot, had just become president of the Soviet Union . Most media was skittless about covering the Pope's assassination .
 Intelligence officials remain unconvinced by allegations in Italy that Bulgaria was behind the plot . It was reported that intelligence officials remained unconvincing by allegations .
 Ali Agca exposed the involvement of the Bulgarians, who are now in prison . Agca was the most important witness at the trial of the Bulgarian gang members .
 Ali Agca claimed to be Jesus Christ reincarnated . The case was solid, but at the trial he was convicted of murder .
 In our next commentary we will tell how ""60 Minutes"" found the explanation for Ali Agca's bizarre behavior and validated the Bulgarian-KGB role in the plot to kill the Pope .
 Agca sabotaged the trial of three Bulgarians who were his co-conspirators . The trial was held in 1985, 1985, and Agca was found guilty of attempted murder .
 Agca, the key witness in the trial, discredited himself, terminating the trial by claiming to be Jesus Christ reincarnated . Agca claimed to have been Jesus Christ incarnated .
 It claimed that the KGB was behind the plot to kill the Pope and that there was a KGB colonel who could confirm this . The KGB colonel is said to have confirmed this, according to the report .
 Agca explained that he proclaimed himself to be Jesus Christ in a letter . Agca said that he was Jesus Christ .
 He said that before the trial, a Bulgarian lawyer named Stefan Markov came to question him in prison . He said he was questioned by Markov in prison before his trial . The trial is expected to last two weeks .
 He decided to feign insanity, and began to claim that he was Jesus Christ reincarnated . He claimed to be Jesus Christ .
 He made that claim at the trial, and prosecutors saw that they had lost their key witness . Prosecutors saw that he had lost his key witness, and the prosecution saw that .
 The trial was halted and the three Bulgarian agents were freed and sent back to Bulgaria . The three agents were sent home to Bulgaria after the trial was stopped .
 He had many hours of conversations with Agca when he was imprisoned in Italy . Agca was a friend of the former president of Italy .
 He was convinced that the KGB was involved in the assassination attempt and that the Bulgarians were acting as their agents . The KGB was responsible for the attempt to kill the Soviet Union leader in Moscow .
 He said the KGB and Bulgarian Special Services were not involved in the plot to kill the Pope . He said that the KGB did not have any involvement with the plot .
 "60 Minutes" learned that during breaks Markov could have given Agca a message in Turkish that the Italian magistrate would not have understood . ""60 Minutes"" learned that Markov may have been able to communicate during breaks .
 Markov insisted that Agca had lied about the three Bulgarians who were put on trial, but Agca knew a lot about them, Markov said . Markov: Agca showed that he knew much more about them .
 He described the apartment of Sergei Antonov, the top agent, very accurately . He described Antonov's apartment as 'the top agent' and 'very accurately'
 Imposimato said he brought the two men together, and Agca confronted Antonov with so many details that Antonov could not explain that he became very angry . Antonov became angry when he was confronted by Agca .
 Agca sabotaged the trial of the Bulgarians who directed his attack on the Pope . The ""60 Minutes" segment made an important contribution to history . Agca made a significant contribution to the history of the country .
 Nexis search could not find a single story reporting that contribution in the print or electronic media . A Nexis searches could not be found a story reporting the contribution .