 He did not order the Navy to do anything . Send submarines to the Soviet harbor for a covert attack . Set up a naval 'quarantine' around Cuba . Annihilate the Soviet ships that were entering the Cuban territory .
 Hint Nikita Khrushchev . Hint Aleksej Kossygin. Hint Nikolaj Bulganin. Mikhail Gorbachev .
 Bay of Pigs Invasion Soviet Union declares war on the United States World War II . Hint: The Berlin Wall .
 Hint Launch a strategic war between the two nations Start World War III Demilitarize all of their offensive weaponry Demanding the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 The final agreement was that both countries agreed to dismantle their arms totally, and stay away from each other's continents . Both countries agreed that they would not be allowed to fight again .
 In 1963, the Soviet Union and the United States signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was signed by the two countries .
 The United States of America became aware of this in 1962 and the fact that the Soviet Union was taking active steps to place missiles in Cuba a clear threat to the U.S. The U.K. became aware that this was in 1962 .
 In October 1962, a U.S. U-2 reconnaissance spy plane that was flown by Richard Heyser discovered that the Soviets were building underground sites in Cuba for the potential launch of offensive missiles against the United States .
 Kennedy ordered the U.S. Navy to set up a partial naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the delivery of nuclear weapons to the country . Kennedy became aware in October of 1962, and ordered the United States Navy .
 Kennedy announced to the world that he was setting the quarantine up until the missiles from Cuba were removed from Cuba . Kennedy announced the quarantine to be set up until missiles from the country were removed .
 A full-scale nuclear war between the two superpowers would have been a possible outcome if Soviet ships had challenged the U.S. actions . The United States and the Soviet Union have been at odds for decades .
 During this era, the United States would not allow any naval vessel reach within 12 nautical miles of the North and South American coastline which includes the islands as well . During this period, the U.S. would not allowed any naval vessels to reach within . within 12 . nautical
 He was in charge of launching plans to place missiles on Cuba's Cuban territory . He was also responsible for launching missiles into Cuba .
 The U.S. missiles in Turkey threatened the Soviet Union, which made the Soviets set up missiles in Cuba . The United States missile threat in Turkey led to the creation of Cuba missiles . The Soviet Union set up its own missile bases in Cuba after the United States threatened Turkey .
 Both countries wanted to set up missiles that were closer to each other . This was because they wanted to strike within a few minutes if there was to be a nuclear strike .
 During this era, the Bay of Pigs Invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961 caused the Soviets to place missiles on the Cuban territory . The Soviets placed missiles on Cuban territory during the invasion of the country .
 Cuba was a strong ally to the Soviet Union, and was against the covert operation the U.S. had done to oust the Cuban Premier, Fidel Castro . The United States had done a covert operation to oust Castro .
 Khrushchev proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba . Demanded the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Khrushchev demanded the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba . The final agreement was that both countries agreed to dismantle their arms totally, and stay away from each other's continents .
 This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor bloomsby before going online . Author Geg_Geg555 is the author of the quiz .