 The program failed to give due credit to persons entitled to be denoted young “unsung heroes,” whose conduct literally may have saved the world from destruction,’s conduct literally helped save the world .
 I would like to share with the Council my personal observations, interactions and conversations, from the time I was in the Department of Justice in Washington, D.C. during the Cuban missile crisis .
 Robert F Kennedy and Ted Sorenson were unsung 12 2 heroes in the 1960s . Kennedy was just one year into his service as attorney general and now 36 years of age, now 36, age .
 The other unsung hero – not a young man – was former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Llewellyn E Thompson Jr. Thompson Jr., who was an intimate of JFK, was indicted on February 21, 1962 .
 The mayor had been awaiting confirmation as JFK’s nominee to serve as Ambassador to Greece . The mayor was awaiting confirmation . JFK's nominee had been confirmed to serve in Greece .
 By May 1962, the President had found someone to nominate as the U.S. Attorney for the District of Washington, D.C.
 He was 35 years old when he began his service as attorney general . He was just 35 when he started his service in Washington .
 He had not had a 32 2 2 record as a prosecutor or legal scholar, or the experience of someone who had served at the bar for a good length of time . He had no record of a distinguished record or a good experience .
 He had managed JFK’s political campaigns, served as Chief Counsel to the McClellan Committee which was concerned with official corruption, particularly within labor unions .
 He had also been minority counsel to the McCarthy Committee . The committee was concerned with purportedly ferreting out supposed communists from government service .
 He seemed clearly to lack a sufficient background for appointment as attorney general . Based on his work, he wrote The Enemy Within .
 He was, from a distance, not thought to have a sufficient background to handle critical matters that would likely come to the attention of an attorney general . He was thought to be a good candidate for the job .
 Young lawyer, then 36, played decisive role in making critical decisions that avoided nuclear destruction and led to a diplomatic resolution of the crisis .
 RFK and White made no comment with respect to Sinatra . Neither RFK nor White made any comment .
 Thereafter I had several conversations, becoming more frequent in October 1962, as to whether I was a proper “fit” for Las Vegas or was needed somewhere else .
 RFK sat in his office, sleeves rolled up, feet propped up on the edge of the desk, receiving calls from the White House and teletype messages relating to the crisis . RFK maintained control and coolness, whether we were speaking generally or about a new assignment or whether
 "He used me in a very real sense as a sounding board as he formulated his strategy. From time to time, as I happened to be in the office overhearing one side of the conversation, he turned to me and used me to help him formulate his strategy."
 Robert McNamara, who had earned the moniker of “whiz kid” before his service as Secretary of Defense,v Ambassador Thompson and Air Force Chief of Staff, Curtis LeMay, 52 2 who never encountered a war he didn’t like .
 RFK did not neglect his duties as attorney general following his arrival at the Department of Justice in his jalopy an old “beat up” Plymouth sedan . RFK arrived at the DOJ in an old "beat up" Plymouth .
 Despite efforts to hamper my investigation in Indiana, I believed RFK knew what was “right,” and as a result, we developed a warm, but respectful relationship . RFK: RFK was a good man who knew RFK's "right"
 Some favored immediate air strikes to destroy missile bases with an invasion of the Island to follow . The group chosen by the President had been considering several options, some favored air strikes .
 Others favor a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of further shipments destined for Cuba . Others favored a naval blockage .
 General Taylor ordered to destroy or cause submarines to surface, which would facilitate their capture . General Taylor had ordered the Navy to take steps to destroy the Soviet submarines .
 The efforts of the Naval Chief of Staff failed. Fortunately for the world, the world did not . Fortunately, the efforts failed.
 RFK’s views were that precipitous military action was too risky because we just didn’t know enough to make a military decision, and care had to be taken when we were dealing with nuclear weapons .
 RFK reported the views to JFK, who did of course make the final decision . It was reported that the person presiding at such meetings was the young attorney general, and JFK was seldom present .
 There had been plenty of ‘hawks’ on the Council, but RFK, Thompson and behind the scenes, Sorenson, were firmly of the view that there was not enough known to pursue the option of military force . RFK: "There were plenty of "hawks
 RFK and Thompson were derided as being too dovish, but events would later show how sage was RFK’s position . RFK's position was later shown to be sage .
 Khrushchev was prepared to seek approval of his own Council to remove the nuclear missiles it had placed on bases in Turkey that could destroy Moscow in under 20 minutes . The Soviet Union would no longer deliver missile parts to Cuba if the U.S. removed the missiles .
 Russian and United Nation technicians would assist Cuba in dismantling what had been on the Island housing the missiles already there and those that had already shipped and would soon be received . Further Russian and U.N. technicians would also be assisting Cuba .
 Kennedy’s position, announced to those around him, including himself, was that this was not a ‘tit for tat’ deal, but an act that was necessary to save the nation, he says . Kennedy: "This is not a 'tit-
 72 2 was, for one or more of the Soviet submarines off the Florida straits had been outfitted with nuclear missiles . So very right he was .
 Had Dean Acheson and the truly experienced ‘hawks’ of the Council had their way, most assuredly, there would have been quick nuclear retaliation by the Russians, as well as our own destructive response .
 I was fortunate enough to interact with him, observe him and form judgments about his character under pressure when the interests of his brother were at stake in organized crime investigations, and now the threat to the very existence of the nation was real .
 He rose to grand heights to ensure the very preservation of the nation, and for that, he must be remembered, not only as a legendary attorney general, a truly great American, but one entitled to be admired .
 This article was prepared with the assistance of my esteemed associate Alex S Huot .
 RFK was assassinated on June 8, 1968, just days after Attorney General’s assassination by one who was consumed with such hatred of Israel and RFK . He believed it was necessary for him to win the plaudits of Arab nations by assassinating RFK as he stood
 RFK relieved him of what would have been the standard upset when a prosecutor is forced to compromise because of political considerations . RFK: "When it became clear that I would be subjected to the same pressures that I had endured in Indiana, RFK, relieved me of what I had