 The missile base is still there, in the middle of the marshy Everglades, but the missiles are long gone . Half a century later the missile base still exists in the Evergades .
 The Nike Hercules missile was once tipped with a nuclear warhead and aimed at Cuba . Now, to mark the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, students at a Miami aviation school are restoring it .
 Florida is home to tens of thousands of Cubans who fled the island after Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution . The United States and Cuba remain ideological foes to this day, but tensions have cooled down considerably .
 The students realize the decommissioned missile was once part of a historic event but confess to knowing little about one of the momentous episodes of the Cold War . The students say they know little about the event .
 41-foot surface-to-air Nike Hercules missile was previously stored in a U.S. army depot in Alabama . The missile was stored in the depot covered in dust and spider webs . The Nike Hercules missiles were stored in an Alabama army depot .
 A flatbed truck hauled it down Interstate-95 to a Miami school next to Miami International Airport . The school is located near the airport .
 For the past two months, students have been working to restore the 5-ton missile to near-original condition . Students sanded wings, replaced sheet metal and repainting Army markings .
 Its final destination is Everglades National Park, where it will be installed at an abandoned Nike missile base . The missile base's final destination will be an abandoned missile base in Florida . It will then be installed in the national park .
 The 13-day missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when then-President John F Kennedy first learned the Soviet Union was installing missiles in Cuba, barely 90 miles off the Florida coast . Then-President Kennedy learned the Soviets were installing missiles near Cuba .
 The U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union withdrew its missiles from the island . After secret negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the United States agreed to withdraw the missiles .
 Samuel Robles, 16, said he heard something about Che Guevara on the History Channel . Robles said he didn't know a lot about the incident but heard something on the channel about the revolutionary icon .
 Military use of the Everglades site ended in 1979 . The facility, known as HM69 Nike Missile Base, was turned over to the National Park Service . It offers tours in the winter months .
 Because the site lies within a national park, the base is almost unchanged since its closure . It includes the three missile ""barns,"" a missile assembly building, barracks and a guard dog kennel .
 Nike sites were strategically located near cities as part of a national air defense system . Nike sites are named after the Greek goddess of victory . During the Cold War the United States was dotted with Nike sites .
 Most have disappeared or been converted into other public uses, including an immigration detention facility in Florida, a golf course in Illinois and an elementary school in Kansas .
 Battery of anti-ballistic missiles near Miami stood as the nation's first line of defense against nuclear attack .