 At about 2m., Batista, his family, and closest associates, board a plane at Camp Columbia,and leave the island . Batista's family, friends and associates were also on the plane .
 Fidel Castro replaces Miró Cardonas as Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government . Fidel Castro, Commander of the Rebel Army, replaces Miro Cardona .
 Major Jesus Sosa Blanco was executed at the ancient moat of La Cabaña Fortress . He was executed in the ancient fortress's moat .
 In Havana, 2 members of Rolando Masferrer's private army are captured after a shootout in which 2 policemen and a civilian are wounded . 2 policemen are wounded in the shootout .
 Castro announces that general elections will be held in Cuba in 2 years . Castro announces general elections in Cuba will take place in 2015 . Castro says general elections are due to take place two years later .
 The Cuban government nationalizes the Cuban Telephone Compnay, an affiliate of ITT, and reduces telephone rates . The government reduces rates of telephone service in Cuba .
 Five men arrested for conspiracy to kill Premier Fidel Castro; Roberto Corral Miramon, Roberto Lopez Paz, Roberto Perez Merens, Jose Sosa Mojena and Andres Arango Chacon . Five men were arrested for a plot to kill Fidel Castro .
 Prosecuting attorney Lieutenant José Antonio Suarez asserts that Nye received $100,000 from the ousted Batista regime . Nye is accused of receiving the money he received from Nye .
 Alan Robert Nye is convicted of a plot to kill Premier Fidel Castro and sentenced to death . Nye was convicted of plotting to kill the Castro family . Alan Nye has been sentenced to the death .
 The sentence is suspended on the condition that Mr Nye leave Cuba within forty-eight hours April 13 . Nye is allowed to leave Cuba by April 13 on condition that he leave Cuba .
 Alan Robert Nye is convicted in a plot to assassinate Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro . Nye was convicted after a 7-hour public trial that lasted 7 hours .
 Castro signs Agrarian Reform Act, expropriates over 1,000 acres of farmlands and forbids foreign land ownership . Castro signed the law in order to keep the land under control .
 In Cairo, Che Guevara makes the first official contact with the Soviet Union . In Cairo he meets with Soviet leader Vladimir Putin for the first time . The visit is the first visit to Cairo since the fall of communism .
 President Urrutia resigns, and Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado becomes Cuba's 19th president . Urruti resigns as president, and Torrido becomes president .
 Huber Matos resigns his post as military commander of Camagüey province, along with 14 officers, because of the ""rising influence of communism"" in the revolution . Matos was a leading figure in the revolutionary war .
 Huber Matos sentenced to 20 years in prison for conspiracy and treason . Matos was convicted of treason and conspiracy to commit murder .
 The Soviet Union will purchase 5 million tons of sugar over a five-year period . The visit results in a trade agreement in which the Soviet Union purchases 5 million tonnes of sugar .
 Anti-Castro radio station goes on air as part of Eisenhower-approved plan for covert operations . Radio Swan was created by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency .
 In the U.S., the Frente Revlucionario Democrático is formed by Cuban exiles to oppose the government of Fidel Castro . In the United States, Fidel Castro's government has been overthrown by the government .
 U.S. companies, under pressure from the United States government, refuse to sell fuel to Cuba . At the same time, they refuse to buy fuel from Cuba . The Cuban government is under pressure to stop selling fuel to the island nation .
 The Soviet Union announces that it will purchase 700,000 tons of sugar cut by the United States July 23 . The U.S. cut the sugar by the U.K. cut .
 U.S. embassy: Popular support of the Castro regime has dropped markedly . Cable cable from Havana to Washington says support of Castro regime dropped in recent months . Cable: "During the past three months the popular support of [Castro] regime has ... dropped markedly"
 In the first 2 years of the revolution, Cuba loses more than 50% of its doctors and teachers . Cuba has lost more than half its doctors, teachers and doctors in the last 2 years .
 At the UN Security Council, Cuba charges that the United States is preparing an invasion . Cuba says the U.S. is preparing to invade Cuba . The U.N. Security Council is currently at odds with Cuba .
 Castro demands U.S. embassy staff be reduced to 11, the same number as Cuba's embassy in Washington . Castro demands that the number of staff at the embassy be cut to 11 . Castro: "The United States embassy staff in Cuba is the same size"
 The Communists were right to be distrustful becaue we of the Sierra, leaders of the guerrillas, were still full of petty-bourgeois prejudices and defects, despite Marxist reading . The Communist Party was right to distrustful of us, says the author .
 The ideas were not clear to us, though we wanted with al or strength to destroy tyranny and privileges . We wanted with the strength or strength of the people, though not clear what they wanted to do .
 Ecuadorian President: U.S. demands that his country break off diplomatic relations with Cuba as a condition to the approval of various loans . President of Ecuador, Josh Maria Velasco Ibarra, announces United States demands . Ecuadorian president: Ecuadorian government must break diplomatic relations
 Cuban soldiers arrest CIA agent Carlos Antonio Rodriquez Cabo, aka El Gallego . The agent is accused of being an agent for the CIA .
 The alleged attack violates the Neutrality Act, which forbids the launching of any military expedition from U.S. territory against a nation with which the United States is not at war . The act is a violation of the neutrality Act which prohibits the launch of military expedition .
 José Miro Cardona, issues a statement that asserts, ""We are not, nor could we be, counterrevolutionaries" Cardona issued a statement in which he said, "We are ... not counterrevolutionaries," Cardona said .
 Another explosion at the store El Encanto destroys the 7-story building . Another explosion destroys the building . The explosion was caused by an explosion inside the store .
 8 B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad, San Antonio de los Baños and Santiago de Cuba . A total of 8 bombers attacked airfields in Cuba .
 After three days of fighting, the invading force is defeated by the Cuban army . The Cuban army defeats the invading forces .
 Sorí Marin and Rogelio Gonzalez, CIA agents captured a few days before the Bay of Pigs invasion, are executed . Gonzalez, Marin and Gonzalez were captured days before invasion . Gonzalez and Marin were executed .
 Goodwin goes on to write a memo to President Kennedy describing the content of their meeting on August 22 . Goodwin writes about the contents of the August 22 meeting .
 He had been charged with violating U.S. neutrality laws by financing a 27-man invasion of Cuba . The Cuban invasion was part of a Cuban invasion of the country .
 President Kennedy creates inter-agency team to plan actions against Cuba . President Kennedy created inter-agencies to plan Cuban attacks on Cuba .
 Alexis Johnson, from the Defense Department Roswell Gilpatric and from the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer. Alexis Johnson . Alexis Johnson is from the defense department . Roswell: "I'm glad to be here for the first time" Alexis Johnson says .
 Also included were General Maxwell Taylor and Robert Kennedy, with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara as occasional participants .
 An assortment of U.S. naval vessels gather about the Cuban coastine .
 "Any impulse toward widespread revolt is inhibited by the fear which the apparatus inspires," says the author . "Any expectation of liberation within the foreseeable future is not possible," he says .
 The 23 members of the expedition are not arrested, and no charges are brought against them . No charges have been brought against the expedition members . The 23 expedition members were not arrested .
 Discredit and isolate the regime; Harass the economy; Intensify intelligence collection . Intensifies intelligence collection; plit regime leadership and relations with Bloc . Assist Cuban exile groups and Latin American governments to take actions; Be prepared to exploit a revolt .
 Alexis Johnson (Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs) outlines a 2-track course of covert action against Cuba . Martin to U. Alexis Johnson outlines a two-track plan of covert actions against Cuba.
 James Donovan negotiated the release of Bay of Pigs prisoners with Fidel Castro on behalf of the Kennedy administration . Donovan negotiated a deal with Castro to release the prisoners . Donovan was the man who negotiated the prisoner's release . Donovan is credited with negotiating the prisoner release of Fidel Castro .
 Alpha 66 members of Alpha 66 hold a press conference to take credit for yesterday's attack on the Soviet ship Lvov .
 Plan renews support for exile attacks on selected Cuban targets . Targets include transportation facilities, power plants, fuel production and storage operations . The plan renews the support of exile attacks .
 Former Press Secretary Pierre Salinger: "If Kennedy had lived I am confident that he would have negotiated that agreement and dropped the embargo" November 22. 1962 .
 Cuba becomes first nation in the Western Hemisphere to jam radio broadcasts . Using Soviet-supplied equipment, Cuba becomes the first country to jam broadcasts . Cuba is the first nation to jam Western Hemisphere broadcasts .
 The first apparent target was the anti-Castro stations in the U.S. 1964 January 7 . The first appeared to be a target of anti-Cuban stations .
 Look magazine runs a prelude to the book The Invisible Government by David Wise and Thomas B Ross . Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc., is a cover for a CIA operation .
 At the time, this was the largest CIA station in the world after Langley . The CIA station was located in Fort Worth, Texas, in the 1970s . It was the first CIA station to be located in the country .
 In The Closest of Enemies, Wayne Smith writes, "I was bothered by the hardness of our demands," Smith says .
 President Lyndon B Johnson signed into law the Cuban Adjustment Act . Act exempts Cuban immigrants from general U.S. migration laws . Cuban immigrants are exempted from general immigration laws .
 Rolando Masferrer Rojas and 67 others are arrested in Marathon, Florida, for an alleged plot to invade Haiti and then Cuba .
 Che Guevara was killed in Bolivia by U.S.-trained rangers in the village of Vallegrande . Che died in his native country of Bolivia .
 It is asseted that had the microfaction succeeded, ""it would have subordinated Cuban sovereignty"" to the Soviets .
 In Miami, 2 businesses who regularly ship packages to Cuba are bombed before dawn . Businesses regularly send packages to the island nation of Cuba .
 More than 75% of Cuban women have chosen not to enter the workforce, according to Granma, Cuba's official newspaper . According to a survey, more than 75 per cent of women in the workforce do not work .
 The Boeing 727, with 80 passengers and a 6-person crew, lands in Havana's José Martí Airport at 10:21m. The plane landed in Havana at 10.21m .
 The first contingent of the Venceremos Brigade, a group of voluteer workers from the U.S., arrives in Cuba to work on the sugar harvest . The group is the first of the voluteers to arrive in Cuba .
 By this time, more than 85 percent of Cuban trade is with the USSR or Eastern Block countries . By the time of this time of the Cuban revolution, more of its trade is in the Soviet Union .
 Cuban exiles gather in Miami to dedicate a monument to the 10-year anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion . A few hundred Cubans gather to dedicate the monument . The monument is a monument dedicated to the invasion of Cuba in 1961 .
 In Puerto Rico, 80,000 people march through San Juan demanding independence . Albizu Campos' birth is celebrated on the 80th anniversary of his birth .
 Cuba joins the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance . The Council is an economic organization of the Soviet Union, East European socialist countries, and Mongolia . Cuba joins Russia, Mongolia and East European countries .
 At the United Nations, Cuba requests that in light of adopted resolution 1541 that the UN declare that Puerto Rico has a right to self-determination . Puerto Rico is a U.N. territory that is located in Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico .
 Eastern Airlines flight 8894 lands at Miami International Airport at 11:55 A.M. with the last 84 passengers of the Cuban airlift . The flight lands with the final 84 passengers .
 The 13th Congress of the Cuban Labor Confederation ties wages to productivity in an effort to improve efficiency . The union's union says wages are tied to productivity . The Congress is expected to take place in the coming months .
 The Committees for the defense of the Revolution celebrates its 13th year . The Committees are celebrating their 13th anniversary this year .
 OMEGA 7, an anti-Castro paramilitary group, was founded in the United States by Eduardo Arocena . The group was founded by Arocen, a former member of the U.S. government . The organization is based in Miami, Florida .
 The most visible ‘operation’ takes place on September 21, 1976, with the car-bomb assassination of Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letelier .
 Miami Mayor Maurice A Ferré asks Attorney General Edward H Levi for federal help to combat violence in the Cuban exile community that police regard as politically motivated .
 Mayor Ferré sites the assassination of Luciano Nieves, and the bombings of TV station WKID in Dania, among other incidents . The assassination of Nieves and the bombing of a Dania TV station are among the incidents .
 Mayor Ferré estimates that the actual terrorists number less than 2-dozen . The actual terrorists are believed to be around 2,000 people .
 The United States will allow foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies to sell products in Cuba . It will also no longer penalize other nations for trade with Cuba . The move will also allow other countries to trade with the Cuban government .
 Rolando Masferrer Rojas was killed by a bomb planted in his car in Miami . He was killed in Miami, Florida .
 Pinar del Rio, La Habana, Matanzas, Cienfuegos, Villa Clara, Santi Spiritus, Ciego de Avila, Camagüey, Las Tunas, Granma, Holguín, Santiago de Cuba, and
 Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letelier and Ronnie Moffitt are murdered with a car bomb in Washington, D.C. In Washington, Chile's ambassador and ambassador to the U.S. are killed .
 The murders were later attributed to José Dionisio Suarez Esquivel, who was pardoned in 2001 . He was convicted of the murders and later pardoned .
 The new president serves as head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the Armed Forces . 600,000 women work outside the home . The country's new president is expected to be the first female president .
 Carlos Muñoz Varela is murdered by members of Command Zero, an offshoot of Omega 7 . Command Zero is a group of members of the anti-Omega 7 terrorist group Omega 7.
 Varela managed the Viajes Varadero Travel Agency which organized trips to Cuba . She supported the establishing of dialogue between the two governments .
 At a meeting of the sixth sumit of the Nonaligned Movement in Havana, Castro is elected chair of the movement and serves until 1982 . Castro served until 1982, when he was elected chair .
 In Union City, Eulalio José Negrin is murdered in front of his 12-year-old son by Omega 7 member Pedro Remon . The victim was killed by Remon's Omega 7 members in Union City .
 Cuban women comprise 17 percent of participants in competitive sports . In competitive sports, Cuban women are 17 percent participants . Cuban women make up the majority of Cuban athletes .