 Imagine how frustrating that game gets when your opponent takes all of his ships off the grid without telling you . Imagine how frustrated that game becomes when you can't tell your opponent what happened .
 The U.S. naval blockade on Cuba goes into effect on October 24, 1962 . The blockade began October 24th, 1962, and lasted for nearly a decade .
 Yesterday, the Soviet top brass met for the first time to discuss the crisis . The Soviet Union's top brass have now met in Moscow to discuss its crisis .
 They decided to not provoke the U.S. openly by sailing through the blockade line, but still keep their nuclear missiles on Cuba, and run the line with four foxtrot class, nuclear armed submarines .
 American President John F Kennedy spent the entire day dealing with the details of how to get the blockade in place politically and how to enforce it militarily . Kennedy spent that day working out the details .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy was pessimistic about the effect of the blockade . He was worried about political fallout for having acted so late, and worried about the consequences .
 The question that I’ve heard raised is why this was not uncovered sooner, when there were some reports about it, to why we didn’t know about it . The question is why a blockade of some kind was not instituted earlier, and therefore why it wasn’
 "What we are doing now is, in fact, closing the barn door after the horse is gone. And so that this is the second question, what we are ... is, the . second question . What we are . doing is, actually, closing . the barn doors after the
 Senator Keating’s frequent statements. And those questions that will be raised… Well that . Well that ties into Senator Keated's frequent statements, he said .
 The U.S. is building pads that would be ready for fire at the United States in six months . The pads are being built there, says Obama .
 It seems to me that somebody in a responsible position ought to take up this question . Now it seems to be a responsible person ought to answer it .
 "I don’t think that it’s realized how quickly these mobile bases can be set up and how quickly they can be moved," says author . "I’m going to be surprised by how quickly mobile bases are set up," he says .
 The question is getting this point over, in view of the next 24 hours. So that I’m just wondering now what is the judgment—the question is . The judge says he’s just wondering what is now the judgment .
 At 2 PM Greenwich time, so 10AM in Washington DC, October 24th, 1962, the blockade of Cuba goes into effect . At 2PM Greenwich time in Washington D.C. at 2PM in 1962, Cuba began to be isolated in Cuba .
 The President and EXCOMM, the national security committee dealing with the crisis, are now huddled up in the White House monitoring developments . The President is expected to be briefed on the latest developments .
 One concern is what to do about submarines, if they are caught breaking the blockade . The U.S. has not been able to find out where to stop them .
 Depth charges have such a small charge that they can be dropped and they can actually hit the submarine, without damaging the submarine . We have depth charges that have so small charge they can strike the submarine without damaging it .
 When our forces come upon an unidentified submarine we will ask it to come to the surface for inspection by transmitting the following signals, using a depth charge of this type and also using certain sonar signals which they may not be able to accept and interpret .
 It is the depth charge that is the warning notice and the instruction to surface . The depth charge is the signal to surface. Therefore, it is the indication to surface and the warning .
 This is a very dangerous operation and could easily end up either sinking the submarine or provoking a responsea nuclear response . The operation is a 'very dangerous operation' and could end up sinking a submarine, provoking a nuclear response.
 Robert Kennedy will write down that; “these few minutes were the time of greatest worry by the President.” Later in the day Robert Kennedy writes down that . “These few minutes . were the times of greatest concern by the president,” he will write .
 CIA Director McCone interrupts the debate on the danger of the proposed ant-submarine actions . CIA director McCone then interrupts the conversation to discuss the danger .
 All six Soviet ships currently identified in Cuban waters have either stopped, or reversed course . It says that we’ve just received information through ONI that . ONI .
 It's the ships heading towards the blockade that are being referred to . It’s the ships that are going to be sent to the blockade .
 The U.S. and USSR stood “eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just flinched,” as the Russian ships approach the line and seemingly turn around at the last moment . Now, a lot has been made over the years of this being the
 The eyeball quote is attributed to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who whispers it to National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy . Rusk is said to have whispered it to Bundy .
 Russian ships with military equipment on board were already ordered to turn back or to stop 24 hours ago . The Russian ships had military equipment .
 Rusk doesn’t know this though, and it’s interesting to see why . Rusk is not the only person in the world to know this .
 There’s an aircraft carrier group south of Cuba, Several submarines patrol the waters . Several aircraft carrier groups are also on patrol .
 Dozens of planes and a bunch of smaller ships monitor the Russian cargo vessels . Russian cargo ships are monitored by planes and ships .
 US Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay is one of the recipients of the report that the blockade is seemingly being respected . We do know that they are opposed to the blockade and for a harder confrontation, especially US .
 He directed the firebombing campaign on Japan in 1945 that killed some 500,000 civilians and left millions more homeless . He directed a fire bombing campaign that killed 500,00 civilians .
 In fact, they literally had to lock up the nukes to prevent him from using them, so he carpet bombed urban areas and dams, destroying agriculture and causing famine . He carpet bombed cities, dams, and caused famine .
 Don't forget those four Soviet nuclear armed submarines that are not turning around, CNN's John Sutter says . Don’t forget that four Soviet submarines are still turning around .
 The Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba from Cuba, CNN's John Sutter says . "There’s also the issue of the Soviets removing their missiles," he says .
 Khrushchev has penned a strongly worded letter that Kennedy is about to receive . Kennedy is due to receive a strong worded response to the letter he received .
 The letter doesn't concede anything, though, and doesn't even acknowledge the existence of the missiles . It doesn’t even acknowledge that the missiles are missiles .
 The United States Navy has stepped up another action that will further escalate the situation . Meanwhile, the U.S. Navy has also stepped up its own action against Syria .
 CIA-operated U-2 high altitude planes have been furnishing photographic evidence of missile build up . ExCOMM has been a sore spot with EXCOMM since the start of the crisis that these photos are difficult to analyze, do not furnish proof .
 Until the crisis was made public, they refrained from low altitude recon flights, as this would first of all be really dangerous and force things to become public right away .
 Captain William Ecker and his wingman Lieutenant Bruce Wilhelmy made the first low altitude flights . Captain Ecker made the flight with a wingman .
 Real Top Gun style flight stunts with no guns, only cameras on board . Now, this is real Top Gun-style flight stunts .
 They're flying in RF-8 Crusaders, that’s the unarmed recon version of the F-8 Crusader . To make really clear photos they have to fly really low, like I mean really, really low and to not get shot down, they must fly fast .
 They take off from Jacksonville, Florida, and head for Cuba at their regular flight altitude . They head for Havana at regular altitude .
 Cuban and Russian soldiers scramble for their guns . As they scream over the site, they scramble for guns . The incident happened in Cuba and Russia . The site is located in the eastern part of Cuba .
 One picture even reveals a Cuban soldier tripping out of an outhouse with his trousers still around his knees . The picture was taken in Havana, Cuba .
 The pilots snap their cameras, capturing crystal clear images of the site . The pilots snapped their cameras as they flew over the world's tallest building .
 When they're already out of range they see the smoke puffs of the anti-aircraft artillery behind them . When they’re already out, they see . The smoke puffles of the aircraft artillery can be seen behind them.
 In total it takes less than four minutes to fly over Cuba, but they're not out of danger .
 If the airplane gets busted all to pieces, it wouldn't do anybody any good . Here I've got the pictures, and if it gets busted, it would be good .
 When he returns to base he’s not even allowed to leave his plane . He was ordered to fly straight to Washington .
 There, to his astonishment, he’s debriefed at the Pentagon directly by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor .
 He’s taken off his pressure suit, and underneath his uniform is wet with sweat . The pressure suit is wet under his uniform, and he's taken it off .
 Curtis LeMay is fuming at the Navy for having upstaged his Air Force . Later when the pilots are decorated for the action during a White House event, LeMay will refuse to take part .
 Kennedy and Adlai Stevenson now have photographic evidence they need to confront the Soviets .
 Several of the nuclear missiles are ready and can be fired at short notice . But they also now know that several of them are ready to be fired .
 Robert Kennedy was right. what we are doing now is, in fact, closing the barn door after the horse is gone . Robert Kennedy is right. He was right to say, "What we do now is ... close the barndoor after the horses are gone"
 The blockade hasn’t resolved anything and instead the world has taken yet another few steps towards nuclear war . The blockade has not resolved anything, instead it has led to yet another step towards a nuclear war.
 The United States Strategic Air Command is now taken to defense readiness level DEFCON 2, the final stage before imminent nuclear war . The U.S. Strategic Air command is now in the final state of readiness .
 The U-2 spy planes were the first U.2 spy plane to fly over the U.S. Air Force in the 1960s . The planes were used to carry out missions in the United States .
 Don’t forget to subscribe to our patreon.com or tg.tv so that we can make more awesome history . Please support us at patreon .