 The State Department had gotten slightly ahead of the White House by mentioning the possibility of further action by Washington . President John F Kennedy was irate by the State Department's comments .
 He called State Department spokesman Lincoln White to reprimand him personally . He stressed the need to coordinate and calibrate all public statements . The State Department says it is coordinating and calibrating all statements .
 It stemmed from the possibility that the opposing sides could trigger a nuclear conflict that nobody wanted . Nobody wanted through miscommunication and freak accidents, which became increasingly likely .
 The same is almost certainly true of the present crisis with North Korea . Kim Jong-Il Jong-won is the son of a former South Korean president . The North Korean crisis is the result of the Korean crisis .
 The nightmare of an accidental nuclear war was very much on Kennedy's mind during the 13 days . The world came closer than ever before, or since, to blowing itself up .
 He had recently read a book by historian Barbara Tuchman that described how a previous generation of statesmen had blundered into World War I . Nobody really understood why, he said .
 Kennedy was determined to avoid a similar chain of unpredictable events involving atomic weapons . Kennedy wanted to avoid an unpredictable chain of uncontrollable events involving nuclear weapons .
 For a student of the Cuban missile crisis, the fact that our current Twitter-happy commander in chief is surrounded by sensible, highly competent generals is only partly reassuring . For a history student, it's not reassuring .
 The missile crisis showed that there are some decisions that only a president can make . President Barack Obama made a decision to take action after the crisis .
 JFK was in a minority of one in the Excomm, the committee set up to manage the crisis, in his willingness to compromise with Khrushchev . JFK was a minority in the committee, in which he was willing to compromise .
 Only the president had the overarching sense of history to consider the interests of future generations of Americans, and ultimately all of humanity . The president had to consider his own interests, and that of humanity, in this case .
 Kennedy was assured in October 1962 that the U.S. could wipe the Soviet Union off the map . As is no doubt today, the generals assured Kennedy that the United States enjoyed overwhelming nuclear superiority over its adversary .
 Classic game theory teaches us that you can gain an advantage over your opponent if you can convince him that you are madder than he is . Game theory says you can get an advantage by convincing him that he is mad .
 The driver who swerves out of the way first loses in the game of chicken . In the game, two cars are heading for a frontal collision, with two swerving into each other's path .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, the role was played to perfection by Castro, the only leading actor who was seriously prepared to risk a nuclear war . Castro was the only . leading . actor who risked a nuclear . war .
 Cuban revolution slogan: Patria o muerte -- "fatherland or death" was slogan of Cuban revolution .
 The role of madmen has always been part of the arsenal of the weak against the strong, whether in the case of Cuba or North Korea or the Islamic State . Assuming the role of a madman is always a key weapon for the weak .
 Playing chicken is, however, a dangerous indulgence for the leader of a nuclear superpower . Playing chicken may be dangerous for the president of a superpower .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev ended up making common cause against Castro . During the 1962 crisis, the two ended up together against the dictator .
 Jackie Kennedy wrote a handwritten letter to the Soviet leader following her husband's assassination . Despite everything that divided them, the two had a sneaking sympathy for each other .
 While big men know the needs for self-control and restraint, little men are sometimes moved more by fear and pride . Big men know self control and restraint but little men move more by pride and fear .
 You are using an older browser that may impact your reading experience . Use the mobile web browser to view the content of this article articles .
 President John F Kennedy confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct. 1962 . The buildup of military tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month .
 This photo shows Soviet missile equipment being loaded at the Mariel naval port in Cuba on Nov., 1962 . At left is Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin .
 Curtis LeMay, then Air Force chief of staff, met with President John F Kennedy in the White House in 1962 to discuss U-2 spy plane flights over Cuba .
 Now retired and living in Apalachicola, Florida, Heyser says he was relieved the crisis ended peacefully because he didn't want to go down in history as starting World War III . Now retired he says he doesn't want history to be remembered as starting the war .
 Picture of Castro during his speech was copied from a monitor set at Key West, Florida .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk takes part in debate at extra-ordinary session of the Organization of American States to consider action against Cuba . Secretary Rusk is seen as a strong supporter of President Obama .
 President John F Kennedy posed in his White House office with Gen. William J Smith . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 The chiefs met with the president to review the present situation in Cuba and operation of the United States naval blockade . This is a low level photograph made Oct., 1962 of the medium range ballistic missile site unde construction in the San Cristobal area of Cuba .
 President John F Kennedy reports to the nation on the status of the Cuban crisis from Washington, D.C. on Nov., 1962 . It was released by the Defense Department .
 He told radio and television listeners that Soviet missile bases ""are being destroyed"" and that U.S. air surveillance would continue until effective international inspection was arranged . He said United States air surveillance will continue until international inspection is arranged .
 John F Kennedy tells the American people that the United States is setting up a naval blockade against Cuba, during a television and radio address, Oct., 1962, from the White House . AP
 President Kennedy leaves St. John F Kennedy's funeral home in New York City .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet rocket bases in Cuba dismantled and rockets returned to Russia . Soviet Freighter Vogoles was carrying what appeared to be missile launchers out of Cuba . The plane circled a private plane carrying AP reporters .
 The ship's afterdeck is believed to be loaded with shrouded missile apparatus . The ship was believed to have been carrying missile technology .
 The real risk of war arose not from the conscious designs of Kennedy, Khrushchev or even Fidel Castro, author says . "One Minute to Midnight" is a new book on the 1962 nuclear showdown .
 Electoral College reform is the least Congress owes us to us, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the current Twitter-happy commander in chief is surrounded by sensible, competent generals . He says it's only partly reassuring that he's surrounded by smart generals .
 Given the explosive rhetoric of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, it is understandable that President Trump should be tempted to respond in kind . President Trump is expected to respond to the threat posed by North Korea .
 Playing chicken is a dangerous indulgence for the leader of a nuclear superpower . Playing 'chicken' is dangerous for the president of a superpower, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As Trump girds for a possible nuclear confrontation with North Korea, we can only hope that he will prove to be a big man rather than a little one .
 Hunting feral hogs with helicopters and machine guns is a fast and effective way to combat the state's pig problem . The state's pigs are estimated to be at least 1,000,000 annually .