 Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in . Write your Centre number and candidate number for all work you do .
 Do not use staples, paper clips, highlighters, glue or correction fluid . Use glue, paperclips, glue, glue and correction fluid instead of staples .
 The number of marks is given in brackets at the end of each question or part question . The question marks are shown at the bottom of the page .
 Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, then answer all the questions . Study the background information and sources carefully . Then answer the questions.
 Historians disagree about whether the South had any chance of winning the Civil War . Historians have long disagreed about the South's ability to win the war in the South .
 Some point towards the overwhelming strength of the North, but others argue that the Confederacy could have won and only had itself to blame for its defeat . Some point to the overwhelming North's overwhelming strength .
 In numbers the Confederacy seemed no match for the United States . The Confederacy was defeated by the U.S. in 1864 .
 Confederate army could draw upon little more than a million men to fill its ranks . Since southerners were unwilling to put guns in the hands of slaves, the Confederate army was only able to draw upon a million soldiers .
 The North also had more than twice as many miles of railroad tracks as the South . Twice as many horses, donkeys and mules were among the horses and donkeys .
 The Confederacy had certain advantages over the Union . On the other hand, the Union had some advantages . The Union had a few advantages .
 Southerners were defending their homeland and their whole way of life was at risk, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Southerners defended their homeland. They were at risk"
 There were 22 million people in the North compared with only 9 million in the South . There are 22 million North-South-North people, 22 million in total .
 The Confederacy hoped to compensate for its lack of basic materials by trading with Europe, especially Britain . It hoped to trade with the continent for basic materials .
 From the start of the war the North ruled the seas and was able to impose an increasingly effective blockade . The North was able, from the start to the end of the conflict, to impose a more effective blockade.
 In 1861 most Southerners, and most European observers, were confident that the Confederacy would triumph . However, in 1861, most were not confident that they would triumph in the war .
 Even if Northern armies occupied Confederate territory they would have difficulty holding down a resentful population and maintaining supply lines .
 Southerners hoped that Northern public opinion might question high casualties . Northern people were outraged by the high casualties of the war effort .
 A cabinet meeting would last four or five hours without deciding anything, while the desk of every chief of a Department was covered with papers demanding his attention . Frequently a cabinet meeting . would last 4 or 5 hours without decision .
 Stephen Mallory, a member of the Confederate government, wrote about Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederacy . The Confederate president was Jefferson Davis .
 Despite the criticisms of him, Davis gave the Confederacy a sense of identity and purpose . Despite the criticism of him he gave the Confederate a purpose .
 He might be cold and reserved but without him the Rebellion would crumble to pieces in a day . Without him he would have been in charge of the Rebellion, the rebellion would not have existed .
 My brother officers have been too kind to report it and so far the troops have not been too generous . So far, the troops are too generous, report it. So far it has been a good thing for the public to report .
 Everything, therefore, points to the advantage of having a new commander, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Everything in the world is looking forward to a new leader"
 I know he will have as gallant and brave an army as ever existed to support his efforts. I know there will be a gallant, brave and brave army to support him .
 It seems incredible that human power could bring about such a change in so brief a time . "It seems incredible," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Then we were at the height of our success – today we face absolute ruin . Today we face absolutely ruin. We were at height of success. Today we are facing absolute ruin. That is not the case. We are at risk of absolute ruin, says David Cameron .
 You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those sources which you are told to use . You may also use the information which you have been told to .
 In answering the questions you should use your own knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources . In answering these questions, you should also use your knowledge to help with the answers .
 In 1962 the Soviet Union started to build missile sites in Cuba from which nuclear warheads could be launched at America . The Soviet Union built the sites to launch nuclear warheads from Cuba .
 In October an American U-2 spy plane photographed the sites being constructed . The U.S. government says the sites are under construction .
 President Kennedy demanded that the sites be dismantled, but Khrushchev refused . President Kennedy wanted to keep the sites in place . The sites were later dismantled .
 For thirteen days the world held its breath while the two superpowers faced each other . The world held their breath as they faced off against each other for 13 days .
 For some people at the time this crisis was simply a personal trial of strength between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev, whilst for others it had a wider significance . For others, it was a trial of personal strength between the two men .
 He thought anyone so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten; and anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through had no guts . He thought that anyone who was so young . as well as anyone who . got in that mess can be beaten
 If he thinks I’m inexperienced and have no guts, until we remove those ideas we won’t get anywhere with him, he says . Until we remove that idea, we won't get anywhere in the world, he said .
 Kennedy spoke to a reporter in 1961 shortly after a meeting with Khrushchev . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1961 .
 "I just don’t see any other solution except direct military action right now," he says . "I'm not optimistic about the future," he adds .
 A blockade would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this. A blockade is considered by many as being the weak response, says the BBC . A blockade of the island could be considered a 'pretty weak response'
 General Le May, Chief of Staff of the American Air Force, spoke in a meeting of President Kennedy’s advisers on 19 October 1962 . Le May was the chief of staff of the Air Force .
 Unknown to everybody present, the discussions were recorded by the President . Unknown to everyone present, it is not known to everybody else .
 Even after it was all over, the President made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred .
 He instructed his staff that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory . He instructed them to not give interviews or make any statement which would say victory .
 He respected Khrushchev for properly deciding what was in his own country’s interests and in the interests of mankind .
 If it is a triumph, it was a triumph for the next generation, not for any particular government or people, it says . If it's a triumph it was for the young generation, it's not for the government, it is for the country's future, it adds .
 We were sure the Americans would never agree to the existence of Castro’s Cuba . We were also sure the U.S. wouldn’t agree to accept the idea of a Castro-controlled Cuba .
 They feared, and we hoped, that a Socialist Cuba might become a magnet that would attract other Latin American countries to socialism . They feared it might be a magnet for other Latin America countries .
 "We had to find an effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean," says George W. Bush . "We need to find a deterrent," he says .
 The Cuban Crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career . The Cuban crisis was the 'victory of foreign policy' and 'personal triumph' of my career, he says .
 Today Cuba exists as an independent socialist country right in front of America . Cuba is now a socialist country in the United States .
 We behaved with dignity and forced the U.S. to demobilise and recognise Cuba, says President Obama . The US 'behaved with dignity' during the war, says Obama .
 It predicts that Kennedy and Khrushchev will end up in hell after destroying the world . It also predicts that they'll end up ending up with each other after destroying world .
 In the final analysis our most basic link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet . In the end, our link is that we are all on the planet .
 In answering the questions you should use your knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources . In answering these questions, you should be using your knowledge to help with the answers .
 John Garraty's Story of America was published in 1991 . The book was written by John Garr at the time of the book's release .
 Source B © Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002; 2002 . Source A: The Civil War was the Civil War of 1861-65 . Source B: Source B is Alan Farmer's Civil War .
 Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002. Source E © Alan Farmer . Alan Farmer's The Civil War: 1861-65; 1861-1865; 1865 .
 Alan Farmer's Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002. Source F © Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1860–65, 1861-65; 1861-1864 . The Civil War was the first Civil War to begin in 1863 .
 B O’Callaghan is a historian of the Twentieth Century . His work was published in 1987 by Longman, Longman .
 Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible .
 Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity .