 "This is a truly marvelous piece of work in terms of its explanation of the integration of a specific form of intelligence -imagery -into the decisionmaking process," says author .
 It is a tale told by someone who was in a position to know what was going on ""in the trenches"" and who has spent considerable time and thought in the intervening years coming to terms with the place of his and others' efforts in one of the defining moments of the nuclear age
 Brugioni clearly had access to the tapes from the recording system President Kennedy installed in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room in the Summer of 1962 . Bates, NIPQ 14.2, notes in retrospect that Brugionsi had access .
 The previously troublesome quotation marks around conversations to which Brugioni could not have been privy are not so troublesome after all . Therefore, the previous quotation marks are no longer so troublesome .
 The focus is on the mobilization that took place in October 1962 for a possible invasion of Cuba . The focus of this week's program is the mobilization of Cuban troops in Cuba .
 According to Cogan, "t is noteworthy that the intelligence mechanism generally functions better after a crisis erupts"
 The author explores the U-2 flights over Cuba in 1962 from the point of view of the pilot who died in that effort . Maj. Maj. John Sutter was the pilot of the U.2 who flew over Cuba .
 Proceedings 135. To Stavridis, this ""instant classic ... provides the best single-volume treatment in print of the events leading up to the crisis, as well as its resolution"
 Dobbs's work within a wider review of Cuba under Fidel Castro, Abedul and Hughes, I&NS 26. , see the author bringing ""a seasoned journalist's racy style as well as a great deal of important new information"" to the discussion of the Missile Crisis .
 Dobbs praises the handling of the crisis by Kennedy and Khrushchev . The reviewers are less pleased with Dobbs's praise of the handling by Kennedy .
 The book recounts the low-level reconnaissance flights of the Navy's VFP-62 squadron . The book is an enjoyable and easy read .