 The State Department was notified that night, and President John F Kennedy was briefed the next morning, setting in motion a crisis that brought the world frighteningly close to nuclear war . The State Dept. was notified, and the next day, that the world was in danger .
 The United States considered options, deployed troops and weapons to Florida, confronted the Soviets at the UN, and shortly set up a naval blockade of Cuba . The U.S. considered options .
 For 13 tense days, the crisis deepened and people around the world feared the very real possibility of a new, horrific worldwide conflict . For 13 days, people feared a new world conflict . The crisis deepens .
 On October 27, the United States and Soviets reached a secret agreement, where Kennedy would order the removal of missiles in southern Italy and Turkey, and Khrushchev would remove all missiles in Cuba . The agreement would also remove missiles from southern Italy, Turkey and Turkey .
 U.S. forces monitored the departure of 42 missiles aboard eight Soviet ships . Over the following weeks, the crisis was averted .
 Gathered here are a few glimpses from those tense Cold War days, as the world approached, then retreated from, the brink of destruction . The world approached then and then again, but retreated from the brink .
 U.S. air surveillance will continue until effective international inspection is arranged, he said . He said United States air surveillance to continue until international inspection arranged .
 Note shadow at lower right of the RF-101 reconnaissance jet taking the photograph . Photo was taken by a reconnaissance jet at the time of the photo .
 U.S. warships watched over Soviet freighters carrying missiles back to Soviet Union . American planes and helicopters flew at a low level to keep close check on the dismantling and loading operations .
 Americans are missing a key Stratum of Modern Knowledge . COVID Won’t End Up Like the Flu. COVID won't end up like the flu. Americans are Missing a key strand of modern knowledge .
 Nothing Beautiful Survives the Culture War Why the Past 10 Years of American Life Have been Uniquely Stupid .