 On April 17, 1961, 1,200 American-supported Cuban exiles landed at Cuba's Bay of Pigs . The event was the first time the U.S. government had attempted to take control of Cuba's Cuba .
 President Kennedy was against the direct intervention of the overthrow of Castro . President Kennedy did not provide sufficient support for the exiles .
 In October 1962, it was discovered that the Soviets were secretly installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The missiles were installed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy ordered a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of the weapons . Kennedy ordered the naval "quarantine" of Cuba .
 On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to pull missiles out of Cuba . On October 31, he agreed to a compromise in which he would pull the missiles from Cuba .
 The Americans also agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island . The U.S. has also agreed not to invade Puerto Rico . The island has been under quarantine since the outbreak .
 Civil rights marchers were repelled by police with attack dogs and high-pressure water hoses . Police repelled the march with dogs and hoses in the face of protesters .
 President Kennedy dedicated himself to finding a solution to the racial problems in 1963 . Kennedy delivered a speech to the nation on June 11, 1963 in which he dedicated himself .
 Kennedy's pushed his ""New Frontier"" plans, which included trying to fix unemployment and inflation and keeping wages high for workers . Kennedy's plans included fixing unemployment and keeping inflation high . Kennedy pushed his 'New Frontier' plans .
 Kennedy proposed the Peace Corps, an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring American skills to underdeveloped countries . The Peace Corps was a volunteer army that brought American skills and talents to developing countries .
 Southern Democrats and Republicans despised the president's New Frontier plan . Southern Democrats, Republicans despised New Frontier .
 Kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the Eisenhower years . Kennedy had won the election on a promise of reviving America's economy .
 In 1962, he negotiated a noninflationary wage agreement with the steel industry . He negotiated the non-inflation agreement with steel industry in 1962 .
 President Kennedy lambasted the steel industry when it announced significant price increases, promoting inflation . Kennedy: The steel industry's price increases promoted inflation . President Kennedy said they were promoting inflation.
 In August 1961, the Soviets began to construct the Berlin Wall, which was designed to stop the large population drain from East Germany to West Germany through Berlin . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to stop a population drain between East Germany and West Germany .
 Kennedy secured passage of the Trade Expansion Act in 1962, authorizing tariff cuts of up to 50% to promote trade between America and the Common Market countries . The act was passed by President Kennedy in 1962 .
 The doctrine of ""flexible response"" lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way to troops . The doctrine was designed to reduce the level of 'flexible responses' to diplomacy .
 In 1961, Kennedy increased the number of 'military advisors' in South Vietnam to protect Diem from the communists . In 1961 the number was increased to military advisers in South Vietnam .
 In November 1963, President Kennedy encouraged a successful coup and killed Diem . Kennedy was fed up with U.S. economic aid being embezzled by Diem in Vietnam .
 On April 17, 1961, 1,200 American-supported Cuban exiles landed at Cuba's Bay of Pigs . The Bay was the site of the first American invasion of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Continued American attempt to overthrow Castro caused Castro to further support the Soviets . Continued U.S. attempt to oust Castro further destabilised Castro further supported the Soviet Union . Castro supported the Soviets during his time in Cuba .
 For a week, Americans waited while Soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the U.S. Navy off the island of Cuba . Americans waited for a week to see the Soviet ships approach .
 In late 1963, a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the atmosphere was signed . The pact was signed by the U.S. in late 1963 .