 The Cuban Missile crisis and the way that it was handled by the Soviet Premier was the final straw for the Soviet elite . The general consensus amongst historians that have studied Khrushchev and the Cold War is that the Cuban missile crisis was the end of the Soviet regime .
 Khrushchev was removed from power just two years later . It is generally seen as the ultimate reason as the reason as to why he was ousted from power . The incident is seen as one of the reasons for Khrushchchev's removal of power .
 Usitalo and Whisenhunt argue that Khrushchev “provoked the most dangerous crises of the cold war in Berlin and Cuba’s Cuba . The authors also argue that “Krushchev” provoked the “most dangerous crises” of the Cold
 Two historians argue that Khrushchev handled the crisis in the complete opposite way in which other soviet leaders would have and thus this cost him his premiership . Additionally, these two historians also argue that the way that Khruschev handled his crisis was done in the opposite way .
 The Cuban Missile crisis was what tipped them over the edge leading to his removal from power . The Cuban missile crisis was thus the final straw for the leadership .
 This connotes the discontent at his policies and ideas and this comes to the surface in the crisisthe final straw for them and they thus remove him from power . This is the final straw in the way for them to take control of the country .
 This lack of common sense and initiative to consult Castro was a vital lapse in judgement . This is not the first time Castro has consulted with the White House. This is a serious lapse of judgement .
 The effect that this had on his premiership is that he has shown to his fellow countrymen that he is clumsy and reckless in decision making, and thus not fit to hold office . He has shown that he was clumsy and recklessly in decision-making, writes CNN.
 The crisis is a classic example of Khrushchev making a poor decision in a high stake’s situation, writes David Gergen . Gergen: The crisis was the result of a bad decision in high stakes situation .
 The outcome of the crisis led to “Khrushchev’s last two years in power were a time of not so quiet desperation.” The outcome was “quiet desperation” for the Soviet Union, historian says .
 After the collapse of his Cuban adventure, he tried to address other foreign problems the solutions to which had eluded him . But without the positive momentum that a Cuban triumph would have produced, he failed to find a solution .
 This demonstrates that Khrushchev himself probably knew that time was running out to revive his career . The former Soviet Union leader's career was in decline for decades .
 The Soviet elite were growing tired of the humiliation that Khrushchev brought the USSR on the world stage . These viewpoints heavily imply that the Soviet elite was growing extremely tired of its humiliation .
 On top of economic and food problems and the complications he brought to the USSR with the twentieth party congress speech, he brought the complications with the Soviet Union with the . USSR .
 Stalin's removal led to the appointment of Leonid Brezhnev, who only Stalin had a longer reign than Stalin . This is because of his removal from the Soviet Union . Stalin was a completely different style of leader that the U.S. had to deal with .
 This new leader would change the direction of the cold war away from the direction in which Khrushchev was taking it, says CNN's John Sutter .
 From the time of troubles to the collapse of the Soviet Union, ,241 Steven A Usitalo and William Benton Whisenhunt, Russian and Soviet History, ,243 Paul Du Quenoy, The role of foreign affairs in the fall of Nikita Khrushchev in October