 Get access to the Daily Mail's weekly Newsquiz . Use this week's weekly newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 This material was researched by the author of this article during a stay in the United States in 1996 .
 Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testament, translated and edited by Talbott, Strobe, Little, Brown, Boston, 1970, 493Google Scholar, and Khrushchevich, Nikita, Khrushchi Remembers, 1975, 511.
 Whereas Khrushchev's main concern was to safeguard the Cuban Revolution, Castro's reasoning therefore inverted Khrushches' . Castro's thinking therefore inverted the Soviet Union's .
 See Fundamental Principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, Handbook of the Red Cross, 13th ed., Geneva, 1994, 620 .
 Khrushchev's letter looked as though it was confirming a proposed deal with the Soviets . From an American perspective, the letter seemed to be confirming the same lines that had leaked out through KGB channels .
 New information has made it clear that this informal démarche was never authorized by the Fursenko, Kremlin . New information, however, has made a clear that it was not authorized by Kremlin .
 The highest alert posture, DefConi, is announced only when a full-scale war is already in progress . The most alert posture is announced when a war has already begun . The highest Alert posture is only announced when the war is in full force .
 There has been a long-standing controversy as to whether the private offer to remove the U.S. missiles in Turkey was an explicit part of the deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev . The two main protagonists are still debating whether the offer was made explicit .
 Cuban leader assumed he would be negotiating a solution to the crisis with U Thant . Khrushchev had agreed to the terms of the settlement based on the agreement reached between Kennedy and Khrushvic on 28 October .
 Soll das IKRK eingeschaltet werden?”, Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 6 November 1962, evening issue, 1. November 1962 .
 See also letter Bretscher to Schindler, 7 November 1962, NL Rüegger, Dossier 28.3.25.25 .
 View all Google Scholar citations for this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .