 This thirteen-day confrontation’s major occurrences will be analyzed by the rational actor model . The leaders John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev made rational decisions that led to the avoidance of nuclear annihilation . This is a look at the 13-day nuclear confrontation between North Korea and
 In addition to the rational actor model, the organization process model and the politics model will be presented for further comparison between the process in which major decisions are made . The organization process process model will also be presented .
 Cuban exiles trained by CIA operatives in an attempt to invade southern Cuba in an effort to remove Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader . This operation was the unsuccessful attempt to take over southern Cuba .
 The missile gap was a term used in order to scare the U.S. because of their technological achievements regarding nuclear missiles . The term was used to highlight some of the country's technological achievements .
 CIA proved that the U.S. still maintained a significantly greater number of missiles than that of the Soviet Union . However, it was proved by the CIA that the United States still maintained significantly greater numbers of missiles .
 In July 1962, the Soviet Union placed nuclear weapons in Cuba secretly because the U.S. had placed nuclear arms in Turkey in 1961 . The Soviet Union had placed the weapons in Turkey because of a disagreement over U.N. presence in Turkey .
 The United States sent an ultimatum to the U.S.R. to withdraw their weapons or they will wage war against them . At once, the United States . The United Nations. sent an . ultimumatum to . the . United States. to . withdraw their
 The United States later chose a naval blockade to send a threat to Cuba . The U.S. later chose to depict their preparation to attack . The blockade was used to depict the Cuban government's intentions .
 The U.S.R. had eventually backed down and removed their missiles from Cuba in the condition that the United States removed their missile missiles from Turkey . The United States had agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for removing them from Cuba and Turkey .
 The United States discovered the presence of Soviet missile silos in Cuba . The silos were capable of launching nuclear-tipped weaponry that could target much of the Eastern U.S.
 President John F Kennedy ordered a naval ‘quarantine’ of Cuba . President Kennedy under pressure from his advisors chose to order a naval 'quarantine of Cuba'
 The then president, John F Kennedy, decided to ban trade with any item with Cuba except for non-subsidized food and medicine . Cuba was banned from trade with Cuba in 1961 .
 A year later ban financial transaction with United States citizens to Cuban citizens . And then a year after ban on U.S. citizens to Cuba citizens .
 It was basically an embargo that surprisingly still stands to this day . The embargo still stands today and is still in effect .
 The USA and the USSR never really got on after WW2 ended, it was always a competition to see who was the greatest superpower was . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were the two most powerful countries in the world .
 Humanity had survived through two World Wars, the Great Depression and many other revolutionary events . Humanity had lived through two devastating World Wars and many revolutionary events. Humanity had also survived two Great Wars, Great Depression .
 Humanity witnessed firsthand what science was able to achieve in the military sphere and how much destruction could possibly follow . Moreover, humanity witnessed firsthand the destruction of the planet .
 The U.S. government and the Russian government interacted for 14 days . The interaction emphasized the seriousness and the intense rivalry between the two super powers . The United States and Russia are the world's most powerful superpowers .
 2003 Words 9 Pages Powerful Essays . It is often said that Literature is a social commentary . In addition to demanding attention, the author demanded attention to his work .