 No consensus exists on the reasons why the crisis was actually so dangerous . No consensus on why it was so dangerous, although many scholars have studied it .
 Khrushchev, to fire the first shot in a conventional military engagement later escalated into nuclear war . The first shot was fired in a shoot-out that escalated into a nuclear war in the 1960s .
 Another school of thought has emphasized the risk of accidental or inadvertent war, growing out an unauthorized behavior or technical failures with explosive potential under crisis conditions . The risk of an accident or accidental war has also been raised by some .
 In this study I revisit the October 1962 superpower crisis, in order to gain additional perspective on the relationship between organizational decision making and crisis outcomes . The study was published in October 1962 .
 This exercise is partly an historical 'counterfactual' or 'what i f f f excursion' using recently declassified documents and simulated exchange calculations . From which I hope to draw three principal benefits from the exercise, from which I can draw three principles .
 Study may shed some additional light on why Khrushchev was willing to take such a dangerous gamble . The study may shed light on the dangers of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Counterfactual crisis suggests risk of deliberate, miscalculated escalation might have been just as important as the risk of inadvertent war . The risk of accidental war may have been more important than accidental war, experts say .
 The balance of command and control vulnerability might have mattered more to crisis-ridden U.S. leaders than the balance of strategic nuclear forces . Third, the U.N. might have been more concerned about the balance .
 If so, it helps to explain the apparent reluctance of U.S. leaders to employ highly coercive forms of nuclear brinkmanship . It helps explain the reluctance of American leaders to use such coercive tactics .
 U.S. missile deployments are noted in the report .
 The U.S. strategic nuclear command and control system of the late 1950s and early 1960s was declassified . Next, we introduce some recently declassified documents pertinent to the status of the United States strategic nuclear system .
 A simulated nuclear exchange if war had broken out in October 1962 is then used to measure how much difference, if any, U.S. command vulnerability might have made, from the perspective of America's leaders . The simulation is then compared to a simulation of a nuclear exchange .
 The findings suggest that the expectations of command organizations about their own vulnerability are especially significant during organizational change from a less to a more centralized approach to decision making .
 President Kennedy went on the air on 22 October 1962 to announce a clandestine Soviet buildup of offensive missiles in Cuba . The stage had been set for the most significant confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War .
 The Soviet ability to exploit nuclear diplomacy for coercive political purposes was perceived as dangerous by U.S. leaders . Among those areas of disagreement was the ability to use nuclear diplomacy .
 The successful launch of Sputnik in 1957 and the Soviets' first intercontinental ballistic missile test flight in the same year set off a raucous debate within Washington policymaking circles . The debate continued from Eisenhower to Kennedy administration .
 The US intelligence community expected that the Soviets would build and deploy by the early 1960s an ICBM force second to none, and one potentially capable of placing into vulnerability much of the American strategic bomber force .
 Kennedy campaigned in 1960 on the assumption that trends in defense spending and force modernization favored the Soviet Union . Kennedy campaigned on the belief that Soviet spending and modernization favored Russia .
 His administration immediately upon election undertook a comprehensive evaluation of national defense policy . His administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past .
 One result of that assessment was a commitment to an across-the-board increase in strategic nuclear capabilities . Special emphasis is on increased numbers of landbased and sea-launched strategic missiles .
 The United States flirted with a version of counterforce or damage limitation strategy in the early years of the Kennedy administration . The U.S. also flirts with the adoption of a counterforce strategy .
 This strategy called for a capability to disarm the Soviet Union's remaining nuclear arsenal, even after absorbing a Soviet first strike, in order to impose on the adversary war termination on U.S. terms . This strategy was called for disarmment of the remaining nuclear weapons .
 The strategy was later abandoned by Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara as a declaratory strategy . Both capabilities called for in the strategy and the bargaining aspects of it discomfited critics .
 U.S. capabilities relative to Soviet ones provided the option for damage limitation by means of counterforce second strike, throughout the early and mid-1960s . On the other hand, American capabilities provided the . option for . damage limitation .
 By 1961 Washington had photographic and other intelligence which revealed conclusively that Khrushchev's nuclear ambitions had overreached his nuclear capabilities . By 1961 the U.S. government had concluded that the Soviet Union had over-reached its nuclear capabilities.
 Washington decided to go public with its assessment that the Soviet position was inferior in kind, and not just in degree, to the American . The U.S. went public with the assessment that Russia's position was superior in kind .
 In October 1961 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric announced that the United States had in fact achieved a significant lead in the numbers and survivability of its nuclear forces, compared to Soviet forces .
 The US could destroy in retaliation a larger target base than the Soviets could attack in a first strike against the continental U.S. The US deterrent, Gilpatric, says .
 U.S. had a second strike capability and the Soviet Union did not . The Soviet Union had no such capability . America had a strike capability .
 The alarms that this speech must have sent through the Kremlin can only be imagined by historians . The alarms must have been heard by historians, but historians can only imagine .
 The U.S. announcement was designed to deter Khrushchev's nuclear coercive diplomacy, especially renewed pressure against Berlin . The United States made the announcement in response to renewed pressure on Berlin .
 The fact of a U.S. lead in numbers of strategic nuclear weapons could not have come as a complete surprise to Soviet intelligence . The United States led the Soviet Union in the number of nuclear weapons .
 The U.S. must have obtained very accurate intelligence about the actual locations of Soviet missile and bomber bases, the author says . Soviet planners were probably most unsettling to Soviet planners, he says .
 A counterforce, damagelimiting second strike, or a first nuclear strike launched preemptively in the expectation of an imminent Soviet attack, was a feasible option for Washington seen from the Soviet perspective .
 If the U.S. maintained this nuclear predominance, it could theoretically have enforced on Moscow strategic compellence, a more active and more dangerous form of nuclear threat . If the United States maintained this .
 Deterrence is the prevention of an act that has not taken place by influencing the cost-benefit calculus of the actor . Deterrence can be used to influence the cost of an actor's actions by influencing its own cost of the act .
 Deterrence is status quo oriented with regard to the existing policy . Because it emphasizes prevention of actions or decisions not yet taken, deterrence is more likely to be more likely .
 Soviet counterescalation outside the Caribbean, for example, in Berlin, or against US Jupiter missiles which had been deployed to Turkey . Complicating matters further was the need to avoid inadvertent escalation or nuclear war .
 Kennedy administration version of a damage limiting, counterforce strategy in the early 1960s was part of a larger military-strategic compass . The Kennedy administration's version of the damage limiting strategy was the Kennedy administration .
 Kennedy planners rejected the logic of Eisenhower's massive retaliation in favor of flexible response, at both nuclear and conventional levels . Kennedy planners refused to use nuclear or conventional responses to the threat .
 The nuclear version would allow for the conduct and termination of limited wars, including limited strategic wars . It would also allow the conduct of limited . wars .
 The conventional aspect would raise the nuclear threshold in Europe by equipping NATO with more substantial conventional defense forces . NATO would also be able to increase the number of nuclear weapons in Europe .
 The non-nuclear aspect of Kennedy strategy also sought to strengthen U.S. capabilities to assist other states threatened by communist-support insurgencies . Kennedy strategy sought to make clearer the firebreak between conventional and unconventional warfare .
 Soviet threat assessors in the early 1960s faced a more complicated picture of their opponent . The Soviet threat assessment of the U.S. posed a more complex picture of its opponent with regard to strategic nuclear forces and capabilities .
 The reasons for Khrushchev's decision to attempt to deploy Soviet medium and intermediate range missiles into Cuba are even now only speculative . The reasons behind the decision to try to deploy missiles are still speculative .
 There is also the possibility, alluded to by Khrushchev and given some confirmation by Soviet participants in subsequent superpower crises, that the communist leader sought to pose a threat of prompt nuclear destruction close to American borders . The threat is comparable to that posed by United States Jupiter IRBMs deployed
 Few American scholars have taken Khrushchev's own explanations for the missile deployment decision at face value . Few have taken his own explanation of the missile decision to use the missile launch in the 1960s .
 Without an unimpeachable version of Khrushchev's own testimony, all the explanations can't be met with counterarguments . Without a unimpeached version of the truth, the answers can be found in the book . The book is published by Pulitzer Prize-winning Pulitzer Prize winner
 Khrushchev's own rationales are of special interest here, not only because of the Soviet leader offers them, but also on account of their direct relevancy for the problem of deterrence . The Soviet leader offered them, and they are of particular interest .
 Khrushchev's first rationale, that Soviet nuclear weapons would deter any invasion of Cuba, cannot be dismissed entirely as a possible motive for his actions . The first rationale was that Soviet forces would defend against any invasion, but it was not entirely dismissed .
 Kennedy had tried to dislodge Castro by military invasion, and might try again . Kennedy had previously tried to do so by invading Castro in military invasion .
 U.S. forces exercised frequently in Caribbean waters under auspices similar to invasion of Cuba . United States forces exercise frequently in the Caribbean waters .
 Administration officials have stated that President Kennedy had taken no decision in favor of any additional attempts to invade Cuba . Cuban leaders might reasonably have inferred hostile intent . Administration officials say President Kennedy did not take no decision on invasion .
 Contingency plans for invasion and air attack had been prepared and tested during repeated Caribbean muscle flexing, says U.S. intelligence . Plans were in place to destabilize Castro's regime, and destabilize his regime .
 The problem with this explanation from a deterrence standpoint is that it offers an inappropriate, and unnecessarily provocative, cure for the problem as the Soviet leadership is alleged to have perceived it . The problem is that this explanation offers an unnecessarily provocative solution .
 Khrushchev claimed in his memoirs that his primary motive for the deployments was to deter any future invasion of Cuba . Two other approaches commend themselves better than strategic nuclear weapons, he writes .
 First, the Soviets could have signed an explicit security and defense guaranty agreement with Cuba . Second, the U.S. should have signed a formal agreement with the Cuban government .
 The Soviets could have been less secretive about the size of their conventional force deployments, allowing Washington to infer that no invasion of Cuba could take place without significant casualties . Second, the Soviets could also have been more secretive about their conventional forces deployments .
 Khrushchev felt that missiles, once in place, were a more secure deterrent and no more provocative than a major, acknowledged deployment of Soviet general-purpose forces . The missile system was designed to deter Soviet forces in the 1960s .
 The Russian leader decided to deploy the missiles in order to deter the U.S. once the missiles had been deployed, a new logic would be imposed on the Americans .
 The disproportionate costs to the U.S. of any Cuban invasion which failed to eliminate fewer than all of the Soviet missiles would stay the Americans' hand at an acceptable cost .
 If the U.S. discovered the missiles were there after they were already poised and ready to strike, the Americans would think twice before trying to liquidate our installations by military means, he says .
 "I knew that the United States could knock out some of our installations, but not all of them," says President Obama . Obama says the U.S. "could knock out" some of the installations .
 Khrushchev assumed he could present Washington with a fait accompli, once missiles had become operational, once they were operational . The assumption was tied to optimistic thinking about secretly accomplishing the deployments in Cuba .
 He assumed a successful covert deployment despite the abundance of surveillance and other intelligence agencies available to Washington in its Caribbean backyard .
 Khrushchev's military and intelligence advisors were optimistic about avoiding untimely discovery . On the other hand, it is also possible that Khrushchevitch's military advisers were actually optimistic about the discovery .
 U.S. discovery, against Khrushchev's hopes, of offensive missiles in Cuba does not invalidate the defense of Cuba, by nuclear deterrence, as a motive . Nonetheless, the United States discovery of the offensive missile in Cuba is not invalidating the defense .
 If one accepts Khrushchev's wishful assumption that the entire . original contingent of . medium-range ballistic missiles and IRBMs would arrive in Cuba and be made operational . prior to discovery, the implausibility of placing bets on nuclear as opposed to conventional deterrence is less apparent
 Khrushchev's second rationale for deploying the missiles was the desire to 'equalize' the strategic nuclear balance of power . Western audiences have found Western expert audiences more receptive to the idea of the missiles .
 Some administration officials at the time of the crisis felt that the nuclear balance of power must have mattered to Khrushchev . Kennedy's ExComm Cuban crisis advisory group was among the more hawkish .
 I think it mattered a great deal to the Soviets, and I thought it properly mattered to the Soviet Union . "I thought it was important to the U.S. and it was a very important part of the world," he said .
 Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon concurred in Nitze's judgment that the strategic balance mattered a great deal . Another member of the ExComm had previous experience in nuclear diplomacy on behalf of the US government .
 Sergei Mikoyan contended that the main objective of the Soviet deployments was the defense of Castro's regime by deterring another invasion, but repairing an adverse strategic balance was an important secondary consideration, he said .
 Fyodor Burlatsky and Georgi Shaknazarov argued at the same conference that Khrushchev's main objective was to redress the strategic nuclear imbalance . On the other hand, the Soviets argued that the goal was to reverse the imbalance .
 His conclusions were that the Cuban deployments were of major significance for several reasons .
 Garthoff: MRBMs and IRBMs provided additional first-strike counterforce capability . The most important reason, he says, was the additional first strike capability provided by MRBm and IRbMs against U.S. soft ICBM silos and airfields .
 With the completion of the 'present base complex' late in 1962, Soviet effective first-strike potential against targets in the continental U.S. would be increased by over 40 per cent .
 Soviet expert Arnold Horelick, at the 1987 Hawk's Cay Cuban missile crisis conference supported Garthoff's assessment that the relative balance of strategic nuclear power was important .
 Arguing that the essential calculation in the military balance was prompt ICBM capability . Argued that the vital calculation was the need for prompt ICB capability. Argued .
 Horelick suggested that the Soviet leadership 'simply thought it was unacceptable that the United States should have a first-strike capability, especially after we became aware of our superiority and let them know it' The Soviet leadership thought it 'unacceptable' that the U.S.
 "If you go to nuclear war, and the other side retaliates, you the one who just initiated the nuclear war -will have had to shoulder the responsibility for the worst catastrophe in the history of this country"
 This means that all those fancy nuclear weapons are militarily useless . But this means that they are still useless to the world .
 McNamara did not deny that nuclear weapons had political utility . He regarded this political utility as two sided . McNamara regarded this as two-sided .
 The other side might respond to nuclear diplomacy in unexpected ways, raising the risks of accidental or inadvertent war . Those weapons could certainly be used for political coercion, but the other side may respond to them unexpected ways .
 The former Defense Secretary indicated that he worried far more about inadvertent escalation and war than he did about a deliberate Soviet first strike .
 McNamara argued that Khrushchev's options would have made no difference in his calculations . As for his perception of his options, McNamara said it would have been irrelevant . McNamara: "It would have mattered more than anything"
 Among the objectives of the Kennedy administration was the revision of preexisting war plans in order to provide additional, and more limited, nuclear options . As part of a transition from massive retaliation to flexible response, this was part of the transition .
 McNamara's dismissal of the SIOP as pertinent to the crisis reflected not only his doubts that any nuclear exchange could have been fought to U.S. advantage . McNamara: "The SIOP was not relevant to the nuclear crisis"
 It implied that, given an actual war with the Soviet Union, the control of events could not be managed with sufficient certainty to convert limited options on paper into limited options in fact . It also implied that . given . an actual . actual . war with . the Soviet . Union, it
 American leaders might have had good reasons for doubts about the controllability of even the early stages of any conflict, as explained in the next section .
 Academic doubters of the argument for equalizing the strategic nuclear balance of power as the primary motive for Khrushchev's behavior . Adam Ulam and Richard Ned Lebow offer representative skepticism of the idea .
 Khrushchev saw the Cuban missiles as a bold stroke which would simultaneously resolve several outstanding problems . Ulam reconstructs the possible thinking of the Soviet leader .
 It would show Khrushchev's domestic critics and the Chinese that he was a stalwart defender of socialism against imperialism . It would be a show of solidarity against imperialism, it would show him to his critics .
 Khrushchev would reveal the missile deployments in a dramatic way, offering to bargain them away for suitable concessions . The missile deployments would be part of a dramatic shake-up of the Cold War .
 Among the concessions would be American guarantees against any nuclear-armed West Germany and U.S. collaboration with Moscow in preventing the Chinese from going nuclear . Among these concessions would include guarantees against West Germany, and cooperation with Moscow .
 Lebow rejects Ulam's model of Khrushchev's motives and other analyses which attempt to explain the Soviet leader's deployment decision by the use of rational decision models . Lebow: "Krushchev made a rational decision decision to deploy troops in the Soviet Union"
 Lebow's alternative explanation for Khrushchev's behavior is based on his research in comparative historical crises, especially 'brinkmanship' crises in which one state challenges the commitment of another in the expectation that the second state will yield .
 Lebow found that most brinkmanship challenges were undertaken without good evidence that the challenged state lacked the resolve to defend its commitments . Lebow: Most brinkmanship challenge was undertaken without evidence of the state lacking the resolve .
 Lebow does not necessarily reject the hypothesis that Khrushchev's deployment decision was motivated by a perceived strategic inferiority or a felt need to do something about it . Lebow doesn't reject the theory that the decision was made to deploy troops .
 Khrushchev faced strong pressures which allowed him to convince himself, against evidence that U.S. leaders would have regarded as convincing, of the need for his dramatic Cuban adventurism .
 The first, third and fourth of these permissive conditions for brinkmanship challenges certainly existed in the Soviet Union, and perhaps therefore in Khrushchev's set of cognitive and motivational biases, at the time . The first and third of these conditions were likely to exist in the USSR .
 The critiques by Ulam and Lebow argue about the logic of Khrushchev's strategy from the standpoint of its support for Soviet policy objectives . Ulam, Lebow, among others, argue that the strategy was justified by its objectives .
 As Graham Allison's work on the Cuban crisis has suggested, other levels of analysis must be addressed in order to obtain a complete explanation for superpower crisis behavior .
 If we consider expectations of military organizations about command and control vulnerability and the influence of those expectations on crisis behaviors in the early 1960s, additional insight about an otherwise inexplicable Soviet decision might be forthcoming .
 The Soviet Decision Revisited . The military-technical aspects of Soviet decision making in 1962 have received less apparent scrutiny . The decision was made at the politico-military level .
 U.S. studies have dismissed the possibility that Soviet military planners might have sought 'workarounds' for their strategic invulnerability . The workabouts could have given hope, however misplaced, to a reborn nuclear assertiveness by the Politburo .
 A conjectural approximation of planners' thinking might offer one aspect not previously explored . Without hard evidence from the Russian archives about the actual Soviet war plans in 1961, the conjecture is not known .
 If the U.S. command and control system was the focal point of Soviet plans for coping with interim strategic inferiority, the Cuban deployments might have a rationale . If the United States command system was a focal point, it might be a rationale for Cuban deployments .
 The rationale would not seek to overturn the military balance in the short run, nor to make nuclear war winnable, but to provide for the Soviet leadership in extremis an improved option for a strategic surprise attack .
 Recently declassified Pentagon studies give some perspective on the kinds of assessment that Soviet military planners faced in 1961 with the public exposure of Khrushchev's nuclear coercive diplomacy as based on COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 21 fiction .
 The Cuban deployments as an interim fix of Soviet nuclear inferiority were not irrational in the policy sense nor illogical from a military-technical or operational perspective . The U.S. and Soviet forces deployed in Cuba in 1962 were not rational or irrational .
 No options could have spared the Soviet Union from nuclear destruction in a war with the United States . But perceived American vulnerability to a Soviet surprise attack might have been increased by measures including Cuban missile deployments .
 Soviet military planners might have sought or welcomed as option for stylized attacks on the U.S. nuclear command and control system . Soviet planners would neither have had to expect nuclear war nor to anticipate an acceptable outcome from it .
 The assumption supporting our exploration is simply that nuclear command and control organizations, as do other organizations, seek to reduce the amount of uncertainty in their environments . The assumption is that . .
 One way for organizations to do this is by providing themselves with additional options in the interest of their own survival or growth . Organizations need to provide themselves with more options in order to survive or grow, say experts .
 Military command and control systems would be attracted by organizational ethos and professional expertise to the problem of command suppression of the opponent . Military command systems are conscious of their own vulnerability to even a few nuclear detonations .
 Cold War planners feared the vulnerability of their command and control systems, perhaps more than the susceptibility of their forces to preemptive attack . We have evidence that superpower military planners and political leaders were interested in command suppression options .
 The options for attacking leaders and national command centers in U.S. war plans were treated, during the latter 1970s and early to mid-1980s, as 'withholds'
 The interest of the Soviet political and military leadership in the problem of command vulnerability, theirs and that of potential adversaries, is copiously documented . The interest has been documented in the history of Soviet leadership .
 There is little evidence in Soviet military writing of interest in using the capability for command destruction as a coercive bargaining tool once war had begun .
 In any instance, the 'major targets' of the strategic nuclear strike were 'intercontinental rocket positions, nuclear weapons depots, air and naval bases, state control system, military command posts, military production centers, individual major installations, and other targets of military and economic significance'
 Some saw it as a mirror image of Politburo fears for their own political survival in the face of wartime domestic upheavals . Others said it was a mirror-image of fears for the country's future .
 Others view the targeting of nuclear command and control as a logical outgrowth of interest in suppressing enemy first strike or retaliatory capability . Others see the targeting as a response to first strike .
 US experts concur that 'Soviet strategists have historically treated attacks on command structure with utmost seriousness' Regardless, U.S. experts seemed to concur with their assessment .
 Enclosure C on national command and control procedures and vulnerabilities was two months ahead of the main body of its report . The Weapons Systems Evaluation Group of the U.S. Department of Defense was tasked with a comprehensive assessment of its own weapons systems .
 Enclosure C details the status of U.S. nuclear command and control as it was seen by experts in 1960 . Experts looked over the horizon to a future which might include ballistic missile attacks on vital United States targets . In 1960, experts were looking at the possibility of a ballistic missile
 Enclosure C assumed that the Soviets, in carrying out any nuclear strikes against the continental US, would dedicate some against national political and joint military command structures, control systems, and communications .
 1960 assessment: America's existing national command system was highly vulnerable to destruction or incapacitation which would at best disrupt planned retaliation and, at worst, might preclude a politically meaningful response . According to this 1960 assessment, the U.S. existing command system in the context of the anticipated threat
 The anticipated Soviet ICBM threat of 1964-67 did not materialize as rapidly as U.S. pessimists had anticipated in the late 1950s . We now know that the anticipated ICBM threats didn't materialize quickly .
 WSEG-50 study's conclusions about national command vulnerability were also pertinent to the effects of lesser, but still damaging, Soviet attacks, including some attacks of which early 1960s Soviet forces might be capable .
 The study noted that the national political and joint military command structure 'is highly vulnerable' The report was quite specific about how many Soviet weapons it might take to deprive the United States national command authorities of effective control . over retaliatory forces .
 Presidential; Secretary of Defense/Joint Chiefs of Staff; and, nuclear-capable commanders in chief and command posts of their designated successors . Presidential . Commanders in chief, secretaries of defense/joint chiefs of staff; . and . command posts .
 Of these 14, only six were not collocated with important strategic-delivery system target complexes . Only six of those 14 were collocated, and two of those six collocated .
 Undoubtedly in case of attack some U.S. forces would survive to retaliate, even under the worst assumptions . Undoubtedly, some United States forces would survived to retaliate .
 Surviving commanders, in the absence of other instructions from authorized Presidential successors and in de facto control of nuclear forces, would fire back . Surviving Commanders would be able to fire back if they were ordered .
 This met the standard of assessment for the U.S. strategy of the 1950s, but it would not do for the new standards being applied by the Kennedy administration to nuclear war planning .
 Kennedy flexible response strategy called for the ability to apply force in less than total amounts and for the involvement of political leaders during war in nuclear force operations .
 The North American Air Defense Command warning and assessment center in Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado was hardened . The underground command post for SAC headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, Nebraska, was also hardened.
 The likelihood that even clumsy attacks against the U.S. command and control system would significantly disrupt centralized control over retaliation was high in the early 1960s .
 Some planners saw advance predelegation of nuclear command authority as a solution to command vulnerability . WSEG-50 addressed the option in its report . The report addressed the issue in its own report .
 The report noted that the President might reasonably desire to make advance COMMAND, Control AND CUBAN MISSILES 25 delegation of his authority in the singular case of an all-out Soviet nuclear attack 51 .
 A leader who had given advance predelegation to subordinates might want to change those instructions under newly obtaining conditions . On the other hand, in less than holocaust situations, a leader might decide to change his instructions .
 Even if subordinate commanders with predelegated authority were to survive initial attacks, they would lack the means to determine what was happening . Even if they survived initial attacks they would not be able to determine if they were attacked .
 The probability that the nuclear capable CINCs and their command apparatus would be disabled was sufficiently high that, under present circumstances of surprise attack, 'the most that would be likely to be launched against the Soviets would be a delayed, uncoordinated and ragged response of reduced size'
 Of course, the Soviet system may have been as vulnerable, or more vulnerable, than the American one . The Soviet system was as vulnerable as the American ones .
 The status of Soviet command, control and communications pertinent to nuclear crisis management for the early 1960s . We have little reliable knowledge about the Soviet Union's nuclear program .
 American scholars say Soviet strategic nuclear forces were never alerted at the same time that American forces had . Many in the US intelligence community believed the Soviet forces had never been alerted .
 Soviet leaders did alert at least some components of their nuclear forces in 1960, 1962, 1968 and in 1973 . The WSEG-50 study is important for the insight it gives into United States defense experts' perceptions of their own vulnerabilities .
 WSEG-50 analysts had indicated that U.S. command and control vulnerability was serious . Whether the Russians suspected that the vulnerability was as serious is not known . The vulnerability is not clear whether the Russians believed the vulnerability is serious .
 The drawing up of a list of notional targets is not equivalent to a war plan . Soviet military decisionmakers would also have to have some criteria for assigning weapons to targets and for setting target damage expectancies .
 The political aspects of NCA targeting decisions are complex, even if a state does not intend to use command targeting as a bargaining chip . The political implications of the NCA decision are complex even if the state is not intending to use it for political reasons .
 The prompt destruction of enemy national-level command and control without the simultaneous destruction of major force elements leaves disconnected nuclear hydras in place to execute retaliatory strikes against the attacker's society .
 The flailing tail of the scorpion may also strike back at the enemy's command and control system with particular relish .
 Another recently declassified and formerly Top Secret Pentagon study raises some additional points about the political economy of Soviet command attack options in the early 1960s .
 US-USSR Strategic Arms Competition, 1945-1972, was commissioned by the Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense .
 Soviet forces deployed to Cuba made little apparent military sense, report says . Report acknowledges, as other scholars have, that Soviet forces made little military sense . Report: Soviet policy in the early 1960s made little obvious military sense.
 Despite improved Soviet-counterforce capabilities resulting from Cuban missile deployments, it remained the case that neither a first nor a second strike could preclude unacceptable, and asymmetrical, damage to the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev's actions seemed to lack an apparent strategic rationale, either from the perspective of counterforce and damage limiting strategy or from the standpoint of unacceptable countervalue losses . The actions were taken in the wake of the Second World War II .
 Khrushchev's apparent military irrationality may have been a motive for his irrationality, according to the study . Military assessments in COMMAND, Control and CUBAN MISSILES 27 Moscow suggested greatly improved outcomes, compared to previous estimates, from previous estimates .
 The indications are admittedly speculative, and they fall into two basic categories . The indications, however, are not all clear, are speculative .
 Soviet planners might have deduced from their 1961 nuclear test series that electromagnetic pulse effects could be exploited to render ineffective the command and control system for American retaliatory forces .
 Soviet SS-7 missile programs began in the summer and fall of 1962 . New reentry vehicle with lower beta and increased yield was tested in the Soviet program .
 Reentry vehicle attributes would mean reduced accuracy and greater EMP propagation compared to other SS-7 force loadings . These attributes would, if accurately described by U.S. intelligence, mean reduced accurate accuracy .
 EMP is a tricky business, and much less was known about it in the early 1960s, compared to now . EMP is still a big mystery in the world today, but it's still important to know more about it now .
 EMP-enhanced attacks on command systems are more feasible than the appeal of EMP as the makeweight of any successful first strike . The possibility of EMP attacks is more realistic than EMP as a makeweight for a first strike, experts say .
 Soviet missile deployments to Cuba can therefore be viewed from two perspectives . Soviet missile deployment in Cuba can be viewed as one of the reasons for the deployment .
 EMP calculations are taken into account in attack design . From the second perspective, America's military command structure becomes the primary focus of attack .
 By 30 Oct. nuclear warheads had been placed on 9 missiles at Vandenberg AFB Base, California, and CINCSAC Gen. Gen. Jan. David Gergen . Gergen: "By the end of the month, the U.S. military had placed nuclear warheads on
 Thomas Power reported that, of 36 available AFSC missiles, 25 had been generated within ten days . Thomas Power said of 36 . available . available available . missiles, he said . 25 of the available available missiles were generated within 10 days .
 The number of reliable missiles cannot be inferred directly from these Emergency Combat Capability numbers . Numerous problems interfered with efforts to rush missiles into operational capability, the Pentagon says .
 Crews taking control of the first operational Minuteman ICBMs were not fully evaluated or certified for the task . In addition, crews taking over the mission were also not fully qualified for the mission .
 If we assume that scenario we can ask, under different conditions of command and control vulnerability, about the outcomes of a superpower nuclear exchange . We can also ask about the outcome of a nuclear exchange in different circumstances .
 Soviet deployments of MRBMs and IRBMs to Cuba in December 1962 were employed to round out the components of a first strike force . Assume for the sake of discussion that completed Soviet deployments were employed .
 The United States 'rides out' the attack and then strikes back with missiles, followed by bombers . The U.S. 'ride out' of the attack before striking back with missile and bomber strikes .
 In this first model, no degradation of the U.S. command and control system is assumed . The first model is based on the fact that no degradation has been made by the United States .
 When degradation of the United States command and control system as part of a Soviet first strike is assumed, using the same sequence of attack and response at similar superpower alert levels, results significantly differ .
 Two exchanges simulated in which the Soviet first strike caused significant degradation in the opposing command and control . Two exchanges were simulated . The Soviets first strike was simulated .
 In the first of these two cases, a degradation in performance of 50 per cent was assumed as a result of stylized command attacks . In the second of these cases, the performance of these attacks was assumed to have been degraded by a degradation .
 The assumption of a 50 per cent loss in U.S. responsive capability creates a much more equal situation . The assumption is based on the loss of responsive capability .
 The U.S. has a post-attack advantage of two to one compared to warheads used by the Soviets against American targets . Of course, this still leaves the United States with a considerable postattack advantage .
 The disparity remains very much in the Americans^ favor, although the asymmetry weakens as command destruction increases . The disparity between command destruction and command destruction is very much greater .
 If we assume a 75 per cent degradation in performance as a result of attacks on the U.S. command system, the outcomes move close to postattack parity . The outcomes would be similar to post-attack parity, according to the author .
 The great disparity between superpower prewar bomber forces still leaves Washington with a slight advantage . But the degradation in performance due to attacks on the command system eliminates most of the disparity based on force sizes alone .
 The results of this analysis do not mean that Khrushchev had, or thought he had, a recipe for successful nuclear war fighting or war winning in.autumn 1962 even with his completed Cuban missile deployments .
 His own testimony makes clear that he expected to use those deployments for coercive bargaining purposes, not to actually strike at America with nuclear weapons . The U.S. president's own testimony shows that he expects to use the deployments to use coercive bargaining .
 The coercive utility of Cuban-based nuclear weapons to existing Soviet forces was of three kinds . The Cuban-born nuclear weapons were of three types of coercion .
 First, missiles located in Cuba might be of special help in deterring attacks against Cuba . Second, they could be used to deter attacks against the island nation . First, they might be able to find out if the U.S. is attacking Cuba .
 Khrushchev's mind was that threat posed by U.S. missiles in Cuba was similar to that posed by United States missiles in Turkey . Kennedy: The threat was comparable to that of the threat posed in Turkey by the United States .
 The missiles in Cuba were designed to help resolve a problem of extended, not basic, deterrence . Third, the missiles were designed for extended and not basic deterrence, the author says .
 The Soviet ability to deter a nuclear attack on the Soviet homeland was not in doubt . The Soviets were able to deter an attack on their homeland, experts say .
 Administrators went public with their proclaimed nuclear superiority in October 1961 . Washington's capability to deter a Soviet first strike was never considered a serious threat .
 American presidents required nuclear deterrence to bolster the credibility of its guarantees to defend Berlin . The Soviet leadership judged that they needed nuclear deterrence against a possible future U.S. invasion of Cuba .
 That the Soviets might have had a stronger command attack option in the autumn of 1962, is a finding consistent with the academic literature on more mature nuclear forces and command systems .
 Decisionmakers who felt that a necessary and sufficient condition for deterrence viability were too optimistic . Decisionmakers felt that survivable retaliatory forces were provided by survivable . retaliatory . forces were not sufficient to provide deterrence viability .
 The United States strategic nuclear command and control system was far more vulnerable, from the 1960s through the 1980s, than the retaliatory forces which it was designed to support . The U.S. strategic nuclear systems were designed to be more vulnerable .
 Those who didn't see the crisis as dangerous might have miscast the kind of danger that existed . And those who did regard it as dangerous may have misjudged the danger, he says .
 This sense of danger was certainly felt by Washington decisionmakers and has subsequently been testified to, in their writings about the crisis . This sense was felt by many of Washington's decisionmakers, and was testified to .
 It is unarguably the case that the shared sense of danger for the superpower leaders, that they might lose control over events, was a major impetus for resolving the crisis when it was terminated .
 The existence of leaders' fear of loss of control is insufficient evidence for the argument that the risks of inadvertent war or escalation outran those of deliberate use of force . The risk of accidental war is not the same as the risk of escalation or accidental war, the authors say .
 There are two different contexts in which the manipulation of risk, within the context of nuclear or other crisis management, can take place . The risk of a nuclear device being used in a nuclear reactor can be manipulated in a crisis management context .
 A risk with a known and bounded range of outcomes is used by one side to test the resolve of the other . The first context is that a risk is used to test a relationship between the two sides .
 Games of Chicken or Potlatch illustrate dangerous and amusing variations of this kind of competition . The games of chicken or potlatch are often dangerous or amusing .
 Risk taking differs from this simple test of resolve . Another kind of competition in risk taking differs in this case .
 In the more complicated kind of risk manipulation, the universe of potential outcome is more unstructured, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Leaders can't order preferred outcomes, or attach probabilities to desired outcomes, is reduced in comparison to the bounded-outcomes case . Because the range of outcomes is less predictable, leaders are less likely to be able to predict preferred outcomes . Leaders are less able to attach probabilities of desired outcomes
 Some theorists say bipolar systems reduce cognitive complexity of leaders' assessments by offering them a more structured array of potential outcomes . One reason why bipolar systems may be more manageable and more stable than multipolar systems is that they offer more structured outcomes, they say .
 A two-sided crisis or war cannot usually be complicated by third parties . Third parties have sufficient military power and political influence to have a seat at the great power table . Third party parties must have enough military power to sit at the top of the table .
 The Soviet Union dealt with Castro as a nonentity from the time of Kennedy's 22 October address to the nation until the upward spiral of the crisis ended in Khrushchev's decisive concession of 28 October .
 The United States resisted the temptation to deal with Castro as the putative host or owner of the missiles . The U.S. insisted upon treating the missiles as Soviet missiles, under the presumably unilateral control of Moscow .
 The preceding point is related to the kind of manipulation of risk in which leaders were engaged . The influence of that factor on the probability of successful crisis management can be seen here .
 The bipolar character of superpower confrontation over Cuba contributed to a bounded universe of possible outcomes, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The bipolar nature of the superpower confrontation contributed to the outcome .
 During the crisis Khrushchev tried to escape from the closed universe of alternatives, by seeking a way to avoid capitulating to Kennedy's demands while proceeding to complete missile deployments and by making missiles operationally ready to fire .
 The Russian leader was unable to open alternatives which were both acceptable to the administration and left at least some Soviet missiles in Cuba permanently .
 The situation prior to the discovery of the missiles was more unstructured, and dangerously so so . The situation before the U.S. photographic discovery of them, the situation before .
 U.S. President and his administration unwittingly sent mixed signals to Khrushchev . The United States President and . his administration had unwittingly sent . mixed signals, not about their resolve in general but about . policy with regard to Soviet offensive weapons deployments in Cuba, specifically .
 Washington failed to make clear limits beyond which Soviet involvement in Cuban defense could not go . Washington, having one year prior to the crisis, boisterously asserted its nuclear superiority .
 Once the existence of Soviet medium-range missiles in Cuba had been unambiguously confirmed, the ambiguity of American commitments suddenly melted down in Kennedy's anger at Khrushchev's deception . The ambiguity of U.S. commitments melted down after Kennedy's angry anger at the deception .
 Kennedy's approach to crisis management was henceforth outcomebounded instead of outcome-enhanced . Kennedy's insistence on this helped clarify his and Khrushchev's stakes .
 Bounded-outcome competition challenges the cognitive limits of decision makers less than unbounded . We argue bounded-outcomes competition in risk taking challenges cognitive cognitive limits .
 'Counterfactual' history showed Khrushchev might have been persuaded by optimistic calculations that his nuclear diplomacy had the support of a feasible, but risky, national command attack option . Our 'counterfactual history' shows that Khrushvic might have thought that his diplomacy had support of
 If so, this would not necessarily have made him more reluctant to remove the missiles without the simultaneous threat posed to him by the U.S. conventional superiority in the local theater of operations .
 A side with an inferior position in usable military power may not be able to bolster its nuclear coercive diplomacy because it has no option for manipulating risks to its advantage . The U.S. has no choice but to use nuclear weapons to bolster coercive diplomacy .
 The outcomes of nuclear war are too unfathomable, and outcomes below that level are all one sidedly defeats . The outcomes are too difficult to imagine, and nuclear war is not possible .
 It follows that the Soviet position in Cuba was weak, even if buttressed by a theoretical command attack capability, because of the softness of its conventional force underbelly . The Soviet position was weak even though it was buttressed with theoretical command .
 The risks of inadvertent war and escalation were certainly present during the crisis, but they were not the dominating risks . The argument suggests, against some influential academic opinion, that they are not .
 The crisis warmup was outcome-unbounded, but the crisis itself was very outcomebounded . "The crisis warm-up was out of control, but not outcome-bounded. The crisis itself is very outcome-freezing," the author says .
 The risk was more of advertent war or deliberate attack, undertaken in a desperate decision to seek relative advantage before the other side's attack . Therefore the risk of a deliberate attack was more likely to be the result of a desperate attack .
 Soviet leaders feared an American conventional attack on Cuba, and the administration feared that Soviet pressure on Berlin might follow such an attack .
 Such a chain of events would be not entirely foreseeable, but the decisions setting the events in motion would not therefore qualify as accidental or inadvertent war . The events would not be entirely foreseeable but not accidental or accidental .
 The behavior of Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis was actually, albeit intuitively, quite responsive to the risk of inadvertent escalation or outbreak of war . The behavior was actually quite responsive, says historian John Avlon .
 The Soviets swallowed any temptation for escalation after a stray U-2 reconnaissance plane overflew their airspace at the height of the crisis . The U.S. reconnaissance plane was a U.2 that flew over the Soviet border .
 The administration backed off from a previous ExComm decision 40 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES after the U-2 shootdown of Major Anderson and did not strike immediately .
 If you have not lost command of yourself and realize clearly what this could lead to, then, Mr President, you and I should not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war . The harder you pull, the tighter the knot will become,
 The difference between a deliberate but mistaken, in view of consequences, decision for war, on one hand, and an unexpected loss of control over events, on the other, is very significant in this context .
 Miscalculated escalation or loss of control can be judged as irrational in some contexts, but they present different kinds of irrationality . Both decisions are judged irrational, but not irrational, in some cases .
 An ambitious coercive diplomacy which turns unexpectedly into war is the result of deliberate, if mistaken, intelligence estimates about enemy capabilities or intentions . The diplomacy of the great powers in July 1914 is the reason for the war .
 A loss of control over events implies that organizations carrying out standard operating procedures or standing orders generate inappropriate responses, from the perspective of the policymaker . Policymakers failed fully to understand the implications of these procedures or orders, the author says .
 Kennedy's ExComm being unaware that U-2 flights near Soviet airspace had not been cancelled could have resulted in combat between superpower aircraft .
 Khrushchev's policy decision to put missiles into Cuba, versus his assumption that those deployments could be concealed from U.S. intelligence . The difference between miscalculated escalation and loss of control is apparent in the different decision logics which guided the policy .
 Khrushchev's deployment decision is a case of miscalculated escalation, deliberately undertaken and based on a misestimate of the consequences, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: 'Khrrushchev made a mistake by miscalculation'
 The Soviet leader's expectation that the deployments could be concealed resulted from his willingness to accept military estimates based on an answer to the wrong question .
 The right question was whether the Americans, sensitized to the risks of Soviet offensive missile deployments, could be deceived . "The right question is whether the U.S. can be deceived by the Soviet missile threat?"
 The wrong question was whether suitable camouflage for the missile sites was available in Cuba which would preclude serendipitous discovery before Khrushchev sprung his diplomatic trap . The wrong thing was whether the camouflage was available .
 If we ask what lessons might be learned from the Cold War that would be applicable to the new international order, one implication from our findings is rather ominous. The findings are rather ominous .
 From a strictly counterforce perspective, one might choose to develop an argument that nuclear proliferation is not inconsistent with crisis or arms race stability . The U.S. has been involved in a nuclear arms race since 1980s .
 Regional adversaries with survivable nuclear forces might dissuade one another from preemptive or preventive war . Third World regional adversaries might have survivable nukes .
 The challenge of command and control is more qualitative and procedural than the problem of deploying enough survivable delivery vehicles and warheads . "Command and control" is more difficult than deploying enough vehicles, warheads .
 Command vulnerability is not only, or perhaps not mainly, vulnerability to the physical destruction of bunkers, warning sensors and command post aircraft . It is also vulnerability to bunkers and warning sensors .
 The disruption of stable expectations and routines by an event falls outside of the range of preprogrammed cases with which the organizational memory has been made familiar, by experience or by simulation . It is also, and perhaps mostly, the disruption of organizational routines .
 Military commanders who fear that less than a dozen warheads might stun the national command headquarters in New Delhi or Islamabad might assume predelegated authority for preemptive attack .
 Saddam Hussein's most 'efficient' target set might not have been United States and allied forces, but the command and control systems of his enemies in Saudi Arabia . Had Saddam Hussein had available even crude nuclear weapons for delivery by short-range ballistic missiles in January 1991, his most efficient target
 Israel's enemies might choose to 'use' rather than to 'lose' those weapons against Israel's political and military control system . Israel's nuclear weapons in smaller quantities than Israel's presumed holdings .
 Khrushchev could not have redeemed his exposed position without retreating in the face of overwhelming U.S. military power . He could have retreated without retreating without retreating .
 The Soviet lag in nuclear strategic power helped to cause the crisis . But that power played only a partial role in resolving the crisis, and, ironically, it did not help .
 The Soviets in 1962 might have designed around the U.S. force superiority with a better deterrent than the Americans, or they, knew they had . The Soviets may have designed to protect the United States in 1962 .
 This is consolation for neither 42 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES hawkish nor dovish analysts . This is a consolation for the hawkish analysts . The U.S. has been in the throes of a war with Russia .
 The conclusion that Khrushchev had no military option which could jeopardize the carrying out of a controlled US retaliation may not be unassailable . The conclusion of Khrushvic's decision not to use a military option may not have been unassured .
 Major risks in October 1962 were not only of loss of control, but also of miscalculated escalation . The risks were knowingly but erroneously chosen, writes David Gergen .
 Conclusion: Rational strategy models emphasize the objectives of leaders and planners for value maximization . The study concludes that rational strategy models are necessary for leaders to be successful .
 Value simplification dictates to the organization that, above all else, it must survive and persist in some viable form . The organization must survive, and persist, in order to survive .
 The organizational drive for negative entropy means, for politico-military command and control systems, that they must survive to retaliate from the dead, if necessary . The organization's drive to negative entropy is that it must survive and retaliate if necessary.
 It is but a short step to the realization that the opponent's potential vulnerability may be the mirror image of one's own . It is a short time to realize that the opponents' potential vulnerabilities may be mirror images of your own .
 The possible availability of a command attack option for Moscow in 1962, on the other hand, is itself relevant to other and broader concerns about strategy and crisis management . The possibility of an attack option in 1962 is also relevant to broader concerns .
 If American command and control was about as vulnerable or nearly so in October 1962 as expert assessments claimed it was as of 1960, then essential parity in vulnerability, apart from city destruction, existed at an early stage in the superpower missile race .
 The Cuban command and control situation may suggest that crisis management organizations are in an especially vulnerable and sensitive mode when they are in transition from a loosely coupled to a tightly coupled relationship among component parts . Crisis management organizations may be especially vulnerable in transition between loosely coupled and tightly coupled relationships .
 The U.S. nuclear command and control system in the late Eisenhower and early Kennedy years underwent a transition from loose to tight coupling . The United States nuclear command system underwent just such a transition between loose and tight coupling.
 The author was obligated to consult a variety of sources on U.S. and Soviet strategic nuclear weapons in autumn, 1962 . The author is forced to consult sources on United States and Soviet nuclear weapons .
 The sources did not always agree, and interpolation was necessary to deduce a usable compromise . The sources of this article are shown below .
 Nuclear Weapons Databook, Vol. 43, is published by William Arkin, Robert Norris and Jeffrey I Sands . The Nuclear War Archives, Nuclear Power, Nuclear Weapon Databooks, are published by Arkin .
 Bomber force loadings proved especially problematical, since a variety of bomb yields could be assigned to each aircraft in the United States or Soviet inventories, depending on their assigned missions within a given operational plan .
 Categorical estimates were used for classes of bombers and the logical per bomber loadings were assumed in each case .
 I am very much in debt to Scott Sagan for reviewing an earlier version of this article and helping to tighten the argument . Scott Sagan is a friend of the author of the book .
 I also thank Stan Norris, Natural Resources Defense Council and William Arkin, Greenpeace, for suggested references .
 Freedom of Information and Security Review Director was indispensable to the Secretary of Defense/Public Affairs .
 None of these persons bears any responsibility for . arguments, facts or opinions in this study .
 Sagan used counterfactuals by Sagan in his study. Implications, Reconsiderations, Provocations 107, and the use of counterfactorials .
 Miscalculated escalation is the deliberate taking of a decision to increase the scope or intensity of fighting in the erroneous expectation that the other side will back down . The U.S. President Barack Obama has been accused of encouraging violence in Iraq .
 Gilpatric spoke to the Business Council in Hot Springs, Virginia on 21 Oct. 2013 . He spoke at the summit of the Virginia-based Business Council .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk gave a televised interview the next morning which reaffirmed that Gilpatric was not speaking only for himself . Rusk said the next day that the secretary of state had not been speaking for himself.
 Khrushchev's own explanations appear in Strobe Talbott , Khrushchevich Remembers . Khrushchchev Remembers: "I remember my life as a child. I remember my childhood."
 The explanation that Khrushchev sought a missile trade from the outset is not developed or critiqued in detail here . Therefore, the explanation for the missile trade in the 1960s isn't developed .
 U.S. leadership may consider the option at a late stage of the crisis, if other approaches short of war prove unsuccessful in resolving the confrontation . Its significance appears more compelling as an option considered by the United States .
 Most of these weapons had been spotted by U.S. intelligence . Many were incorrectly assumed to be intended for use by the Cuban armed forces .
 The issue is whether a psychological or organizational model provides the most parsimonious explanation for Khrushchev's misplaced optimism about nondiscovery . The issue here is whether the psychological or organization model provides a psychological explanation .
 I am grateful to Scott Sagan for calling this issue to my attention; he is not responsible for the discussion here .
 Interview with Paul Nitze, 6 May 1987, in Blight and Welch, On the Brink 150 . Interview with Nitze published in 1987 . Nitze's book, "On The Brink," is published by On The Brinks 150 .
 Mikoyan served as personal secretary to his father, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyans . He worked closely with his father during the crisis in the Soviet Union .
 Garthoff's commentary on this document notes that the estimated increase of 40 per cent in first strike potential was based on then current National Intelligence Estimates of 75 Soviet ICBMs .
 United States intelligence subsequently revised this estimate to 44 . U.S. intelligence later revised it to 44; thus, the incremental improvement in Soviet first strike potential resulting from the Cuban MRBM and IRBM deployments was much greater than originally thought .
 President Kennedy may have reserved judgment about McNamara's claim that the missiles in Cuba did not affect the strategic nuclear balance . McNamara: "It's not a matter of whether or not it affects the strategic balance"
 You may say it doesn't make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union or one that was 90 miles away . It doesn't matter if you're killed by a missile or a missile that's 90 miles from your home .
 Security Security 10/1 repr. in Sean M LynnJones, Steven E Miller and Stephen Van Evera, Nuclear Diplomacy and Crisis Management 304. In the book, the authors discuss nuclear diplomacy and crisis management .
 I am grateful to Peter Roman, Duquesne Univ. for suggesting this point . I am also grateful to be able to make the point in this article .
 This represent McNamara's recall of his feelings many years after the event and is not tantamount to contemporary evidence of his doubts at the time . McNamara: "This is not the same thing that McNamara said he thought about the war"
 Cognitive biases important in deterrent situations include leaders' overconfidence in their decision making abilities, their inability to see value trade-offs, and their tendency to assimilate new information to preexisting beliefs . Cognitive biases include overconfidence, overconfidence and inability to think about value tradeoffs .
 Sokolovskii trans. with analysis and, annotation, annotated by H Dinerstein, L Goure and T Wolfe 405. 405. With analysis and annotated annotations, the author's work is published at http://www.cnn.org/souol
 Ponturo, The Evolution of U.S. Strategic Command and Control and Warning, 1945-1972 239 . Ponturo: "The Evolution of the United States Strategic Command" was a major source of intelligence for the CIA .
 In all likelihood, predelegation was still in effect when Eisenhower left office . It was likely still in place when he left office in 1953 .
 WSEG had access to a great deal of information about the technical attributes of strategic weapons systems . Information about operational details (e.g. about airborne alerts) was more closely held .
 The arrangement for predelegation provides some additional perspective on SAC CINC Gen. Gen. George H. Eisenhower . Gen. Eisenhower was the first person to be assigned to the CINC. Eisenhower to the task force .
 I am grateful to Peter Roman, Duquesne Univ. for the opportunity to read a draft MS on Eisenhower strategic-force planning and with information pertinent to the predelegation .
 SAC's underground command post at Offutt was about 30ft underground and could have been destroyed by a small nuclear weapon . Built in 1957, SAC could have destroyed a small bomb .
 NORAD, formerly in above-ground cinder blocks at Colorado Springs, was moved to a more secure location in the late 1950s . The decision to move NORAD to a new secure location was made in the mid-'60s .
 When NORAD was moved inside Cheyenne Mountain in the mid-1960s, it was not built to withstand a direct nuclear attack on the facility . NORAD moved inside the mountain in the 1960s .
 BMEWS radars had no capability to detect missile launches from the south, since attacks from this direction by ballistic missiles had not been anticipated . BMEWs radars were not equipped to detect launches from south .
 This system was vulnerable to misidentification of U.S. ICBM test launches, satellite tracks or mistimed simulations as actual attacks . It was also vulnerable to mistiming of United States ICBM tests and satellite tracking .
 For some references to military writings of this period related to command and control, see Cimbala passim . For more references to this period, see . For some . references to . command and . control related to the . period .
 The 1960 U.S. alert was ordered by Eisenhower's Sec. of Defense, Thomas S Gates, during the Paris summit as a precautionary test measure . The 1960 United States alert took place during the 1960s Paris summit .
 The other instances occurred during the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, and the Arab-Israeli War of 1973 .
 Soviet intelligence would not necessarily have had to deduce information about EMP from their own tests . They might have inferred a great deal about EMP's properties from their knowledge of United States tests .
 Some American experts doubted that the Soviets could have learned very much about EMP from the tests conducted in 1961 due to the technical parameters of those Soviet tests . The tests were carried out in 1961 .
 A 34-month nuclear test moratorium was observed by both countries from Nov.58 to Sept.61 . Both countries observed a moratorium on nuclear tests in the fall of 2011 .
 The test series included both endoatmosphere and exoatmospheric large yield tests . Large yield tests were conducted in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The most exhaustive documentation of this appears in Blair, Strategic Command and Control passim .
 'Castro suggested that in order to prevent our nuclear missiles from being destroyed, we should launch a preemptive strike against the United States. According to Khrushchev, Castro suggested that . in order . to prevent . our nuclear missile missiles from . being destroyed . According to 'Cast
 Some of these distinctions were drawn, and warnings given, subsequent to Khrushchev's actual decision taking, which occurred during spring 1962 . Admittedly, some of these warnings were made, and given, prior to the actual decision .
 These distinctions and warnings subsequent to the Soviet decision taking cannot fairly be charged against the Kennedy administration's ledger of ambiguous signals . The Kennedy administration has been accused of sending ambiguous signals since the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Military Planners projected that by D + 10, United States casualties might reach 18,500 . U.S. military planners said that by the end of the year, the U.N. might have reached 18,000 casualties .
 U.S. officials worried counterforce superiority would do little to keep American population losses at 'acceptable levels' even in the case of a United States preemption .
 Soviet command and control system included a capability for postattack retaliation even if the command system were subjected to comprehensive destruction . The Soviet command system was designed to be able to retaliate against any attack .
 The situation with respect to United States command vulnerability, according to at least one expert assessment, provided little confidence in prospective wartime performance well into the 1970s . The situation in the U.S. was described as a low point of confidence in future performance .
 Programs to improve command, control and communications undertaken during the 1960s benefited peacetime U.S. forces, but as of the early 1970s wartime performance and continuing control remained uncertain .
 The U.S. strategic forces of the early 1970s would have lost any capability for central coordination and direction . The United States strategic forces were not completely incapacitated by an attack on their command structure, but would have rapidly lost any ability to coordinate and direct direction .