 Oct. 1962 was arguably the single most dangerous moment in human history . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were on the verge of unleashing upon each other thermonuclear Armageddon .
 Perino's candid admission is often depicted as a funny, self-deprecating anecdote . Perino’s candid admission was often depicted in a funny and self-defending anecdote .
 I think such a pivotal event, and the lessons it taught us, should not be forgotten . I think it should be remembered for its lessons, such as its lessons of life .
 One Minute to Midnight , One Hell of a Gamble and Essence of Decision stand prominently in my personal library . One Hell Of a Gamble is one of the best known novels in the world .
 As the world marks half a century since the Cuban missile crisis, some fine new volumes have been published . The world marks the 50th anniversary of the crisis .
 CNN's John Sutter highlights four new angles of this perilous event . Sutter: "I want to highlight four below, each presenting new angles on this perilous moment"
 If you don't know how Operation Anadyr, Operation Mongoose, the Berlin Crises and the Bay of Pigs Invasion relate to the Cuban missile crisis, this is the book for you .
 It has an eight-page long, no-nonsense summary of the causes, course, and consequences of the crisis . It has been published by the World Health Organisation .
 Almost two hundred pages of entries on key people, institutions and concepts . This is followed by almost two hundred entries on people and institutions .
 A detailed chronology starts with the Monroe Doctrine in 1823 and ends with Castro’s resignation in 2008 . The Monroe Doctrine was established in the U.S. in the early 1800s .
 Many have argued that the Crisis, far from being Kennedy’s ‘finest hour, was the result of his own miscalculations . Many have said that the crisis was not his “finest moment,” but his own .
 The book blames Kennedy’s disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion and the subsequent efforts to assassinate Castro through Operation Mongoose . The book also blames the willingness of Cubans to become a nuclear outpost for the Soviet Union on the Bay Of Pigs invasion .
 The Kennedy administration’s decision to limit surveillance flights over Cuba for five weeks in the late summer and early fall of 1962 allowed the Soviets to sneak the nuclear weapons into the island . The decision was dubbed by JFK's detractors as the ‘photo gap’
 The authors claim that even once the crisis began, a failure of U.S. intelligence, due to Washington's self-deception as much as to Moscow’s duplicity, almost resulted in a catastrophe . The authors say the failure of United States intelligence, as well as
 Had the terms under which the crisis was settled been clearly understood by the public at the time, the authors claimed . They said a different interpretation of who had swerved in this nuclear game of chicken .
 President Kennedy had begun to secretly tape his presidency . Kennedy had a "remarkable window into Kennedy’s presidency" President Kennedy .
 Kennedy kept the tapes rolling in the following months, a decision that affords us now a fly-on-the-wall perspective, with more “nuance and objectivity” of how intense Kennedy’s battles with the press after the crisis were .
 The “Missile” Crisis as seen from Cuba, by Tomas Diez Acosta, is an account of the crisis from the perspective of Castro’s Cuba . It serves as a sort of antidote to Robert Kennedy's hagiographic account, Thirteen Days, Th
 The latter is written from a self-serving perspective flattering to those in the Oval Office . The transparent objective of using it in Kennedy’s own presidential campaign in 1968 is to use it in his own campaign .
 The former is written by one who participated in the mobilization of Cuban forces as a 16 year old and then spent his life as part of Cuba’s military .
 Unapologetically aligned with Castro’s rhetoric, the book has to be read, just as any other, with a healthy pinch of salt . The book has been published by the Castro family .
 Cuba's history of the Cuban revolution is a chance to understand how it was presented to the Cuban population . But it represents an opportunity to understand the events in Cuba today .
 In complex geopolitical situations, truth is often a relative term, events are interpreted differently by different players, and history is written with different ink in different places . This in itself is a useful reminder that, in complex geopolitical times, truth can be relative term .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro were victims of their own ideologies . Kennedy was a victim of his own ideologies, writes CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Robert McNamara speaks about the lessons he has derived from his life . In one of my favorite films of all time, Errol Morris’s “The Fog of War,” Robert . McNamara spoke about his life lessons in the film .
 Every time I hear that, I think of Nietzsche’s famous aphorism, warning those that fight monsters to make sure they not become monsters themselves, and warning that if we gaze for long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze back into us .