 Might be useful to add it back, // but only if the ""skipping"" works on a per-resource basis, not the entire group .
 Kennedy was elected president of the U.S. by making a commitment to be tough on the Communists . Kennedy made the pledge in a speech to the nation .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro took office in Cuba; he rapidly took initiative to nationalize American businesses . Fidel Castro quickly nationalized American businesses in Cuba .
 In response, the United States stopped buying Cuban sugar and kept delivering oil to Cuba . The U.S. stopped buying sugar from Cuba in response to the Cuban embargo .
 The United States government grew increasingly worried about the fresh Cuban government . The U.S. government is concerned about the new Cuban government.
 It came to concern that the United States could act against the Cuban government . The Cuban government was concerned that the U.S. could act .
 U.S.-trained Cuban exiles staged an invasion of Cuban territory at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The fear was that the United States would invade Cuba seriously . This fear surfaced when the U.N. tried to invade Cuba .
 Castro proclaimed Cuba as a socialist republic shortly after the unsuccessful annexation of the Bay of Pigs . Castro entered into strong relations with the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . Castro declared Cuba as socialist republic after the failed invasion of Cuba .
 This resulted to a significant improvement in the protection of the Cuban military . The Cuban military was protected by the Cuban government in the 1980s .
 The U.S. started a financial embargo against Cuba in February 1962 . The embargo was started in 1962 . Cuba is the only nation to have been subject to the embargo .
 The drastic situation was defined by the reality that with comparatively little feedback from the various bureaucracies typically engaged in the foreign policy system, it was mainly carried out at the White House and Kremlin stage . After the unsuccessful attempt by the United States to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba with the inc