 The Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the edge of a nuclear precipice . The crisis was the first time the U.S. had seen a nuclear threat .
 Some influential voices will present the Cuban crisis in a different light, downplaying the danger that it might have got so catastrophically out of hand . They will stress the rationality of the decisions taken by John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, the two superpower leaders of the time,
 There is something in this argument but it tends to lead to the false proposition that because nuclear war did not happen in the Cuban crisis, it could not have happened . There is also something in the argument, but it leads to a false proposition .
 Some Western politicians give the Cuban crisis the benefit of the doubt, denying how close we came to annihilation . There is another reason why some Western politicians and academics give it the benefit .
 Khrushchev sought to deploy medium-range missiles secretly on the island of its new ally Cuba . He was trying to redress the strategic balance between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 The argument that Khrushchev was really trying to defend Cuba from the United States is weak and has been dismissed by Fidel Castro himself . Fidel Castro would have preferred a simple Soviet-Cuban defence treaty .
 When the United States discovered the ruse, before the missile deployment was complete, Kennedy decided that they would have to be removed . Kennedy decided to remove the missiles from the U.S. arsenal .
 President Obama rejected calls from the United States military – and some civilian hawks – for immediate military action . Fortunately, he rejected those calls for immediate action .
 Khrushchev realised that he blundered and signalled his desire for a compromise by refusing – unlike the United States – to put his strategic forces on war alert . Fortunately too, he realised that .
 Kennedy guaranteed not to invade Cuba in the future and to withdraw U.S. missiles from Turkey . The missiles were aimed at Soviet targets . Kennedy agreed to withdraw the missiles, under some form of inspection .
 Miscalculation or accident might precipitate nuclear war at any moment . But it was a closely run affair, with the danger that miscalculation could precipitate war .
 U.S. did not realise that Soviet submarines in the area carried nuclear weapons . When one of them was harassed by an American plane, the commander had to be dissuaded by fellow-officers from launching a missile .
 By the end of the crisis the United States had nearly 2,000 launchers capable of delivering over 7,000 megatons ready for combat . The U.S. also had over 1,500 launchers that could deliver more than a megaton .
 The resolution of the Cuban crisis did produce a new US-Soviet understanding for a while . The resolution led to the conclusion of the partial Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty of 1963 .
 The chance of a real breakthrough faded after the assassination of Kennedy and the removal of Khrushchev – in large part because of his “adventurist’s gamble in Cuba – faded .
 Moscow’s determination to catch up with the U.S. would lead both sides to redouble the nuclear arms race in the late 1970s and ‘80s . Moscow and the United States would continue to use nuclear weapons in the 1980s .
 The Cold War was still so intense a decade and a half after it began, in spite of the death of Stalin and attempts at a thaw in the mid-1950s . First, we should ask why the Cold War still was so intense, despite attempts to thaw .
 Significant opportunities for a breakthrough between Washington and Moscow were missed . These have only begun to be the subject of research in recent years . Significant opportunities have been missed, say experts .
 Nuclear weapons are supremely dangerous, the Cold War which justified their possession in conventional deterrence theory is long over . The established nuclear powers have made no serious effort to move towards a nuclear-free world, while more countries have entered the club .
 Banning the bomb should not just be a nostalgic slogan of the 1960s but a top priority for disarmament negotiations today . Banning nuclear weapons should not be a nostalgia slogan, it should be a priority in disarmament talks today .
 John Gittings worked at The Guardian for twenty years as assistant foreign editor and chief foreign leader-writer . He has worked for The Guardian since 1989 .
 The U.S. pursued a competitive strategy over detente until Nixon because of the institutional memory of Stalin and Soviet foreign policymainly distrust . I suspect that the United States pursued a . competitive strategy .
 Premising nuclear weapons as the chief means of bankrupting the U.S.R. appears to have coalesced under Carter and matured under Reagan .
 The main reason that the U.S. is not an empire is because formal imperial rule is no imperial rule . The United States is not a empire, the author says . "The main reason" is that formal imperial control is no longer dominant, he says .