 Moscow significantly raised the ante in the nuclear rivalry between the superpowers . The offensive weapons represented a new and existential threat to America, Moscow said . The United States and the Soviet Union faced a nuclear war .
 On October 22, the president, with no other recourse, proclaimed in a televised address that his administration knew of the illegal missiles, and delivered an ultimatum insisting on their removal . The president announced an American “quarantine” of Cuba .
 Kennedy and his lieutenants brooked no compromise; they held firm, despite Moscow’s efforts to link a resolution to extrinsic issues . Despite predictable Soviet blustering about American aggression and violation of international law, the U.S. held firm .
 In tense 13-day crisis, the Americans and Soviets went eyeball-to-eyeball . In the tense 13 days, the U.S. and Soviet Union fought off each other for 13 years . The Americans and the Soviets fought off the Soviet Union .
 Every sentence in the above paragraph describing the Cuban missile crisis is misleading or erroneous . Every word in this article is misleading, erroneous .
 This was the rendition of events that the Kennedy administration fed to a credulous press . But this was the story that has insinuated itself into the national memory .
 Sheldon M Stern was the historian at the John F Kennedy Library for 23 years and the first scholar to evaluate the ExComm tapes . Stern is among the numerous historians who have tried to set the record straight .
 His new book marshals irrefutable evidence to succinctly demolish the mythic version of the crisis .
 Although there’s little reason to believe his effort will be to any avail, it should nevertheless be applauded .
 Stern’s conclusion that “John F Kennedy and his administration, without question, bore a substantial share of the responsibility for the onset of the Cuban missile crisis” would have shocked the U.S. in 1962, for the simple reason that Kennedy had misled them about the
 In 1960 presidential election, Kennedy had cynically attacked Richard Nixon from the right, claiming that the Eisenhower-Nixon administration had allowed a dangerous ‘missile gap’ to grow in the U.S.R.’s favor . In the 1960s, Kennedy claimed
 Eisenhower and Nixon had suggested that the missile gap was to America’s advantage . But in fact, Kennedy received classified briefings from the White House . The missile gap, and the nuclear balance generally, was overwhelmingly to America's advantage .
 Nikita Khrushchev was acutely aware of America’s huge advantage not just in the number of weapons but in the quality and deployment as well . The U.S. was aware of its huge advantage in the weapons field .
 Kennedy understood that missiles in Cuba did not alter the strategic nuclear balance . Kennedy and his civilian advisers understood that the missiles were not changing the balance of the nuclear arsenal .
 JFK ordered the largest peacetime expansion of America’s military power, and specifically the growth of its strategic nuclear forces . JFK, in keeping with his avowed aim to pursue a foreign policy characterized by ‘vigor,” had ordered the expansion of U.S.
 This included deploying intermediate-range ‘Jupiter’ nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey . The missiles were deployed near the Soviet Union in 1961 . The U.S. deployed the missiles in Turkey and Italy .
 Because they sat aboveground, were immobile, and required a long time to prepare for launch, they were extremely vulnerable . Because of their high profile, they sat immobile and required long preparation time to launch .
 Of no value as a deterrent, they appeared to be weapons meant for a disarming first strike . They were weapons meant to disarm themselves and thus undermined deterrence . They encouraged a preemptive Soviet strike against them, says author .
 The Jupiters’ destabilizing effect was widely recognized among defense experts within and outside the U.S. government and even by congressional leaders . Even congressional leaders recognized the destabilizing effects of the Jupits .
 Senator Albert Gore Sr., an ally of the administration, told Secretary of State Dean Rusk that they were a “provocation” in a closed session of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in February 1961 .
 Senator Claiborne Pell raised an identical argument in a memo passed on to Kennedy in May 1961 . Pell raised the same argument in an identical memo sent to Kennedy .
 Moscow suspected that Washington viewed a nuclear first strike as an attractive option . Given America’s powerful nuclear superiority, as well as the deployment of the Jupiter missiles, Moscow suspects that Washington views a first strike .
 The archives reveal that in fact the Kennedy administration had strongly considered this option during the Berlin crisis in 1961 . The archives show that this option was considered .
 Khrushchev may have assumed America’s response would be similar to his reaction to the Jupiter missiles . He kept the deployment secret in order to present the U.S. with a fait accompli, he says .
 The tapes of the ExComm deliberations reveal that Kennedy and his advisers understood the nuclear situation in much the same way Khrushchev did . remarkably remarkably remarkably, given the alarmed and confrontational posture that Washington adopted during the missile crisis, the tapes reveal that .
 Kennedy himself declared repeatedly that the Jupiter missiles were “the same” as the Soviet missiles in Cuba . Once that was straightened out, Kennedy insisted that the missiles were the same .
 The Soviets were entirely justified in their belief that Kennedy wanted to destroy the Castro regime . Kennedy was right to want to destroy Castro's regime, the author says .
 Kennedy: "It doesn’t make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union or one that was 90 miles away" Kennedy appreciated that the missiles were “an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas”
 America’s European allies, Kennedy continued, “will argue that taken at its worst the presence of these missiles really doesn’t change” the nuclear balance, he said . Europe will argue that it doesn't change the balance, Kennedy said .
 Unlike Soviet ICBMs, the missiles in Cuba required several hours to be prepared for launch . Moreover, unlike Soviet ICBM, the Cuban missiles were able to launch themselves .
 Given the effectiveness of America’s aerial and satellite reconnaissance, the United States almost certainly would have had far more time to detect and respond to an imminent Soviet missile strike from Cuba than to attacks from Soviet bombers, ICBMs, or SLBMs .
 Bundy then said he fully supported McNamara's verdict . McNamara: "Not at all" McNamara says he fully supports the verdict .
 The following day, Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen summarized the views of the ExComm in a memorandum to Kennedy . Special Counsel Roosevelt Kennedy received the memo .
 Sorensen’s comment about a surprise attack reminds us that while the missiles in Cuba did not add appreciably to the nuclear menace, they could have complicated U.S. planning for a successful first strike .
 If so, the missiles could have enhanced deterrence between the superpowers . yet . yet, the Kennedy administration advanced on a perilous course to force their removal .
 The president issued an ultimatum to a nuclear power, an astonishingly provocative move, which immediately created a crisis that could have led to catastrophe . The move was astonishingly provocative move, and could have caused catastrophe .
 He ordered a blockade on Cuba, an act of war that brought the superpowers within a hair’s breadth of nuclear confrontation . The blockade of Cuba was an act that we now know brought the world to a brink of nuclear war .
 The beleaguered Cubans willingly accepted their ally's weapons, so the Soviet’s deployment of the missiles was fully in accord with international law . The Cuban government was forced to accept the weapons .
 The blockade, even if the administration called it a “quarantine,” was illegal, ExComm members acknowledged, illegal . The administration euphemistically called the blockade a ‘quarantine’ But the blockade was illegal .
 Kennedy and his lieutenants contemplated an invasion of Cuba and an aerial assault on the Soviet missiles there—acts extremely likely to have provoked a nuclear war . Kennedy's decision to invade Cuba and attack Soviet missiles in Cuba is a mistake .
 The American reaction to the missiles requires, in retrospect, as much explanation as the Soviet decision to deploy them—or more . In light of the extreme measures they executed or earnestly entertained to resolve the crisis they had largely created, the U.S. reaction to them requires explanation .
 The Soviets suspected that the U.S. viewed a nuclear first strike as an attractive option . The Soviets believed that the United States viewed it as an option .
 Kennedy had defined a tough stance toward Cuba as an important election issue . Given the humiliation he had suffered with the Bay of Pigs debacle, the missiles posed a great political hazard to Kennedy .
 Kennedy asserted that this was “more important than the direct threat,” and Kennedy and his other advisers concurred . Kennedy and other advisers energetically concurred with him .
 America’s European allies insisted that Washington should ignore these intangible concerns, but Sorensen was dismissive . America's European allies insist that Washington shouldn't ignore these concerns .
 Washington’s self-regard for its credibility was almost certainly the main reason it risked nuclear war over a negligible threat to national security . The U.S. is almost certainly likely to risk nuclear war because of its credibility .
 At the same meeting in which Kennedy and his aides were contemplating military action against Cuba and the U.S.R., he said, “Last month I said we weren't going to and last month I should have said … we don't care.” The president stated,
 The risks of such a cave-in, Kennedy and his advisers held, were distinct but related . Kennedy and advisers held that the risks were separate and related . The risks were related to the risks of a cave in, they said .
 The second risk was that America’s friends would suddenly doubt that a country given to appeasement could be relied on to fulfill its obligations . The risk is that the U.S. will not be trusted to be trusted on by its friends and allies .
 America’s allies, as Bundy acknowledged, were aghast that the U.S. was threatening nuclear war over a strategically insignificant condition . Bundy acknowledged that the United States had been living with the presence of intermediate-range missiles in neighboring countries for years .
 Kennedy and the ExComm lost in an erosion of confidence in its judgment, writes Julian Zelizer . Washington gained by demonstrating steadfastness of its commitments, it lost in confidence, he says .
 This approach to foreign policy was guided by an elaborate theorizing rooted in a school-playground view of world politics rather than the cool appraisal of strategic realities . This approach was guided—and remains guided—by theorizing .