 Some of the most important information may be found in the tapes made of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council (the “ExComm”) during the missile crisis . The tapes were made without the knowledge of any of the participants save President John F Kennedy and
 The Administration’s initial reactions to the discovery of Soviet mediumand intermediaterange ballistic missiles secretly being installed in Cuba . The earliest formulations of possible American responses are shown in the book .
 McGeorge Bundy transcribed the tapes of the meetings on October 27, just prior to the resolution of the crisis . Bundy was the Special Assistant for National Security . Bundy is a former National Security Adviser who was in charge of the National Security team .
 Members of the ExComm try to find a way to bring the crisis to a favorable conclusion in the face of conflicting signals from the Soviet Union and an escalating military situation .
 The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of McGeorge Bundy and Marc Trachtenberg . The body of literature devoted to the Cuban missile crisis is already enorably enorwritten .
 Explaining the Cuban Missile International Security, Winter 1987/88 0 1987 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
 Many believe all of the relevant lessons have already been learned from the missile . But the received wisdom is being challenged by information newly available from conferences, interviews, and correspondence .
 We are only now getting facts crucial to understanding the Cuban missile crisis . We're only now being told about the missile crisis in Cuba .
 This essay directs attention to surprising and important revelations in the record of the ExComm meetings of October 27 . This essay is an attempt to make the public aware of these revelations .
 This document is unlikely to eliminate all controversy surrounding the events of October 27, 1962 . But it ought to go a long way toward grounding the controversies empirically .
 The literature on crisis management is voluminous, but several works stand out . Crisis management is the subject of much of the world's most popular books .
 The remainder of the essay sets forth a brief outline of the events of the Cuban missile crisis, and then notes important issues that are illuminated, sometimes in quite surprising ways, by the transcript .
 These include cases where a significant conventional understanding or a controversial hypothesis about the crisis is strongly confirmed or is contradicted by new information . New information is often contradicted or confirmed by new evidence .
 We direct the reader’s attention to telling portions of the transcript and provide information from other sources that aids understanding . We direct our reader the reader to the transcript .
 Photographs reveal presence of Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba on October 15, 1962 . Crisis lasted until October 28 .
 The President announced the discovery of the Soviet deployment in a televised speech at 7:OOm. on October 22 .
 President Obama has imposed a limited quarantine on shipments of military hardware to Cuba . The Organization of American States has the backing of the United States .
 The likely maximum yield of the SS-5’s warhead was reported to be in the range of 3-5 Mt. Mt. The most powerful weapon in the world has never been seen to have been used in a nuclear bomb .
 The SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile was reported to have a range of 1,020 nmi-capable of reaching Savannah, Georgia, New Orleans, or the Panama Canal- with a CEP of 1 to 1. nmi and a yield between 25 kt and
 Both were liquid-fueled missiles, and each launcher was expected to have one reload . The missiles were expected to be reloaded .
 The SS-5 sites were being built at Guanajay and Remedios, the SS-4s at San Cristobal and Sagua la Grande . The SS 5 and SS 4 sites were built in the Philippines in the 1950s . SS 5 sites were in operation at Guan
 There was evidently some confusion in the ExComm as to what ‘operational” meant, discussed more fully below . There was apparently some confusion about what it meant .
 Work on missile sites in Cuba continued at what appeared to be an accelerated pace . Soviet ships carrying suspect cargo did not challenge the quarantine .
 Administration’s goal in the crisis was to secure a Soviet commitment, first to halt work on the missile bases and then to withdraw their nuclearcapable systems from Cuba .
 A number of formal and informal channels of communication were open between Moscow and Washington throughout the public phase of the crisis . But by Friday, October 26, none of them seemed to be bringing the Administration closer to its objectives .
 Khrushchev’s unusual meeting in Moscow on October 24 with American businessman William Knox, provided no tangible 5.5 . Some of the letters between Kennedy, Khrushvich and Russell contained no real basis for a negotiated s o l ~ t i o n . Others, such
 The Cuban missile crisis is the only time U.S. nuclear forces have been placed on DefCon 2 . The Cuban Missile Crisis is only time American nuclear forces were placed on the 2 .
 Commander-in-Chief of SAC, General Thomas Power, sent out DefCon 2 alert in the clear, rather than in code, as would have been standard procedure . General Power sent out the alert in clear, not in code .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara learned of this only at the Hawks Cay meeting . McNamara was secretary of defense at the time of the meeting .
 British philosopher and activist Bertrand Russell had written an open letter to both Khrushchev and Kennedy appealing for a peaceful settlement . Russell's letter was written by Russell in response to the crisis .
 Khrushchev’s reply included a vague proposal for a summit, but Kennedy was unwilling to commit to premature negotiations . Kennedy refused to commit .
 Khrushchev communicated to Kennedy that the missiles in Cuba were under strict Soviet control . Knox was the first person to tell Kennedy that Soviet control of Cuba's missiles was strictly monitored .
 The first concrete proposal for a negotiated solution came from Secretary-General U Thant . The Soviet Union voluntarily suspend arms shi6ments to Cuba for a period of two to three weeks . The United States at the same time voluntarily suspend the quarantine .
 Khrushchev ordered his ships to stop short of the quarantine line-something the President’s quarantine proclamation failed to d0.l’ The United Nations proved unable to secure a standstill, it did .
 Whether Khrushchev was correct about his control over the weapons in Cuba remains unclear, as is the issue of what he meant to communicate by this statement .
 President had just ordered permissive action links -mechanical or electronic locks -installed on his own nuclear weapons - to ensure that they would be fired only on his orders . This could hardly have been reassuring to the President who had ordered the locks removed from his nuclear weapons .
 Russia could hardly have done any meaningful damage in this case, though they probably could have been fired without orders from Moscow .
 Khrushchev may have been taking responsibility for military activities in Cuba, signalling that the relevant weapons were in Soviet rather than Cuban hands, thereby preventing the crisis from devolving into a U.S.-Cuban confrontation .
 On this view, Khrushchev was in a backhanded way using Knox as a channel for communicating a deterrent threat, says historian . The former Soviet leader used Knox to communicate a message of deterrence .
 The Soviets called the quarantine proclamation a flagrant violation of international law . The Soviet Union called the quarantines a flagant violation of law .
 Khrushchev would have had difficulty justifying orders that Soviet ships respect quarantine without appearing weak to hard-liners in Moscow, Cubans, and to his more vociferous critics .
 Khrushchev ordered his ships to stay clear of the quarantine line so as not to prejudice negotiations . U Thant publicly asked Khushchev to order ships to avoid the line so not to prejudge negotiations .
 International Security 12:3 10 I munication was the correspondence between the two leaders . International Security is the most important part of the world's security .
 ABC news correspondent John Scali was approached by Alexander Fomin, an official at the Soviet Embassy . Then the necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will be 0 b ~ i a t e d e d . l ~ That same day, ABC news reporter was approached .
 Before a reply could be made to Khrushchev’s first letter, a second came through, this one apparently the work of a committee . The committee had apparently been working on a reply .
 Let us reach an understanding on what time you and we need to put this into effect. 12.I5 12.50 12.30:30:00.00:00 . Let us know what time we need this to put it in effect.
 Robert Kennedy notes that there were almost daily communications between President Kennedy and Khrushchev . Robert Kennedy says there were also almost daily conversations between the two .
 These missiles were owned by Turkey, though the U.S. had custody of their warheads . The United States also had control of the warheads, but the United States did not .
 The linkage with the Jupiters in Khrushchev’s second letter clearly signalled a hardening of the Soviet bargaining position . The link between the two sides was a sign of hardening the Soviet Union's position .
 American U-2 on a routine air sampling mission strayed into Soviet air space over Siberia . The mission was part of a routine mission to sample Soviet-Russian air space .
 A U-2 piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down by a surface-to-air missile over Cuba . Major Anderson had discovered the Soviet missiles in the first place in October .
 This was the situation when the ExComm convened in the Cabinet Room that afternoon . These are the events President Kennedy and his advisors are seen grappling with in the transcript .
 U.S. decided to reply to Khrushchev’s letter of October 26, accepting its ”proposal” as refined by Alexander Fomin, while ignoring the second letter altogether . U.K. decided that the United States should reply to the letter, accepting
 This ”Trollope Ploy” was contained in a letter delivered to the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin by the President’s brother . The choice of messenger was not made by the full ExComm and is consequently not discussed in the transcript .
 Robert Kennedy offered a public guarantee against the invasion of Cuba in return for a Soviet withdrawal of all offensive weapons from Cuba . Robert Kennedy met with Dobrynin at 7:45m.
 President Obama made a vague threat of military action against Cuba in the event of a failure to comply . At the same time, he said he would take military action if Cuba did not comply . Obama also threatened to use military force against Cuba .
 When pressed about the Jupiter trade, Robert Kennedy reportedly gave private assurances that missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn . Kennedy refused to consummate a public deal to that effect . Kennedy reportedly told reporters he would withdraw missiles from Turkey .
 Robert Kennedy reported that he told Dobrynin “we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed.” Robert Kennedy said . Robert Kennedy: “We had had a commitment that by tomorrow, those bases had been removed. That commitment was by tomorrow
 He should understand that if they did not remove those bases, we would remove them,’s bid., bid., 108. bid., . bid., would be removed .
 The balance of this essay explains why they are of particular interest to historians and students of the crisis . It also points to new interpretations suggested by the transcript and other relevant information .
 'The President is in a grave situation,' Robert Kennedy said . 'And he does not know how to get out of it,' he said . Robert Kennedy: 'He is in the grave situation'
 President is appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev for his help in liquidating the conflict . That is why the President is appealed directly to him for help, says President Vladimir Putin .
 It is highly unlikely that Robert Kennedy said any such thing, but it is not unlikely that the appearance of exhaustion and agitation, whether genuine or feigned, proved useful in securing Soviet acceptance .
 Cuban soldiers apparently surrounded the missile sites, and Soviets took up defensive positions . Nothing further seems to have happened after the incident .
 The President wished to announce the end of the quarantine in a speech on November 20, and he would not do so until the bombers had gone . The President wishes to announce that the quarantine had been quarantined .
 A meSsBg@ww sent to NATO warning of possible military action against the bombers, apparently on the understanding that this would leak to the Soviets . To prod the Soviets along, the Soviets sent a meSbg@WW warning . NATO .
 On November 19, Castro gave the President announced that the bombers would be withdrawn, ended the quaranhrte, and cancelled the DefCon 2 alert .
 Khrushchev's second letter placed the United States in an awkward position . Some members of the Administration seem to have been expecting the Soviets to demand a trade for some time .
 There was a compelling superficial symmetry between the Soviet deployment in Cuba and the presence of American nuclear weapons in Turkey . U.N. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson had suggested early on that a trade be considered as a lever for a negotiated withdrawal of Soviet missiles .
 President Kennedy and his advisors had the trade option in the back of their minds throughout . Some expressed the view that the trade might be necessary . President Kennedy had the option in back of his mind throughout his presidency .
 The Jupiters were in Turkey under a treaty of mutual defense, whereas no such treaty obligation existed between Cuba and the Soviet Union . Cuba and Soviet Union did not have such an obligation .
 On October 24, Dean Rusk had cabled Paris and Ankara with a request for an assessment of its likely political repercussions within NATO and on U.S. relations . He was informed in return that they would be very grave indeed .
 Turks do not want to be compared with the Cubans, used as a pawn, or shorn of the Jupiters which have always been to them a proud symbol of their ability to strike back if they are hit . The Turks have already made abundantly clear that they do not
 Hasty surfacing of long-held U.S. military evaluations of the obsolescence of the Jupiters would be ineffective in meeting these strongly held views . The United States has long held an opinion that the U.N. should not rely heavily on the "J
 The Jupiters are not important as a military-strategic asset-but then, neither is Berlin . Berlin is not as important as the Jupits, but then is Berlin, says German Chancellor .
 Both have elemental significance as symbols of the integrity of the Alliance and especially of its commitment to stand by the interests of each of its members .
 The Turks rejected the Soviet trade proposal in no uncertain terms . The Turks themselves went so far as to issue a statement on October 27 rejecting it .
 Those who have told the story of the missile crisis consistently avoid the implication that the trade option was ever under serious consideration . The U.S. government avoided the idea of a trade option .
 Domestically, the trade might have been widely received as a major diplomatic defeat, particularly in view of President Kennedy’s initial tough stance . President Kennedy's initial tough stand on the trade may have been a big diplomatic defeat .
 The Administration had all along attempted to stress the asymmetries in the Turkish and Cuban deployments .
 The President was in fact inclined to trade the Turkish missiles if he had to . Yet as the transcript reveals, the President was actually inclined to do so .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin seems to have been strongly inclined to avoid military action or a prolongation of the crisis . Perhaps concerned about the risks of escalation associated with an air strike .
 The popular view that the Administration considered the trade unacceptable is powerfully contradicted by the tone and content of the President’s statements in the meetings of October 27. Thus the popular view . is that the administration considered the . trade unacceptable .
 President Kennedy would not let the Jupiters in Turkey become an obstacle to the removal of missile sites in Cuba . Kennedy: "It was clear to me that President Kennedy wouldn't let them become obstacles to removal of the missile sites"
 Mr Cordier was to put that statement in the hands of U Thant only after further signal from us, says Cordier . The statement was to be made public only after a further signal was given from Cordier, says U Than .
 President Kennedy, Andrew Cordier and I were the only ones who knew of this particular step . International Security 12:3 16 I President Kennedy was the only one to know about this step .
 The President seems to have signalled his willingness to suffer the political costs of a trade rather than the incalculable costs of armed conflict .
 President's brother Robert met with Dobrynin that evening to execute the Trollope Ploy . Some significant members of the ExComm-such as Maxwell Taylor33 and Paul NitzeX-were never informed of the maneuver . Some of the President's family members were never informed .
 Rusk testifies that ""the Jupiters were coming out in any event,"" he implies that a decision to withdraw them had already been made . Rusk says that the Jupits were "coming out any event"
 Transcript does not suggest that this is generally understood by the members of the ExComm . None of whom make any reference to such a decision, none of whom makes such a reference .
 Russia would not have been so intractable if such a decision already existed, says Rusk . He says Polaris submarines were not available until 1963 .
 The suggestions that the President suffered from an unnecessarily belligerent ""crisis mentality,"" are clearly contradicted by the content of this transcript . Suggestions that he was risking a major conflict with the Soviet Union for domestic political reasons, are clearly contradicting .
 This is a fascinating example of his willingness to think aloud and to lead discussion in new and creative directions without undue defensiveness . This is one of many examples of him leading discussion in a new way of thinking .
 The circumstantial evidence would seem to indicate that while the missiles may have been ”coming out in any event,” there may not be little more than a vague conditional intention to remove them at a later date .
 It is possible that Robert Kennedy was wrong when he reportedly told Ambassador Dobrynin that ”President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time.” President Kennedy was anxious to . remove those missile missiles from . Turkey and . Italy
 At the President’s insistence, Secretary Rusk had raised the question with the representatives of Turkey following a NATO meeting in the spring of 1962, he said .
 In the summer of 1962, when Rusk was in Europe, President Kennedy raised the question again . President Kennedy asked Rusk if he would be allowed to carry out his mission in Europe .
 State Department said they felt it was unwise to press the matter with Turkey . He was told by the State Department that it felt it would not be wise to press Turkey .
 He wanted the missiles removed even if it would cause political problems for our govern36. He wanted to remove the missiles even though it would have caused political problems .
 Committee considered these missiles to be both obsolete and vulnerable . Committee considered them to be 'both obsolete' and 'vulnerable'
 I remember that we joked about which way the missiles would fly if they were fired . I remember joking about the way they would fly, and how they would be fired .
 A tourist driving an automobile along a public highway with a .22 caliber rifle could knock holes in the skins of these missiles, he says . I also remember being told that a tourist driving . along a .public highway with an automobile could knock . holes in these missiles .
 President Kennedy asked me to take up with the Turkish government to withdraw missiles from Turkey . President Kennedy wanted to withdraw the missiles, but the missiles were never withdrawn .
 On May 1, 1961, I attended a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of CENTO held in Ankara, Turkey . The meeting took place in Ankara .
 The United States was not a signatory of CENTO, but the Secretary of State usually attended as an observer . The U.S. did not sign up to CENTO .
 After dinner I had a walk in the garden with Mr Selim Sarper, the Foreign Minister of Turkey, and took up with him the matter of withdrawing the Jupiters from Turkey .
 It would be very damaging to the morale of Turkey if the Jupiters were to be withdrawn before Polaris submarines became available in the Mediterranean . Polaris submarines would not become available until the spring of 1963 .
 Rusk’s recollections of Kennedy's life may be a mystery . Rusk and Kennedy's recollections could be at odds with each other's memory .
 Rusk recalls CENTO meeting in the spring of 1961, and Kennedy a NATO meeting in 1962 . If they are speaking of the same meeting, Rusk says it was a CENTO .
 State Department representatives discussed it again with the Turks and, finding they still objected, did not pursue the matter . The State Department said it did not want to pursue the issue .
 The President believed he was President and that, his wishes having been made clear, they would be followed and the missiles removed, he said .
 He learned that the failure to follow up on this matter had permitted the same obsolete Turkish missiles to become hostages to the Soviet Union . Now he learned that he had learned that .
 President Kennedy was angry when he discovered that the Jupiters had not been removed from Turkey . Rusk says simply, “It is generally supposed that at the . time of the Cuban missile crisis President Kennedy . was angry at the lack of removal .
 The orthodox understanding of the trade option is undeniably challenged by the transcript, other documents, and Rusks testimony . Rusks testified in the House of Representatives on the issue .
 It is clear that the full story of the technical status of the Jupiters has yet to surface . The full story has not yet been revealed .
 The story of what the President intended to do with them must now be revised . But the more important and more surprising finding is that the story must be revised, he says .
 It appears that he was prepared to trade them for the Soviet missiles in Cuba if the alternative were military action . It appears he was willing to trade the missiles for the missiles .
 President Kennedy’s expectation that the Soviets would prove to be tough bargainers and insist on the Jupiter trade has already been noted, and was of course proven wrong by events . President Kennedy's expectations of the Soviets proved wrong by the events .
 The pessimism evident in the transcript is reflected in later accounts . It is not the first time the transcript has been published in this article .
 Barton Bemstein’s argument that President Kennedy neither ordered the withdrawal of the Jupiters nor was surprised that they had not been dismantled thus appears to be confirmed . Barton Bimstein: “President Kennedy was surprised’ that they were not dismantled .
 The genesis of the Trollope Ploy is an interesting feature of the transcript, which shows that Robert Kennedy's account oversimplifies and distorts its origin . Robert Kennedy says he's not aware of the origins of the trollope ploy .
 It is clear that the idea entered the discussion gradually and was embraced by several members of Congress . Llewellyn Thompson's argument finally persuaded a reluctant President to accept it .
 ExComm members recall hearing the news that Major Anderson's U-2 was shot down over Cuba have reported it as a turning point . Major Anderson was killed in the U.2 crash over Cuba in June 1968 .
 Anderson was the first and, so far, the only casualty of the crisis . Anderson is the only person known to have been killed by the crisis to date .
 The Soviets, as an unidentified speaker says in the transcript, had fired the first shot . The Soviet Union had fired first shot, the unidentified speaker said .
 There was the realization that the Soviet Union and Cuba were preparing to do battle . The Cuban government was preparing to take on the Soviet-Russian forces .
 There is brief discussion of whether the Soviets intended this to be a political signal, whether Cubans or Soviets had fired the shot, and whether it indicated a new tone of belligerence .
 The transcript reinforces the view that the President’s mind was already moving in the direction of a quick, peaceful settlement . The transcript of the transcript shows that President Obama's mind is already moving towards a quick and peaceful settlement with Syria .
 If an air strike or invasion had been the options he favored, then the difficult issues posed by the shoot-down-Soviet and Cuban anti-air capabilities, the question of Moscow’s control over the weapons in Cuba, and the problems of inadvertent escalation-surely should
 President Kennedy was not thinking in terms of a prolonged, tightened quarantine . The urgency of maintaining air surveillance in a SAM environment growing more deadly by the day should have led him to direct the discussion .
 At the height of the crisis, 46.7 percent of Americans were in the U.S. at the time of crisis, according to a CNN report .
 This view seems to be inconsistent with McNamara’s present insistence on the importance of avoiding potentially escalatory uses of force . McNamara: ‘This is not the same thing that McNamara said in the past . This view is inconsistent with his insistence on avoiding potential escalatory
 Bob and I were reminiscing last night about the night of Saturday the 27th . Bob and Bob are still friends and have a great relationship .
 Bobby Kennedy had just dispatched Bobby Kennedy to Dobrynin, expecting the so-called ""ultimatum"" to be rejected . Bobby Kennedy was expected to be sent back to the Kremlin .
 The only word which can describe the meeting that night is ""rancorous""-- the effects of stress and fatigue . The air strike was gaining strength and its proponents were becoming more and more vigorous .
 The President was under tremendous pressure at this point, and I think it's highly speculative to say that he would ""never"" have gone ahead with the air strike, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The hawks demonstrated increasing ferocity and more unity as time wore on . The hawk showed increased ferocity in the battle for dominance .
 I didn't believe the President would consent to an air strike on the missile bases in Cuba, but I was scared to death that Nitze, Dillon and Taylor would wear the President down . "I thought the President wouldn't consent to a strike on Cuba," he says .
 The transcript of October 27 is remarkable how little evidence of this can be found in the transcript of this week's debate . Yet it is remarkable that there is little evidence that this is found in this transcript .
 The transcript periodically indicates both laughter and low voices, but nowhere does it indicate shouting or lost tempers . The transcript does not indicate a lost temper .
 Similarly unexpected is the silence of those who have become known as the hawks . The silence is also unexpected for those known as 'the hawks'
 President, Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Bundy, Thompson and Rusk dominate the discussion . Dillon, McCone, Nitze and Taylor all speak relatively infrequently and rarely engaged in conversation .
 By October 27 there was a clear majority in the ExComm in favor of military action,51it is unclear from this transcript just who could have composed such a majority .
 Few if any remarks from any ExComm members indicate enthusiasm for significant military action against Cuba . Few if if any . any remarks indicate enthusiasm . for significant . military action .
 The October 16 meetings appeared more hawkish than the October 16 meeting transcripts . The transcripts show that the meetings have been more aggressive .
 By October 27 the hawks were losing ground, rather than gaining it . Infernational Security 12:3 22I all around .
 Much attention has been paid recently to the problem of decision-making under fatigue and stress, particularly in major crises .
 Research has indicated that up to a certain point, stress can have a beneficial effect on performance . But prolonged, intense stress can result in dysfunction or breakdown, with ominous implications for sound decision-making and the risks of war .
 It is commonly thought that the members of the ExComm were suffering from stress and fatigue by October 27 . The ExComm members are thought to have been suffering from fatigue .
 Dobrynin apparently thought Robert Kennedy was on the verge of collapse . So also is Robert Kennedy, whom Dobrynins apparently thought was about to collapse . Robert Kennedy is still alive and well .
 It's impossible, merely from reading a transcription, to determine with certainty whether any of the ExComm members were impaired by stress or fatigue . Of course, it is impossible, simply from reading the transcript .
 This evidence strongly suggests that stress and fatigue were real but manageable . But this evidence suggests that they were not, and confirms the views of those who recall stress .
 Irving Janis has identified small-group politics, or ”groupthink’, as a powerful influence on collective deci~ion making .
 The resulting decisions may be hastily considered and subject to inadequate criticism, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Janis argues that the Kennedy Administration suffered greatly from groupthink in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, but that the President avoided it in the Cuban missile crisis by organizing deliberations in such a way .
 The transcript of October 27 confirms Janis’s view that the pernicious effects of groupthink were avoided in this case . Janis says the transcript of the transcript confirms that groupthink was avoided in the case .
 Another well-established thesis is that bureaucratic politics can distort the rationality of a decision-making process . A unitary rational actor might choose a value-maximizing course of action as the result of a careful exploration of the alternatives .
 An alternative, admittedly controversial, theory is that groupthink did operate on the hawks . An alternative theory is to say groupthink operated on hawks.
 It is apparent from interviews that Dillon, Nitze and Taylor either did not completely speak their minds to the President, or have been deceived by their present memories of how they felt at the time .
 The generally successful avoidance of groupthink in this case, though masterful, may have become moot by October 27 . Of course, it is ironic that the generally successful .
 If the President were making key decisions with one or two of his closest advisors and consciously excluding the ExComm from them, little if anything depended on the avoidance of groupthink in the Cabinet Room .
 I your contribution to the decision-making process will depend upon your parochial point of view and the interests of the organization you represent . International Security 12:3 24 I .
 The transcript does not indicate that bureaucratic politics played a significant role in the ExComm’s deliberations . Taylor, the only military man present, does not argue a hawkish line throughout, nor is his participation as active as one might have expected .
 McNamara felt free to dissent from the military’s preferred course of action throughout the crisis . McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, obviously felt free .
 Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General, and Douglas Dillon, the Secretary of the Treasury, express wideranging views throughout the crisis unfettered by concern for their respective bureaucratic interests . Robert Kennedy: "We are not going to solve the problem. We are going to find a solution"
 Rusk and Ball from the State Department do not appear unduly parochial in their approach, although they exhibit greater sensitivity to the diplomatic dimensions of the issues . Rusk: "Rusk and Ball are not unduly unsympathetic"
 The various positions taken might better be accounted for by,g.g., the distribution of responsibility,62the personal histories of the participant^,^^ and their understandings of the adversary . The positions of the participants might be explained by their personal histories .
 President Kennedy’s course of action was heavily influenced by his concern for his political welfare and that of his party . It has been suggested that President Kennedy was influenced by concern for the welfare of his political party and his political interests .
 It has been suggested that bureaucratic politics should be expected to play a greater role in implementation than in the formulation of a decision, especially in a crisis .
 The evidence in the transcript appears consistent with this suggestion . The evidence suggests that this is consistent with the suggestion of a possible motive .
 Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara interviews with Blight and Welch, May 18, 1987, and May 21, 1987 respectively, respectively. respectively.
 This transcript does not support the claim that President Kennedy based his decisions on domestic political considerations . This transcript is a transcript of a conversation between President Kennedy and President Kennedy .
 It is revealing that in the discussion of the political costs of the Jupiter trade, for example, he discusses at length the potential disruption of NATO and of relations with the Turks, but not the domestic political repercussions not at all .
 Kennedy’s own political health was not his primary concern in this crisis, it appears . This does not cast doubt on the theory of political risk aversion per se, but it appears that this does not .
 At several points in the discussion, it is possible to discern a real sense of urgency . At several times in the debate, it seems to be an urgency .
 The President and several of his advisors appear to have felt strongly that the crisis had to be resolved quickly . The crisis had been in the grip of the White House .
 One might have expected concern over the operational status of the Soviet missiles in Cuba to have generated the urgency, as it did in the very first ExComm meetings .
 McNamara: "Before I comment on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that we ought to accept as, uh, foundations for our further thinking"
 Central Intelligence Agency reported that two of the SS-4 sites were ”operational” by October 19 . The presence of warheads was never confirmed .
 CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline says the terminology angered the President throughout the crisis . Cline: This terminology was vague and evasive, and the President was angry .
 The presence of warheads in Cuba was neither confirmed nor disproved but there was intelligence that warheads were on the way . The ExComm may have felt strongly that the crisis had to be resolved soon .
 The presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was increasingly becoming a feature of the status quo, making their removal more difficult p~litically . It was becoming increasingly difficult to remove the missiles .
 Of course, we didn’t know that there were no warheads in Cuba, we merely confirmed there were . We merely never confirmed that there there were.
 McGeorge Bundy does not recall ever being briefed on shipments of warheads from the Soviet Union to Cuba, casting some doubt on the hypothesis that this was responsible for the sense of urgency . Bundy says he was never briefed on such shipments, which he does not remember .
 The risks of inadvertence were mounting, as evidenced by the U-2 events . "The risks of accidental accidents are mounting," says President Obama .
 The troops and planes that had been rushed to Florida were being maintained at a high level of readiness, though impressive for a peacetime operation, might not have been sufficient to prevent an eventual deterioration of their effectiveness .
 Anxiety, uncertainty, and the press of normal business might all have pressured the President and his advisors to resolve the crisis quickly .
 All of these are possibilities which singly or in concert might account for the urgency . All of the possibilities are possible, singly and in concert .
 Transcript does not yield many conclusions as to which played a role and what extent . Transcripts do not yield conclusion as to whether or not it was a factor .
 President Kennedy seemed willing to trade Jupiter missiles to avoid an armed strike against Soviet missiles . President Kennedy traded Jupiter missiles for a trade deal with the Soviet Union .
 The latter was somewhat more likely, if only because it might have become necessary to protect reconnaissance missions while a negotiated settlement was being sought . The latter might have been more likely because of the need for protection .
 In the transcript, we see evidence of willingness by hawks and doves alike to undertake strikes against SAM sites . We see evidence that hawks, doves both agree to take part in strikes .
 Decision to postpone response to U-2 shoot-down postpones response . President Kennedy time to try Trollope Ploy first . Decision is to give President Kennedy more time to respond .
 President Kennedy would have gone to war if for some reason the Soviets rejected the Jupiter trade . Of course, it is possible that Kennedy would go to war .
 Khrushchev’s letter proposing the trade had been publicly released . But this was highly unlikely given the fact that the letter had been released publicly .
 Another possibility is that the Soviets might have dragged their heels on a negotiated settlement, forcing the President to take action 75.5 years ago .
 International Security 22:3 28 I against Cuban SAMs to protect his reconnaissance aircraft in the meantime . International Security: I against Cuba SAMs I against .
 A third possibility is that the situation might have gotten out of control . A third possible is that it might have got out-of-control .
 An inadvertent clash of Soviet and American forces, or a desperate act by an adversary, might have given the President no choice but to resort to arms .
 Nowhere do we see any contingency planning for the steps that would have been taken at any stage in an armed conflict with the Soviet . We see no discussion of whether the Single Integrated Operations Plan would be used .
 President Obama had done a great deal to ensure that war could be avoided, says President Obama .
 We have mentioned discrepancies between the testimony of the transcript and the recollections of the participants in the years after the missile crisis . Throughout the foregoing tour of issues, we have also mentioned discrepancies .
 The frequency of stark contradictions and reversals of opinion is surprising . While the occasional difference in nuance or lapse of memory should be expected, the frequency of contradictions is surprising.
 There is nothing useful to be gained simply by catching former policy-makers in error . There is no useful to catch former policy makers in error, it says .
 Our understandings of the event have for so long depended so heavily on recollections alone . But the point is worth noting simply because of the point of the issue .
 When apparent contradictions arise, it becomes increasingly important to try to understand why they do so and how we are to interpret the disparities . We need to try and understand why these contradictions exist and how they do .
 The transcript shows McNamara thinking in a vague way about how to limit a U.S. Soviet war . It also suggests that he did not believe he had an acceptable answer to the problem .
 This is consistent with the recollections of the principals at Hawk’s Cay and in previously noted interviews . This is fully consistent with . The principals of Hawk's Cay and . previously noted interview .
 None recalls any meaningful discussion of military contingencies in the event of a Soviet response to an American air strike, an inadvertent escalation or a use of nuclear weapons .
 Only the hawks-Dillon, Nitze, and Taylor--express confidence that there would have been no Soviet military response . The United States’ massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons would have prevented a Soviet response, they say .
 The Administration which emerged from the Cuban missile crisis was in many ways more confident than the one we see agonizing in the transcript of October 27 . Afterword The Administration emerged from this crisis more confident .
 Administration learned a great deal about itself, about its adversary, and about international politics . But it was also an Administration that had learned a lot about itself .
 We have seen the experience of the missile crisis shaping Soviet and American policy ever since . Largely for good, sometimes for ill, it has shaped Soviet and U.S. policy since the crisis .
 The Cuban missile crisis has exerted such a powerful influence on the conduct of superpower relations, it has been accurately understood . One would like to be able to say that the Cuban crisis is accurately understood.
 The transcript, as we note, seems to raise as many questions as it answers . The transcript raises more questions than answers . We ask: What do you think?