 As the years go by, more and more historians take a very investigative approach and come to the conclusion that the actions taken in that two weeks were a political move . The actions were taken in the two weeks of the summer .
 It is typically believed that the Soviets never planned on actually firing the missiles . With the first theory, the firing of missiles was a very real possibility . The second theory is that the missiles were never fired .
 David Horowitz was one of the first to write on the subject in his 1965 book, The Free World Colossus .
 President Kennedy had to act because the political balance of the globe was in jeopardy, says Horowitz . Horowitz explains the reason why he acted was because of the political balancing of the world .
 The U.S. couldn’t be shown as weak and vulnerable, David Horowitz says . The United States was concerned about appearing to be a Soviet act of defiance, he says .
 If they wanted to bomb the U.S., they were just as likely to do it from their own country . The fact that they placed missiles 90 miles away from the American shores really didn't make a difference in the likelihood of them using them .
 Irving Bernstein focuses more on the possibility that the Soviet Union would have used the bombs against the U.S. In contrast with Horowitz, Bernstein focuses on possibility of using the bombs . Bernstein: The bombs would have been used against the United States .
 He considers the peaceful end of the Crisis a “triumph” for the United States and for Kennedy . The peaceful end to the crisis was a ‘triumph for the U.S. and Kennedy, he says .
 Both Horowitz and Bernstein present their beliefs very quickly and precisely . Some other historians delve deeper into their actual thought processes .
 In it, he lengthens the President’s thought process into looking at what his decision would mean for the long-term future . In it he looks at what he would like to see the President's decision .
 The theory broadens the context of the Cuban missile strike . It is not the only explanation for what happened in Cuba .
 The book goes more into analyzing the actual action that the U.S. took against the Soviets and the Cubans . The basis for all of the actions comes back to why any action was so necessary .
 Allison hints that the missile placement and the actions the world leaders took were all done for political gains in the eyes of the world . Allison hints in the book that the actions were done for the political gain .
 The photo gap that delayed the discovery by the U.S. of the missiles in Cuba was a photo gap . In it, he takes a look at the photo gap in which the missiles were discovered .
 Over time, the reasoning behind why Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba went back and forth, literally . The reasoning behind the decision to put them in Cuba is still debated .
 Historians become critical and analytical of both the event and the leaders involved . It is clear to see that as the years go on, more information becomes available to the public, historians become critical .
 As evident with Barrett’s book, more and more theories have surfaced as to what really happened during that week . Barrett's book was published in September 2013 .