 The U.S. government says it has evidence that a much smaller adversary may have acquired nuclear weapons . The United States government says evidence suggests a smaller adversary has acquired a nuclear weapon .
 Several officials recommend that the president launch a pre-emptive strike, as a hedge against waiting until the West becomes vulnerable to nuclear blackmail . A debate ensues in the press and the Congress about the appropriate course to take .
 Others propose solutions short of an attack and invasion led by the United States . They focus on removing the threatening weapons .
 40 years ago, in October 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis . But we have been here before, exactly 40 years since .
 Historical analogies, like biblical references, often can be used inappropriately . Historical events are, to a degree, unique, and so historical analogies can often be inappropriate .
 Prior experience remains our best guide in anticipating the future . Yet prior experience remains best guide to anticipate the future, says CNN .
 During the 1962 crisis, U.S. and Soviet officials shared a common view about Cuba . Evidence of the Cuban mind-set bears an eerie resemblance to what may be the evolving Iraqi psychology now .
 Both believed the Cuban leaders were irrational, even suicidally irrational, toward the end of the crisis . The Cuban leaders are considered irrational by both sides of the debate .
 In the eyes of Washington and Moscow, Cuba seemed to be thwarting a peaceful resolution of a nuclear confrontation merely to protest small insults to its sovereignty . The Iraqis appear to be hellbent on a military confrontation with the United States in order to acquire .
 So while conditions, leaders, and geography may change, human psychology may not . Human psychology may never change, say experts . "Human psychology may change," experts say .
 President Kennedy guessed shortly afterward that the chances were as high as one in two . President John F Kennedy guessed that the chance of the success of the mission was one in a million .
 The superpowers acquired a new appreciation of the danger of nuclear weapons, which led to improved communications between them and to arms-control accords .
 The superpowers' experience of the missile crisis bore little resemblance to that of the Cubans . Superpowers began to take steps to try to prevent a recurrence of the crisis .
 Guevara was far from alone in his characterization of the crisis, one that is at odds with the received wisdom in the U.S. and much of the rest of the world .
 One might surmise that Guevara's ""sadness"" derived from his disappointment that the United States had not been destroyed in the course of the confrontation . One might . surmiserise that he was disappointed that the U.S. was not destroyed .
 Guevara was a central figure in the Cuban leadership at the time . He was killed in 1967 in Bolivia, on a mission to spark revolution throughout Latin America against U.S. dominance .
 Cuban leaders felt the superpower agreement left them even more vulnerable than before . The small country had made itself a strategic target by accepting the Soviet missiles . But the real source of Cuba's crisis was that it had made it more vulnerable .
 The Soviets acquiesce to virtually every American demand for withdrawing weapons without seriously acknowledging Cuba's perception of the threat it faced . The Soviets then saw the U.S. withdraw from Cuba .
 Cuban leaders put no stock in the U.S. pledge not to invade the island . They believed the promise was hollow . Cuban leaders believed it was hollow.
 The U.N. says it would not allow on-site inspections of the missiles' removal . Cuban officials fully expected that they would once again need to defend themselves against the U.S.
 Castro stipulated that missile inspections could occur only on a reciprocal basis . The U.S. would allow a U.N. team to verify the closure of American facilities from which Cuban exiles were still launching terrorist attacks .
 Others attribute it to the Cuban leaders' relative youth and inexperience, which made them irresponsible, trigger-happy, and dangerous . Others say it's because they are young and inexperienced .
 Many have concluded that we should be grateful that the Americans and Soviets found a way to work around the Cubans, by ignoring their demands and excluding them from the negotiations .
 Castro went on to say that the attack would be either a limited air strike, aimed at missile sites, or an all-out attempt to destroy the Cuban revolution . Castro said that a land-and-sea invasion and occupation of the island would be the next step .
 Castro reasoned that the U.S. knew there were tactical nuclear missiles on the island that were likely to be fired at the invaders . But Castro reasoned the United States would launch an invasion only if it also was prepared to wage nuclear war . Kennedy was not aware of the warheads on the
 U.S. policy makers were basing their decisions on very limited information, experts say . American policy makers should be basing decisions on limited information .
 The U.S. did not recognize Cuba as a full-fledged player in the crisis, because it was not a superpower . Like the Soviets, the Americans didn't recognize Cuba's role in the Cuban crisis .
 To the Cubans, the superpowers appeared at best arrogant and possibly delusional . Worse, Cuba's bravado seemed to be the stance of madmen .
 Castro could not fathom why the Soviets refused to stand firm on at least one Cuban demand, that the U.S. agree to negotiate directly with Cuba . Castro was angered by the Soviets' refusal to agree directly with the United States .
 He could not imagine that Kennedy would rationally launch an invasion -and, in effect, a nuclear war - if he could avoid that outcome simply by talking to his Caribbean neighbor .
 Castro expected an American attack not only would kill many Cubans, but also would destroy Cuba as an independent, sovereign nation . Castro expected a U.S. attack on Cuba would also destroy Cuba .
 First, recognize that there will be unintended consequences of our actions . Two stand out: "There are unintended consequences for our actions," he says .
 If the U.S. had attacked Cuba in 1962, it would not have expected, nor would it have sought, a nuclear war . The United States would have not sought nuclear war in Cuba .
 It is not known what caused the fire to start, but it probably would have started one anyway, according to what now known .
 Human beings are fallible, and when they endeavor to manage military operations involving weapons of mass destruction, a mistake can result in utter catastrophe . Second, talk directly to Iraq, in a way that recognizes Saddam Hussein's need to salvage some political honor .
 It was not Kennedy's toughness and inflexibility that enabled us to survive the 1962 missile crisis . Kennedy's vaunted toughness helped us survive the crisis, says historian John Avlon .
 He sought options that would allow Khrushchev to claim that he had not capitulated totally . Khruschev sought options to allow him to claim he hadn't capitulated . He sought .
 Our tendency when dealing with a non-superpower state is to disparage its needs and attempt to intimidate it. We should not be disparaging it, our tendency is to try to intimidate them. We are not intimidated by it, we are intimidated by its needs. We need to
 That is how Kennedy dealt with Cuba in 1962, and that is how the U.S. dealt with Iraq today . That's how the United States is dealing with Iraq now .
 It was less dangerous to act like that in 1962, because Cuba did not control the missiles . In 1962, the missiles were controlled by Cuba, not Cuba .
 Our approach to weaker powers is fraught with danger and is not likely to achieve the results we seek . Today, Iraq probably does have access to weapons of mass destruction . Cuba's experience during the 1962 missile crisis is a lesson we can learn by looking at Cuba's .
 The U.S. tends to expect a weaker power will cower when the superpower roars . But American efforts to intimidate are more likely to produce the opposite effect . The United States tends to think a weaker country will cowers when it is threatened .
 Intimidation emboldens the small power, and however irrational the resulting behavior may seem to us, a weaker power may resort to unimaginable acts as a last line of defense . Intimidation emboldens small power .
 A key similarity between Iraq and Iraq has received too little attention from those advocating pre-emptive action against Baghdad . But we believe a key similarity to the two has received little attention .
 The inability of the U.S. to empathize with those who feel the threat of annihilation increases the likelihood that such weapons will be used . The hawks advising Kennedy in October 1962 were dead wrong to recommend attacking Cuba .
 Based on our reading of Cuba's mind-set 40 years ago, we believe it is worth considering that the hawks might also be wrong about Saddam Hussein and Iraq today . We believe it's worth considering considering that it is also worth considering .
 It just may be that the events of October 1962 constitute, if not a crisis for all seasons, at least a cautionary tale with disturbing relevance to the season that is upon us . The events may be a warning tale for all season .
 This article was first published in the Chronicle of Higher Education and is reprinted with permission of the authors .