 Michael Dobbs has used previously untapped American, Soviet, and Cuban sources to produce the most authoritative book yet on the Cuban missile crisis . Dobbs' book is entitled "The Cuban Missile Crisis: The American Missile Crisis"
 Castro shows how Castro--never swayed by conventional political considerations--demonstrated the messianic ambition of a man selected by history for a unique mission . Castro showed how he recognized the terrifying realities of the nuclear age .
 Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs pored over previously untapped American, Soviet, and Cuban sources to produce the most authoritative book yet on the Cuban missile crisis . Dobbs' new book is published by the Washington Post .
 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union were sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviets were sliding toward a nuke war over Cuba .
 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union were sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba . He shows how Castro--never swayed by conventional political considerations--demonstrated the messianic
 October 27, 1962, was a day dubbed Black Saturday in the Kennedy White House . The day was dubbed "Black Saturday" by President Kennedy .
 The Cuban missile crisis is at its height, and the world is drawing ever closer to nuclear apocalypse . The world has been hit by a series of nuclear missile crises since 1962 .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev mobilize their forces to fight a nuclear war on land, sea and air . The world watches in terror as the world watches as the Cold War leaders prepare for war .
 In One Minute to Midnight Michael Dobbs brings a fresh perspective to this crucial moment in twentieth-century history . Dobbs: "One Minute To Midnight" is a new look at American history .
 In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear conflict over the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba . The U.S. and Russia came to a nuclear standoff in October 1962 over placement of Cuban missiles .
 Khrushchev's plan to destroy the U.S. naval base at GuantAnamo is revealed for the first time . The story of a U-2 spy plane that got lost over Russia at the peak of the crisis is told in new book .
 This is a placeholder reference for a Topic entity, related to a WorldCat entity . The Topic entity is an entity related to the WorldCat Entity .