 On August 13 the Berlin Wall sign the is built between East and Limited West Berlin . The Wall was built between the East and West Berlin during the early 1960s .
 All Americans enjoyed the peace and prosperity of the 1950s . A Soviet nuclear missile on parade in Moscow . Build on What You Know ot all Americans .
 The growing civil rights movement and its successes inspired other groups to demand their equal rights . It was the beginning of the civil rights era in the U.S. Civil Rights movement .
 Americans questioned traditional values through protests, art, and music . Some East German soldiers built the Berlin Wall . Americans also question traditional values .
 Golda Meir served as Israel’s minister of labor and foreign . If you were there . . . You were there, Meir was the prime minister before becoming the nation's prime minister .
 As you read the section, write information you learn about each topic under the appropriate flap . Use this information to help students understand the basics of each topic .
 American viewers saw the first-ever televised debate between presidential candidates . September 26, 1960, was the first televised presidential debate in the United States .
 Most Americans saw John F Kennedy as calm, confident, and relaxed in front of the cameras . Kennedy was calm and relaxed during his presidency .
 Richard Nixon seemed tense and sweaty, with a tight smile . Richard Nixon, his Republican opponent, seemed tense, sweaty . Nixon was Nixon's Republican opponent . Nixon died in a landslide in 1968 .
 At 43, John F Kennedy became the youngest person ever elected president of the United States . Kennedy was 43 when he was elected president in 1963 .
 As a Catholic, Kennedy had to overcome religious prejudice and convince voters that his political decisions would not be influenced by religious leaders . Kennedy: "I'm a Catholic. I'm going to make a difference in my life," he said .
 President Kennedy called on Americans to look beyond their own needs and help others . At his inauguration, President Kennedy said Americans should look beyond themselves to help others.
 Ask what you can do for your country. Explain your answer. Explain what it's possible to do for you . Ask what your country has done for you. Explain it to you .
 "Ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man," Obama said . Obama said: "My fellow citizens of the world—ask not . what America does for you."
 The Peace Corps was created by Kennedy in 1961 to carry out improvement projects in developing countries . Some joined the Peace Corps, a volunteer organization created by JFK .
 President Kennedy also announced a set of domestic reforms he called a New Frontier . JFK also announced  reforms he  announced he  called a new frontier .
 At the same time, he wanted to increase spending on the The Peace Corps poor, the military, and the space program . He wanted to spend more on the poor and the military . He also wanted to raise spending on The Peace Corp poor .
 In March 1961 President Kennedy established the Peace was to improve the economy . One goal of the New Frontier was to help the economy. One goal was to make the economy better .
 Kennedy asked union members to accept smaller raises and graduates who served in business owners not to raise prices . Peace Corps volunteers were mostly young college industry workers .
 Steelworkers agreed, but U.S. Steel Africa, Asia, and Latin America . and other companies raised their prices . Steelworkers agree .
 Kennedy asked the The Peace Corps now admits many retired people, Federal Trade Commission to investigate whether the steel industry had and it serves countries in Eastbroken antitrust laws .
 United States Steel soon lowered its prices . The former The New Frontier worried some members of Congress who feared a Soviet Union .
 Republicans and conservative southern Democrats, experiences enriching each other . Republicans and southern Democrats have been at odds with each other for years .
 He also offered economic aid to needy countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America . President Barack Obama also offered aid to the needy countries .
 The first of three major Cold War crises that President Kennedy had to deal with took place in Cuba . President Kennedy faced a series of crises in the country during the Cuban crisis .
 By 1960, revolutionary leader Fidel Castro had set up a communist dictatorship that had ties to the Soviet Union . Fidel Castro set up the communist dictatorship in Cuba .
 Kennedy approved a plan that the Eisenhower administration had developed to invade Cuba . Kennedy approved the plan in response to the threat of Cuba .
 In April 1961 about 1,500 Cuban exiles waded ashore at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba . The Bay of the Pigs was a Cuban invasion of 1961 .
 About 1,200 of the invaders had been captured and the rest killed . After three days of fighting, about 1,000 of the invading had been taken . The rest of the invasion was killed .
 A second crisis took place in Berlin, located in the heart of East Germany . The second crisis occurred in Berlin .
 Kennedy confirmed Homestead AFB reports of Soviet technicians  arriving in Cuba . Kennedy confirmed reports of  Soviet technicians arriving at Key West . Key West was Key West, Key West and supplies arriving at Cuba .
 Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s HAITI DOMINICAN Roads proposal to end the crisis . Kennedy accepted the proposal to stop the crisis in Vietnam .
 The Soviets would remove the missiles, and the VIRGIN BRITISH ISLANDS would end the blockade . The U.S. would end its blockade of Cuba and promise not to invade Cuba . The Soviet Union would remove missiles from Cuba .
 Kennedy addressed the HONDURAS 4 nation on the Soviet threat and Oct. 1962 . The Soviet Union announced a blockade of Cuba . U.S. warned that United States actions could lead to nuclear war .
 By the summer of 1961, thousands of East Germans were leaving the country through East Berlin, greatly alarming Communist officials . Thousands of people were leaving East Berlin through the city's borders .
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev demanded removal of all foreign troops from West Berlin . West Berlin was occupied by West Berliners during the Cold War .
 Berliners woke to find workers building the Berlin Wall out of cement and barbed wire . The Berlin Wall was built on August 13, 1961, in the early hours of August 13 .
 The barrier, which separated East and West Berlin, was successful in stopping the escapes . The barrier was designed to stop the escape of East Berlin .
 President Kennedy responded to the “brutal border closing” by sending additional U.S. troops to the city . President Kennedy sent troops to help close the border .
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev was willing to go to war over Berlin . Neither were willing to fight over Berlin, and the war was never resolved .
 U.S. spy planes discovered that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba . United States spy planes found out that the missiles were being placed in Cuba by the Soviets .
 Any misinterpreting Political Cartoons sile launched from there could hit the United States within minutes .
 At a news conference on October 22, President Kennedy demanded that “Kennedy karate” was removed from the missiles . This cartoon shows President Kennedy Khrushchev removing missiles .
 The United States Navy was sent to Cuba to prerespond to the vent the Soviets from bringing in more weapons . The U.S. Navy was deployed to pre-responding to the threat .
 Do you think the artist approved of Soviet ships approaching the U.S. blockade? Share your thoughts with iReport .
 The Cuban missile crisis encouraged Kennedy and Khrushchev to work to prevent conflicts that might lead to nuclear war . The Cuban Missile Crisis was the result of the crisis in 1962 . The crisis was the first time the U.S. government had been involved in the Cuban crisis .
 The Soviets agreed to remove missiles from Cuba in return for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba . The Soviets removed missiles in Cuba in exchange for a United States promise to not invade .
 In 1963 the superpowers set up a telephone “hotline” so that the two leaders could talk to each other at a moment’s notice . The two leaders set up the telephone "hotline" for each other .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev also signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . The treaty ended the testing of new nuclear weapons aboveground .
 Describe three major Cold War crises of Kennedy’s administration . Describe the three major crises of the Kennedy administration . Summarize the three crises of JFK's administration in the 1960s .
 Identify and explain what was Kennedy’s New Frontier, and which • Peace Corps below . Analyze Informa3 Finding the Main Idea • John F Kennedy tion Copy the diagram . Find the main idea of the Peace Corps .
 Imagine Imagine that you are a foreign-policy • Limited Nuclear adviser to President Kennedy . Imagine that he was a foreign policy adviser to Kennedy . Evaluating his role in Kennedy's assassination .
 Write a memo Test Ban Treaty telling Kennedy how effective you think his administration has been at fighting communism . Write a letter to Kennedy telling him how effective his administration had been .
 The security of the president of the U.S. is still an important challenge for the federal government . Neil Armstrong's mission to the moonwalkers still poses a significant challenge for government .
 Use this week's Daily Discussion to learn about challenges that the Secret Service faces protecting the president . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport.com .
 The Story Continues n November 1963 President Kennedy began a quick tour of I Texas cities . President Kennedy toured Texas in 1963 .
 On the morning of November 22 he worked on a speech he planned to deliver that day in Dallas . On November 22, he was working on the speech he was about to give that day .
 By that afternoon, he had died from an assassin's bullet . To the nation’s horror, by that afternoon he had already died .
 That same day, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson became the nation’s president . Vice President Johnson became President Johnson that same day .
 On his third birthday, John F Kennedy Jr. saluted The Kennedy Assassination his father’s coffin in the funeral procession .
 On November 22, 1963, as President Kennedy’s motorcade traveled through Dallas, Dallas, shots rang out . Shots rang out as the motorcade passed through Dallas .
 Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, following in another car, was unharmed . Vice President Johnson's car was also hit by the crash .
 Just two hours after Kennedy’s assassination, Johnson took the presidential oath of office on Air Force One, the presidential airplane . Johnson was the first president to take office on the presidential plane .
 One Kennedy administration official remembered his reaction on hearing of the president's death . The official's reaction to the death of President Kennedy was to be remembered as an aide .
 More than 90 percent of American homes and millions of people worldwide watched Kennedy’s funeral on television . Millions of people watched the funeral on TV .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested hours after the assassination . Oswald was a Soviet sympathizer and former U.S. Marine .
 Jack Ruby pushed his way through the crowd and killed Oswald . Two days later, as officials moved Oswald to another jail, Ruby killed him . Ruby was a nightclub owner and nightclub owner .
 President Johnson chose a special commission to try to clear up the mystery of Kennedy’s assassination . Chief Justice Earl Warren headed the commission headed by President Johnson .
 The Warren Commission, as the group of investigators, spent months studying the evidence . Warren Commission spent months looking into the case .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was the assassin and that he had acted alone . Oswald was found to have acted alone in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 There remains much controversy surrounding the Kennedy assassination to this day . The Kennedy assassination remains a mystery .
 While Kennedy’s family enjoyed wealth and power, Johnson grew up poor in rural Texas . He was raised in poverty in rural areas .
 Johnson learned what it took to win the votes of Lyndon B Johnson was born his fellow senators . Citizenship leader in the Senate, Johnson had learned what he needed to win votes .
 One member of Congress recalled Johnson’s forceful in 1908 in central Texas in 1908 . Johnson was assassinated in 1918 in Texas .
 President Johnson was determined to pass the education and known as the wonder kid of Texas politics for his early civil rights legislation that he and Kennedy had supported .
 Roosevelt made Johnson the War on Poverty, a series of programs to help poor Americans . Roosevelt made the war on poverty the War of Poverty . Johnson was the first president of the White House .
 Johndirector of the Texas National son called for the creation of the Office of Economic Opportunity Youth Administration . Youth Administration will help poor people earn money .
 He was the youngest state NYA direcstarted the Job Corps, a program to teach young adults basic job skills . The Job Corps is a program for young adults to learn basic skills .
 In addition, it established Head Start, an educational program to pre-NYA built highways, parks, pare poor children for school .
 OEO also created a domestic version and playgrounds throughout Texas . The OEO has also created playgrounds in Texas .
 Johnson’s popularity soared because of his success in gettives in 1937 . Johnson won election of the Peace Corps—the Volunteers in Service to America .
 Johnson continued his rise into the Senate, on to the vice date for president in 1964 . The Democrats nominated him as their candidate for president . He was nominated as their vice president in 1966 .
 Barry Goldwater ran as the Republican presidency, and then the candidate . Barry was the Republican candidate for the presidency in 1964 . Barry ran for the first time .
 A former colleague described Johnson’s plans to reduce federal social programs and expand the U.S. military . Johnson's former colleagues said he wanted to expand the military .
 History “The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty Makers for all.” History ‘Makers of all. Makers’ .
 Johnson saw his Great Society as an expansion of Roosevelt’s New Deal of the 1930s . Johnson's Great Society was an extension of FDR's New Deal .
 The Great Society established Medicare, Medicaid and Medicare . Medicare includes people age 65 and older in a government health care plan . Medicaid provides health insurance for people with low incomes . Medicare is Medicare .
 Another law gave more than $1 billion to local schools to help students with special needs . Another law gives more than a billion dollars to help special needs students in schools .
 Former New Deal official Robert C Weaver became HUD’s secretary . Weaver was the first African American member of a presidential cabinet . Weaver is now the first black member of the cabinet .
 President Johnson believed after reading about communism was a major threat to democracy and world peace . Like Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, President Johnson thought about communism . After reading about Communism, Johnson believed it was a threat of democracy .
 Fearing the Housing and Urban Development Act on the a communist takeover in the Dominican Republic, he sent United States Marines Holt Researcher CD–ROM, there in April 1965 to stop rioting in the country .
 He also sent more United States troops to help defend South Vietnam from communist North Vietnam .
 President Johnson saw the space race as a key part of the Cold War . Like President Kennedy, President Johnson wanted to see space race in space race . President Kennedy saw the race as part of Cold War.
 After Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited Earth in 1961, the Soviets appeared to be winning the space race . The Soviet Union appeared to have won the race in the 1960s, but the Soviets were losing it .
 Kennedy pushed the newly created National Aeronautics and Space . The Apollo program was created to meet the long program .
 Altogether, there were eight T-range goals of landing an American on the Moon . The goal was to land a landing on the moon .
 The Apollo astronauts faced missions to the Moon, six of which landed on the surface . Even with careful planning, the Apollo astronauts had to be careful .
 The U.S. relies heavily on robots for much of its space exploration . For example, only quick thinking and tech can be relied on by robots .
 United States space missions changed since the Apollo program malfunction in space . How have nical skill saved the crew of Apollo 13 after an equipment malfunction? United States has changed its equipment since Apollo 13 .
 He committed the nation to “landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth” before the end of the 1960s . The president promised to return a man to the moon safely to earth .
 Alan Shepard Jr. became the first American to launch into space in May 1961 . Alan Shepard was the first person to launch a spacecraft into space . Shepard was also the first astronaut to enter space .
 In 1962, astronaut John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth . Then, in 1962, John Glenn was the first man to orbit the Earth .
 With President Johnson’s support, NASA soon surpassed the achievements of the Soviets . NASA soon surpasses the achievement of the Soviet Union in space travel .
 On July 20, 1969, United States astronauts reached the Moon nearly six months ahead of Kennedy’s target date . The Moon was reached by astronauts six months earlier than Kennedy had planned .
 Neil Armstrong and Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin piloted a landing vehicle toward the Moon’s surface . While their Apollo 11 spacecraft orbited the Moon, the two men piloted the landing vehicle .
 Millions of people around the world watched on television as the craft touched down and Armstrong took the first steps on the Moon . Millions of millions of people watched the craft touch down .
 ‘spin-offs’ included improved building materials, computers, medical devices, and communications systems .
 Satellites became important tools for sending telephone and television signals and for collecting weather data in the 1960s .
 While NASA led efforts to explore space, scientists discovered new dangers on Earth . NASA's mission to explore the Earth led to the discovery of dangerous new dangers .
 Biologist Rachel Carson studied a noticeable increase in the death rate of birds in Massachusetts . Rachel Carson says the increase in birds' deaths was due to an increase in bird mortality .
 Rachel Carson concluded that DDT, a widely used insecticide, caused the deaths of many people . Carson concluded in her 1962 book Silent Biologist Rachel Carson, shown Spring Spring, she concluded .
 Imagine that you are a historian writing a book about President Lyndon Johnson’s reforms to help poor Americans . Neil Armstrong is a historian and author of the book .
 Write • Rachel Carson an introduction to your book in which you B Johnson’s O Johnson's describe what actions Johnson took .
 Write the letters of the alphabet vertically on a Civil Rights Act of 1964 sheet of paper . Use the alphabet alphabet to create a reading strategy .
 The Voting Rights Act of 1965 was part of the civil rights movement . It was the first act of its kind of civil disobedience in the U.S.
 The two African American men sat down at the ‘whites-only’ section of the lunch counter . The men sat at the "whites only" section .
 The waitress refused to serve them, but they sat at the counter until the store closed for the day . The couple sat until the end of the day until they could be served .
 Restaurants throughout Peaceful Protests the South segregated white and African American . The tactic used in Greensboro was known as a sit-in—a demonstration customers .
 The Greensboro group inspired other students to hold sit-ins at segregated stores . Greensboro, North Carolina, led the Greensboro community to protest segregation in stores . The group was inspired by students who sat in segregated stores in Greensboro .
 To achieve their goals, the sit-in protesters practiced nonviolent resistance . The sit-ins were held in protest against the government .
 This strategy of peaceful protest rejected the use of violence, even for self-defense . This strategy was rejected by the protesters, who reject violence, as well as self-defence . The protests are peaceful, the protesters say .
 Crowds of angry white citizens often shouted insults, threw food, and even attacked protesters . Crowds often shout insults and threw food at protesters, even attacking them .
 One protester describes her appearance after a sit-in that turned violent . One protester described her appearance as a 'mom of day'
 I didn't have on any shoes because I had lost them when I was dragged across the floor at Woolworth’s . I didn’t have on a shoe because I lost them Drawing Inferences and Speak when I had to be dragged across a floor .
 Over time, Woolworth’s and some other businesses in the South integrated . Woolworth's and other businesses integrated .
 The success encouraged African American student leaders to form the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in 1960 to organize civil rights demonstrations . This success encouraged the formation of the Committee .
 In May 1961 the Congress of Racial Equality began a series of Freedom Rides to protest segregation on buses and in southern bus stations . The Freedom Ride was the first Freedom Ride of the 1960s .
 On these rides African American protesters used “whites-only” bus-station facilities . White protesters used "blacks-only" facilities . African American and white protesters used different bus station facilities .
 The first two Freedom Riders buses of Freedom Riders were attacked in Alabama by angry white mobs . Freedom Riders' buses were attacked by angry mobs .
 SNCC stepped in to continue the protests . CORE leaders called off the rides due to the danger . SNCC leaders canceled the rides because of the danger of the protesters .
 The attorney general sent a civil rights activists worked police escort, and the rides went on . The rides were escorted by the attorney general and the police escort .
 On November 1, 1961, an Interstate together together on protests such as the Freedom Rides . The Freedom Riders were the first to ride together in the U.S.
 Commerce Commission ban on bus and railroad segregation goes into effect . Commerce Commission bans on bus, railroad segregation went into effect in 1964 .
 Freedom Riders had made an important contribution to desegregation . The Freedom Riders were the first Freedom Riders in the U.S. history .
 SNCC route May 4 IL WV Richmond Arrests The 1961 VA Violence . Nashville workers stage Freedom Rides Charlotte May 8 throughout the South .
 AR Memphis First CORE bus May 9 SC Atlanta Winnsboro Skills Assessment Second CORE Bus Augusta May 10 1 . AR Memphis, Memphis, Atlanta, Atlanta and Atlanta will take part .
 Riots broke out, army troops restored order, and Meredith went on to graduate . Meredith was forced to withdraw from the University of Cambridge .
 Martin Luther King Jr. organized a series of marches in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963 . The marches were led by the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . King led the SCLC, which led the civil rights movement .
 King wrote Letter from Birmingham Jail, explaining his faith in nonviolence . King was arrested and put in jail, where he wrote Letter From Birmingham Jail .
 In May, King and the Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, a Birmingham civil rights leader, led more protests in the city . King led the protests in May .
 Police Commissioner Eugene “Bull” Connor ordered his officers to use their attack dogs against the marchers . 2,500 marchers walked through the streets, police commissioner Eugene ‘Bull’ Connor said .
 President Kennedy asked gathered to listen to speakers in June 1963 . The March on Washington, 1963, marked the start of the civil rights movement in Washington .
 250,000 people gathered near the Lincoln Memorial on August 28 to listen to speakers . The event was held in honor of African American and white Americans .
 Martin Luther King Jr. gave his now famous ‘I Have a Dream’ speech at a gathering in Washington, DC . It was at this gathering that King gave the now famous "I Have A Dream" speech .
 After the march, however, the hopeful mood disappeared in a wave of violence . The violence followed the march of the Occupy Wall Street protesters .
 In September a bomb exploded at an African American church in Birmingham, Alabama, killing four girls . In September four girls were killed in an explosion at a Birmingham church .
 Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson, took up the cause of civil rights legislation . However, he was not the first president to take up the issue .
 Martin Luther King Jr. public places, such as restaurants and transportation facilities, are included in the King memorial service .
 African American activists had been working to protect voting rights in several southern states since the early 1960s . Activists had been fighting for voting rights since the 1960s in southern states .
 Unfair election rules, along with threats of job loss and violence, often kept many African Americans from voting . Many African Americans were often kept from voting because of unfair election rules .
 On June 21, 1964, three Freedom Summer volunteers disappeared . James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, both white students, disappeared . The three were African American and white students .
 The brutal murders drew national attention to the voter registration effort . It was the first time the brutal murders were linked to a voter registration drive .
 King organized a voter registration march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama . The search for the three is ongoing in Montgomery, the state capital .
 As the violence broke out, television news programs focused national attention on civil rights . The violence was broadcast by volunteers who focused on the civil rights movement .
 The federal government gave the federal government the power to inspect voter registration procedures and protect all citizens’ voting rights .
 Within three years, more than half of all qualified African American voters in the South had registered to vote . More than half a million qualified African Americans registered in the past three years .
 During the midto late 1960s, many younger reformers began to criticize the civil rights movement . New Directions: The Civil Rights Movement is a modern form of American history .
 Malcolm X was a leader of the Nation of Islam, a religious in 1964 group that favored black separatism . As a result, some of these activists posed for this picture while visiting Egypt .
 Malcolm X argued that African Americans should work for social and economic independence rather than for racial integration . Malcolm X: "African Americans need to work for economic independence"
 He also believed that African Americans had the right to protect themselves from violence . He believed African Americans should be protected against violence .
 Speak: "You’re getting a new generation . . and they're beginning to think with their own minds and see that you can’t negotiate" Speak ate up on freedom nowadays .
 This was a social and political movement that called for greater African American power and independence . This was the movement of African Americans in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Some Black Power activists rejected integration as a final goal . Like Malcolm X, some Black Power leaders rejected integration .
 Many encouraged African Americans to take control of their own communities and futures . Many also encouraged African American women to take over their communities .
 Despite the efforts of activists, discrimination still affected many African Americans . Discrimination still affected African Americans in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In August 1965 a riot broke out in the Watts section of Los Angeles, killing 34 people and destroying the neighborhood . 34 people were killed and the neighborhood was destroyed .
 President Johnson appointed the Kerner Commission to investigate the violence . The Kerner commission was appointed by President Johnson in 1964 . President Johnson was the first president to address the violence in the Vietnam War .
 In 1968, the commission reported that anger over racism was a leading cause of the riots . In 1968 the commission said anger over racial issues was a major factor in the riots in Chicago .
 The report also warned that “the nation is rapidly moving toward two increasingly separate Americas” One white and wealthy, the other African American and poor, the report says .
 President Barack Obama visits Memphis, Tennessee, to support striking garbage workers . He also visits Memphis to support the city's garbage collection workers .
 On April 4, as King Leaders of the Black Power stood on his hotel balcony, a hidden gunman fired at him . The shooting occurred on the balcony of a hotel in New York City, New York .
 Police arrested ex-convict James Earl and political influence . About two months later, the police arrested Earl . Earl and Earl were arrested .
 King’s assassination horrified many people in the U.S. and around the world . King's assassination horrified people around the globe .
 With King's death, part of the civil rights movement also seemed to die, but other leaders vowed to carry on the fight . King’s death seemed to be the last gasp of civil rights .
 SC5 HP28 1 Define and explain: 3 Sequencing Copy Copy 4 Finding the Main Idea • sit-in the time line below .
 Imagine that you are taking part in a debate on the Civil Rights Act of 1964 strategies of civil rights activists . Imagine that the March on Washington 1960s. are debating the different . Committee pieces of legislation .
 Malcolm X ment changed during the late 1960s and early • Black Power 1970s and whether it was more effective as a result . Write an open• Voting Rights Act of 1965 ing speech explaining how the civil rights move .
 More than 250,000 people participated in the March on Washington in support of civil rights in 1963 . The march on Washington was held on August 28, 1963 .
 The demonstrators gathered near the Lincoln Memorial, where Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his ‘I Have a Dream’ speech . The demonstrators gather near the memorial where King delivered his "I Have A Dream" speech .
 His address is remembered as one of the most powerful and effective speeches of modern times . His speech is remembered for his use of the term 'The King of England'
 "We must forever conduct our struggle symbolic shadow we stand, signed the Emancipation on the high plane of dignity and discipline," says Mandela . Mandela Mandela: "We will never be able to repeat our struggle."
 This momentous decree2 came as a not allow our creative protest to degenerate11 into great beacon3 light to millions of Negro slaves who physical violence. The decree was made by President Abraham Lincoln .
 "We must rise to had been seared4 in the flames of withering injustices," says David Cameron . "The majestic heights of meeting physical force with tice. Again and again we must rise"
 "It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long soul force. . . . The long night of captivity. It came as ... joyous ... daybreak," she said .
 One hundred years later, we must face of the difficulties and frustrations of the moment . The tragic fact that the Negro is still not free, he says .
 The life of the Negro is still in the American dream. It is a dream deeply rooted hundred years later, a hundred years after the first African-American president .
 When the architects of created equal.” our republic wrote the magnificent words of the I have a dream that one day on the red hills Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons they were signing a promissory note .
 This note was together at the table of brotherhood. a promise that all men would be guaranteed I have a dream that one day even the state of the unalienable8 rights of life, liberty, and the Mississippi, a desert state sweltering with the heat pursuit of happiness
 I have a dream that one day the state of Alabama will become a state of justice . But there is something that I must say to my Alabama, whose governor’s lips are presently people who stand on the warm threshold10 .
 In the process of nullification,15 will be transformed into a situation gaining our rightful place . We must not be guilty of where little black boys and black girls will be able to commit wrongful deeds, says activist .
 Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst join hands with little white boys and white girls and for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness walk together as sisters and brothers .
 I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted,16 every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places . And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, he wrote .
 "With this faith we will be able to hew17 out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to sing with new meaning, “My country ’tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.”
 Let freedom ring from the that day when all of God’s children, black men and prodigious men were freed . So let freedom ring .
 Let white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New Catholics, will join hands and sing in the York .
 Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of 1.1.1 . Freedom of speech is freedom of expression, freedom of mind, says author .
 From every mountainside, let said that the U.S. had given African freedom ring . From every mountain peak, let say that the United States had given Africa freedom ring.
 Use or other current events sources to identify one feminist writer and his or her views on the status of women in the United States today . Use these photos and videos to help us understand today's changing attitudes toward women .
 After he was killed in action, his body was returned to his hometown in Texas for burial .
 The local funeral-home director refused to hold services in the chapel for him because he was a Mexican American . The funeral home director said he was not allowed to hold the services .
 Longoria was buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia . Texas senator Lyndon B Johnson arranged for Longoria to be buried .
 The Hispanic population of the U.S. was on the rise in the 1960s . World War II veteran Félix Longoria is a veteran of the Army who served in the Army .
 It grew from about 4 million to more than 10 million by the end of the 1960s . The population of the U.S. grew to 10 million .
 Hispanic Americans began to fight for their own rights in the 1960s . Their growing population and the success of the African American civil rights movement encouraged many to fight .
 In 1965, the union began a strike and boycott against California grape growers . In 1965 the union started a strike against grape growers in California .
 Chávez became a nationally recognized Hispanic rights leader . Five years later the union won several of its demands, and he became a national leader .
 Poverty has been with us since the beginning of time . But poverty has been poverty in the world since the ages of infancy .
 I despise exploitation and I want change, but I’m willing to pay the price in terms of time . "I want change but I want it to change," she says . She says she's willing to 'pay the price'
 The UFW and activists like poet Rudolfo “Corky’s” Gonzales inspired Pursuit of Excellence younger Hispanic leaders to take action . Autobiography of La Causa by Jacques E Levy Character Trait .
 César Chávez was born in Arizona, but he lived in nation by forming the Chicano movement . Some activists fought discrimiations .
 Chicano activists sought to dozens of towns as his increase Hispanic cultural pride and political power . The Hispanic civil rights movement led to important new laws . Family moved in search of the Chicano community .
 His early experience led him to help form 1968 Elementary and Secondary Education Act addressed the needs of unions for migrant workers . Students who did not speak English were not allowed to speak English .
 In some cases, the law allowed for Chávez viewed union work federally funded bilingual programs . The law allowed him to view union work as a federal program .
 Kennedy outlawed gender discrimination in civil service jobs . In response, Kennedy banned gender discrimination . Kennedy also banned discrimination against women in the military .
 That same year, Congress passed the Equal Pay Act, which made many employers pay men and women the same wages for the same job .
 The Civil Rights Act of 1964 also outlawed discrimination based on sex as well as race . The civil rights act was passed by Congress in 1964 .
 In 1963 The Feminine Mystique by Betty Friedan began a national debate on the roles of women . Betty Frieden began a debate about the role of women in the 1960s . Her work was published in 1963 in The Feminist Mystique .
 Friedan described what she saw as the dissatisfaction of some homemakers . Friedan: Homemakers were unhappy with some of the world's most famous women .
 The modern women’s rights movement was born as more women questioned their roles . The modern U.S. women's rights movement began in the 1930s .
 This group fought for women’s NOW was both the name of rights in educational and job opportunities . the organization and when women wanted their rights. the organization fought for their rights . Now is the group that fought for education and employment opportunities .
 Congress approved the Equal Rights Amendment in 1972 . It was intended to prevent gender discrimination in any form . The amendment was passed by Congress .
 Opponents felt that the ERA was too radical, and it failed to become law . Opponents, including many women, felt that it was too extreme .
 The Educational Amendments Act of 1972 was passed in 1972 . Women's rights activists achieved a victory with the passage of the act .
 This A Long-Lasting Experiment law opened up new educational opportunities for many women . The law was passed by Congress in 1996 . It is the first time women have been allowed to go to college .
 300,000 test Other Groups Fight for Equal Rights copies sold out in just eight days . But the test sold out within eight days of publication .
 Within weeks, the ediAmerican Indians and people with disabilities also called for greater tors had received 26,000 subrights .
 Some American Indian reformers worked through the National scription orders and more Congress of American Indians to help win passage of the than 20,000 letters from readers .
 This law sought to protect the rights of American Indians and their right to self-government on was simply labeled Spring. Spring. The law was passed in 1972 .
 Red Power spokespeople of the late 1960s said the NCAI moved too before they run out of things slowly . One news anchor even comreservations. mented, “I’ll give it six months’s six months .
 Despite doubts of some people, the magazine to fight for the rights and properties guaranteed in earlier treaties sold very well . Despite the doubts some people still think the magazine sold well .
 AIM's protests drew attention to the group’s cause, but its methods frightened away many potential supporters . AIM’ed protests were followed by a series of violent acts against the group .
 In the 1960s people with disabilities also began to fight for the right of access to buildings and better opportunities . In the same time as today, they also fought for the rights of access .
 The RehaProtest These American Indians bilitation Act of 1973 outlawed discrimination by federal agencies in New Mexico against people with disabilities . The Act was passed in 1973 and outlawed discrimination against Americans with disabilities.
 DIA protests showed that people with disabilities were determined to be seen and heard . People with disabilities are determined to see and heard in the DIA . The protests were held in support of disabled people .
 Use the chart to help students understand the progress of the Hispanic rights movement . Describe the progress in the United Farm Workers movement below . Summarize and find the main idea of César Chávez . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in the
 Show the characteristics that the movements shared in the overlapping spaces. Show the • Beatles characteristics that they shared in . overlapping spaces . Show the . characteristics of the movements that the . movements shared .
 When a student demonstration was called on the college campus, she attended . She attended the demonstration . The demonstration was held at a college campus .
 Hundreds of students also rushed to join in the protest . To her amazment, hundreds of students joined in .
 The high turnout for this event inspired Flacks and other activists like her . Flacks was inspired by the high turnout .
 Students came away from the protest thinking that students could make a difference . These students came away with a message that students can help students .
 Students realized that the Student protests occurred student body could bring about social reform . The protests occurred at their on many college campuses during the 1960s . college and across the country .
 SDS and other students held protests against racial discrimination, strict college rules, and the growing U.S. military presence in Vietnam . The SDS was formed in the 1960s .
 For them, the students’ actions showed a lack of respect for authority, they said . The students' actions were seen as an example of a disrespect for authority .
 The first baby boomers were born between the end of World War II and 1964 . During the 1960s, the first baby boomer generation began to enter young adulthood .
 The number of people aged 15 through 24 rose almost 50 percent during the 1960s . People aged between 15 and 24 rose 50 percent in that period .
 Many American leaders were concerned about the attitudes of these young students . Many Americans are concerned about their attitudes toward young people .
 This generation gap grew as more young people rejected their parents’ values and beliefs, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 In the early 1960s much of society and culture seemed unchanged from the 1950s . In the 1960s, much of the society was unchanged from that era .
 Media celebrated white, middle-class suburban values and traditions . The media celebrated white suburban values, traditions .
 They created a counterculture with values that ran counter to, or against, those of the main society . They created the counterculture, a culture with values running counter to or against those of society .
 The counterculture stressed individual freedom, group sharing, and nonviolence . Counterculture stresses individual freedom and group sharing . Anti-violence was the focus of the counterculture movement .
 Members of the counterculture, some of whom called themselves hippies, tried different lifestyles . Some of them were hippies .
 Many hippies also used drugs such as marijuana or LSD, sometimes leading to drug dependence and even death . Drug dependence and drug dependence often lead to death .
 Some young leaders tried to bring together members of the student movement and the counterculture . The counterculture movement was formed in the 1960s and '60s .
 Many student leaders believed, howHippies expressed their rejecever, that the aims of the counterculture were too different from their traditional values and own goals . Many students believed that, how . how . they expressed their . rejeecver that, that . the aims
 Student activists wanted to challenge society's customs with new ways of dressing and behaving. improve it. Student activists want to change society in order to . improve it .
 Hippies rejected that society and tried to form an alternative culture . Hippies reject the society and try to form alternative culture. Hippies were born out of a society that rejected the society .
 Many students believed the counterculture abandoned its responsibility to society by encouraging unhealthy behavior, such as drug abuse . The counterculture was accused of abandoning its responsibility for society .
 Both youth movements challenged the way many Americans viewed their world . Both movements were movements that changed the way Americans viewed the world .
 The movements led to a greater acceptance in American society of differences in dress, music, and personal relationships . The movements also led to greater acceptance of differences between the sexes .
 Many commercial drawings were used in advertisements and An Artistic Revolution greeting cards . Many of his commercial drawings are used in advertising and greeting cards.
 The art and music world reflected these new points of view . In the late 1980s, the world of music and art reflected this new world of ideas .
 The pop art 1950s. movement took its name from its use of popular, everyday images . In the 1960s he exhibited his objects .
 Pop artists believed that traditional art lacked humor and human humor . Campbell’s soup cans were a turning point in his art career .
 They challenged long-standing values of art and culture and tried to career . They tried to be successful, they said . They said: "I'm not going to be afraid of the future."
 He created many paintings of Campbell's soup cans and objects as subjects . Campbell’s soup cans were his subjects of many paintings .
 Art critics debated whether Warhol was criticizcopies of familiar everyday ing or celebrating consumer culture . Warhol's work was published in the 1960s and '60s, '70s, and '80s .
 Musical styles also reflected the social changes of the era . These images of mass Musical styles reflect the changes in society .
 British culture led viewers to quesperformers became popular in the U.S. Quesperformsers were popular in British culture .
 This “British Invasion’s” began with the Beatles, a foursome from Liverpool, England . This ‘British invasion’ was both serious and fun .
 The Beatles’ popularity opened opportunities for other British musicians . The Beatles' popularity led to their success in Britain .
 The Moody Blues, the Rolling Stones, the Who, and many other bands toured the United States and sold millions of records . The Rolling Stones and the Who also toured the U.S.
 These successes made the growing generation gap more obvious because most older Americans could not understand the appeal of this music . The success of this generation gap made it more obvious, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The following year the company produced the first of many gold records—records selling 500,000 copies .
 Many Motown performers were popular with both African American and white listeners . Motown was popular with African Americans and white Americans .
 Aretha Franklin, Marvin Gaye, and the Temptations were among some of the most successful soul artists . Aretha will be inducted into a new generation of soul singers .
 Folk musicians gained popularity while addressing political and social issues . During this period folk musicians also gained in popularity . Folk musicians addressed social and political issues .
 Bob Dylan sang about the struggles of poor and powerless people to rise above their troubles . Bob Dylan wrote about the struggle of poor people to overcome their troubles.
 In the 1960s, rock was the most popular form of American music . Rock was the best form of music in the country .
 Electrically amplified instruments, particularly the guitar, became the driving sound of the 1980s .
 Jimi Hendrix added electronic distortions, called feedback, to his music . Hendrix used feedback to add electronic distortions to his songs . The feedback is a form of feedback .
 Despite rain, overcrowding, and a shortage of food, many fans considered this show the high point of the 1960s . Woodstock became a symbol of the counterculture’s optimistic spirit .
 The Makers best sound that I have ever played on outdoors outdoors to date hapSpeak pened at Woodstock . The best sound I've ever played outdoors was that of the night .
 SC5 HP28 1 Define and explain: 3 Categorizing Copy the 4 Finding the Main Idea • generation gap diagram below . Find the main idea and explain how to use it to find out what you want to do .
 Andy Warhol was a pop icon of the 1960s and early '60s and '70s pop culture . The Beatles were influenced by the Warhol era . Warhol's influence was a key part of the movement .
 Use the following terms or people or people in historically . Then write a paragraph in which you list what you believe were the three most important events in 1.0 .
 During the 1960s many groups including hippies, hippies and the Great Society were influential . Pop art was a key part of the movement .
 What major Cold War crises took place during formed organizations to seek civil rights . Civil rights groups were formed during the Cold War .
 For once, the table is set with plates full of hope, and in our illiterate hands some kind fate has placed a promise of gold for tomorrow . For once the table was set with a plate of hope for once, and for once it was full of hopes .
 Today we eat to soothe a pain —a pain of alien-hungers Vallejo never knew . Not that the hollows in your sad face of death will ever be filled —or the seedy, stale figure of the poor .
 Develop a recruitment program that offers information about what the project is and where it is . Write a profile of outstanding women in science, what it will accomplish, and what kinds of skills technology, or mathematics will need .
 Create a poster, a sign, and a recruiting brochure to advertise your program . Create a pamphlet on the United Farm Workers. Create a brochure and sign .