 IBO is grateful for permission to reproduce and/or translate any copyright material used in this publication . The IBO has published the IBO's most recent issue of the International Baccalaureate Organization .
 IBO will be pleased to rectify any errors or omissions at the earliest opportunity . Acknowledgments are included, where appropriate, and, if notified, the IBO is pleased to .
 General ordering queries should be directed to the sales department in Cardiff . The sales department is based at the Cardiff branch of the Cardiff City Centre .
 The Historical Investigation: Guidance for Teachers . The Written Account is written in the United Kingdom by the International Baccalaureate Organization, Cardiff .
 An investigation comparing a film and a written account of a historical event . 9 4.9 4.10 . An investigation into the origins of a film .
 The Women s Army Corps during World War II 59 6 7 Introduction This teacher support material has been prepared by senior examiners and practising teachers of Diploma Programme history .
 The detailed requirements for the internally assessed components, and the internal assessment criteria, are given in the Assessment Details section of the guide . The assessment details of the assessment details can be found at www.assessment.org .
 The historical investigation is assessed against six criteria that are related to the objectives of the history course . The history course is based on six criteria, including six criteria .
 The document includes four outlines illustrating some possible approaches to the historical investigation . The document also includes outlines of the possible approaches .
 These are followed by five examples of the full historical investigation . The full investigation will be published in the next edition of this week's book .
 The examples provided are actual student work and are presented in their original styles, which may include spelling, grammatical and any other errors . Students' work is presented in the original styles of the work .
 All five examples are followed by detailed comments and marks on each criterion, written by senior examiners . Senior examiners comment and mark each criterion .
 The investigation must be a written piece and should be the work of the individual student . Investigation must be written piece of the student .
 It is marked out of 20 for both HL and SL and weighted at 20% and 25% of the final assessment . It is also marked out for both SL and HL .
 Timing is up to the teacher, but it is advisable to start an investigation at least three months before the May and November sessions have to be with the moderators .
 Students should use as many as will produce an effective investigation, students say . Students should be able to use the number of questions they need to answer .
 No; only the first one, which should not be heavily annotated or edited, should be lightly annotated . Only one of the first ones should be heavily edited or edited .
 Guidance is available from IBCA if the validity of the investigation is in doubt . This is not a requirement and is not regular practice, but guidance is available if the investigation is in doubt.
 No marks will be awarded for criterion F if investigation is shorter than 1,500 or longer than 2,000 words . Criterion F does not apply to criterion F for short investigations . Criteria F is not required to be awarded marks for short investigation .
 The word limit has been imposed in order to focus the student s investigation, to ensure fairness for all students and to reduce the overload on teachers and students .
 Comments can be very helpful to the moderator in understanding how marks have been allocated . This is not a requirement but comments can be helpful to a moderator .
 The investigations are kept for several months by the moderator and then destroyed . After the process of moderation, the investigation is kept in storage for months .
 The student and teacher may therefore like to keep a record of the finished investigation .
 If you have reasonable evidence that this is the case, make the student rewrite his or her investigation . The student is accused of sexual misconduct in the classroom .
 Do not sign the form and submit the reasons for your suspicion . If time does not permit this, then do not sign it and submit your suspicions .
 Teachers may find that it is useful to photocopy this page and the section entitled The Written Account to give to students .
 On completion of an investigation, you may find it useful to use the following checklist . Use the checklist to complete your investigation .
 A sharply focused question and a clearly structured plan will be more likely to produce a successful investigation . A clearly focused question will be key to success in the investigation, CNN.com reports .
 Any illustrations, documents, or other relevant evidence should be included in an appendix . The word count will not be included .
 This section should be organized and referenced and provide evidence of thorough research . This section is an attempt to highlight the importance of this section .
 This section of the written account should be a critical evaluation of two important sources appropriate to the investigation . It should refer to their origin, purpose, value and limitation .
 More than two sources may be evaluated but the emphasis should be on the thorough evaluation of two sources rather than a superficial evaluation of a greater number of sources .
 The two sources chosen should be appropriate for the investigation . They could include written, oral or archeological sources .
 The purpose of this section is to assess the usefulness of the sources but not to describe their content or nature . This section includes the use of the content of these sources . It is intended to assess whether the sources are useful .
 In this section the elements of the investigation identified in section B will be broken down into key issues/points . This section will focus on the key issues and points that have been identified .
 Consideration of historical context can add weight and perspective to the study . Consideration should be taken into account for historical context .
 Where appropriate links can be made with associated events and developments to aid understanding of the historical importance of the chosen investigation . For more information on the investigation click here .
 E Conclusion The conclusion must be clearly stated and consistent with the evidence presented . E Conclusion E Conclusion .
 This section is a follow-up to section D . It requires an answer or conclusion, based on the evidence presented, which either partially or fully addresses the question stated or implied .
 A bibliography or list of sources must be included although this will not form part of the word count . F List of sources will not be included in this article .
 A recognized method of listing sources must be used consistently throughout the investigation, for example, the Harvard author date system . For example, Harvard author dates system is used .
 Written sources should be listed separately from non-written sources, such as web addresses, web addresses and oral interviews . It is recommended that written sources be listed .
 A Plan of the investigation to establish what Hitler s ideal for the family was. To establish what . Hitler s . ideal for . the . family was . Hitler's ideal for his family was to be the ideal for a family .
 C Evaluation of sources: Nazism and German Society . Comparison of two historical studies: Crew, Crew, D F Nazism, and Pridham .
 Ideal of women as mothers/wives/employees as promoted by Hitler and Goebbels . Ideal of a mother/wife/employee is that of women in society . Ideal was that women were mothers/wives/wives as they were mothers .
 E Conclusion Evaluation of myth of German family as measured against evidence of family life from social history studies .
 Discussion of pressures/outside influences that undermined family policy . Discussion of pressure/outside influence that undermined policy .
 Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March 14 . TSM: March 14 Outlines for the Historical Investigation 2.2.3.4.5.6.5 . Diploma programme History .
 A Plan of the investigation to show how the reports of Kennedy s assassination reflected the impact of the event on America . To show . how the . reports of the assassination reflected . the impact on America. America .
 Kennedy s assassination story will be told in one newspaper or in another newspaper . Use this to compare contemporary accounts or show how treatment of Kennedy changed over time .
 How newspaper reporting changed with emerging evidence and changing moods of country . How it changed in wake of emerging evidence .
 To study the film October and compare it with a historical study of the storming of the Winter Palace . A Plan of the investigation: To study October and October .
 Function of film giving confidence and pride to an emerging Russian state . Film gives confidence to emerging Russia state .
 Evaluation of sources and evidence as presented, for example, propaganda, western historian s view . Western historian's view.
 A Plan of Investigation assesses the significance of Fidel Castro in the Missile Crisis . Castro s role is investigated in the initial days of the Crisis, during the shooting down of the American U-2 plane, and in the resolution of the crisis . The investigation evaluates his role in each stage
 Memoirs and oral history are mostly used to evaluate Castro s significance . Memoir, oral history is mostly used in evaluating Castro's significance .
 The Mikoyan-Castro Talks, 4-5 November 1962: the Cuban Version, are evaluated for their origins, purposes, values and limitations . They are then evaluated .
 The investigation does not assess the difference in ideologies of the nations involved . The investigation was conducted by the United States, Soviet Union, Cuba, and Cuba .
 The counterrevolutionary failed, pushing Castro into an alliance with the communist Soviet Union . Castro was wary of American designs in Cuba .
 Castro s fears were confirmed in early 1962 when his intelligence service noticed signs of U.S. activities related to what was later uncovered to be Operation Mongoose, another American invasion to overthrow Castro . Castro s fear was confirmed when his . intelligence service .
 Fidel Castro s Secret 1968 Speech, Cold War International History Project Bulletin . Fidel Castro's Secret 1968 speech was published in 1968 . Castro's speech was recorded in 1968 in Havana, Cuba .
 TSM, March 2004, informed the Soviet Union that were concerned about a direct invasion of Cuba by the United States . The Soviet Union were thinking about how to step up country s ability to resist an attack .
 Khrushchev conceived the plan of protecting Cuban sovereignty by installing missile with nuclear warheads in Cuba without letting the U.S. find out until it was too late do anything about them .
 Castro accepted Khrushchev s proposal 6 and the Soviet Union began deploying nuclear arms . The Soviet Union deployed nuclear arms in response to Castro's acceptance of the proposal .
 For America, the Crisis began in mid October 1962 when American intelligence discovered Russian nuclear missile in Cuba . The crisis began in October 1962 .
 The Crisis began on 22 October 1962 when American President Kennedy revealed in a televised broadcast that U.S. surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba had uncovered as series of offensive missile sites in preparation for no other purpose .
 Kennedy called for a naval blockade of Cuba 8 and used diplomatic negotiations with Khrushchev to come to an agreement in the removal of the weapons .
 During negotiations, several incidents occurred which heightened tensions and seemed to bring the world one step closer to nuclear holocaust . Several incidents occurred during negotiations, which brought the world closer to a nuclear war .
 Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was killed in the shooting down of the U-2 airplane in October 1962 . Major Anderson died in the crash of the plane .
 At the time the U.S. and the Soviet Union believed that it was Castro who ordered Cuban antiaircraft artillery to fire at low-flying United States planes on the morning of 27 October .
 After further analysis, it is clear that it was a Soviet soldier, not Cuban, who shot the plane . The plane was shot by a Soviet solider, not a Cuban, according to the report .
 Castro ordered Cuban antiaircraft artillery to fire, but there is no evidence that he ordered Soviet 4 Blight, Nikita S Khrushchev . Castro ordered Cuba to fire on Soviet aircraft, but no evidence he ordered it .
 Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March 20 . TSM: March 20 Example 1 artillery to fire .
 Soviet officers in Cuba identified so closely with the Cuban government s cause that their field commander gave the order to shoot at the U-2, thinking as an ally supporting comrades in war . Instead, what is most likely to have happened was that the Soviet officers identified closely with their Cuban government
 Castro wrote to Khrushchev recommending that the Soviet Union should launch a first-strike nuclear attack on the U.S. Another incident is Castro s letter to Khruschev recommending a first strike on the United States .
 Khrushchev thought Castro was a young and hotheaded man one who was inexperienced as a statesman . Castro's proposal to become a state of Soviet Union shocked the Soviet Union leader . Khrrushchev believed Castro was inexperienced and inexperienced .
 The Crisis drew to a close when both great powers found a mutual solution outlined in a message sent by Khrushchev and Kennedy s response of 27 October . The two men agreed that if the Soviets would withdraw their offensive weapons from Cuba under United Nations supervision, the United States would remove its
 The Crisis came to an end on 28 October 1962 when Khrushchev s new order to dismantle the weapons... and return them to the Soviet Union .
 Neither Castro not a Cuban representative took part in the negotiations . The issue was entirely one between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev s announcement on the radio not only shocked Castro but also humiliated him for his exclusion from the negotiations . Blight, xi. Castro was humiliated for being excluded from negotiations .
 Philip W Bonsal, Cuba, Castro and the United States. A Personal and Diplomatic Account of U.S.-Cuban Relations Since Blight, Philip W.Bonsal. A personal and diplomatic account of US.-Cuba relations since .
 Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Soviet Collapse compiled by James G Blight, Allyn J Bruce and David A Welsh . Report on the Havana conference in 1992 hosted by Castro to discuss Cuba s specific role during the Crisis .
 Cuba on the Brink was written with the purpose to greatly enlarge the number of participants in the Havana conference by supplying context sufficient for readers to be there vicariously .
 The book s values lies in the fact that it provides a new Cuban perspective on the Crisis that has often been disregarded . The book offers a new perspective on Cuba's crisis .
 Castro hosted the conference . Castro s own interpretation and evaluation of Cuba s significance . As well, the reader is exposed to Castro's own interpretation .
 It is doubtful that the recollections of veteran participants have not been altered either subconsciously or for the purpose of conforming to political pressures . The Havana conference is dependent on critical oral history 19 .
 These conversations were obtained form Philip Brenner, Cuba specialist, who provided them to the Cold War International History Project and translated form Spanish by Carlos Osorio .
 Cuba s release of these documents provide a valuable source since these records are primary documents recorded immediately after the event and expose the hurt and betrayal felt by Castro over Khrushchev s withdrawal .
 Historians can notice the different interpretations of each country . As well, since this is a conversation between a Soviet and a Cuban, the historian can notice that .
 Cuban documents are limited as they were translated awkwardly . Both documents are transcriptions of memo notes taken during a speech and do not seem to have been corrected .
 Documents can be compared against the Russian version of the Mikoyan-Castro Talks released prior to the Cuban version . However, these Cuba documents can't be compared to those of Russia .
 Historians can compare the two versions to one another for accuracy and biases . The historian can then compare the versions to each other for accuracy .
 Blight, Critical oral history, is the synthesis of recollections of participants with declassified documentation and the analyses of historians . Blight is critical oral history of the Vietnam War .
 Castro s significance in the Crisis can either justify or discredit American interference in Cuban internal affairs . TSM, March22, March 22, is a Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment .
 International society was willing to accept American attempts to overthrow Castro . Americans were portrayed as heroes while Castro seemed to be a fanatical socialist . Prior to the event, the international society .
 If Castro was merely a pawn between U.S. and Soviet Union, he improves his reputation . Castro improves his international reputation making it difficult for future heroic American interference in Cuba .
 Castro s role may be more limited since it is unlikely that Khrushchev s missiles were sent solely to protect Cuba . However, Castro may have played a more limited role since it was unlikely he would have been sent to protect his country .
 Khrushchev wanted to equalize the balance of power and redress the strategic imbalance between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Before the Crisis, the American had surrounded the Soviet . Union with military bases in Turkey 21 ; sending missiles to Cuba would give the United States a little
 During late October 1962, Castro s role is often directly related to the shooting down of the U.S. U-2 plane . Khrushchev s and Kennedy s secret deal later on in the . Crisis that Khrush . would remove missiles from Cuba if Kennedy would remove Jup
 Diploma Programme published October 2010 Updated February 2015 International Baccalaureate . Guide to school authorization: Diploma programme .
 Considering the period 1933 to 1945, analyze the economic, diplomatic, and military reasons for Germany s defeat in the Second World War . Analyze the economic and military factors for Germany's defeat in World War II .
 The French and Indian War had caused the British to be in a great deal of debt . Raising taxes led to the Revolutionary War .
 Some of us lie awake at night worrying about family members, health, finances or a thousand other things . Some of them worry about family, health or finances . But some of us worry about other things, such as family members and finances .
 International Baccalaureate Peterson House, Malthouse . Diploma Programme . Rules for IB World Schools: Diploma programme .
 We were allies then, it is the time to join hands now to meet the enormous challenges facing both our nations and the world . The Defence Planning Committee met in a Ministerial Session in 1967 .
 We were allies then, it is the time to join hands now to meet the enormous challenges facing both our nations and the world, says President Obama . "We were allies when we were," says Obama .
 Nikolay Makarov participated in More information Programme standards and practices . Nikolay Makhov participated in more information programme standards .
 German initiated battle in western europe that attempted to push back allied advance that was unprovoked . German government requested financial assistance .
 Signed at London, Moscow and Washington on 10 April 1972 . German initiated battle in western europe .
 For details concerning amendments to the legislation, please visit http://www.cnn.org/ . For more information, visit the website of the legislation .
 Writing about film is one of the best ways to respond to film . Diploma Programme is the International Baccalaureate Organization’s Diploma Program .
 Section 11 is about describing what is meant by feedback . This section will focus on situations where you will be given, and where you'll give feedback .
 Students try to solve a mystery about the Pledge of Allegiance . In this activity, students try to find out what the Pledge is about .
 Students try to solve a mystery about the Pledge of Allegiance . The changing Pledge is a mystery .
 DoD Public Affairs Assistance to Non-Government, Non-Entertainment-Oriented Print and Electronic Media ASD References: DoD More information CLE On-Demand .
 Spell your name exactly as it is written on your passport . Application Deadline: December 20, 2011 Application deadline: Dec. 20 .
 Online Reputation in a Connected World examines the expanding role of online reputation in both professional and personal lives . The Middle Years Programme is based in the Middle Years Program .
 Simulation: The Treaty of Versailles . Use this activity to help students understand the history of the negotiations .
 In the winter of 1963, the eyes of most Americans were on Vietnam during the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was the first major war in the United States .
 Whether patent application GB 2383152 A relates to a patentable invention is patentable . A critical article review briefly describes the content of an article . It provides an in-depth analysis and evaluation of its ideas and purpose .
 Questia Writing Center 9 Step Writing Guide F . A research paper is your opinion on a topic, informed by research you have done . Questia writing center: Research paper is a research paper .
 It is not a summary of others thoughts, a personal essay or a review or critique . The author of this article does not provide a written version of this essay .
 Insurance Inspection Manual is provisionally prepared and subject to change without notice . SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES THAT CAN BE OUTSOURCED...2 More information .
 AP EUROPEAN HISTORY 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES . Analyze various ways in which government policies during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic era contributed to a greater sense of French national identity . Social Media Charter 1.1 .
 I, the undersigned natural person of the age of twenty-one years or more, a citizen of the State of Texas, acting as an incorporator of More information Name. I was an inspectator of Texas .
 Use this passage adapted from Mark Kishlansky s, Patrick Geary s, and Patricia O Brien s text, Civilization in the West . A Turning Point Name is the name of a turning point .
 P Jean Baker, Esq. A Turning Point, is a self-assessment expert and author of the book, "A Turning Point" The book is written by Jean Baker .
 It is designed to test your knowledge of negotiation theory and best practices . It is a test of your negotiation skills and knowledge of negotiating theory .
 Scottish CND s educational resource Nuclear Weapons: Yes or No is aimed at late primary to early secondary school pupils . The Nuclear Weapons Debate is a discussion of the nuclear weapons debate .
 Social Imaginings: A Rhetorical Analysis of the text Alcoholics Anonymous . Kevin Kardos Rhetoric Dr. Dr. Kevin . Kevin .
 Karen was undertaking a PhD in engineering to investigate whether a new type of plastic was safe to use as cookware . David Franke Fall 2003 One could as well describe writing as an imagination of a relationship. -George
 Assume a government authority has bought a software from a software company . Assume that the government has bought the software from the software company. Assume it is a government purchase of a software .
 Many think that negotiation is reserved for high-powered executives or lawyers sitting in the board room . Negotiation skills are essential for negotiation skills . Negotiating skills are a key part of the negotiation process .
 You can't read a sentence or a paragraph without knowing at least the most common words in the English language . You can t read a paragraph or a whole sentence without learning at least one of the most commonly common .
 United States History, Geography Assignment Discovery Online Curriculum Lesson: U.S.-Cuba Relations . Students will do the following: Composition as Explanation Gertrude Stein .
 Before 1914, the nations of Europe were involved in a race to obtain overseas colonies all over the world, mainly in Europe .
 Del O'Roark, Loss Prevention Consultant, Lawyers Mutual Insurance Co. of Ky. Del O’Roark is a loss prevention expert and loss prevention consultant . He says the insurance industry needs to be on the radar of insurers worldwide .