 Cuba is 90 miles off the coast of Florida . This development brought the Cold War close to home because Cuba is Cuba . The U.S. has been at odds with Cuba for decades .
 In October 1962, the United States learned that the Soviet Union was about to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. learned in October 1962 that the Soviets were planning to deploy the missiles . The Cuban missile strike was the first to hit Cuba in 1962 .
 Any Soviet attempt to penetrate the American blockade would be met with an immediate military response . U.S. would respond with a military response if any Soviet attempt was made .
 Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, October 27, 1962 . Letter from Chairman Khruschev to . President Kennedy . Letter . Khruski: "I am a man of honor to my people"
 President Obama: "You wish to ensure the security of your country, and this is understandable. This is understandable"
 Turkey has placed destructive missile weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey, literally next to us . But you have placed destructive missiles weapons, it's called offensive, the Turkish president says .
 Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the United States, for its part, will remove its from Turkey . The United States will remove the U.S. from Turkey, the president says .
 "The greatest joy for all peoples would be the announcement of our agreement," says President Obama . "Great joy would be to announce the agreement," he says .
 I have read your letter of Oct.th with great care and welcomed the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem . I have been in touch with the letter to express our appreciation of the letter .
 "There is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days," says President Obama .
 The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding ""other armaments""", as proposed in your letter .
 The continuation of this threat by linking these problems to the broader questions of European and world security, would surely be a grave risk to the peace of the world, writes Peter Bergen .
 Dobrynin’s cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, October 27, 1962, was published in 1962 . The cable was sent to the Russian Ambassador to Soviet Russia .
 I am sure the Soviets will respond and a real war will begin, in which millions of Americans and Russians will die . In response to the U.S. invasion of Crimea, the Soviet Union will respond . Millions of Americans, Russians and Americans will die, says author .
 R Kennedy: “If that is the only obstacle to achieving the rules I mentioned earlier, then the president doesn’t see any difficulties in resolving this issue”
 The deployment of missile bases in Turkey was officially done by special decision of the NATO Council . NATO Council made a special decision to deploy the bases in the country .
 President Kennedy ready to come to agreement with Khrushchev . President Kennedy is ready to agree on that question . Kennedy: "I want to know if you want to go to war with the Soviet Union"
 I think that in order to withdraw these bases from Turkey we need 4-5 months. We need to withdraw them from Turkey. I think this is a long way to go, and we need more time .
 Russian Ambassador Dobrynin cable to Foreign Ministry, October 27, 1962 . Russian ambassador to Soviet Union: "I am not afraid to go to the U.S. Embassy"
 Russian Foreign Ministry archives were released in the early 1990s . They were released by the Foreign Ministry of Russia .