 When I'm not involved in Model UN, I spend my time in the Science and Technology Club, while also playing football and rugby . I also play rugby, football and science and technology .
 I look forward to see how the Missile Crisis plays out in my committee, says Sen. Barbara Walters .
 The delegates representing Kennedy 2 and Khrushchev will have veto power over all resolutions and directives . The veto can be overridden by a ⅔ majority of votes .
 The Excomm and the Politburo will debate amongst themselves, and can meet in one room to negotiate with the other side at certain times . The ExComm and Politbure will will debate among themselves .
 Delegates can also send messages between the two committees during internal debate . Delegates also can send messages to each other during internal debates .
 As crisis committees, both the Excomm and the Politburo possess the power to pass directives within the power of the respective executive branches of each nation . The Excomm is encouraged to compromise and avoid escalation of the conflict . As crisis committee members, both are encouraged to avoid escalation .
 The first phase of the Cold War took place two years after the Second World War . The Cold War was the first period of its kind .
 The USSR solidified its control over the states of the Eastern Bloc . The United States strengthened ties with Western Europe by extending military and financial aid and creating the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The U.S. strategy of global containment began in the United States strategy .
 The USSR and USA competed for influence in Latin America, and the decolonizing states of Africa and Asia . They were competing for influence over Latin America and Africa .
 In 1957, the Soviet Union successfully launched the world’s first manmade satellite into orbit . The nuclear arms race took on a new dimension in 1957 . The Soviet Union was the first to successfully launch a manmade space satellite .
 Policy makers understood that any missile capable of sending a satellite into orbit could do the same for nuclear warhead . Unlike aircraft with atomic bombs, there was no defense against a ballistic missile, which introduced the idea of mutually assured destruction with nuclear weapons .
 On June 1, 1961, the United States officially started to deploy Jupiter type nuclear intermediate-range ballistic missiles targeting the Soviet Union in Turkey . On the planet’s surface, the competition took the form of an arms race .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev discussed international relations in Vienna on June 3rd, 1961 . During a meeting in Vienna, the two leaders met to discuss international relations .
 President Kennedy accepted the Berlin Wall lest war break out . Ultimately the tanks were withdrawn and President Kennedy withdrew .
 Kennedy launched a covert operation to overthrow Fidel Castro’s communist regime in Cuba . Only a few months after assuming the presidency, Kennedy decided to launch a covert mission to overthrow Castro .
 The U.S. suffered a massive national security embarrassment in what became known as the Bay of Pigs invasion . The invasion was a massive embarrassment in the United States .
 The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency trained a group of Cuban exiles who attempted to invade Cuba in April 1961 . The group was part of an effort to trigger an anti-Castro rebellion against Castro .
 Just before the launch of the operation, Kennedy decided not to provide United States military support for the invasion .
 Cuban military forces caused the exiled Cuban army to route . As a result, Cuban forces forced the exiled army out of Cuba . The Cuban army was forced to leave Cuba .
 Few Cubans rose up against Castro and more than one thousand Cuban rebels were captured . In addition, few Cuban rebels rose against Castro . Few Cuban rebels are now alive in Cuba .
 The Western Bloc consisted of the United States, NATO allies, and other nations, 5 . The Eastern Bloc contained the Soviet Union and its satellite states .
 The two global superpowers supported many smaller scale regional wars known as proxy wars . However in the absence of a direct military confrontation, the two support each other in the region .
 The Cold War split up the previous wartime alliance against Nazi Germany . It was the first time the Cold War had been formed .
 Both sides never engaged in full-scale combat, but they were prepared for a possible nuclear war . Both sides were heavily prepared for the possibility of a nuclear war in the 1950s .
 The struggle for dominance was expressed via proxy wars around the globe, psychological warfare, massive propaganda campaigns and espionage, rivalry at sports events and technological competitions such as the Space Race .
 Nikita Khrushchev first considered placing nuclear missiles on Cuba . It was because of this numerical advantage that Soviet Premier considered placing missiles there . The Cuban population had a numerical advantage over the Soviet Union .
 The strategic location of Cuba would give the Soviet Union the kind of deterrent capability that numbers alone could not, he said . He hoped that Cuba would be a deterrent to Soviet Union .
 Castro readily agreed to accept the Soviet weapons on Cuban territory . Fearful of another U.S. invasion of Cuba, Castro readily accepted the weapons .
 During the summer of 1962, Soviet construction crews worked feverishly to prepare bases and installations that would be needed to fire and store the weapons .
 U.S. U–2 aircraft took several pictures showing sites for missiles under construction in Cuba . Despite the warning, the images were clearly showing missile sites under construction .
 On October 15th, 1962, an American reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed that the Soviets were constructing missile sites in Cuba . The Soviets were building missile sites .
 Debate raged in the U.S. government for a week after the discovery of the discovery . Debate raged over how to respond to the situation in Cuba .
 Encyclopædia Britannica: Cold War Cold War . Britannica. 17 Feb.17, www.britannica.com .
 U.S. State Department: "Cub an-missile-crisis" State Department's history.gov: "The Cuban missile crisis was a major event"