 As workers lost their jobs, the impact on them and their families was devastating . Social effects of the Great Depression were devastating . The Great Depression was a devastating period of unemployment .
 At the height of the AND AUSTRALIA Depression, 28 per cent of workers were unemployed . At the peak of the and AUSTralia Depression, at the time of the Great Depression, the unemployment rate was at 28.7 per cent .
 Many people lost their homes and were forced to live in makeshift dwellings in shanty towns . Many people are now living in makeshift homes in shantant towns .
 Government introduced welfare payments for people who had nowhere else to turn . The government introduced the payments for those who had no other options .
 ADAMANT is one technique used by historians to interpret primary and secondary sources . Being unemployed was seen as very shameful, and depending on ‘susso’ was degrading . The ADAMAN is a form of analysis of historical sources .
 ADAMANT 1.1 stands for author, date, audience, message, agenda, nature and technique . ADAMant 1 stands for authors, audiences, audience and technique. 1.2 stands for the author, author, audience .
 Using ADAMANT, evaluate The Great Depression in Australia Source 1.1 as a primary source .
 Wall Street crash in October 1929 signalled a worldwide depression . Conditions in Australia had begun to deteriorate even before this . Conditions had already been deteriorating before .
 Australia had borrowed overseas money, and as prices for wheat and wool began to fall, the government found it was unable to repay the loans . The government was forced to rely heavily on the money from overseas money .
 Australian banks also cut back on lending, and unemployment began to spiral . Unemployment began to rise as the economy began to falter .
 As more people lose jobs and can't borrow money, paying for goods and services became impossible . As more and more people lost their jobs and could not borrow money people could not afford to pay for goods .
 In turn, fewer people were paying taxes, leading to a drop in income for the government . The government says fewer people are paying taxes and fewer people pay taxes .
 Government jobs lost as a result, and the cycle of depression and economic hardship continued . Government jobs were lost in the country's economic downturn .
 We’re on the susso now, We can’t afford a cow, ges Audience . We live in a tent, We pay no rent, We're on the  susso now .
 The ‘susso’ is an Australian slang term, originating in the Great Depression and referring to welfare payments . It is a slang term that originated in the Depression .
 Sir Donald Bradman is regarded as one of the world's best batsmen . Bradman was a hero of the Great Depression during the 1930s and 1940s .
 Bradman’s significance, 1 Gandhi and the nationalist however, is due to more than just being a great achievement in India cricketer . Bradman is one of the most famous cricketers in the world .
 Many of his achievements on the cricketing field took place during the Depression during the 1930s .
 The majority of Australians out of was the largest empire in history . With the majority of Australia out of the . largest empire, the largest . empire in . history . The majority were out of . the largest empires in history. Australia .
 India was work and struggling to find a place to live and brought into the empire during the seventeenth something to eat, life was a continual hardship . World Ordinary people were inspired by the feats of War I, a nationalist movement began .
 Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born in India and trained in London as a lawyer . He returned to India to use new methods of non-violent protest to gain independence, civil rights and freedom for his country . Gandhi was the leader of this movement .
 Don Bradman was the ordinary Australian writ large, who came from an ordinary house ges in a small provincial town . Bradman had a certain gift for music and salesmanship, golf and tennis .
 He found his calling and practised it, and with it he electrified a nation and startled an empire . He electrified the nation and shocked an empire with it, with it .
 Gandhi was a religious man who saw violence as unnecessary . He became a hero when heroes were sorely needed, when pa pa pa Source 1.2.1 .
 World Depression splintered the hope of innocent lives and put through pointless torment families and communities deserving of better . World Depression had splinted the hope and the hope for innocent lives .
 Don Bradman showed what persistence, courage, concentration and a certain focused cleverness can do, however . The Essence of Non-violence m hard the situation and however great the forces .
 He showed that valour, dignity, grace under pressure and the poetry of personal effort are qualities that all can reach for, whatever our street of origin or family advantage .
 "Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infinitely greater than and superior to brute force," he writes . "His life had suffering in it, but the love that was always at his back, of the woman he had loved from Non-violence"
 "In the last resort it does not avail to those who do not possess a living faith in the God of Love," she said .
 Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s self-respect and sense of honour, but not always to possession of land or movable property . Non-violent practice is a better bulwark than the possession of armed men to defend them .
 Non-violence in the very nature of things is of no assistance in the defence of his boyhood and swore he would not survive very long, swore he wouldn't survive very . "He was sustained, nourished and cheered him in the darkest of his years," he said .
 Individuals and nations who would practise Nonviolence must be prepared to sacrifice their all except honour . Nonviolence is a form of nonviolence that involves sacrifice of honour, not honour .
 It is therefore inconsistent with the possession of other people’s countries,e.e. modern Source Premier Bob Carr on death of Sir Donald Bradman, 25 February 2001 .
 Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally by all—children, young men and women or grown up people, a Using ADAMANT, interpret Sources .
 Present a summary of your analysis below. provided they have a living faith in the God of Love and have therefore equal love for all mankind. provide they have . Therefore, they should be able to live in the same faith as those who believe in God .
 Non-violence is accepted as the law of life it must pervade the whole being and not be applied to isolated acts . Non-violent acts must not be carried out in isolated acts, says the author of the book .
 It is a profound error to suppose that whilst the law is good enough for individuals it is not for masses of mankind . It is the law for individuals but for millions of people, it is for the masses, says the author .
 An extract from Gandhi’s writings on non-violence, 1.2 Harijan, 5 September 1936 . Find out about the life of Sir Donald Bradman using the above sources and additional research .
 Use the information to write a report in a Word document outlining what the cricketer did for the Australian people during the Depression .
 This war was different to a traditional war where armed conflict takes place, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 The Cold War was a state of continual tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union that did not develop into direct military action . It was the Cold War between the United States and the USSR .
 Both sides possessed nuclear weapons that, if used, would have assured their mutual destruction . The war involved tense periods and incidents that stopped short of outright war .
 A U.S. Air Force spy plane photographed a nuclear missile base being constructed on Cuba in 1962 . The base was being built on Cuba .
 The United States President, John F Kennedy, was shown the photographs on 16 October . The photographs were taken at the request of President Kennedy .
 Photos show missile sites being prepared . Three days later, more missile sites were being prepared in the area .
 On 22 October, President Kennedy announced a naval blockade of all ships travelling to Cuba to quarantine all military equipment . Kennedy announced the blockade on 22 October .
 Nikita Khrushchev instructed ships to ignore the blockade . Initially, the Soviet Leader was infuriated and instructed ships not to be stopped .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter acknowledging the serious nature of the incident and turned back Soviet ships before they reached the blockade . Two days after the incident, Kennedy wrote a letter to the Soviet leader .
 Using Source 1.3.1, explain why the U.S. was concerned about a missile base being constructed in Cuba . Use this article to help us understand why the United States was concerned .
 Sa Gandhi followed the belief of satyagraha which translates as ‘truth-force’ and is a component of nonviolent resistance . Sa Gandhi was inspired by his belief in the concept of 'truth force'
 Using the information on Gandhi and your own research, create an electronic presentation (of approximately four slides) on satyagraha and how it was used in the Indian fight for self-determination . Create a four-slide presentation of about four slides .
 Both of the main players could have reacted differently to the circumstances of the incident . Explain your answer to the question: 'Why did you react differently to what happened?'
 Complete the table below by giving three possible scenarios for each person and how this may have altered events . The table includes three scenarios each person may have been involved in the events that occurred .
 Source 1.4.4 and 1.5.4 show two different perspectives of the 11 September terrorist attacks . Source: The 9/11 terrorist attacks were carried out on September 11, 2001, in New York City .
 Australia has been active in assisting the United Nations in its peacekeeping role for more than 50 years . Australia has assisted the U.N. peacekeeping in Timor-Leste in more than 60 years .
 In 1975, the Portuguese colony of East Timor was invaded by Indonesia . It became that country’s 27th province . In 1975 it was invaded and became part of the Indonesian territory . Indonesia is now the largest country in the world .
 Timor-Leste officially came into being in May 2002 . This was followed by two decades of conflict between those who wanted independence and those who supported Indonesia . Timor Leste is now an independent nation of Indonesia .
 Australia currently supports peacekeeping in the region with approximately 2000 personnel and equipment such as Blackhawk helicopters .
 Annotate your map with the information you have found about each place located on your map . Use this map to create a map of your favorite places in the U.S.
 Agenda pa d Investigate what the current situation is in regards to peace in Timor-Leste . Investigate the situation in the country to find out more about the country's future .
 Find a current newspaper article and summarise your information using who, what, where, when, why and how . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 Interview two adults who were adults when the attacks took place in Australia . Interview two people who have been adults at the time of the attacks . Interview the adults who have lived in Australia since the attacks occurred . Find out more about the attacks in the book .
 Using the above information on Timor-Leste and your own research, construct a timeline of events did or didn’t have the same effect and include this in your report from question peacekeeping efforts in the region . Explain in detail why these e explains why these actions were taken
 We speak out to put the world on guard against what is happening in South Africa . Apartheid. We speak . The world is on the brink of war against apartheid.
 The brutal policy of apartheid is applied before the eyes of the nations of the world . South Africa's brutal policy is applied to the world's nations, says Nelson Mandela .
 Human rights standards are contained in internationally agreed human rights treaties and declarations . Use the ADAMANT technique to evaluate Source 1.6.2 as a primary source .
 Under this system, a person’s rights and opportunities were determined by the colour of their skin . The system was set up under the rule of colour of skin .
 Using the information above and your own research about the system of Apartheid, compare and contrast the rights and freedoms of white and black people living under the system . An anti-Apartheid movement developed in the 1960s and 1970s, with the international community putting political pressure on South Africa
 Present your findings in the Venn diagram below . Use the diagram to help you understand the history of Australia and the world .
 Nelson Mandela was the first president of South Africa to be elected in a democratic election . Mandela was elected in the first democratic election in South Africa . Nelson Mandela is a South African politician .
 Be sure to include who, what, where, when, when and why and how to structure your article .