 Switzerland took on a large number of mandates to represent the diplomatic interests of foreign states in third countries during the Second World War . This was mainly due to its policy of neutrality . During the war, Switzerland represented the interests of third countries .
 Switzerland's mandate to represent the U.S. in Cuba is the longest in Swiss history . The Swiss government has been chosen to represent Cuba in Cuba for the first time .
 The U.S. Interests Section in Havana was part of the United States Interests section in Havana . It lasted from 1961 to 2015, albeit a reduced form from 1977 .
 From 1961 onwards, it engaged intensively in negotiations and worked hard to find solutions benefiting U.S. citizens and interests in Cuba . The United States has been involved in negotiations since 1961 .
 This was especially true in the first years, amid global tensions resulting from the Cold War . The first years were especially true during the first year, amid the global tensions .
 Swiss representation in Cuba acted as a privileged intermediary between the two governments, a neutral but effective player in extremely tense political situations .
 The Cuban government was instrumental in enabling 260,000 Cubans to leave for the U.S. In particular, it was able to help more than half a million Cubans leave .
 Switzerland took on a large number of mandates to represent the interests of foreign states in third countries during the Second World War . Switzerland's neutrality was due to its policy of neutrality in a conflict-torn world . The Swiss government took on many of the mandates during World War Two .
 The United States' proposal in October 1960 that Switzerland should represent U.S. interests in Cuba was unexpected . The small size of the Swiss diplomatic mission compared with the staff of other countries such as the United Kingdom .
 Switzerland's neutrality combined with its long-standing experience as a protecting power for foreign interests, dating back to the Franco-German War of 1870-1871, meant that Switzerland's good offices were called upon numerous times throughout the 20th century .
 Its assistance was also sought during the first period of the Cold War between 1947 and 1963, most notably in the immediate aftermath of the Suez Crisis of 1956 .
 From 6 January 1961, Switzerland began to represent United States interests in Cuba . Switzerland represented the United States in Cuba after the breaking of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the U.S.
 The U.S. Interests Section in Havana was taken over by United States officials in Havana in 1977 . This representation mandate is the longest in Swiss history, lasting from 1961 until the present .
 Switzerland agreed to take on the mandate of protecting U.S. interests in Havana . In 1961, following the breaking of diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba, Switzerland took on the role of protecting United States interests .
 The request was made by United States Secretary of State Christian Herter to the Swiss ambassador in Washington, August Lindt . Lindt is a Swiss chocolate bar .
 The Swiss government has accepted the mandate subject to the Cuban consent of the Cuban authorities . The Cuban government in Havana was informed by the government in Bern .
 The ambassador in Havana secured this agreement after Czechoslovakia agreed to represent Cuba in Washington . The ambassador to Havana quickly secured the agreement . Czechsoslovakia will represent Cuba at the U.S. Embassy in Washington.
 The first major task was to explain to the new revolutionary government the international rules governing the role of a protecting power .
 Nine Swiss personnel were dispatched immediately to replace the 60 or so U.S. officials . Nine Swiss officials were dispatched to replace 60 or more United States officials .
 Gaston Jaccard and Emil Stadelhofer were Switzerland's ambassador to Cuba in November 1961 . This preliminary assignment was overseen by Gaston Jaccard, who would become Switzerland's ambassador to Cuba in Nov 1961 .
 From the outset, the priority for the Swiss delegation was to organise the departure of US citizens . The Swiss delegation assumed both the consular and diplomatic mandate, which included both consular duties and diplomatic duties .
 From spring 1961, tensions ran high between the U.S. and Cuba, with the attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs and other disputes surrounding the confiscation of ships and aircraft registered in one country but located in the other .
 The archives attest to intense diplomatic activity and many attempts by the Swiss embassy to explain and ease tensions . The archives of the Swiss Embassy's archives show that diplomatic efforts have been made by the embassy .
 A direct dialogue was established, as testified by the various photos from the Swiss Federal Archives attached to this document . The dialogue was a direct dialogue between the two sides .
 He would frequently remind his interlocutors of the principles of public international law, while maintaining a strict neutrality that gained him much credit .
 Cuban government approves quick and pragmatic solutions that met with approval of U.S. citizens . President Obama also came up with quick, pragmatic solutions to the situation in Cuba .
 The issue of political prisoners and individuals arrested after the failed invasion of the Bay of Pigs proved harder to resolve . Political prisoners were political prisoners after the failure of the successful invasion .
 The Swiss embassy showed constant concern for their plight and endeavoured to enforce humanitarian law, in accordance with its mandate and the Swiss tradition .
 In October 1962, Kennedy announced a blockade on all deliveries of military equipment to Cuba . He demanded the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already on the island .
 Lindt was asked to inform Fidel Castro that the United States would be making reconnaissance flights over Cuba . The signal rockets should not be mistaken for bombs, triggering a response from Cuban air defences .
 From Brunner's house, Lindt called Stadelhofer, who forwarded the message straight to Castro . The message was sent within an hour to confirm the transmission of the message . Lindt: "It's a good thing that you can talk to Castro"
 Lindt was able to get back to Rusk between 4 and 5m. and assure him that no Cuban response was to be feared . This allowed Lindt to get . back to . assure Rusk that no . Cuban response would be feared, Lindt said .
 The Cuban 3 Federal Department of Foreign Affairs FDFA General Secretariat GS-FDFA Presence Switzerland Missile Crisis ended on 28 October with an exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 Major Rudolf Anderson Jr. was shot down on 27 October . However, an American aircraft flown by Major Anderson, Jr. died in the crash .
 Swiss delegation helped repatriate pilot's remains on board a US plane repainted in Swiss colours . Pilot's remains were found in a plane painted with Swiss colours on board .
 Stadelhofer, described as an inventive and extremely dedicated man, began to play a leading role from this point . He is described as 'extremely dedicated man'
 In 1964, the Líder Máximo presented him with his beret at a reception in Switzerland .
 Following the 1962 missile crisis, all maritime and air links between the U.S. and Cuba were suspended .
 Red Cross delivered medicines by boat and plane in exchange for return of prime suspects in 1961 invasion . Agreement between the two countries allowed the Red Cross to deliver medicines by plane and boat . Red Cross was allowed to deliver medicine by boat, plane .
 Stadelhofer prevailed on senior officials to allow a number of American citizens to board these boats and the weekly flights chartered by the Red Cross on their empty return journeys .
 Obtaining these passages, handling applications, checking passenger details and responding to hundreds of letters sent to the Swiss embassy was a huge burden . Obtaining the applications, . checking passenger . details and . checking . passenger details was a big burden .
 The embassy staff were motivated and resilient in the face of challenging local conditions . However, the embassy staff are resilient and motivated .
 The ambassador was unable to walk in the street without being stopped at every turn by people begging him to help them leave . For example, the ambassador was forced to help people leave the country .
 Emil Stadelhofer is a U.S. citizen who has dual nationality in Cuba . Handling the applications and practicalities for the return of United States citizens and those with dual nationality would be a concern .
 Switzerland continued its work defending the interests of two countries that were no longer talking to one another . Cuba and Switzerland are no longer speaking each other .
 Switzerland would assist the U.S. judicial authorities and act as intermediaries with the Cuban government, which diligently provided what information it had . Switzerland would also assist the United States judicial authorities .
 Four Cuban fishing vessels were arrested by the United States Coast Guard on 2 February 1964 . The U.S. Coast Guard arrested the vessels and their crews were detained .
 In retaliation, Cuba cut off the water supply to the United States naval base at 4 Federal Department of Foreign Affairs . The move elicited a note of protest from the U.S., delivered by Stadelhofer .
 Stadelhofer intervened in person, declaring that this was diplomatic property . Vienna Convention would be violated only over his body, he said .
 Cubans made no further attempts to nationalise the U.S. embassy . After that, Cubans did not attempt to do so again . The embassy was nationalised by the Cubans in 1961 .
 Stadelhofer negotiated the repatriation of Cuban fishermen in exchange for the return of a hijacked American vessel and aircraft . In February 1964, it was also negotiated the . return of hijacked American vessels and aircraft as well as the cessation of hostile actions against the Guantanamo naval base .
 A number of South American countries entrusted Switzerland with defending their interests in Havana . Switzerland had diplomatic relations with Cuba during this period .
 Thousands of Cubans set sail from the port of Camarioca, near Varadero . Some of the vessels were unsafe and capsized, often with children aboard .
 As happened whenever Stadelhofer made representations to the Cuban government, Fidel Castro listened and looked for solutions to avoid heightening tensions . As happened happened whenever the German government made representations .
 In this case, he was moved by the drownings and wanted an immediate end to them on humanitarian grounds . He wanted an end to the deaths of people who drowned in the water .
 Washington and Havana decided in their common interest to end the sealift . Havana and Washington decided in the common interest of ending the sealingift .
 The United States instructed the Swiss embassy to negotiate the conditions for an airlift from Varadero to Miami . The U.S. told the Swiss Embassy to negotiate conditions for the airlift . The airlift is scheduled to take place in Miami .
 Stadelhofer was given precise instructions but conducted the negotiation himself . He conducted the negotiations himself . The negotiations took place in the middle of the summer .
 An agreement was reached between Cuba and the United States (with no time limitation), resulting in an airlift operation starting on 1 December . The operation is scheduled to take place on December 1 .
 3,000 to 4,000 Cubans per month on board U.S. aircraft departing from Varadero military airport . The departure enabled the departure of between 3,00 and 4,500 Cubans a month .
 9,268 refugees left Cuba in 1965, including 3,349 in December alone . In total, 9,000 refugees left the country in total, including in December .
 The Swiss embassy played a leading role in managing the airlift . The airlift remained in place for the next seven years .
 It was tasked with interviewing all those applying to leave, for approval by Washington .
 By the end of the operation in April 1973, a total of 260,737 Cubans had entered the U.S. this way . The operation was the first Cubans to enter the United States .
 By 1977, the mandate was not over but a partial rapprochement between the two countries resulted in the establishment of a ""United States Interests Section of the Swiss Embassy in Havana""", enabling the return of American diplomats to Cuba .
 The Swiss flag still flew over the former United States embassy building . However, the Swiss mandate continued with the Swiss flag .
 A ""Cuban Interests Section" was also established in Washington (under the protection of Czechoslovakia) Cuban diplomats returned to Washington after the war . A Cuban interest section was established under the protection from Czechoslovakians .
 Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba were restored in July 2015 . Cuba assumed this mandate until 20 July 2015, when diplomatic relations were restored .
 Direct dialogue between Cuba and the U.S. has gradually strengthened since 1977 . Switzerland's dual mandate ends today .
 Switzerland welcomes the restoration of diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba on 20 July 2015 . Switzerland is the only country in the world to have diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Its dual mandate to protect the interests of these countries is drawing to a close . It is drawing into a close.
 Switzerland will continue to make available its good offices during the process of normalising relations, if desired . Switzerland has offered to help Switzerland normalise relations with Russia .