 President Kennedy called together his closest advisers to decide the course of action for the U.S. after the CIA had shown him evidence of Soviet missiles on the island of Cuba .
 Archive has become the most prolific and successful non-profit user of the United States Freedom of Information Act . Founded in 1985, the Archive has been the most successful and successful user of FOIA since 1985 .
 Archive's microfiche, CD-ROM and Web publications of declassified documents now totaling over 500,000 pages . Blanton serves as series editor of the Archive's publications .
 Washingtonpost.com moderators retain editorial control over Live Online discussions . moderators choose the most relevant questions for guests and hosts .
 The most surprising new evidence revealed that we were even closer to nuclear war than we knew at the time . Robert McNamara thought he might not live to see the sunrise on Saturday .
 Joint Chiefs had recommended air strike and invasion of Cuba, as of 4m. The Joint Chiefs recommend air strikes and invasion . Joint Chiefs also recommended air strikes, invasion and invasion as of Cuba .
 The Cubans were firing on all the low-level U.S. recon flights . The Cuban government was firing on low-low-level United States recon flights.
 U.S. destroyers were dropping signaling depth charges on a Soviet submarine near the quarantine line that was carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo -totally unbeknownst to the United States Navy . At the conference, we found out that exactly at that moment, United States destroy
 The Soviet captain lost his temper, there could be a world war up there, let's take some of them down with us, etc. etc. Let's take a look at the Soviet captain losing his temper . Let's go back to the page you came from, "Let's
 The sub brigade deputy commander named Vasily Arkhipov calmed the captain down . Cooler heads prevailed, and the captain was calmed down .
 The sub came to the surface about 15 minutes after Soviet ambassador Dobrynin left Bobby Kennedy's office carrying RFK's urgent message to Khrushchev . RFK: If you take the missiles out, we will pledge not to invade Cuba, plus we'll take our missiles out of
 Early the next morning, Khrushchev announced the Soviet missiles would be coming out . The missiles were the first Soviet missiles to be released from the Soviet Union .
 JFK was the main ""dove"" throughout the discussions of the ExComm. JFK was JFK's main "dove" during the discussions . JFK was also JFK's 'dove' in the discussions during the 1960s .
 The first reaction of the President and all his advisers, 40 years ago today, as they looked at the photos of the missiles, was we'll have to take them out . President George W. Bush's first reaction was to remove the missiles from the site .
 Bobby Kennedy was initially one of the most hard-line attack-oriented advisers, but quickly picked up on his brother's caution . By the end he was leading the secret diplomacy with Dobrynin, Bobby Kennedy's brother was leading him .
 Robert McNamara was right with the President on the caution front, but McNamara also kept the military options open . McNamara kept the President right on the President's side .
 Ted Sorensen summed up the arguments against pre-emptive strike on Oct. 31, 1962 . JFK was JFK's voice on the issue . JFK: "There is no need to be a war in the United States"
 The Joint Chiefs were seriously out of step with the President, as was Dean Acheson . President George W. Bush and President Richard Nixon were in touch with the U.S. President .
 JFK dresses down Dean Rusk for not having worked through all the options ahead of time . JFK says Rusk didn't have worked through the options before .
 I would highly recommend your reading the second and third volume of the ""Great Crises"" transcripts of the Kennedy tapes, produced by the Miller Center at UVa. and published by Norton.
 If he was pursuing the deterrence model, he would have made sure the U.S. knew about the missiles . Logically, it would have been possible to make sure the United States knew about it .
 Castro's criticism of Khrushchev was for putting the missiles in secretly . Castro criticized for putting missiles in secret . Castro was critical of the secret weapons program .
 Castro presented evidence showing the Cubans in the summer of 1962 argued for a public mutual defense treaty and public placement of the missiles . The U.S. put its medium-range missiles in Turkey the same way the United States did .
 Ted Sorensen said it would have tied U.S. hands if the Soviets had placed the missiles openly . The key for the United States having the high ground was the secrecy and deceit about the missiles, he said . Ted Sorennsen: The key to the U
 Documents suggest Khrushchev didn't want to hurt Kennedy politically by doing this openly during mid-term election season, fall 1962, but planned to spring it on the world in late November . The documents suggest he planned to do this in late fall 1962 .
 Obviously, the Soviets never thought through their actions and the U.S. response . The Soviet Union never thought about their actions, and the United States did .
 It sounds like General Sweeney thought if they bombed the installation, they wouldn't get all the missile launcers and thus we'd be exposed to a direct attack . General Sweeney didn't want to bomb the installation so it wouldn't be bombed .
 "As an engineer I can say, you can't build up to that level of completion and still hide the evidence of construction. As an engineer he can say," he said .
 Kennedy MUST have had U2 overflight photos MONTHS before the drama of October played out . Kennedy must have had photos of U2 on overflight flight months before the tragedy of October .
 "Please don't tell me because they didn't have enough funding or the authority to do so," she says . And please don't say because they had to . "I don't know why they're not doing this. And please tell me," she asks .
 As an engineer, you should take a good look at the extraordinary feat of engineering the Soviets managed in getting all that equipment and all those people to Cuba in a very short time .
 U-2 photographs from Aug. and Sept. show no construction whatsoever at missile sites . Only anti-aircraft sites are underway .
 The Soviets surged the construction, these were mobile missiles on trailers . All they had to do was pour some concrete for the pad and run some cables for the command-and-control and keep the nitric acid fuel away .
 The CIA caught the build-up, took photos of every single Soviet ship on its way to Cuba, but only the DCI John McCone believed MRBMs were on their way .
 CIA received 3,000 human intelligence reports of sightings of missiles in Cuba before the first one went in . CIA had already received some 3.000 reports of missile sightings in Cuba prior to the first strike .
 CIA/Navy/SAC photographic collection is one of the greatest intelligence feats of our time . After the U-2 caught the missiles on Oct. 31, the U.S. Navy and CIA captured the missiles in a joint effort to capture them . The collection of photos is
 Only 33 of the 42 missiles we now know were there were found, and not one of the warheads for either the missiles or the tactical weapons . Even so, they only found 33 of 42 missiles .
 If the U.S. had invaded, the likelihood is, we would have set off a nuclear exchange . The likelihood is that the United States would have caused a nuclear war .
 JFK and his advisers are debating what to do about the two letters and thinking, well, we've got to respond to the tough one, that says the Soviets will only pull out if the U.S. pulls out of Turkey . JFK's advisers were debating whether to pull out of
 Tommy Thompson, longtime Russia expert, former ambassador to Moscow, knows Khrushchev personally . Thompson: "Let's give him a way out, he wants to be able to say he saved Cuba, let's ignore the Turkey letter" Thompson: Let's ignore Turkey letter and give him
 JFK did both, the pledge on Cuba publicly and the Turkey deal secretly . JFK pledged Cuba to Turkey publicly and secretly .
 The main lesson is they achieved Khrushchev's pullback by putting themselves in their adversary's shoes . They avoided backing him against the wall, and looked for alternatives short of war - which at best is a crude instrument of policy .
 JFK commented on the tapes: "We're not going to have a very good war if we find out later we could have gotten the missiles out by trading ours in Turkey"
 I recently heard a radio show discussing the recently released Kennedy tapes regarding the missile crisis . Kennedy tapes were released on the Kennedy tapes about the crisis .
 Kennedy withdrawal of our medium-range nuclear missles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviets' pulling their missle from Cuba was a new revelation, i.e., that Kennedy swap had long been hidden from the American public .
 The first version of the story put out by Kennedy advisers in leaks after the crisis was only Adlai Stevenson proposed such a trade, which the President refused . The first versions of the . story were put out in leaks from Kennedy advisers .
 In official testimony after the crisis, top officials Bundy and McNamara explicitly denied such a trade . Bundy, McNamara said in official testimony they would not have traded .
 In RFK's posthumous book, "Thirteen Days," he describes his conversation with Dobrynin as refusing any quid pro quo, just that the United States was planning to take the missiles out anyway .
 Only in 1989 Ted Sorensen admitted he edited that passage of the book before publication . Dobrynin pushed him to admit that he edited the passage in 1989 .
 Dobrynin's own cables back to Moscow, including one just published in the 1990s in the Cold War History Project Bulletin . RFK kept the letter for a day and gave it back, saying such a letter in the files could ruin his political career . Now we have Dobryn
 The real problem with the secrecy of this history is it contributed to the myth of ""calibrated brinksmanship"" - we have to hang tough, ratchet up the pressure, and the other guy will blink. The real issue is that the real problem is that it contributes to
 I am sure many military and civ DOD employees faced the same predictment as today and do today. I'm sure many of them are still dealing with the same situation today .
 I am a DOD employee and don't have a place to go in case of a nuc or WMD attack . I'm not sure if I'll be able to stay in the U.S. in the event of an attack .
 My dad was to be evacuated by chopper to someplace in Pennsylvania or Virginia . His father was evacuated by helicopter to a location in Virginia or Pennsylvania .
 Your dad would have emerged from a bunker to a ruined world, if a nuclear war went off . Your dad emerged from that bunker to emerge from the ruined world if a war broke out .
 We caught ourselves in a nuclear arms race that built up tons of fissile material that now represents perhaps the biggest threat to our national security . Unfortunately, we and the Soviets caught ourselves ourselves in an arms race .
 Robert McNamara and other officials came back to Cuba this past weekend to find out more about the nuclear dangers . The world can better reduce those risks in the future, McNamara says .
 There was a brief golden age of openness in the Soviet archives, from 1991 to 1993 -ironically corresponding with the brief age in the CIA archives . The CIA archives were closed to the public in 1993, when the CIA was closed .
 The National Security Archive's Russian specialists, led by Dr. Vladimir Putin, were at the conference this past weekend . Dr. Putin was invited to speak at the event in Moscow .
 Svetlana Savranskaya unearthed more than a thousand pages of new Soviet documents . The documents include military orders that gave local commanders authority to fire tactical nuclear weapons if an invasion came, then took that authority away at the height of the crisis .
 The Cuban government declassified nearly a thousand pages of its files, including all its defense agreements with the Soviets, long lists of all the equipment the Soviets gave them . Plus transcripts of Castro's very difficult meeting with Soviet emissary Mikoyan .
 U.S. covert operations that were meant to deter Castro from subverting the hemisphere actually compelled him to accept Soviet missiles . What's really interesting is the Cuban sense of constant threat from the United States, or put another way, our covert operations .
 For the Cubans, they call the crisis ""the October crisis,"" in effect the crisis of the month . In effect, the crisis is the 'October crisis' in effect . Cubans call the October crisis the "October crisis"
 JFK and Khrushchev were reckless before the crisis, but were cautious once the crisis broke . Both looking for a way out without war without war . JFK with covert operations and Nikita with secret deceitful missile deployment .
 Your archive seemed to be more anti-liberal now in releasing anti-Communism documents . Your archive seems to be less anti-Liberal now, in releasing documents .
 "Whoever is or was in power will be embarrassed by the kind of openness we're pushing," Obama says . Obama administration is pushing openness in the U.S. and around the world .
 We had to sue Presidents Reagan, Bush and Clinton to save the White House e-mail . The White House is suing the government to get rid of e-mails .
 We now have partners in 35 countries of like-minded people trying to open their secret files . We now want to open our secret files.
 In Poland those files not only embarrass Communists but lead to criminal trials for some of them . In Poland some of the files have led to some of those being tried for political crimes .
 In Chile those files embarrass generals and lead to criminal trials for some of them . In Chile, the files have led to some of the country's highest-ranking military leaders being investigated .
 The Cold War was often a dirty war, on all sides, and to say so does not amount to moral equivalency . It was not always a clean war, but it was a dirty conflict, all sides .
 In Russia then, no one did anything without orders from the homeland . Message traffic from Cuba stepped up noticeably during the construction and deployment phase of the missile systems .
 Documents show that the Soviets didn't propose the missiles to Castro until May 29, 1962 . We now know from Soviet documents that the missiles were proposed by the Soviets .
 Raul Castro didn't even have the treaty drafted until his trip to Moscow in early July . Castro had no idea of the treaty until he traveled to Moscow to sign it .
 Castro is sending Che Guevara to Moscow to make the final deal and argue to do the deployment openly . At the end of August, Castro plans to send Che to Moscow for the final decision .
 The deal was so closely held that the number 3 man in the Cuban military, now Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, was not told . Fernandez found out about it from his subordinates who were stationed around the first missile site in late September . He raises it with Raul Castro the Minister
 This book, plus one of the Kennedy tapes volumes, plus a new book by James Blight and Philip Brenner, ""Sad and Luminous Days"" on the Cuban perspective, plus the Fursenko/Naftali book ""One Hell of a Gamble" on the Soviet perspective
 Khruschev taught Cuba about the imbalance of power and interests between Cuba and its ""partner"" in relations with the United States . The Cuban leadership received a harsh lesson from the Soviet Union .
 That should have been gravely damaging to Castro's political position -really, to much of his overall philosophy . Castro's position is that of Castro's overall philosophy, and that of the Castro family .
 Cuban participants said they were reluctant to take the missiles and only did so out of ""solidarity"" with the socialist camp . The Cuban participants were reluctant .
 The Soviets cut their deal with the United States without consulting Castro . Castro only found out by accident on his trip to the USSR in May 1963 that Nikita had traded for the Turkish missiles .
 You should take a good look at the British ambassador's after-action report, included on our Web site . It's a spectacular, prophetic document .
 He goes on to predict a net result of long-term victory for Castro . He predicts a net win for Castro for the next four years .
 At one of our dinners in Havana, I must admit late at night after multiple anejos, a Cuban colleague raised a glass to the historical mystery of whether Cuba has suffered from American aggression or Soviet friendship .
 When Bobby spoke, the listener knew you were hearing from the President, just -as Richard Goodwin commented -with much less charm . Richard Goodwin: "Bobby spoke, but with less charm, less charm. It's not the same thing you hear from Bobby."
 As close to war as has been said some have even suggested that we were even closer to nuclear war during the Reagan years .
 There's mixed evidence on this, and I think the chances for accidential or delibate nuclear exchange were much less in 1983 than in 1962 . The chances for an exchange of nuclear weapons are much less likely in 1983 and 1962, he says .
 A CIA historian named Benjamin Fischer has written one of the best accounts of all this . Fischer writes about the CIA's involvement in the Vietnam War .
 Reagan shifted his Soviet policy pretty dramatically in early 1984 . Reagan's Soviet policy shifted dramatically in 1984 .
 Reagan had always wanted to film on US-Soviet relations . Reagan found a producer on the Soviet side to make the movie in 1985 .
 On NBC's ""Today" show a 1962 Navy officer was involved with the tracking and chase down one of several submerged Soviet diesel subs moving towards Cuba . The officer was a Navy officer involved in the chase .
 Each sub, unknown to U.S. leaders carried one nuclear tipped torpedo AND the tactical option to use it . Each sub had one nuclear tip torpedo and the option of using it .
 After 17 hours submerged the Soviet submarine being tracked by this author's captain launched a device thought immediately to be an attacking torpedo . The device thought to be a torpedo was thought to have been launched by the submarine .
 It was instead a sonar disruptor/noise making device launched to allow its escape . The device was launched by a device that was launched into the air .
 The U.S. ships captain says the next move was now in the mind of the captain . The next move is to make sure the ship is safe and secure .
 According to the author everyone knew that his next decision was key to their living or dying but as well whether humankind entered its last world war or continued to live . The author wrote that everyone knew their next decision would be key to survival .
 Capt. John Peterson had been dropping signaling depth charges on a Soviet sub on Oct. 31 . Capt. Peterson was dropped by the Soviet sub, but was saved by a rescue attempt . Peterson and Peterson were killed in the attack .
 No U.S. officer or policymaker knew about the nuclear-tipped torpedos before, and certainly not at the time in 1962 . One reason the story hasn't been told until this year is that it was only in the last couple years that the Russian submariners have come
 The real problem is that because of national security secrecy, the documents on these operations don't get released for years afterwards, sometimes 30 or even 40 years, while eyewitnesses are dying off . National security secrecy prevents the release of the documents from being released until after the war .
 "I think of this as two crossing lines, a rising line of the supply of documents over time, and a falling line of veterans and eyewitnesses," says author . I think of the rise of documents and the fall of eyewitnesses, he says .
 "Our whole historical effort is to move up the crossing of the two lines, closer to the events and closer to present," the author says . "We're going to try and get closer to events and the present," she says .
 We have been taking documents to Cuba since 1992 to persuade them to release their on-the-counter documents since 1992 . The documents are now being taken to Cuba by the Cuban government to release them .
 East Bloc items will be used to convince the CIA for more declassification . Then we bring back those items and use them to convince them to declassify them, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Robert McNamara talked at the Havana conference about his trips to India, trying to convince them not to go nuclear . McNamara: "I tried to convince [India] to not go nuclear"
 The Indians and the Pakistanis have not yet had their Cuban missile crisis, they think they are exempt from these lessons, and the world is a much riskier place for it . The world is much more riskier for it.
 The keys unlocked the buttons and the guards were off the red buttons, and the buttons were ready to be pushed . The keys had unlocked the keys and the . guards were . off the . red buttons .
 McNamara said in Havana he used to think the crisis was the best managed foreign policy crisis of the last 50 years . Now that he's gone through these conferences and learned so much that he didn't know at the time, McNamara believes we escaped nuclear war largely by luck .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev made good decisions at the end of October, but luck . Good decisions, in the sense of the caution by both of the two, were good decisions . Kennedy: "Good decisions" were made by both Kennedy and his government in October .
 Dino Brugioni, the CIA analyst who helped spot the missiles on the U-2 photographs, went through the incredible number of nuclear weapons that were on alert DEFCON 2 just short of war on Oct. 1962 . Something like 2,952 nukes on ICBMs
 Brugioni says it was ""divine providence"" that kept us from going over the brink . Brugioi says the country was saved from going into a state of emergency .
 Norfolk base commander says he wasn't so worried that the Soviet sub commanders would have launched their torpedos . But given the record over the years of accidents involving torpedoes, the change of accidental nuclear launch was all too great .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev avoided pushing the button because both were committed not to push it . It was luck that nobody else pushed the multiple buttons that were scattered all over Cuba and at the quarantine line .
 President Castro has discussed these problems at length, and claims a great deal of credit for Cuba's remarkable levels of literacy and infant mortality .
 USAF planes scrambled to prevent a possible interception of the U-2 over Siberia . One of them was this group of planes scrambling to stop a possible intercept .
 The USAF planes because of the DEFCON 2 alert were all armed with nuclear-tipped missiles meant for air combat . The planes were equipped with nuclear missiles .
 JFK called off the strikes, but the CIA's Richard Bissell went along with it . JFK called it off, and the CIA agreed to it . The strikes were canceled .
 Bissell thought the Mafia he was paying would actually assassinate Castro just before the invasion, a magic bullet so to speak . Bissell was paying the Mafia to assassinate Castro .
 The overall plan was tremendously flawed, and the air strikes were only one part of it . But the overall plan for air strikes was also flawed, he says .
 The whole idea that you can invade a foreign country and keep it quiet is absurd, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the idea of invading foreign countries and keeping quiet is "absurd"
 Peter Kornbluh's book, Bay of Pigs Declassified, is out in paperback from New Press/Norton . The CIA's own devastating critique of the plan can be found in Peter .
 Peter Peter's book also has Esterline's commentary and that of Jack Hawkins, the Marine amphibious expert who handled the military planning . Peter says the book is available in the U.S.