 On one side sat the United States and her North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies . On the other side was the U.S. and her allies .
 On the other side, from behind the Iron Curtain, the Soviet Union and her Warsaw Pact allies were at the ready . The Soviet Union was ready to take on the U.S. President Richard Nixon in 1968 .
 Unlike in a hot war, the U.S. and the Soviet Union did not directly fight each other . Unlike in the Cold War, the United States and Soviet Union didn't directly fought each other.
 The threat of invasion and attack was an imminent possibility, both sides raced to stockpile superior weapons . Both sides stockpiled superior weapons in anticipation of an invasion .
 Leaders of the U.S. and the Soviet Union strategically placed nuclear warheads throughout their own nations and in Europe . Like a game of chess, leaders of the United States and the . Soviet Union also strategically placed . warheads .
 The United States secretly installed nuclear missiles inside Turkey close to its border with the Soviet Union . With the full support of Turkey, the U.S. secretly installed the missiles in Turkey . The missiles were installed close to the border with Russia .
 Students will be amazed as they explore this nerve-racking moment in world history . Students will also be amazed at the moment the world's greatest moment was captured .
 Since 1960, U-2 spy planes had flown over Cuba gathering intelligence data for the U.S. government . The crisis began in Cuba .
 In October 1962, pictures taken of the island indicated something potentially threatening was happening . Pictures taken in October 1962 indicated something could be happening .
 Kennedy and his advisors discussed the United States’ options . Over the next several days, Kennedy and advisers discussed the U.S. options .
 Kennedy could use diplomatic pressure, a land invasion of Cuba, air strikes, or a naval blockade to force the Soviet Union to pull out its missiles . The Soviet Union could pull out missiles from Cuba if it wanted to do so .
 "Ignoring the situation and doing nothing is definitely not an option," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It was definitely not a decision to ignore the situation" "It's not an easy thing to do," he says .
 To learn about the first few days of the crisis, visit the National Archives site Eyewitness.com . To learn more about the events of the week, visit Eyewitness .
 Audio excerpt of October 18, 1962 meeting by President Nixon . Read the brief introduction; then click the tabs at the top to listen to a brief audio excerpt . Click here to hear the full transcript of the 1962 meeting .
 Read the special intelligence report and click here to choose your decision . Click here to see what you need to read .
 President Kennedy took his time in making a decision about how to handle the crisis in Cuba . President Kennedy made his decision on Cuba in 1963 .
 Many entries have multiple pages so be sure to read the entries in their entirety . Read the entire entries for the first time .
 Each entry also allows the viewer to see Kennedy’s daily appointments as well as what was in the news . Each entry includes Kennedy's daily appointments and the news surrounding them .
 Kennedy decided on a course of action and spoke to the American people about the events unfolding in Cuba . After several days of meeting with advisors and keeping the crisis out of the public realm, Kennedy decided to speak out .
 The first was to establish a quarantine of all weapons shipments to Cuba enforced by a naval blockade of the island . A naval blockade was enforced by the island's naval blockade .
 Kennedy warned the Soviet Union that the U.S. would consider a launch of nuclear weapons from Cuba against any Western Hemisphere target as a Soviet attack against the United States . Kennedy also warned that a launch from Cuba from Cuba would be considered a strike on any Western hemisphere target .
 On October 22, 1962, Kennedy wrote a letter to Chairman Khrushchev, the head of the Soviet Union, and included a transcript of his televised speech . Kennedy wrote the letter, which was sent to the Soviet leader, to include a transcript .
 Read an online version of Kennedy's letter at Yale Law School’s Avalon Project site . Kennedy: "I'm not going to give up on this. It's time for me to be able to make my point of view"
 The two world leaders exchanged letters throughout the following days . Throughout the week, they exchanged letters .
 Khrushchev's response to Kennedy’s letters is at the Library of Congress . Read the response to the Kennedy letters at the library of Congress at the Archives .
 During the crisis, President Kennedy spoke with other world leaders to gain their support . During the thirteen-day crisis, Kennedy also spoke with world leaders .
 Presidents between 1940 and 1973 secretly recorded over five thousand hours of presidential meetings and phone conversations . President George W. Bush recorded over 5,000 hours of meetings and conversations .
 Kennedy’s own conversations and meetings during this time of crisis . As a result, we are privy to some of Kennedy's own meetings and meetings .
 Listen and read the transcript of a phone conversation between Kennedy and British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan . Listen to the transcript from Kennedy's phone call with the British PM .
 World waited to see if the Soviet Union would challenge the U.S. naval quarantine of Cuba . The crisis ended after several tense days of tension between the two countries .
 An attempt by a Soviet ship to defy quarantine could very easily lead to war, even nuclear war . An attempt to defy the quarantine could lead to a nuclear war, experts say .
 The incident ended peacefully with the Soviet agreement to remove the missiles from Cuba . Fortunately, it ended peacefully .
 The U.S. agreed not to invade Cuba and secretly removed their missiles from Turkey . The United States, in turn, agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba and remove them .
 Cuba remained a communist nation under the leadership of Fidel Castro, but with the removal of the Soviet missiles, the U.S. could breathe easier .
 Even after the assassination of President John F Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev’s fall from power, the Soviet Union and the U.S. remained enemies .
 TEKS §113.32. Understands how the Cold War and conflicts in Korea and Vietnam influenced domestic and international politics . TEKS: "Postwar United States understands how Cold War influenced domestic, international politics"