 Fidel Castro overthrew the American-backed dictator Batista in 1959 . After a three-year guerrilla campaign, the Castro government overthrew Batista .
 New pro-communist state in what the U.S. regarded as their sphere of influence . Now there was a new pro-Communist state . The United States regarded the state as part of its influence .
 John F Kennedy was the first Catholic and the youngest President ever of the United States . He was the President of the USA between 1961-1963 . He died November 3 1963 .
 His youth, vigour and charm created a new hope for Americans that both domestic and foreign problems could be effectively tackled, says CNN's John Sutter . His youth and vigour, he says, created new hope that Americans could tackle their problems .
 He followed a policy towards the Soviets of \u2018flexible response, which meant relying on a range of responses to deal with Soviet actions .
 Nikita Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union after the death of Stalin in 1953 . He was born in 1894 and died in 1971 at the age of 55 .
 In international affairs, Khrushchev followed a policy of peaceful co-existence . He believed that superpowers could exist side by side without destroying each other .
 Despite this policy he still threatened the West over Berlin, he still took a huge risk by putting nuclear missiles in Cuba . He took a risk by placing nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 He took on many cases for the poorest members of society . This made him aware of the inequalities in Cuban society, he says .
 He was resentful of the domination of the Americans in every aspect of Cuban life . He was very resentful that the U.S. was dominant in Cuban life, Cuban officials say .
 Castro with the help of other rebels successfully took power on 9 January 1959 . For two years Cuba and the USA maintained a frosty relationship but without any direct confrontation .
 Castro took over American-owned businesses in Cuba, but he let the USA keep its naval base . Castro took control of the US-owned business in Cuba . Castro also let the U.S. keep control of Cuba's naval base in Havana .
 From the summer of 1960 he was receiving arms from the Soviet Union and American spies knew this . January 1961 The USA broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow him . It did not, or not directly, but it was clear that the USA was no longer prepared to tolerate a Soviet satellite .
 To Cuba and the Soviet Union, the failed invasion suggested that the USA was unwilling to get directly involved in Cuba . The failed invasion suggests that the U.S. was not willing to get involved .
 The Soviet leader Khrushchev was scornful of Kennedy's attempt to oust Communism from Cuba . Loss of prestige within the United States and the rest of the world for Kennedy .
 Kennedy’s attempts to identify the USA with anti-colonialism set back . Set back Kennedy\u2019s attempts . to identify . the U.S. with anti .colonialism. Set back .
 The incident revived fears of U.S. imperialism in South America . Other Latin American governments and peoples were outraged . The incident revives fears of United States imperialism .
 Fidel Castro has gone on to survive ten U.S. Presidents . Fidel Castro survived the Bay of Pigs attack .
 He thought anyone so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten . Anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through, had not guts. He thought that anyone who got in that mess was beaten .
 If he thinks I\u2019m inexperienced and have no guts, until we remove those ideas we won’t get anywhere with him . We won”u2019t get anything with him if he thinks he’s inexperienced and has no guts . We can’
 Cuba's economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, says Fidel Castro . Cuba was partly as a consequence of U.S. policy during the Batista regime .
 In May 1962, the Soviet Union announced publically for the first time that they were supplying Cuba with arms . The Soviet Union said in May 1962 that they had begun supplying Cuba .
 By September 1962 it had thousands of Soviet missiles, plus patrol boats, tanks, radar vans, missile erectors, jet bombers, jet fighters and 5000 Soviet technicians to help maintain them .
 The Americans were willing to tolerate conventional arms being supplied to Cuba, but the big issue was nuclear missiles . The issue was whether the U.S. would be willing to put nuclear missiles on Cuba .
 The USA believed that it was unlikely that the USSR would send any nuclear missiles to Cuba as they had not taken this step with any of their satellite states before . The USA thought that it would be unlikely that any nuclear missile would be sent .
 To bargain with the USA Khrushchev wanted the missiles as a bargaining counter . The missiles were used as a negotiating counter to the U.S.
 The missiles were designed to see how strong the U.S. really were . Whether they would back off or face up, they were tested .
 American U.S. spy plane flew over Cuba on October 14th October 1962 .
 More photo reconnaissance followed over the next two days . That these were nuclear missile sites were being build by the USSR . That they were being built by the Soviet Union .
 This confirmed that some sites were nearly finished but others were being built . Some sites are being built but others are still being built. This confirmed some sites are nearly finished .
 Experts say the most developed of the sites could be ready to launch missiles in just seven days . The most developed sites could launch missiles within seven days, experts say .
 President Kennedy was informed for the discovery on Tuesday 16th October 1962 . American spy plans also reported that 20 Soviet ships were currently on their way to Cuba carrying missiles .
 The Americans still had a vastly greater nuclear power than the Soviet Union . For the U.S. the Soviets were still a vastly larger nuclear power .
 The argument was that the USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so the USSR would never use these missiles . The argument went that the U.S. could still use the missiles to destroy the USSR . But the argument went \u2013 that the USSR never used them .
 To do nothing would be another sign of weakness, Kennedy says . Kennedy: "To do nothing is another form of weakness" Kennedy: Do nothing is the only thing to do .
 Destruction of all sites could not be guaranteed. For It would destroy the missiles before they were ready to use Against Destruction would destroy missiles before the missiles were .
 Kennedy: To attack without advance warning is seen as immoral .
 Against It would almost certainly guarantee an equivalent Soviet response, either to protect Cuba, or within the Soviet sphere of influence .
 For It would avoid conflict Against If the USA was forced to back down, it would be a sign of weakness . If the U.S. was forced down would be the result of a U.N. effort to avoid conflict .
 It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war . For It would be a show of seriousness, but not a direct attack on the enemy . For
 The USA had a strong navy and could still take the other options if this one did not work . The U.S. Navy could still choose other options in the future .
 It would not solve the main problem -- the missiles were already on Cuba . Against it would not . solve the problem .
 The NSC was composed of the regular members of the NSC, along with other men whom the President deemed useful during the crisis .
 The meetings were held in the Cabinet Room of the White House's West Wing . Advisers often sat in on the meetings, which were secretly recorded by tape activated by Kennedy .
 None of the other committee members knew the meetings were being recorded, except for the President\u2019s brother, Robert Kennedy .
 Kennedy calls on Khrushchev to halt and eliminate the reckless and provocative threat to world peace . Kennedy: "He has the opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction"
 Kennedy receives a long personal letter from Khrushchev . Despite this, intensive aerial photography reveals that work on missile bases in Cuba is proceeding rapidly .
 The President is advised to launch an immediate reprisal attack on Cuba . The President should launch a retaliatory attack against Cuba .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove all missiles from Cuba in return for U.S. assurance that it would not invade Cuba . Kennedy sent Attorney General Robert Kennedy to meet with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to Washington .
 There was no reference to United States removal of missiles from Turkey . This part of the deal remained secret .
 The nuclear missiles were withdrawn under United Nations supervision . However, the nuclear missiles are withdrawn under U.N. supervision .
 Kennedy had greatly improved his reputation both at home and throughout the west . Kennedy's reputation was greatly improved in the West .
 In Cuba, we increased our military aid to Cuba . Interventions were not worth the high risk. Intervention was not worth a high risk . In the crisis, the U.S. increased its military aid .
 We were sure the Americans would never agree to the existence of Castro\u2019s Cuba. We're sure the U.S. wouldn't agree to Castro's existence of Cuba .
 Khrushchev made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred . Even after it was all over he refused to take responsibility for what happened .
 He respected Khrushchev for properly determining what was in his own country\u2019s interests and in the interests of mankind .
 President Kennedy will be remembered as the President who helped to bring the thaw in the Cold War . Robert Kennedy in 13 Days . President Kennedy helped to end the cold war with North Korea .
 This view argues that this was Kennedy’s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace . The Orthodox View This view is the view of the U.S. president .
 Kennedy was right to respond to the crisis in a firm and forceful way . The missiles represented a Soviet threat to alter the balance of power either in actuality or in appearance .
 The idea of imposing a quarantine exerted maximum pressure on the Soviet Union while incurring the minimum risk of war . The idea was to impose a quarantine while inciting the minimum war risk .
 He resisted pressure for action from the military, he was statesmanlike and did not attempt to humiliate Khrushchev . 'He resisted pressure from the . military, but did not . attempt to . humiliate the . Soviet leader .
 This view stresses that Kennedy unnecessarily raised the Cuban episode to the level of crisis and confrontation and thus subjected the world to the danger of nuclear war . The results of the crisis helped preserve the balance of power .
 The missiles did not affect the nuclear balance and the USA was under no great threat . The U.S. was not under any great threat from North Korea, the author says .
 This was rather a political problem that could have been resolved by political means . This was not a political issue, it was a political matter, says David Cameron . Cameron: "This is not a matter of political means. This is a political crisis."
 "The imposition of the blockade and the fact that Kennedy made the crisis public turned it into an unnecessarily dangerous situation," says President Kennedy .
 The forthcoming November elections meant that the President wanted the situation solved quickly, so he could not wait for lengthy negotiations . The President wanted to solve the situation quickly, according to the President .
 He followed a policy towards the Soviets of 'flexible response' which meant relying on a range of responses to deal with Soviet actions .
 In international affairs, Khrushchev followed a policy of ‘peaceful co-existence’ believing that the superpowers could exist side by side without destroying each other .
 President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow him . It was clear that the USA was no longer prepared to tolerate a Soviet satellite in the heart of its own ‘sphere of influence’
 Cuba's economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, partly as a consequence of U.S. policy during the Batista regime .
 In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were designed to see how strong the U.S. really were . Whether they would back off or face up, the missiles would be seen as a test of their strength .
 The U.S. still had a vastly greater nuclear power than the Soviet Union . The Americans still had much more power than Russia .
 It would not solve the main problem – the missiles were already on Cuba . Against it, it would not be the first time missiles have been deployed .
 It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war . It would be a show of seriousness, but not a direct action of war, it would be .
 It would not solve the main problem -- the missiles were already on Cuba . The missiles are already on the island .
 The meetings were held in the Cabinet Room of the White House’s West Wing . Advisers often sat in on the meetings, which were secretly recorded by tape activated by Kennedy . The meetings, held in Cabinet Room, were secretly taped by tape activate by Kennedy.
 None of the other committee members knew the meetings were being recorded, except maybe for the President’s brother, Robert Kennedy .
 General Maxwell D Taylor is the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He is also the President of the United States Army . He has served in the U.S. Army since 2001 .
 George Bell \u2013 Under Secretary for Economic, Business and Agricultural Affairs . George Bell is the under-secretary of the Department of Energy and Business .
 Kennedy announces the blockade and calls on the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles . Monday 22 October Kennedy announced the blockade .
 There was no reference to United States removal of missiles from Turkey – this part of the deal remained secret . No reference was made to removing missiles from the country .
 This view argues that this was Kennedy’s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace . The Orthodox View This view is that this is Kennedy's finest hour . This view includes that Kennedy successfully used nuke brinkmanship .
 This view argues that this was Kennedy\u2019s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace . The view argues this was JFK's finest hour .
 This view stresses that Kennedy unnecessarily raised the Cuban episode to the level of crisis and confrontation and thus subjected the world to the danger of nuclear war . This view is the view of Kennedy unnecessarily raising the Cuban crisis to the . level of confrontation .
 Soviet foreign policy changes with the death of Stalin . Soviet Global Policy . Soviet global policy changes .
 During the Cold War there was a constant fear in the U.S. of Soviet invasion . Warm-up warm-up was a major event in the United States' history . The Cold War ended in 1968 .
 After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Soviet weapons flooded into Cuba . Cuba provided with arms after the Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 Late 1950’s: Change in Cuban leadership Fidel Castro becomes dictator of Cuba .