 Kennedy had taken office committed to pursuing the cold war more vigorously than had the Eisenhower administration . Kennedy was committed to pursue the war more aggressively than had Eisenhower administration.
 During his first year he launched a major military buildup, enlarged American foreign aid programs, and undertook new foreign policy commitments .
 Kennedy seemed to shift from the militant approach that had marked his first years in office . In the aftermath of that frightening confrontation, Kennedy began taking the first steps toward detente .
 It can never be known how far Kennedy might have gone in this direction . Kennedy's presidency was cut short by an assassin's bullet .
 The struggle of many newly formed nations to break from their colonial past and establish modern institutions set loose chaos across key parts of the globe .
 The rhetoric and actions of the erratic Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev suggested a new Communist boldness, even recklessness, and a determination to exploit the prevailing instability . Nikita's actions in the 1960s suggested a boldness and recklessness .
 The development of new weapons systems added an especially frightful dimension to the development of weapons systems . The weapons systems were developed in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Kennedy assumed power certain that the survival of the U.S. depended upon its ability to defend free institutions . The fate of the world seemed to hang in the balance, Kennedy said .
 He enlisted a youthful, energetic, and intelligent corps of advisers from the top positions in academia and industry . He enlisted them to get the country moving again, says President Obama .
 These New Frontiersmen accepted the basic assumptions of the containment policy of Truman and Eisenhower . But also believed it was necessary to challenge communism rather than merely react .
 They were alarmed by the dangers of a global war but exhilarated by the prospect of leading the nation through perilous times and winning the ultimate victory . They were also exhilarated .
 They shared a Wilsonian view that destiny had singled out their nation to defend and spread the Democratic ideal . The nation was singled out to defend its Democratic ideal, they said .
 Kennedy revamped the machinery of U.S. foreign policy to meet the challenges faced by his administration . Kennedy's administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 He reportedly fantasized about establishing a small, secret off ice under his personal control to run foreign policy . Contemptuous of the State Department, he once called it a ""bowl of jelly"
 He contented himself with remodeling the National Security Council to enhance his personal control of the White House .
 As his special assistant for national security affairs he chose McGeorge Bundy, formerly a Harvard dean . Bundy is a former dean at Harvard . Bundy will be the president's national security adviser .
 Bundy and his deputy, Walt Whitman Rostow, eliminated Eisenhower's cumbersome committee system . Bundy and Rostow made the NSC a compact body of eleven people . Bundy was the first president of the National Security Council to hold office .
 The White House established its own situation room and installed equipment that gave it direct access to State Department, Defense Department, and Central Intelligence Agency cables .
 The NSC under Bundy's direction maintained effective liaison with the State Department bureaucracy . Bundy's NSC comprised a ""little State Department,"" thus posing a threat to its entrenched rival, the NSC .
 Bundy managed the flow of information, intelligence, and decision papers to the president . Bundy also monitored the operations of other agencies . Bundy managed to keep tabs on the president's decisions .
 Rather than simply acting as a neutral clearinghouse, the NSC lobbied for policies it preferred . The NSC also lobbied for the policies it wanted .
 With the White House leading the way, the Kennedy administration launched a full-scale effort to win the cold war . The Kennedy administration led the effort .
 Kennedy ordered massive buildup of nuclear weapons to establish a strong deterrent to Soviet nuclear power . Kennedy ordered a massive buildup in order to establish strong deterrent .
 Eisenhower expanded and modernized the nation's conventional military forces to permit a 'flexible response' to various types and levels of threats . Eisenhower's reliance on nuclear weapons left the U.S. muscle-bound in many situations .
 The administration devoted much attention to developing an effective response to guerrilla warfare . The emerging nations of the Third World would be the principal focus of the U.S. effort .
 Kennedy and his advisers placed great emphasis on devising programs of economic and technical assistance to the Third World that would eliminate the conditions in which communism flourished .
 The new administration encountered repeated frustration in its first months in office . The administration faced repeated frustration from frustrated Republicans .
 Kennedy inherited from Eisenhower a poorly conceived plan to overthrow the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro . Kennedy inherited a poor plan from Eisenhower to overthrow Castro .
 Obama hesitated to scrap the plan for fear Republican critics would charge him with weakness . Although dubious about morality and workability of the plan, the new president was eager for a foreign policy victory .
 Without the air support he refused to provide, however, the plan was doomed to failure . Without air support, he would have to rely on the air .
 Kennedy assumed responsibility for the resulting debacle at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . His fledgling administration was vulnerable to attack from those who thought the U.S. had done too little .
 Eisenhower's commitment in landlocked Laos could not be upheld militarily and agreed to negotiate a settlement at Geneva . At about the same time, the administration decided that . The administration decided .
 The administration viewed with alarm Khrushchev's January 1961 speech avowing Soviet support for national liberation in the Third World . The administration was wary of the speech .
 At their first summit in Vienna in June, Khrushchev bullied Kennedy by reasserting his commitment to such wars . He renewed his ultimatum on Berlin he had first issued in 1958 . At their second summit in June he reasserted his commitment .
 Kennedy stepped up his plans for a military buildup . A shaken Kennedy, upon returning to Washington, stepped up plans for the buildup .
 Within several weeks, Khrushchev escalated the Berlin crisis, sealing off East Berlin from West Berlin with the construction of a concrete wall . The wall was built between East Berlin and West Berlin .
 Kennedy learned that a ""missile gap"" presumed to be in favor of the Soviet Union actually favored the U.S. Upon taking office, Kennedy had learned that .
 Determined to build on and exploit that lead, he significantly expanded America's already formidable nuclear arsenal . He significantly expanded the already formidable arsenal of weapons .
 In October 1961, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric proclaimed to the world that the United States was invulnerable to a Soviet sneak attack . The U.S. had a second-strike capability as extensive as the Soviet capability for a first strike, he said .
 Any move on the Soviets' part would therefore have been an act of self-destruction, Gilpatric says . Any move would have been self-destructive, he says .
 The U.S. is taking a daring gamble by placing offensive missiles in Cuba . The Cuban government has been criticized for its decision to launch missiles into Cuba .
 Khrushchev and others have claimed that they were trying to protect Cuba from an anticipated U.S. invasion . There were certainly grounds for such fears, but there was certainly no such fears .
 Khrushchev sought to ease pressures from Soviet and Chinese militants and offset his disadvantage in the arms race . Western scholars also speculate that a beleaguered Khrushche sought to offset pressures from the Soviets and China .
 Whatever his motives, Khrushchev's actions provoked the most dangerous U.S.-Soviet confrontation in the history of the cold war . Whatever his motive, the confrontation was likely to be a dangerous one .
 Kennedy responded by ""quarantining"" Cuba, sealing off the island with a naval blockade . Kennedy also demanded that the Soviets withdraw their missiles from Cuba .
 While the world nervously awaited the Soviet response, tensions mounted . The Soviet response to the crisis was met by the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 Neither side had total control of its forces in the area, and on several occasions incidents in or around Cuba threatened to trigger a war . Neither side was able to control the situation in Cuba .
 Khrushchev relented and agreed to withdraw the missiles . To save face, he demanded a pledge from the United States that it would not invade Cuba . The U.S. refused to invade Cuba and Khrushchchev agreed to pull missiles .
 The United States accepted the deal and privately assured Moscow that it would remove its own Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The U.S. accepted the agreement and assured Russia that the missiles would be removed from the country .
 The superpowers pulled back from the brink, and the world breathed a sigh of relief . Superpowers pull back from brink of collapse .
 In the aftermath of the missile crisis, both superpowers moved to ease tensions that had brought them to the verge of nuclear war . Both superpowers agreed to ease the tensions after the crisis in the aftermath .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev toned down their militant cold war rhetoric and even spoke publicly of moving toward peaceful coexistence . Kennedy and his Soviet-Khrrushchev regime was known for its anti-war rhetoric .
 The two nations established a hot line to facilitate communications in times of crisis . The two countries established a hotline to help each other communicate .
 The U.S. and Soviet Union signed a treaty in August 1963 to end atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons . The United States agreed to sell its adversary a large supply of desperately needed wheat, and most important .
 Kennedy's success in turning around the cold war was not matched by success in other areas . Kennedy won't be able to turn around the Cold War, but he was able to do so .
 From the time of the administration took power, it had promoted with considerable fanfare its so-called Grand Design for Europe . The new government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The aims of the Grand Design were to stabilize Europe defensively and expand U.S. trade with Europe . The aims were to help solve the country's growing economic problems .
 Administration promoted tariff reduction and British membership in the European Economic Community to correct the U.S. deficit .
 The U.S. sought to encourage the allies to furnish more conventional forces for the defense of Europe . The allies would rely exclusively on the United States for nuclear deterrence .
 The plans ran afoul of European interests and made Europeans suspicious of both U.S. and British intentions . Europeans were suspicious of the plans .
 France and Germany feared that Britain, as a member of the Common Market, would be what Charles de Gaulle called a ""Trojan horse" for the United States . Charles de Gallle called Britain a "Trojan Horse" for America .
 de Gaulle vetoed British admission in January 1963 . With his usual flair for the grandiloquent he vetoed British entry .
 France, Germany, and Britain hesitated to rely entirely on the United States for nucleardeterrence .
 De Gaulle insisted on an independent nuclear force de frappefor France . He insisted on a nuclear force independent of France .
 By early 1963, the Grand Design was in a shambles amidst mutual recriminations both from the Kennedy administration and the European allies . The Kennedy administration was in the midst of a war with the Soviet Union .
 In Latin America the administration launched the Alliance for Progress as a way of promoting economic and social development and thereby undermining leftist revolutions . The administration, with maximum publicity, launched the alliance for Progress .
 The program made dramatic gains in such areas of tax collection and public health, but its overall progress was disappointing . The program's overall progress is disappointing.
 The pace of agrarian reform was slow, and gains in education were limited . In the 1930s, the pace of reform in the country was slow .
 The goals of the program may have been too ambitious, and private capital for development projects was not forthcoming in the amount required . The goals were not met with sufficient funding for the program .
 The Alliance for Progress was supposed to foster political freedoms . Military coups in Argentina, Peru, Guatemala, Ecuador, and the Dominican Republic have undermined that freedom .
 Cuban premier Fidel Castro survived despite the Kennedy administration's near obsession with eliminating him . Castro survived in Cuba despite efforts to kill him . Fidel Castro was the Cuban prime minister of the 1960s .
 Before the missile crisis, the CIA had launched Operation Mongoose, a multifaceted scheme to destabilize Cuba and overthrow the Castro government . The CIA had the blessing of top U.S. officials .
 As early as August 1960, apparently without explicit presidential sanction, the CIA had formulated a plot to assassinate Castro . The agency enlisted the assistance of leading mob figures such as Sam Giancana .
 Various assassination schemes were actually tried, including poison and exploding cigars, including exploding cigars . Various assassination attempts were made, but none were successful .
 Operation Mongoose accomplished little, the assassination plots failed, and the Castro government remained intact . It was the first attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro in Cuba .
 When Kennedy took office, the Vietcong insurgency supported by North Vietnam threatened the U.S.-backed government of Ngo Dinh Diem . The insurgency was supported by the North Vietnamese government .
 Kennedy decided it was necessary to take a stand somewhere, and Vietnam seemed to be the most likely place . Having suffered major setbacks at the Bay of Pigs, in Laos, and in Berlin, Kennedy decided to go to Vietnam .
 In late 1961 the administration increased support for the Diem regime . By 1963 the U.S. had more than sixteen thousand advisers in Vietnam .
 By the time of Kennedy's death, the U.S. had assumed growing responsibility for the South Vietnamese government . Perhaps more important, the United States had assumed responsibility for Vietnam .
 In the summer of 1963, the predominantly Buddhist population had launched a series of protests against the Catholic-led government . The predominantly Buddhist country had launched series of anti-government protests against Catholic-dominated government .
 The Diem regime responded forcefully, sending armed forces into the pagodas . Diem's regime responded strongly, one point sending armed troops into the Pagodas.
 The Kennedy administration encouraged dissident South Vietnamese army officers to launch a coup . Concerned about the protests and the regime's reaction to them, the regime was persuaded that Diem and his family were their own worst enemies .
 On November 1, 1963, the military overthrew the regime and assassinated Diem and his notorious brother Ngo Dinh Nhu . After several false starts, Diem's regime was overthrown by the military .
 Whether Kennedy would have extricated the U.S. from an increasingly untenable situation in Vietnam can't be known . Kennedy's defenders say he would have saved the United States from Vietnam .
 President Kennedy sharply increased the U.S. commitment to South Vietnam in Vietnam in his 1,000 days in the White House . It is clear, however, that during his brief one thousand days, Kennedy increased the United States' commitment to Vietnam .
 The Africa collection contains a large volume of information on the Congo crisis and the administration's efforts to win goodwill among the continent's newly emerging nations .
 Roughly half of the Latin America collection deals with Cuba . Also included in the collection is important documentation on Brazil and the Dominican Republic .
 The Western Europe collection documents the formulation and implementation of Kennedy's Grand Design in Europe . The collection documents Kennedy's design philosophy .
 The Vietnam and Asia and the Pacific collections document the administration's escalation of the Vietnam War and its involvement in other areas such as the Philippines, Korea, and Indonesia . They document the escalation of Vietnam War .
 Kennedy administration launched bold initiatives to shift the world's balance of power in favor of the U.S. In both the Middle East and South Asia, the Kennedy administration took action to shift power in the region .
 In South Asia, John F Kennedy's efforts to cultivate goodwill with India merely antagonized the United States' longstanding ally, Pakistan, without weaning India from its neutralist cold war stance .
 In the Middle East, the administration's efforts to befriend Gamal Abdel Nasser's United Arab Republic resulted in only limited, short-term success . The U.S. also alienated the United States' traditional ally, Israel, and the more conservative Arab states such as Jordan and
 The United States enjoyed the most success where it attempted the least, with neutral Afghanistan . The U.S. enjoyed most success in neutral Afghanistan, the Taliban .
 Kennedy administration dispatched diplomat Livingston Merchant to encourage a peaceful settlement . The Kennedy administration feared a border dispute between Pakistan and Afghanistan might force the Soviet Union into Afghanistan .
 Merchant failed, and tensions between the two northern-tier nations persisted . The result was not what the U.S. had feared . Merchant failed .
 As Pakistan leaned toward Communist China in the aftermath of the Sino-lndian war of 1962, Afghanistan eased away from Moscow . Pakistan leaned away from the Soviet Union in the 1960s, Afghanistan did not .
 Kennedy and his advisers agreed that Eisenhower administration had erred in condemning Indian neutralism . Eisenhower administration tied U.S. fortunes in the region exclusively to Pakistan . Kennedy agreed that the Eisenhower administration erred .
 The administration attached special importance to India, the world's largest democracy, and set out to cultivate its goodwill .
 The president initiated a warm, personal correspondence with Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru . He dispatched Vice-President Lyndon Johnson to New Delhi on a personal goodwill mission, and initiated a large economic aid program .
 Washington's tilt toward New Delhi was already well along when a border war between India and China in October 1962 provided what seemed to be a splendid opportunity to tighten the relationship .
 The United States immediately sent military aid to a beleaguered India . The U.S. responded immediately to the situation .
 The administration sought to use the leverage provided by aid to India to work out a settlement of the bitter dispute between the two nations over Kashmir . To mollify an increasingly concerned Pakistan, the administration seeks to use this leverage .
 Talks broke down without tangible results in Kashmir . Under pressure from the U.S., India and Pakistan agreed to talks on Kashmir .
 Pakistan moved noticeably toward Peking in response to U.S. tilt toward India . Pakistan was alarmed at the United States' tilt toward China .
 It concluded a provisional border demarcation agreement with China in December 1962 . It arranged a series of much-publicized state visits between the two nations' top leaders .
 Kennedy in his last months in office toyed with the possibility of a vastly expanded military aid program . Kennedy was enticed by the idea of luring India into close ties with the U.S. He was still enticed to the idea .
 U.S. bowed to budgetary pressures and Pakistani protests, however, and approved a program of only $50 million per year . The administration eventually bowed to budget pressures and Pakistan protests .
 India turned increasingly to the Soviet Union for aid . Annoyed at Washington's lack of support, India turned to Russia for help .
 U.S. policies broke down in the face of intractable regional tensions, alienating Pakistan while failing to gain the United States significant influence with India . United States policies thus broke down .
 Kennedy administration sought a more evenhanded approach to Egypt . Eisenhower administration had leaned too far toward Israel . Nasser had been neutralist in Egypt .
 As with Nehru, Kennedy used personal correspondence to cultivate Nasser . Nasser was the prime minister of Egypt's Arab Spring .
 The U.S. agreed to provide Israel with HAWK surface-to-air missiles to upgrade its air defenses, but tied the sale to settlement of the Palestine refugee question . The sale was cleverly tied to the Palestinian refugee issue .
 For a time in the late summer of 1962, the U.S. position in the Middle East appeared to be the strongest it had ever been . The administration's bold policies seemed to be succeeding, but they were not succeeding .
 Israel balked at U.S. proposals to settle the refugee question . Conservative and radical leaders joined in noisy protest over the sale of HAWK missiles .
 U.S. efforts to woo Nasser alarmed more traditional Arab leaders in Jordan and Saudi Arabia . The United States tried to woo the Arab leader, but his efforts failed to impress them .
 Nasser intervened in Yemen in support of a radical who had overthrown a traditionalist leader supported by Saudi Arabia . Nasser's intervention in Yemen underscored these fears of the Saudis .
 Street riots in Tehran in 1961 that nearly toppled the Shah of Iran aroused additional fears of instability in a chaotic region . The riots in Iran in 1961 were the first riots since the Shah's reign in Iran .
 In Iran, Saudi Arabia, and other traditional states, the administration pushed ""revolution from the top down,"" holding out promises of aid and encouraging leaders like the Shah and King Saud to institute moderate reforms .
 Washington also put pressure on Nasser and King Saud to disengage from Yemen . Washington also pressured Nasser to pull out of Yemen .
 By the summer of 1963, the administration's evenhanded Middle East policy was in a shambles .
 In Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Libya, the United States' need for oil triumphed over its concern for reform . ""revolution from the top down"" accomplished little. In Iran and Saudi Arabia the U.S. needs oil more than reform, and reform accomplished little, says
 The dispatch of United States military units to Saudi Arabia in support of the Saudi position in Yemen antagonized Nasser and strained relations with the UAR to the breaking point . Nasser was the prime minister of the United Arab Arab Republic .
 Israel skillfully exploited the divisions among its Arab rivals by blocking a settlement on the refugee issue . Israel also extorted from the United States a long-sought commitment to come to its aid in the event of an external attack . The U.S. has long sought a commitment to
 Congress in late 1963 passed an amendment to a foreign aid bill forbidding PL-480 assistance to any nation engaged in ""aggressive military efforts"" against the United States or its allies . The amendment was only slightly veiled reference to Nasser .
 The half-reel on Afghanistan covers the Afghanistan-Pakistan boundary dispute and the resulting U.S. concern about maintaining Afghanistan's neutrality . The Afghanistan border dispute is the result of a United States concern .
 There is a small amount of material on the Sino-lndian border war and on subsequent U.S. efforts to promote a settlement between India and Pakistan concerning Kashmir . There is also material on efforts to establish a settlement in Kashmir .
 Approximately half of a reel deals with the upheaval in Iran in 1961, including the then-obscure Ayatollah Khomeini's role in the unrest and the resulting U.S. efforts to encourage moderate reform to head off radical revolution . The reel includes footage of Ayat
 Two-thirds of a reel deals with topics related to Israel, such as United States aid, the sale of HAWK missiles, the Palestine refugee question, and the issue of a United States security guarantee .
 material on Saudi Arabia concerns Saudi fears about U.S. relations with both the UAR and Israel . Thomas G Paterson, 176 pages of material from Saudi Arabia .
 This material was originally bound into volumes, each of which was assigned a number . This material has been published in the U.S. Library of America .
 For certain countries, some memos and cables were arranged under agency tabs or embassy tabs . For some countries, memos and cable cables are arranged under embassy or agency tabs .
 The State Department, Defense Department, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency, and Agency for International Development (previously the International Cooperation Administration) were frequently represented .
 Some memos, memcons and correspondence, and reports, are filed under tabs highlighting selected documents, events, or correspondents .
 Staff at the John F Kennedy Library has removed the material from the volumes and filed it into folders . The staff at the JFK Library has filed the material into folders and removed it from the library .
 Each folder is arranged in chronological order and assigned inclusive dates . Each folder has been arranged in order to be placed on a chronological order .
 Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and Latin America; Asia and Pacific; Latin America, the Middle East; and the USSR and Eastern Europe; Vietnam; and Western Europe . The U.S. and Vietnam were the first countries to join the U.N. in the
 UPA has compiled, and included at the beginning of Reel 1 for each NSF collection, a folder title list for that collection that will assist the researcher in locating pertinent materials .
 These withdrawal sheets itemize documents that have been withdrawn from the John F Kennedy Library . Documents withdrawn from folders due to either national security or privacy restrictions .
 For folders in which there are no withdrawal sheets, UPA has included the ""Inventory Lists"" and ""Submission Lists,"" where available .
 The submission lists itemize documents that have been submitted to appropriate agencies for review . The submission is intended to determine if they can be declassified or sanitized and made available for research .
 Lists will help researchers determine which materials are still classified or unprocessed . These lists will help the researcher determine which material still classified .
 The Reel Index details each microfilmed document in the collection . Document listings are arranged numerically by microfilm frame number . The Index is based on microfilm frames .
 Possible Shutdown or Alteration of U.S. Foreign Aid Project in Afghanistan in Afghanistan . Possible shutdown or alteration of United States foreign aid project in Afghanistan.
 The second and third lines contain the author/sender and receiver, respectively, of the document . The author and receiver are the sender and receiver .
 The notation ""NA" in a reel index entry indicates that a particular item of information is not available . The notation "NA" indicates that the information is unavailable .
 The following key identifies the abbreviated security classifications used in the reel index entries for previously classified documents .
 Also included in the reel index are the dates on which documents with the abbreviated security classification ""C,"" ""S,"" and "TS" were declassified . The reel index also includes the dates of declassification dates .
 For documents in which certain information is still being withheld, the notation ""IP" appears following the declassification date . The notation "IP" is used after the date of declassification .
 The following key identifies, by title or description, significant individuals appearing in this guide . The following is a list of significant individuals .
 Consul general, United States consulate general, U.S. consuls general, Florence Deputy executive secretary, State Department. William R. Crawford, William R., Jr. Cootes, Meritt N Furnas, Merritt N. Furnas. Howard .
 William L. Jr. was Maxwell Taylor Hamilton, William L., Jr. Development Development Administrative assistant to Maxwell . Hamilton . William L.'s Jr. is the son of Maxwell Taylor .
 U.S. ambassador to Saudi Arabia Khomeini, Ruhollah Hawkins, Richard H. H. Jr. was assassinated in Iran in June 1989 . Khomomeini was the leader of Iran's first government in 1979 .
 U.S. ambassador to Iran Laboulsse, Henry R. R. Holmes, Julius C. Holmes and Henry R., Jr. were ambassadors to Iran . Holmes was a senior staff member of the NSC . Holmes, Holmes and Laboulse were ambassadors for Iran .
 Henry Cabot, Jr. is the director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Lodge . Henry was the State Department Director of the Lodge . He is also the Director of a Lodge for Greeks, Turks, Turks and Greeks .
 United States vice admiral Special assistant to the president for congressional McGhee, George relations Undersecretary of state for political affairs; O'Donnell, Kenneth counselor, John A Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza Acting executive secretary, State Department Shah of Iran MacMillan, Harold Palmer
 McNally, John J. Jr. was the first secretary of the U.S. embassy in Tel Aviv . McNally was the British Prime Minister of Israel . He was the prime minister of Israel from 1973 to 1977 .
 Consul, U.S. consulate, Jerusalem Tyler, S Roger, Jr. Scott, is a United States brigadier general . Scott, David, David is a former United States Brigadier general general .
 Deputy United States representative to UN Stoessel, Walter J. Walter J., Jr., Jr. U. was U.S. ambassador to UN . Deputy US representative to U.N. Stoessels is Walter J.-Walter J. Jr. Deputy U. J.
 The following acronyms and abbreviations are used frequently in this guide and are listed here for the convenience of the researcher .
 Editorial Note on page xv. For adescription of the items included in the document entries below, see Editorial Note . For adescriptions of the documents, see the editorial note below .
 Afghan Ambassador Mohammed Hashim 0001 0001 Afghanistan—Memoranda of Maiwandwal's Call on John F Kennedy . Afghan ambassador: "We are proud to be proud of our President's legacy"
 Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Afghan Ambassador Mohammed Afghanistan. Mohammed Afghanistan is Afghanistan's Prime Minister .
 John F Kennedy 0018 Afghanistan—January 20,1961and Ambassador Mohammed Hashim September 12,1921 . Kennedy and Hashim met on January 20, 1961 in Afghanistan .
 John Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan F. Kennedy. on Pakistan-Afghan Controversy. F Kennedy on Pakistan and Afghanistan . F Kennedy . on Pakistan, Afghanistan F Kennedy. Pakistan .
 Afghan Ambassador to Discussions with Henry A Byroade U.S. regarding Afghanistan regarding Afghanistan. Maiwandwal, Afghan Ambassador, wrote a letter to Henry A. M. Byrode .
 United States Concern over Break in Diplomatic Long-Term U.S. Commitment to Relations between Afghanistan and Afghanistan's Economic Development Pakistan . United States concerned over break in diplomatic long-term relationship with Pakistan .
 U.S. Position on Afghan-Pakistani 0066 Afghanistan—November 11,1961 . Afghanistan was a major source of conflict in the 1960s .
 Afghan Efforts to Gain Access to the John F Kennedy Offers to Mediate in Sea through Iran through Iran . Iran offers to mediate in sea through Iran following dispute with question of transit traffic between Pakistan and Pakistan .
 Afghan Prime Minister Sardar Sardar United States Efforts to Resolve Transit Trade . Afghan PM Sardar has been in talks with the U.S. to resolve the issue . Daud.
 U.S. Position on Continued Aid to 0104 Afghanistan—March 1-24,1962. United States position on continued aid to Afghanistan . United States Position on continued Aid to Afghanistan: April 1, 1962 .
 Efforts to Find Solulion to Afghan Efforts lo find Solulions to Afghan government . Request for Appointment with John F Pakistani Transit Dispute .
 John M Sleeves was appointed by John F Kennedy for Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan . John F. Kennedy appointed John F . Kennedy for and Prince Mohammad . Nairan, Afghan John M . Sleeve . John M.
 IP. and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Impasse regarding Afghan-Pakislani Foreign Minister, regarding possible Dispute and United States Courses of Action. IP. talks .
 U.S. Embassies, Kabul and 0131 Afghanistan—Elements of United States Karachi . United States Embassies in Afghanistan: Kabul, Kabul, Karachi, Afghanistan .
 John M Steeves's Discussions with toward Afghanistan. IP. regarding Elemenls of U.S. Policy. John M. Steeve: "The U.N. policy on Afghanistan is very different from that of the United States"
 Discussions belween Afghan Marshal and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Shah Wali and John M Sleeves reForeign Minister, regarding Efforts lo garding United States Policy loward Afghanislan Restore Normal Relalions belween .
 Pakistani Minister Sardar Mohammad Daud gency Planning against Communist regarding Aid for Afghan Development Aggression from Afghanistan . United States Discussions with Afghan Prime Pakistani PM Pakistani Desire for CENTO Continues .
 Bandar Abbas Project's Contribution to 0249 CIA Informalion Report #TDCS-3/ Iranian Economic Development and 512,599,599. CIA Informal Report: Iran's economic development . CIA: "Iranian Economic Development"
 Dean Rusk. tation of United States Aid Program for Afghani . U.S. aid program for Afghanistan .
 Two DC-4s for Ariana. Bid by TMA Airlines for Agency for International Development Charter of 0235 Afghanistan—May 16,1962 .
 Lincoln White Statements regarding Possible Visit to United States by Afghan Prime Afghan Prime . United States Aid Program in Afghanistan is a major aid program in Afghanistan .
 Afghan Foreign Minister Sardar Mohammad Daud refused to travel to U.S. on request . Afghan Prime Minister has refused to visit the United States . Daud is the prime minister of Afghanistan, who has been in the country for 18 years .
 Views of United States regarding Fulure Travel Plans of King Mohammed Zahir Assislance lo Afghanislan in Economic Shah and Prime Minister Sardar Developmenl. Shah . Views of U.S. regarding travel plans .
 U.S. Informed of possible Assassinaregarding Lincoln White Statement on lion Attempt againsl Afghan Prime . United States informed of possible assassination attempt .
 U.S. Views on Aid Policy toward and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Afghanistan . John M Steeves and John M. Steeve discussed the Prince of Afghanistan . Prince Mohammad Afghanistan was the Taliban leader of Afghanistan in 2001 .
 Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanislan Stale Departmenl Press Slalemenl on and on and Wesl German Presidenl Heinrich United States Aid to Afghanistan . U.S. President Barack Obama has been in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 Shah of Iran Agrees to Act as Gosador Mohammed Hashim Belween lo Achieve Rapprochemenl Maiwandwal regarding United States Aid . United States Discussions with Afghan Ambasals have been ongoing .
 United States Gift of Agricultural Stock to King Efforts at Reconciliation between Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan . United States gift of agricultural stock to King of Afghanistan to King .
 Pakistani Presidenl Mohammed Ayub Afghan Reaclion lo New Pakislani Khan's Reply lo Message from Shah of Foreign Policy Attrtudes.
 Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime Drafl Slalemenl from Pakislani PresiMinisler, Agrees to Meet in Tehran with denl Mohammed Ayub Khan regarding Iranian and Pakistani Foreign Ministers . Iran and Pakistan will meet in Tehran to discuss Iran's relations with
 Prince Mohammad Nairn was Afghan Departure of Shah of Iran from Kabul Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime following Negolialions wilh Afghans . Prince Mohammad was Afghan President of Iran and Afghan Prime Minister of Iran .
 Meeling belween John F. F. oncilialion Efforts . Iran's Invitation lo Discuss Further Recuperate Efforts.
 Minisler and Depuly Prime Minister Nairn were prime ministers of the Soviet-Afghanistan era . Prince Mohammad Nairna was the son of the Afghan prince who was assassinated by the Soviets in 1945 .
 Kennedy for Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime Minister . Kennedy for . Prince Mohammad . Nairs .
 Afghan Position at Meeting with Iranian Renegotialion of Afghan-Soviet Trade and Pakistani Representatives in Agreement . Afghan position at meeting with Iranian representatives in agreement .
 Minister, Informs John F Kennedy of Informalion on United States Posilion regarding Afghanistan's Position on Transit Afghanislan for Meeting with Prince Impasse wilh Pakislan . Minister Informalized John Kennedy of . Afghanistan's position on transit Afghanislans .
 Prince Mohammad Nairn Informs John F Kennedy of Afghanistan's Position on Transit 0383 Afghanistan—September 27,1962Impasse with Pakislan.
 King Afghan-Pakistani Transit Dispute. United States Posilion wilh regard to Efforts to Request for Permission from John F. Work Out Solution to Impasse in Kennedy for Visit to United States by King Afghan .
 JFK number was also assigned to Bromley K Smith. assigned to document appearing on October 19, 1962. This JFK number also . was also . assigned to . Bromley Smith .
 White House Approval of Cable to Message from John F Kennedy given Kabul. to Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister .
 Discussions between John M Steeves and Prince Mohamand Prince Mohammad Nairn . Discussions were held with Prince Mohammad, Afghan Foreign Minister and Foreign Minister, regarding SinoMinister regarding United States Aid Program .
 John M Steeves, United States Ambassador to United States Efforts to Arrange Appointment Afghanistan. with Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime. 0479 Afghanistan—Memoranda of Minister, to Discuss Unidentified Conversation, June 1963 .
 John F Kennedy and Afghan Ambasals discuss Afghanistan's relations with the U.S. Relations with Afghanistan with sador Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal. respect to Kabul-Kandahar Road and United States Aid Program. John F. Kennedy and Afghanistan's Ambas .
 John F Kennedy and Afghan Ambasals were approved by the U.S. State Department . John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Afghan Ambassador Mohammed United States Aid Policy and Program for Hashim Maiwandwal. U.S. aid policy is based in the United States .
 U.S. sador Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal. John F Kennedy and Afghan Ambasals complained about delays in transport to Afghanistan .
 Mission to United States Discussions between John M Steeves 0494 . John's Mission to the U.S. Discussions were held between John and John's team . John was sent to the United States to participate in the discussions .
 Minister, regarding United States Aid Program Farewell Message on Termination of for Afghanistan. Minister . Minister . U.S. President. President Barack Obama. President of Afghanistan. Afghanistan.
 United States to Make No Further Effort to Use Farewell Message on Termination of Good Offices in Afghan-Pakistani Afghan Ambassador Maiwandwal's Transit Impasse . U.S. to make no further effort to use Farewell message on termination of good offices in
 Lucius D Battle of Afghanistan concerning Reaction to Reaction to To: Ralph A Dungan. of Afghanistan . Reaction to to: Ralph D. Battle. Of Afghanistan .
 Message of Congratulations to Reply from Archbishop Makarios III, Muhammad Yusuf on His Appointment President of Cyprus, to Message from as Prime Minister and Foreign Minister John F Kennedy on Anniversary of of Afghanistan . United States .
 Archbishop Makarios III, Message of Congratulations from President of Cyprus, to Message from Cypriot Government to U.S. on John F Kennedy on Anniversary of Achievements in Space .
 Planning for Visit by Archbishop sion, Through Error, Was Never Makarios III, President of Cyprus, was never Makarios . Approved by Mr Smith for Transmis, approved by the Archbishop of Cyprus .
 President of Cyprus of Colonel John Glenn. of Colonel Glenn . JFK#13. bishop Makarios III, President of Visit to United States by Archbishop Makarios .
 Archbishop Makarios III visited the United States Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Washington, DC . He was accompanied by Elias T. Ypsarides, Secretary in Cypriot Cyprus, and Archbishop of Cyprus .
 Archbishop Archbishop Makarios III is visiting the United States for a visit to the U.S. He will meet with plant plant in Washington, D.C.
 Quo. of His Delegation to Accompany Him Patroklos Stavrou, Director of the during Talks with John F Kennedy. of his delegation. of the . Talks with Kennedy .
 Office of White Request for White House Clearance of House Press Secretary . Office of Administration Request for clearance of White House press secretary. House Press secretary.
 Archbishop Makarios III, President of Exchange of Messages between John Cyprus and John Cyprus, was Archbishop Makario III of Cyprus . Archbishop Makaries III is the Archbishop of Cyprus and the Archbishop Archbishop of Nickeia in Cyprus .
 Archbishop Cost of Proposed Ambassador's Makarios III, President of Cyprus . Cost of Archbishop Cost is Archbishop Cost . Cost was Archbishop Cost's proposed ambassador to the U.S.
 Meeting between John F Kennedy and Cost of United States Embassy Residences . Meeting between Kennedy and cost of U.S. Embassy Residence . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Reaction in Greek Press to Speech by Receipt of John F Kennedy's Reply to Turkish Foreign Minister Feridan Cemal Invitation to Visit Cyprus by Archbishop Erkin regarding Cyprus .
 JFK#11. between John F Kennedy and ArchPresidential Message for United States Exhibibishop Makarios III, President of Cyprus at Cyprus International Fair . JFK and Makarios' message were sent at the same time .
 United States Consultations with Fraser Wilkins Denial of Report of Request for regarding Situation in Cyprus . United States. Denial . of Report on Situation in Cypriot, Cyprus .
 Fraser Wilkins, U.S. Ambassador to 0664 Cyprus, November 1, 1962 . He was ambassador to Cyprus .
 Cypriot Office of Public Information; and U.S. Emergency and Evacuation Plans Elias T Ypsarides, Secretary in Cypriet for Cyprus . Cypriots and United States. Officials from Cyprus and the United. States .
 Andrew J Goodpaster. to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal. January 27,1961 . Good paster to Indian PM Jawarlal in 1961 .
 John F Kennedy on UN Role in the Contents of Indian Prime Minister Congo . Congo. Congo .
 Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru 0832 Withdrawal Sheets. regarding Situation in the Congo. 1p.33 Tab 6.1p. 33 Tab 6 .
 Jawaharlal Nehru to John F Kennedy was Indian Prime Minister of India . Nehru was Indian President of India from 1961 to 1962 .
 JFK#3b. and W Averell Harriman. regarding United States Reply to Indian Prime Minister Situations in the Congo and Laos. Situations . Situations were discussed in the 1950s and 1960s .
 U.S. C. C 8/10/77. to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Proposed United States Messages to Indian Nehru regarding Situation in Laos . U.C. C to Indian PM: "Send Back Messages to India Nehru"
 Lyndon B Johnson Shown Letter from Nehru's Views on Deteriorating Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . Lyndon B. Johnson showed Nehru letter to Johnson . Johnson showed letter to Nehru on how he felt about Nehru.
 Nehru's Congratulatory Message on Discussions of Lyndon B Johnson's Success of Alan Shepard's Space Visit to India and U.S.-lndian Relations . Nehru: "Alan Shepard's visit to India was a very positive experience"
 Message from John F Kennedy to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . Message from Kennedy to Nehru: "India is a nation of opportunity for change"
 John F Kennedy. regarding United States Offer to Assist India in To: Jawaharlal Nehru. regarding U.S. Offer to assist India in to: Jawahlar Nehru . Kennedy. about United States offer to help India in India . John F. Kennedy .
 JFK#5e.e. son's Visit to India and U.S.-lndian Suggested United States Reply to Letter from Relations. U.N. has suggested that the United States respond to the letter .
 Burris Brought This Back with United States Offer to Assist India in Financing Apologies Apologies . Burris brought this back with U.S. Offer to assist India with $1 billion in U.N. Apologies. Burris: "I'm sorry. I apologize
 Letter from Indian Prime Farewell Message on Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was sent to India . Transmittal of Letter from India PM Jawahar Nehru passed to India's then-Prime Minister .
 A Reply Reply to Letter from Indian Prime Min.Is Being Drafted in the President's ister Jawaharlal Nehru regarding DisOffice."" cussions with John F Kennedy during 0891 Letter. A Reply .
 Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru S. S 8/11/77. regarding Discussions during Visit to Text of Message from John F Kennedy United States and Invitation to Jacqueline to Visit India .
 United States Breaks Off Discussions with Indian Lack of Indian Press Coverage . U.S. Government regarding Their Moves regarding John F Kennedy's Letter to against Goa .
 Reception Given to Jacqueline Kennedy S 8/10/77. during Her Visit to India. during her visit to India . Reception . during Her visit .
 Message from John F Kennedy to Jawaharlal Nehru on HisReappointment as Prime Minister of India . Kennedy congratulates Nehru for his appointment as PM .
 William John F Kennedy to Indian Prime MinisH Brubeck ter Jawaharlal Nehru . Kennedy to India's prime minister: "I am a man of honor." Kennedy to Nehru: "You are the son of a man who is not a politician."
 United States Position on Soviet Sale of MIG Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Aircraft to India to India . United States position on Soviet sale of aircraft to India was not disclosed .
 William Congratulatory Message on His ReH Brubeck. appointment to Office. William congratulates William on his appointment . William Congrats on his rehorship .
 U.S. Position on Soviet Sale of MIG 0944 India—Nehru Correspondence, Aircraft to India. India . India .
 McGeorge Bundy. regarding United States Response to Placement September 7, 1962 . September 7 was 1962 .
 United States Requests Help from Indian Prime Minister . Message from John F Kennedy Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in Persuadregarding U.S.-Indian Relations . Pakistani President Mohammed 0954 Letter .
 Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru NA. 1p. 1 p.m. regarding U.S.-lndian Relations.
 Letter from John F Kennedy to Prime Attack on India on India . Indian Foreign Secretary Morarji Desai . John F. Kennedy to PM attack on India. Letter from Kennedy .
 Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru ments on Cease-fire with India . Letter from Indian Prime regarding Chinese Communist StateMinister Jawahar Nehru .
 China's Chou En-lai to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlalal Nehru regarding Border 0001 India—Nehru Correspondence, Conflict between Their Two Countries . Letter from Chinese Communist PreFolder Title List .
 Parliamentary Address concerning Indian Conditions for Peaceful Settle . Chinese Communist Attack on India. ment of Border Conflict with Communist . 0006 Tab 31. 1p.m.
 Jawaharlal Nehru sent the letter to China on the eve of border conflict with Communist China . Conditions for Peaceful Settle were conditions for peaceful settlement .
 Proposed U.S. Letters to Indian Prime Letter from Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and Paki. stani President Mohammed Ayub Khan .
 I Recommend That 0071 Note. Minister Nehru's Letter and Met him on Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime the Points Raised and in Light of Gen. Jawaharlal Nehru’s .
 Message from Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . Message from Jawahlar Nehru. Message from India Prime Minister . Transmittal of Letter from Indian PM
 Letter from Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru . Transmittal of Letter from India Prime Minister . Letter from Nehru.
 Jawaharlal Nehru to John F Kennedy S 12/6/77. regarding the Bokaro Scheme . Jawaharar Nehru: "Bokaro Scheme is a way of getting around the world."
 Letter from Indian Prime U.S. sent to Jawaharlal Nehru . Transmittal of Letter from India Prime United States .
 Office of the Assistant United States Reply to Indian Prime Minister . Secretary of Defense. Secretary of State of Defense . Office of Assistant U.S. to India .
 Letter to Dean Rusk from Charge of Charge 0141 India—Ambassador Galbraith's d'Affaires of Indian Embassy .
 The 0133 India—Nehru Correspondence, Secretary Has a Copy Which I Will Miscellaneous and Extra Copies, Return as soon as h Comes Out of His July 1, 1963-November 22, 1963 .
 Message from Shah of Iran on Proposal That Dwight D Eisenhower His Inauguration as President. S 8/11/77. Shah proposed that Eisenhower be inaugurated as President of Iran . Shah was Shah's first president of the United States .
 Report by General Paul Adams. Exemption from Declassification of Desire of Iranian Ambassador Ardeshir Report . Report by general Paul Adams . General Adams .
 QuO. rity and Intelligence Organization, to Text of John F Kennedy's Reply to Deliver Letter from the Shah. John F. Kennedy's reply to deliver Letter from Shah.
 Iran on Inauguration of John F Kennedy: Schedule of Alternative Categories for as President . Iran on John F. Kennedy schedule of alternative categories for as president .
 John F Kennedy's reply to Letter from Problems and the Possibilities of the Shah of Iran regarding Problems Facing Generations in This Despatch. C 10/22/81 .
 Iranian Security and Intelligence Internal Political Situation in Iran . Iran's internal political situation in Iran has been described as 'strategic and unpredictable'
 JFK#3. about Consortium's Off-Take of Iranian Possible Visit to U.S. by Shah of Iran . Consortium's off-take of Iranian possible visit to United States by Shah was off-Take .
 John F Kennedy of News regarding sador Ardeshir Zahedi regarding SituIran. ation in Iran . Clifton's Decision to Delay Informing United States Discussions with Iranian Ambas .
 John F Kennedy Extends Condolences Critical Situation in Tehran Caused by on Death of Ayatollah Seyed Hasan Nationwide Strike by Iranian Teachers . Nationwide strike by Iranian teachers caused nationwide strike . John F. Kennedy extends Condolence to Iranian Teachers in Iran .
 New Iranian Prime Minister Ali Amini's and Robert H Johnson regarding Iran regarding Iran. C 7/87. Sor T Cuyler Young, Walt W Rostow, Walt R Rostow .
 Arrest of Top Iranian Government and Military Officials on Charges of Corrup . Arrest of top Iranian government and military officials on charges of corruption . Iran's first major political scandal in the country was in 1961 .
 John F Kennedy Requests That Task Report of Task Force on Iran, ""A Force on . Iran Remain in Operation to Review of Problems in Iran and RecomImplement Recommendations for the National Security Council,"" Dated May 15, 1961 .
 Robert Amory. with USSR; United States Economic Assistance To: McGeorge Bundy. to Iran; Prospects for Government of Ali. May 24, 1961. 1p.m. ET. ET .
 Amini Amini: U.S. Political Policies in Iran and Short-Term Outlook for Iran are short-term concerns . Amini says Iran's political and economic relations with the United States have been strained in recent years . He says Iran is a key ally of the U.
 United States Effort to Back Amini Government in Moving toward Resolution of Iran's Political and Economic Problems and Assuring Future Progress . U.S. Effort is part of effort to back Amini government in moving toward resolution of Iranian problems .
 Shah of Shah of Iran Pledges to Support Iran. Strengthen the New Prime Minister of Iran . Shah of the Shah is the prime minister of Iran. Shah was the Shah's prime minister .
 Minister Ali Amini regarding His PosiShah's Views on United States Suggestions and Programs for Dealing with regarding Situation in Iran . Minister Amini discusses his views on U.S. Suggestions that the United States needs to deal with Iran .
 United States Concern over Shah of Iran's Plans Message of Thanks for Flowers from to Replace Prime Minister Ali Amini with Iranian Princess Shahnaz and for General Teimur Bakhtiar, Chief of Iranian . Message on Iranian Security and Intelligence .
 State Department United States Discussions with Iranian Prime Bureau of Intelligence and Research . State Department: U.S. Discussions were held with Iran's Prime Minister . Iranian Prime Minister's office has been in Iran since 2009 .
 Iranian Prime Minister Ali Economic Growth and Progressive Amini addresses Iran's economic growth . Amini is the leader of the country's largest state-run state of economic development .
 Letters to John F Kennedy from ArdeAppeal Asking United States to Withdraw Its shir Zahedi, Iranian Ambassador to United States Support of the Regime of the Shah of Iran . Letters to J.F. Kennedy from . Ardeappeal .
 Khodadad Farman-Farman-Farmayan, ReprePossible Assistance by United States in Helping sentative of the Plan Organization, Iranian Army to Aid in Civil Engineering Accuses U.S. of Cooling Off Support for Projects . Iran accuses United States of
 JFK#13. ing Eighth Anniversary of National United States Military Assistance to Iran to commemorate the 8th anniversary of the U.S. military assistance to Iran . JFK: "I am proud of my family and friends in Iran"
 Uprising against Government of Iranian Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadeq . Uprising includes uprising against government of Iranian PM Mohammad Mossadq .
 JFK#1. ernment of Prime Minister Mohammad Literature on Low-Cost Private Home Mossadeq . #1. The assassination of Iran's prime minister Mohammad Naz Nazmadi .
 Iran regarding Recent Hurricane and ""You May Wish to Show These to the Floods in Texas and Louisiana. Iran regarding recent Hurricane and . ""You may wish to show these to the flood." Iran."
 Delivery of Message from John F. and Louisiana . Delivery of message from John . F.C. and . Louisiana .
 Hubert Humphrey Acknowledges InviInvitation to Shah to Visit U.S. tation to Visit Iran . Shah in power in Iran and possible Hubert . Humphrey . Acknowledged Invi. Invitation to Visit Shah .
 T Cuyler Young 0526 Withdrawal Sheet. and Walt W Rostow. 0526 withdrawal sheet. Walt Rostow 0526 .
 There. Availability of Professor Young to Discuss His Trip to Iran and Situation 0528 Iran—October 28,1961 .
 Message to John F Kennedy from Shah Iranian Ambassador to U.S. of Iran . Phillips Talbot and Ardeshir Zahedi were sent to Kennedy in 1963 .
 Amendment of United States Title I PL-480 Appointment with John F Kennedy for Agreement with Iran to Include Four Julius C Holmes Holmes . Amendment of U.S. Title IPL-480 was made to include four Holmes-Holmes .
 Chester Bowles and Shah of Iran discussed military problems with the Shah . The Shah was the Shah's first ruler of Iran . Bowles was assassinated by the Shah at the age of 50 .
 Qods-Nakhai, Iranian Ambassador to United States 0597 Iran—August 1-11,1962. Iran .
 Schedule for Shah of Iran's Visit to Afghanistan to be April 20 in Afghanistan . Visit is scheduled for April 20 .
 Iranian Prime Minister Ali Amini's Relations between Iran and Afghanistan . Iran's relations with Afghanistan have been strained for years . Iranian PM Amini is the prime minister of the country .
 Denial That His Resignation Was Due to Inadequacy of United States Aid . Denial that his Resignedation Was due to inadequate U.S. Aid .
 Plans of Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas and Akbar Darai, Chief of Iranian False Warning Broadcast Reports by International Organizations Division, to Armed Forces Radio, Tehran, that Attend UN General Assembly. That Attend UN. General Assembly .
 U.S. Report concerning False Warning ening Police Control of Tehran . John F Kennedy's Interest in Strength . Report concerning false warning ening police control of Tehran.
 Need for United States Assistance for Rehabilita0620 Withdrawal Sheet. Need for U.S. assistance for rehabilitation .
 Message of Sympathy from Lyndon B United States to Shah of Iran regarding Minister Asadollah Alam regarding Disasterous Earthquake in Iran . Lyndon B. Johnson sent a message of sympathy to the Iranian PM .
 Shah of Iran's Reply to Sympathy MesC 8/7/79. sage from John F Kennedy following Effects of Iranian Earthquake and United States Iranian Earthquake . Shah of Iranian's reply to the MesC: "Sympathy for Iran"
 United States Disaster Relief Efforts in Iran are underway following an earthquake in Iran . United States has responded to a series of natural disasters in Iran since the earthquake .
 Lyndon B. Johnson's Promised False Warning Broadcast by Armed Assistance in Obtaining Fulbright Forces Radio, Tehran, That Second Scholarship for Iranian Student Leila Iranian Earthquake Would Occur. Iranian Press Reaction . Iranian Press reaction to the announcement .
 John F Kennedy sought help from Shah of Iran following Iranian Earthquake in 1962 . Negotiations with Shah regard . Mesing Five-Year Military Program .
 F. Kennedy and Shah of Iran discussed review of United States Assistance Prospects in Iranian Earthquake . Kennedy and the Shah were discussing the possibility of U.S. assistance in Iran .
 United States Discussions with Iranian Prime United States Military Relief Efforts in Iran . U.S. President Barack Obama has been in talks with Iran's prime minister . Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmad Ahmadinejad is expected to make a speech .
 Plague United States Disaster Relief Efforts in 0661 Withdrawal Sheet . U.S. has withdrawn funds from the U.N. to help the United States .
 Power to Establish Missile Bases in Her Kennedy regarding Cuban Missile Territory . Kennedy's power to establish missile bases in her Kennedy-era homeland .
 Shah of Iran's Invitation to Text of Congratulatory Message from John F Kennedy to Visit Iran was rejected . Shah was the prime minister of Iran during the Shah's reign in the 1960s .
 John F Kennedy to Shah of Iran regarding His Victory in Referendum . Kennedy: Iran's victory in referendum was a victory for the Shah .
 Request by Iranian Students in Text of Congratulatory Message from Germany from Germany for John F Kennedy to Use John F. Kennedy to use John F . Kennedy to Shah of Iran influence to help Iranians Tried by regarding His Victory in Referendum . Iranian Students wanted to use message to
 Iranian Students in Britain protest Detention and Trial of National Front Leaders in Iran . Iranian students in Britain protested detention and trial of national front leaders in Iran. Iranian students are protesting the trial .
 Kennedy's Support in Aiding a Leading U.S. Greetings on Occasions of Iranian Personality of Former Prime Minister Holidays . Kennedy's support in Iran has been described as a "miracle"
 William H Brubeck. tenced to Death by Military Tribunal in To: McGeorge Bundy. William H. Brubck.Tenced to death by military Tribunal in to: McG Bundy.
 Iranian National Front Proposed Procedure for U.S. Holiday Organization in Leoben, Germany . Iran National Front proposed procedure for United States Holiday Organization .
 Mission with the Iranian Army/Military Shah of Iran's Reply to Congratulatory Assistance Advisory Group . Mission with Iran's Army/Shah of Iran’s reply to the Shah's response to the Iran-Shah mission with the Shah of Shah .
 United States Speculation regarding Resignation of Iranian Cabinet Member Hassan Arsanjani . U.S. Speculation is rife with speculation regarding the resignation of Iranian cabinet member Hassan Arseniani .
 Investigation by United States Senate CommitWhite House Clearance of Draft Teletee Headed by John McClellan into Iran to Tehran . Investigation by U.S. Senate Commitment .
 Export-Import Bank Stand on Loans to Iran . Export-Imporation Bank stand on loans to Iran. Export-Export-Import bank stand on Loans .
 United States Discussions with Iranian Prime White House . Clearance of Cable to United States Minister Asadollah Alam regarding Embassy, Tehran . White House clearances of cable to U.S. regarding Embassy .
 John F. Kennedy. regarding His Efforts to Resolve Differ . John F Kennedy . regarding His efforts to solve the problems of the Vietnam War .
 S 4/13/84. ences between Afghanistan and Afghanistan and Request from Shah of Iran for More Pakistan. S.S. re-invited Afghanistan to join in with Iran .
 Iranian Government Urges Calm U.S. Discussions with Shah of Iran following Opposition Attacks and Mob regarding Measures Used by Saze . Violence led by the Ayatollah Ruhollah .
 William H Brubeck. organization] and Iranian Military to To: McGeorge Bundy. organization . organization].
 Request for Appointment with John F in Iran . Quell Recent Street Riots and Demon Demonstrations .
 Recommendation that Princess Ashraf United States Discussions with Iranian Prime of Iran be Received at the White House. Recommendation That Princess Ashrara United States . United States
 Shah, Iranian Elections, Negotiations S 4/13/84 IP. with National Front Leaders, and Meeting with Julius C Holmes on Economic Development. Shah met with Holmes on economic development. Shah, Shah, Holmes, Holmes and Holmes . Shah met in Tehran, Iran, Iran
 70 Iran—July 11,19630749 Handwritten Note. Necessity of Persuading Iranian Government to Solve Its Own Problems.70 Iran .
 "Clear with JFK Unless You've Any White House Clearance of Draft TeleSquawk."" gram to Tehran to Tehran . Clear with JFK unless you've any White House clearance of draft . White House cleared with JFK .
 United States Interest in Progress of Shah of Message from John F Kennedy to Iran's Reform Program . Message from JFK to Iran was sent to Iran in 1960s . Shah was Shah's first president .
 Shah of Iran Thanked him for His Views on Situation in Middle East and Possible Formation of Arab Federation . Shah thanked him for his views on situation in Mideast and possible formation of Arab federation . Shah of Iranian thanked Shah for his support for Arab Federation in possible future .
 Shah of Iran concerning Shah's Views of Economic Cooperation on Middle East Situation and Possible Agreement between USSR and Iran . Shah was Shah's first president of Soviet-Iranian republics . Shah's views on the Middle East are published in Shah's book, "Shah of Iran" Shah
 Iranian Prime Minister Asadollah Alam United States Discussions with Shah of Iran Announces Date for Parliamentary regarding Iranian Security and Need to Elections . Alam: U.S. President Barack Obama and Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad have discussed the possibility of a U.N. election .
 Alleged Inaccuracies in United States Evaluation Embassy, Tehran Embassy, Iran, August 6, 1963. of Political, Economic, and Security .
 Ministry Answering Soviet Charges of Interference with Iraq on Kurdish 0809 Iran—September 6,1963Question. 0809 .
 Appeal for Basic Human Rights and Autonomy within Iraq for Kurdish People . Appeal for basic Human Rights within Iraqi for Kurdish people . Kurdish People.
 Points to be Included in Iranian-Afghan Agreement on Bandar Abbas . "You may want to hold this until State Agreement is reached," says Iran .
 Iran—Shah Visit, April 6-9,1962. Brief Comes over (Promised for End of Day), but I Thought President Might . Brief comes over (promised for end of Day) but I thought President might . Brief Comes with Brief Comes Over (Prom promised
 January 30, 1961, U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv, Israel, wrote to Shah of Iran regarding U.N. nedy and Shah . Shah was Shah's first president of Iran in 1961 .
 John F KenBen-Zvi. nedy and Shah of Iran. discuss U.S. relations with Iran. Kennedy from Israeli President Itzhak . Kennedy from Israel . Kennedy .
 Iranian Foreign Minister Inauguration as President. Congratulatory Message on Kennedy's Inquiry from Iran Foreign Minister inauguration of President.
 Abbas Aram regarding Memoranda of Official Conversations during Shah's 0982 Israel—February 1961 . Abbas Aram was Abbas Aram during the Shah's visit to Israel in 1961 . He was the prime minister of Shah's reign .
 John F Kennedy Transmits Message of Resignation of Israeli Prime Minister Thanks to Israeli Author Moshe David Ben-Gurion . John F. Kennedy: Israel's Prime Minister resigns from his post .
 Discussions between John F Kennedy. and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben0991 Note. John F. Kennedy .
 John F Kennedy's Conversation with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion . Kennedy's conversation with Israeli PM David Ben Gurion. Kennedy's conversations with Ben Gurban .
 U.S. Defense Attaches in Israel Report Source and Editorial Note. Report Source: Report Source .
 Desirability of Avoiding High-Level Statements regarding U.S. Food for Peace Sale to Israel to avoid high-level statements regarding United States food for peace sale to Israel .
 David Ben-Gurion suggested by Israeli Prime Minister I Am Investigating and Will See You David Ben Gurion That Services of His Have Full Report on the Matter . Suggestion by Israeli PM I am Investigating. I am investigating and will see You David .
 Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion United States Embassy, Tel Aviv and Staff Thanked for His Sympathetic Interest in Ignores House Foreign Affairs Subcomittee Group during Their Visit to Israel .
 U.S. Embassy, Tel Aviv's Report Israel Since Beginning of Kennedy: U.K. has been favorable to Israel since beginning of Kennedy . U.N. Embassy in Tel Aviv says it has been friendly to Israel in recent years .
 LOU. ing Israel's Economic Assistance Aspi. Aspi . In 1962, George Ball and George Ball discussed rations for FY 1962 .
 United States Embassies, Amman, Beirut, Cairo, Cairo and Damascus, dum from NEA—Mr Meyer to Mr Jidda, and Tel Aviv. "Transmitted Herewith is a Memoran"
 Embassies, Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Tel Aviv, are located in the region .
 Reports of New United States Initiative Seeking Settlement of Arab-Israeli Dispute . Reports of new U.S. initiative seeking to settle Arab dispute with Israel .
 U.S. Efforts to Meet with Israeli Prime Minister 0069 Withdrawal Sheet. p.p. U.N. efforts to meet with Israeli PM. 0069
 Government of Jordan and Joseph Shimon Peres, Israeli Deputy Defense Johnson, Special Representative, UN Minister. Government of Israel and Jordan. Israel. Jordan. Jordan .
 United States Discussions with Israeli Deputy Defense Minister Shimon Peres . Peres was invited to meet with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in Washington DC .
 Request to Reopen Discussions S 12/12/78 IP. between United States and Israel regarding Amended Flight Schedule of Robert Middle East Situation .
 United States Citizen Convicted of Spying for Israeli Prime Minister David BenUSSR, and Possible Delay in His ExGurion's Visit to the United States Agriculture pulsion from Great Britain .
 Selected Middle East DiploIsrael Probes for Details and Timing of matic Posts . The Middle East diploitalia is based in the Middle East .
 Diplomatic Colleagues' Views on Joseph Johnson's Proposals . Diplomatic Relationship of the U.S. Diplomatic Council of Chiefs of State Department .
 Chiefs of State regarding Direct Israeli Prime Minister David BenNegotiations as Means of Settling Gurion's Reply to John F Kennedy Disputes with Arabs . regarding Israel's Plans to Withdraw 0132 List. regarding Israel’s Plans to withdraw 0132 list. regarding . Israel
 U.S. Attempts to Discourage Israel from Israel. Remain in Iceland Until His Return to United States Attempts To Discourage Israeli from Israel . Remaining in Iceland until his return to U.K.
 Not to Weizman Institute's Invitation to Meyer Foreclose Great Britain from Making Feldman to Visit Israel . Great Britain should not have invited Feldman to visit Israel. Great Britain will not have to make Feldman travel to Israel .
 Cost of the Johnson Plan. hound Missile System . Competitive Offer to Israel of Blood of Blood .
 U.S. Discussions with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir regarding Johnson Plan for Palestine Refugees . United States Discussions . Meir will discuss Johnson Plan with Meir .
 U.S. Discussions with Israeli GovernConduitmentmentment regarding Conditions for Accep0189 CIA Geographic Intelligence Memorantance of Johnson Plan on Palestine dum. dum .
 Meyer Feldman's Trip to Request of Samuel Belk for Copy of Israel . Feldman's trip to Israel was requested by Samuel Belks .
 U.S. and Israeli Joseph Johnson's Proposals on Representatives regarding Modification Palestine Refugee Problem. of United States Policy toward Israel and Middle 0202 Note. Discussions between United States and Israeli .
 State Department Advises That No Reply to Request for Meeting with Meeting with Reply Be Made to Enclosed Letter from Miami, Florida, Delegation Traveling to Israeli Prime Minister David BenIsrael for Dedication of New Town . No reply to request for meeting with Reply be made to En
 U.S. Ground-to-Air Missile System for Handling of United States Sale of Israel . United States sold Israel's missile system to deal with Israel .
 United States Embassies, Amman and Tel Israeli Report on Border Incident with Aviv, and U.S. Consulate General, Jordan. Report on border incident with Tel Aviv .
 United States Advises Israel Not to Impinge on Handling of Possible Israeli Questions Sovereignty of Jordan . U.S. regarding Text of Grant-Segal Letter regarding Text .
 U.S. Report on Border Incident C 12/13/78. between Israel and Jordan . Report on border incident was published in 1978 .
 Selected United States Diplomatic 0223 Department of State Airgram #A-116 . Selected U.S. Diplomatic . 0223 .
 Diplomat Expresses Fear about Minister David Ben-Gurion and UAR United States Position in Forthcoming UN President Gamal Abdel Nasser . Diplomat expresses fear about Minister of Israel and U.S. position in UAR .
 John W Talbot-Halpern Letter or U.S. Military Jones. Jones .
 Walworth Barbour is the U.S. Ambassador to matic Posts . Selected Middle East Diploeworth Barbour will be Ambassador to the Middle East . Barbour was Ambassador to Matic Posts.
 Press Guidance on United States Sale of Missiles July 30, 1962. 1p.m. ET .
 Letter from John F. United States Apologizes to UAR President Gamal Kennedy to Prime Minister David BenAbdel Nasser for Failure to Notify him in Gurion . Requesting that Israel Not PurAdvance regarding Missile Sales to sue to sue Direct-Negotiations Resolution
 British Press Coverage of United States Sale of HAWK Missiles to Israel . Concern by Jordan over U.S. Sale of Concern by . Jordan over United States sale of . HAWk Missiles .
 British Foreign Office Preparing Syrian Concern over Sale of United States Response to Press Inquiries regarding Missiles to Israel . U.S. response to press inquiries regarding missiles to Israel has been criticized .
 Possible Reaction of UAR to U.S. Sale C 12/6/78 of Missiles to Israel . UAR sold missiles to Israel in 1978 . Possible reaction to UAR sale of missiles .
 Report C 12-12-78 IP. of United States Supply of Missiles to Israel . Report was published in January 1978 .
 The U.S. Embassy in Cairo, Egypt, issued a statement of support for the U.K. in 1962 . The statement was made in response to a request for assistance from Egypt .
 Syrian Prime Minister Khaled el-Azm ' Meets with Soviet Charge d'Affairs to 0302 Israel . Discuss United States Decision to Furnish November 13,1962 .
 United States Informs Jordanian Ambassador of Israeli Minister of Labor Yigal Alton's Decision to Sell Missiles to Israel . U.S. Inform Jordan's ambassador of Israel's decision to sell missiles to the U.K.
 Libyan Press Reaction to Report of regarding United States Provision of HAWK United States Sale of Missiles to Israel . Complaint by Iraqi UN Ambassador Libyan Press reaction to report of U.S. sale of missiles .
 Projected Syrian Reaction to U.S. decision to sell survey of Dead Sea Area . Implications for Israel of projected Syrian reaction to United States decision .
 Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion's Reply to John F Kennedy's Message of October 22 . David Bengurion's reply to JFK's message: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 Israel Informed of Events during Cuban United States Position in UN General Assembly Missile Crisis regarding Israel . United States informed Israel of its position during Cuban U.S. position in UN .
 Ben-Gurion wrote to U.S. regarding UN General Assembly proposal . David Israeli replied to United States Package Proposal .
 Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion's Announcement That If UN 0336 Israel—November 14,1962Were Unable to Maintain Peace on December 21,1922 . BenGurban's announcement was made in response to UN Security Council resolution .
 U.S. reacts to speech by Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion . Dead Sea Salt-Pans dispute between Israel and Jordan . Dispute between Israeli and Jordan was a dead-sea dispute .
 C 2/26/79. dor to U.S. Avraham Harman regarding Request for Appointment with John F UN General Assembly Refugee Debate . A. C. C . dor . to United States Avraham . Harman's request for appointment with John . F
 Israeli Deploys Military Units along Israeli View of Syrian Attacks on SetSyrian Border Near Sea of Galilee in tlements in Tel Katzir Area . Israeli deploys military units along Syrian border .
 U.S. Embassy, Damascus, and United States December 17, 1962 . United States Embassy in Damascus, Syria, was located in the Syrian capital .
 U.S. Deplores Outbreak of Fighting by Israel's Response to John F Kennedy's Israel and Syria along Armistice Line Package Proposal on Arab Refugees . Urges Israel to Avoid Retaliatory Action .
 U.S. position on Supplying Missiles to Briefing Materials for John F. Israel . United States has been criticized by Israel for not sending missiles to Israel .
 Text of Message from Israeli Prime Golda Meir, Israeli Minister of Foreign Minister David Ben-Gurion regarding Affairs . Text of message from Israeli PM Meir: "Israel's Foreign Affairs"
 Television Interview of John F Kennedy on His First Two Years as President . Kennedy on his first two years as President: "It was a very difficult time to be President of the United States"
 Arab-Israeli Dispute to Try to Discover Briefing Materials for John F. Common Ground between the Two Kennedy's Meeting with Israeli Foreign Countries . Meeting with Israel Foreign Countries might help lead to a Minister Golda Meir .
 Selected United States Diplomatic Minister Golda Meir regarding Cuba Posts and the Arab Situation . Meir spoke to the U.S. Diplomatic Secretary of State John Kerry about the Arab situation in the Arab world .
 Minister Golda Meir met with John F Kennedy on 12/6/78 . Meir was in Israel at the time of her visit to meet with Kennedy .
 William H Brubeck. nedy and Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Golda. Golda To: Bromley K Smith .
 Outline of Principles Underlying Israeli Conversations between John F KenApproach to Efforts to Solve Palestine nedy and Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Refugee Problem .
 United States Offers Reciprocal Privileges to Text of United States Reply to Letter from Israeli Israel to Establish a Radio Station at or Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion near Its Embassy in Washington, D.C. regarding Palestine Refugee Problem . United States offers Reciproc
 David Ben-Gurion's Letter to Walworth Avraham Harman, Israeli Ambassador Barbour regarding John F Kennedy's to U.S., and James P Grant, Acting TV Interview . Acknowledge Israeli Prime Minister's Major Points of Discussions .
 David Ben-Gurion's Letter to Walworth Israeli Ambassador to U.S., regarding Barbour regarding John F Kennedy's Israeli Economic Objectives . United States Embassy, Tel Aviv Instructed to Conversation between State DepartAcknowledge Israeli Prime Minister ment Officials .
 Text of Message from Israeli Prime Level of United States Aid to Israel for FY 1963 . U.S. aid to Israel is based on U.K. dollars .
 JFK#6. regarding Israel's Views of UAR Presi. regarding . Israel's views of the UAR President . regarding Israel’s Views of . UARPresi. regards Israel”s views on UARpresi .
 Recent U.S. Actions Favorable to Israel. U. Alexis Johnson and Israeli Deputy U.J. Israel. Johnson: Recent United States actions favorable to Israel . Johnson: U. J. Johnson and Israel's ambassador to the U.N. have been critical of U.
 Peres Sent to United States for Discussions regarding HAWK Missile Transaction in Middle East . United States Concern over Weapons Escalation of HAWk Missile Transaction . Peres sent to U.S. to discuss missile transaction .
 White House Approval of Draft Circular Circular Approval into UAR territory . UN Investigation of Israeli Border Incur. Incur . UN investigation of Israeli border .
 White House Approval of Draft Cable to United States Concern over Weapons Escalation Tel Aviv in Middle East. Tel Aviv . White House approval of draft cable to U.S. concerns over weapons escalation in Mideast region .
 Israel Informs UN Emergency Force of Initiative. C 11/30/77. cussion Phase of Arab Refugee Israel . Cussion phase of Arab refugee Israel informs UN .
 U.S. Major Points Contained in Israeli Prime Embassy, Tel Aviv, Israel . United States major points contained in Israeli PM's office .
 United States Urges Israel to Exercise Restraint . Israeli Government Requests Permiswith regard to Proposed Arab Federasion to Publish Text of John F.
 Kennedy's Message of Condolence on 0516 Department of State Airgram #A-675 . Kennedy's message of condolence was sent to the U.S. State Department .
 Text of Congratulatory Message from United States Policy and the Renewed Strategic John F Kennedy to Acting Israeli Debate in Israel . Text of the message from U.S. policy and the renewed strategic John F. Kennedy to acting Israeli Debate .
 President Kadish Luz on Fifteenth Anniversary of Israeli Independence . Israel's independence came on May 4, 1963 .
 Israeli Press Report That Robert Komer Minister David Ben-Gurion. David Ben Gurion . United States Reply to Letter from Israeli Prime. United States .
 William H Brubeckck. tion and Culture, regarding Middle East . To: McGeorge Bundy.
 Congress Expresses Sympathy sions regarding Middle East Made by on Death of Israeli President Itzhak John F Kennedy on April 27 . Transmittal to Israel of Resolution by United States Actions Taken to Implement Deci.
 John F Kennedy Reaffirms Substance Resolution by U.S. House of Represenof Paragraph Three of the Tripartite tatives Expressing Sympathy over Death Declaration . of Israeli President Itzhak Ben-Zvi . of Israel .
 Requested to Transmit Promptly Letters NA. 1p. 1 p.m. for the President .
 William H Brubeck. pathy on Death of President Itzhak . McGeorge Bundy.
 Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion Dated Conversation between Dean Rusk and May 27 . Prime Minister of Israel: "I'm sure you can't wait to hear what I think of you"
 Bromley K Smith. tension of West German Jewish RestiTo: McGeorge Bundy Bundy. tution Agreement. .
 Exchanges of Correspondence with Text of Congratulatory Message from Former Israeli Prime Minister David John F Kennedy to Shneour Zalman Ben-Gurion . Kennedy to Ben Gurion. Kennedy to Gurion .
 Letters on Israeli Security Received by Shazar on His Inauguration as President Lyndon B Johnson. of Israel . John F Kennedy to Shneour Zalman . of Israel. of 1967 .
 Reply to Letter regarding Security of Delivery of John F Kennedy's CongratuMiddle East and U.S. Policy of Friendlatory Message to Israeli President .
 U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ation in Middle East . Reply to Letter regarding Security Situ .
 Letter regarding Security Situ July 10, 1963. 1p. ation in Middle East .
 JFK#2g. under Lease, Four Tons of Heavy Concern over Threat to Israeli Security Water for Research Project. JFK#1g. is under lease, four-tons of heavy water for research project . JFK #2g is under contract with Israel for four years
 Levi Eshkol Installed Following Vote of to Tel Aviv . Cabinet of New Israeli Prime Minister . White House Clearance of Draft Cable has been cleared .
 Request from Wisconsin State Senator Norman Sussman for information on and Israel regarding Sale of HAWK Situation of Israel in Middle East on Missiles . Request from U.S. Norman Sssman for Information on and . Israel regarding . Sale of Israeli missiles .
 McGeorge Bundy. for Information on Situation of Israel in July 4, 1963 . Bundy. Bundy.
 U.S. Ask West German Government to UN Security Council Meetings on IsraeliDiscourage Use of Its Scientists in Syrian Case . West German government to attend meetings on Israeli use of its scientists in Syria .
 Eshkol Threatening to Use Israeli United States Assessment of Probability of Major Defense Force to Halt Syrian Border Hostilities between Israel and Arabs Provocations . Criticizing UAR following Border Incidents with Syria following border incidents with Syria . Threatening UAR assessment of Prob
 Progress on Syrian Resolution in UN UN Security Council Meetings on Israeli Security Council meets on Israeli security Council .
 United States Recommendation on Resolution UN Security Council Meetings on Israelifor Israeli-Syrian Complaint in UN SecuSyrian Complaints. rity Council .
 Moroccan proposal for UN Truce was rejected by UN Security Council meeting . Moroccan proposal would be the first time the UN body has met with the Arab world . UN report on Syrian Complaints was published by UN .
 U. Alexis Johnson and Avraham Israeli Press Reaction to United States Draft on Palestine Refugees . Harman, Israeli Ambassador to U.S. Resolution on Palestine refugees. Harman: U.N. resolution on Palestinian refugees will be a result of the draft of a resolution .
 Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir No-Man's Land near Jordanian border . U.S. Embassy officers on Latrun Area .
 Protests Silence of Delegates when Arabs Referred to Israelis as ""Nazis" in UN Bodies . Protests silence of Delegate when Arabs referred to Israel as 'Nazis' in UN bodies .
 Israeli Reaction to United States Draft of UN Resolution on Palestine Refugee Minister John D Diefenbaker and Israeli Problem . Discussions between Canadian Prime Minister and Israeli Prime Minister were held in Israel .
 Israel wants U.S. Credits for Loans to Refurbish Its Military Establishment . Israel also wants to use U.N. credits to refurbish its military establishment . Israel has been in talks with the United States over the use of Palestine refugees .
 Walter J Stoessel, Jr. by U.S., Israel, and Arab States to Work To: Andrew J Goodpaster. Walter J. Stoessels, Jr., by . Walter JStoessel Jr. to Work to: Work To . Work to. by
 Israeli Press and Government Response Plans of Saudi Arabian Government to to Proposed United States Draft of UN Resolution Broadcast John F Kennedy's Reply to on Palestine Refugee Problem . Saudi Arabia's response to proposed UN Resolution will be broadcasted on Israel's request .
 John F Kennedy's Reply to King Saud 0795 Israel—Ben-Gurion Visit, of Saudi Arabia on His Inauguration as The Arab-Israeli Situation, President. President.
 David Ben-Gurion's Visit to United States from King Saud of Saudi Arabia on John F Kennedy's Inauguration as President . U.S. replied to Congratulatory Message from Saudi Arabia . United States responded with congratulatory message .
 Greetings from King Saud of Saudi Arabia . Suggestion that U.S. Send Publishable Arabia on John F Kennedy's Assumpump. Suggestion That . United States Send publishable Saudi Arabia on JFK's assump .
 McGeorge Bundy. from King Saud of Saudi Arabia and September 1, 1961. 1p.m. ET . Bundy. Bundy.
 President Asked What Is Being To: McGeorge Bundy . Lucius D. Battle. dum dum: Lucius Dum . Lucius dum the President asked What is Being To?
 U.S. Offer to Sell Arms Requested by Saudi Arabia . Saudi Arabia has asked the United States to sell arms to the kingdom . The Saudi government has requested the sale of arms .
 Message from King Saud of Saudi Arabia to Be HosArabia to John F Kennedy. pitalized in Boston, Massachusetts, for 0839 Translation of Letter. Message from Saudi of Saudi King Saud .
 Saudi Press Reports on Crown Prince Message from John F Kennedy Faisal's Visit to King Saud in Hospital. regarding King Saud's Recovery from 0843 Note. on the Crown Prince .
 Meeting between John F Kennedy and King Saud of Saudi Arabia at Palm 0845 Saudi Arabia . November 20,1961Beach, Florida .
 John F Kennedy's Meeting with King Saud of Saudi Arabia in Palm Beach, of months. John F. Kennedy's meeting with King "King Saud Will Be Here Another Couple Saud"
 John F Kennedy met with King Saud of Saudi Arabia in Palm Beach, Florida . JFK met with Saudi Arabia's King Saud at the time .
 Office of the White Bowles to Discuss Certain Aspects of House Press Secretary . Office of President Obama met with White House press secretary to discuss press secretary's role .
 JFK#9. gressman Seymour Halpern on Saudi Statement by King Saud of Saudi Arabia Arabian Discrimination against Jewish upon His Departure from United States Americans . Americans. Americans.
 Discrimination against Jewish AmeriBennett concerning John F Kennedy's cans . John F. Kennedy's canals . Discrimination against Jews .
 Message from John F. Proposed United States Gift of Two Rifles and Kennedy to King Saud of Saudi Arabia . Ammunition to Amir Saud bin Jiluwi, in Spain .
 Understanding of Kennedy Administration Position on Acceptance of Gifts . Kennedy Administration position on acceptance of gifts .
 JFK#7a. and Abdullah al-Khayyal, Saudi Arabian Text of King Saud of Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to U.S., regarding CritiReply to ""Get Well"" Message from John cism of United States in Saudi Press .
 Travel Plans of King Saud of Saudi of Saudi Arabia . Discussions with Prince Mohammed bin Arabia . King Saud .
 William H Brubeck. to Sami Sharaf, Aide-de-Camp to UAR. William H. Sharaf was a member of the UAR staff at Bromley .
 Suggestion that U.S. Not Proceed with Approval of Message for Arms Limitation Talks due to Developing Developing Following Check on Comment by State ments .
 Bromley K Smith. regarding United States Desire to Curtail Nuclear . June 27, 1963. 1p.m. ET .
 UAR President Gamal Abdel Nasser S 9/21/77. regarding United States Desire to Curtail Nuclear United States . Discussions with UAR GovernArms Race between UAR and Israel. ment regarding Use of Lethal Gas.
 Request That Two Cables Be Inserted into McGeorge Bundy's Weekend 1113 Copy of Note . Request that two Cables be inserted into "For Information" into "Saturday 1113"
 McCloy Instructed Not to Visit Israel Until After Return to Washington, 1104 Copy of Note. John J McCloy instructed not to visit Israel until after return to Washington .
 Bromley K Smith. ment of Intentions on Nuclear Weapons . July 2, 1963 . 1p.m. of intentions on nuclear weapons .
 Staff of United States Embassy, Cairo Instructed ""For Information."" to Report Anything Reflecting Progress 1140 Copy of Note. 1140 copy of Note .
 William H Brubeck. or Change in UAR Arms-Limitation To: Bromley K Smith. William H. Smith. Change in Arms- Limitation to Bromley .
 UAR Congratulatory Message gram to Cairo congratulates U.S. on First United States Attempt at Manned Space 1155 Routing Slip . White House Clearance of Draft Tele-Spacecraft has been confirmed .
 UAR President Gamal Abdel Nasser's Message regarding the Congo Situation. ments on United States Involvement in Cuba . Message on Congo Situation .
 The following index lists the authors or originators of documents contained in this collection . The author of each document is listed in the author's author's index .
 2:0560 indicates a document located on Reel 2, Frame 0560 . For example, 2:560 indicates that a document is located in Reel 1, Frame 060 . The number of frames in the film will be shown at the bottom of the page .