 Historians say the world has never been closer to nuclear conflict than it was during the Cuban missile crisis . Historians: The Cuban crisis was the height of the Cuban nuclear crisis .
 Ci sono eroi sconosciuti che hanno dato la vita, e sono ricordati nei cuore di poche persone . Ci soni sono scontosciutti .
 Poi ci sono eroi che sono ricordati solo per un mese, perche hanno combatuto guerre sbagliate con nemici .
 Historians say the world has never been closer to nuclear conflict than it was during the Cuban missile crisis . Historians: The Cuban crisis was the height of the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Nikita Khrushchev and John F Kennedy brought their countries to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 . The two countries were at risk of a nuclear war, with the U.S. and the Soviet Union on the brink .
 "With a heavy heart, and in necessary fulfillment of my oath of office, I have ordered -and the United States Air Force has now carried out -military operations with conventional weapons only,"" Kennedy was to begin .
 Ted Sorensen, who wrote most of the speeches, was told he couldn't write that speech, Putnam says . Putnam: "Ted wrote most speeches and, I think, wrote the one where he announced to the world the discovery of the missiles"
 "What these documents are for us is the raw material of history,"" says Putnam . Putnam says. "These documents are the raw materials of history"
 Archbishop Kliment Archbishop Klyment Archbishop Mark Coleridge . Archbishop of Canterbury Archbishop Vinko Puljic Archbishop of the Canterbury Archbishop . ArciGay Bari arcivescovo Ricardo Ezzati Arcobaleno Tre .
 Général Foch Ava Djamshidi Ava Louise Avanguardia Nazionale Avastin-Lucentis Avdullah Hoti Avedis Anserlian avel Fischer Avi Dichter Avi Halevy Avi Mayer Avi Rubin
 Climate Action Tracker found climate change is changing . Clint Eastwood, Clint Lorance Clinton Foundation and the Clinton BodyCount have been linked to climate change . Clint Albright, Cliven Bundy, Clint Clint Clint Clinton, Richard Clifford .
 Litchfield David Rabinowitz David Ranchman David Re David Reich David Ritz David Rodgers David Rossi David Rubinstein David S Weinstein David Sackler David Sakvarelidze . David Schoen David Schonberg David Schwimmer David Sedney David Simon David Sirota David
 Donata Meirelles, Donatella Legnaioli, Donato De Giorgi and Donatella Tesei donatella Tesei . Donato Tusk, Donald Trunp, Donald Wuerl, Donald Trump,
 Francesco Sarcina, Francesco Totti and Francesco Urraro among those who died . Francesco Vannucci, Francisco I Pedraza, Francisco Galicia, Francisco Javier Errazuriz, Francisco Santos Calderon and Francisco Yanez .
 Gamaleya National Center of Epidemiology and Microbiology Gambia . Gambia National Research Center Gambia is Gambia's only national research center .
 James Dean Blevins Jr James Delingpole James Dobson James Douglas James Duddridge James Farmer James Fields Fields James Fields Jr. James Fields is the son of James Fields, who is a former NFL star .
 John S McCain John Scarlett John Scott-Railton John Seifert John Shipton John Smith John Sopko John Strauss John Stuart Mill John Suffolk John Sullivan John Supple John Thun John Thune John Tino John Travolta John Turano John Tyson John Velaz
 Jova Jovanovic Jr. Jr. Jovan Kosović Jovana Marović  Jovana Žugić Jovem Pan Jovenel Moise Jovena Moïse Jovica Stanisic . Joy Davis Joy Reid Joyce Beat
 Luigi Ferraris Luigi Gallimberti Luigi Gariano Luigi Garofalo Luigi Genovese Luigi La Rocca Luigi Lovaglio . Luigi Manconi Luigi Martattin Luigi Oliva Luigi Patronaggio Luigi Pedone Luigi Proietti Luigi Radice .
 Reuven Berko and Reuben Rivlin were captured in Baghouz, Afghanistan, in 2009 .
 Robert F Kennedy Junior Robert Faurisson Robert Fico Robert Francis Kennedy Jr. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Jr. Jr.
 Sen. Cristiano Malpiglio Semyon Gavrilov and Sen. Alexander Mogilevich are currently serving in Russia .
 Stephen Stephen Stephen King Stephen Kinnock Stephen Kitay Stephen Kohn Stephen L Miller Stephen Mallett Stephen McKinnon Stephen Meyer Stephen Miller Stephen Moore Stephen Morrison Stephen Paddock Stephen Pollard Stephen R Nagy Stephen Sample Stephen Schwarzman Stephen Sestanovich Stephen Smith Stephen Sondhein Stephen
 Vadim Kobzev and Lyalin Mikerin won the Human Rights Prize . Jovanovanovic was awarded the award for his work in Prague .