 Cold War created a new world order under which most of the world was divided between friends and allies of the U.S. and friends of the Soviet Union . Fighting With Proxies is a series of stories from the Cold War .
 Both the U.S. and Soviet Union attempted to win friends by forming alliances with nations in exchange for military security and economic assistance . The United States and the Soviet Union formed alliances with countries .
 The proxy wars of the Cold War would be fought when communism was on the move . The proxy war would have been fought when it was in the throes of communism .
 During WWII, Korea (like China, Indochina, and most of the Pacific) was occupied by Japan . Seatso in Blue CENTO CENTO in Green, Plus USA Divided Korea .
 On June 25, 1950, Communist North Korean troops invaded South Korea with the goal of uniting the country under one communist government . Joseph Stalin approved the invasion of South Korea, with the approval of Stalin .
 Truman saw the invasion by the North as another example of communism spreading by force into places it wasn't already . Truman saw it as an example of the spread of communism by force in the U.S.
 When the U.S. arrived in Korea, the North had advanced through most of the South . When the United States arrived in the South, it had advanced to the North .
 In 1953 an armistice was signed between North and South Koreas . The Korean War ended in 1953 with a cease-fire between the two countries .
 South Korea, a democratic capitalist nation, is one of America’s strongest allies and trading partners . North Korea remains a backward, impoverished communist state with no allies but China .
 The Korean War was an example of the U.S. policy of containment . Raising the Stakes was the Korean War's first major conflict .
 Containment was the idea that communism would be contained to where it already was and not allowed to spread into new places . Containment meant that communism was contained to the place it was already and not allowing it to spread .
 Fidel Castro overthrew the Cuban government run by American ally Fulgencio Batista in 1959 . Castro established a communist totalitarian government allied with the Soviet Union .
 The April 16, 1961 invasion, known as Cubans below the Bay of Pigs for the area where they landed, was a disaster as the United States didn't provide air cover . The invaders were quickly overcome by Castro’s army, with many killed and the rest surrendering .
 Kennedy could not allow the Soviets to position nuclear weapons so close to the U.S. mainland . Kennedy: "I'm not going to let the Soviets move nuclear weapons into the United States' mainland"
 The United States would remove the nuclear missile we had positioned in Turkey, Turkey, and the Soviets would remove nuclear missiles placed in Cuba . The U.S. would then remove the missile from Turkey and Cuba .
 It was not until the 1990s that it was revealed that the Soviets had planned to use nuclear weapons against the U.S. if we had invaded Cuba . It was only later revealed that it had been planned for use of nuclear weapons .
 Following WWII most Southeast Asian countries that were colonies of western nations were given independence . Vietnam was one of the most successful countries in Southeast Asia .
 The United States granted the Philippines independence in 1946, and Great Britain began to withdraw from the area as well . Great Britain withdrew from the Philippines in 1946 .
 France refused to give up Indochina, or Vietnam as we now call it . However, the French government still refuses to give it up .
 Ho Chi Minh’s forces, the Vietminh, won most of the nation over, but the French still refused to leave . The French were still refusing to leave the country .
 After Ho Chi Minh was elected President, the French moved to the south the country and started an attempt to fight him off . The French tried to take control of the country in the south .
 North and anti-communist forces of the South could not come together for elections to join the country into one again . The Vietnam War ended in a stalemate in Vietnam .
 The U.S. could not push back the North Vietnamese, or defeat the Viet Cong and secure South Vietnam . While the United States had almost every advantage thinkable, they could not .
 Many Americans feared what was called Domino Theory, the idea that if one nation turned communist its neighbor would as well, so on and so on . The idea was that if a nation became communist its neighbors did as well .
 Vietnam was, and is, communist, but that communism basically stayed within the region previously known as Indochina . Vietnam was still communist, and that communism stayed in the region . Vietnam is now known as Vietnam .