 Washington DC USA Date: 1962, October . View of many city skylines, town centers, and war industries in Texas during World War 2 .
 Daytime view of a tall skyscraper building and wide street in Houston Texas with cars and traffic . View of the Hotel Nimitz in Fredericksburg Texas .
 Two different views of The Alamo and surroundings in San Antonio, Texas . Alamo was the Alamo's home to many of its inhabitants .
 Distant view of the city of Austin Texas from an elevated position . Then in downtown Austin featuring the State House Capitol building .
 Black clouds in sky from burning natural gas in making synthetic rubber for war effort . Natural gas used to be used to make synthetic rubber in World War II .
 Alabama and Coushatta Native American Indian Indian village with flag of service stars for men in the war . Alabama and cousinhatta native American Indian village .
 Story of Cuban missile crisis in the month of October . Texas United States USA Date: 1945 .
 Chinese airmen board a United States troop carrier aircraft at Austin, Texas July 1946 . United States USA Date: 1962 . Clip was taken in 1962 .
 The 349th Troop Carrier Group was based at Bergstrom and assigned to the Third Air Force, Tactical Air Command as noted on the diploma .
 Maurer states this unit trained Chinese crews to operate C-46 aircraft . Maurer: This unit trained China crews to use C-47 aircraft .
 The C-46s still carry the I TROOP CARRIER COMMAND insigne on the nose, with was disbanded on 4 Nov 1945 . They have the new AAF wide ""Buzz Numbers"" for all aircraft operating solely within the continental USA .
 Texas Senator Lyndon B Johnson speaks about industrial and agricultural growth in the state of Texas .
 U.S. Senator from Texas, Lyndon B Johnson's speaks at his office in Texas . U. Johnson was a member of the Texas Republican Party .
 Senator Johnson speaks about industrial growth of Texas and explains how nation leans more on agriculture of Texas . Senator Johnson explains how the U.S. leans more heavily on agriculture .
 He further talks about the spirit of the people in Texas which resulted in success . He also talks about how the people of Texas helped him achieve success .
 He talks of Texas as a leader worldwide in farming, and mentions rapid growth of Texas cities . Texas is a leader in farming worldwide .
 Johnson speaks about skilled and self-reliant labor, farmers, and ranchers of Texas and their courageous approach to problems which makes everything possible . Johnson: Texas is a great state of opportunity for agriculture .
 Texas business men are progressive, free, cooperative, cooperative and friendly, says Gov. Rick Perry . He lauds business men of Texas who are progressive and free .