 Photos were shown that proves Cuba has long ranging missiles from the Soviet Union . On October 16, 1962, more photos of Cuba's missiles were shown .
 Gromyko explains to Robert Kennedy that the Soviet Union is helping Cuba in advancing their agriculture . The Soviet Union was helping Cuba advance their agriculture in the 1960s and '60s .
 Since Cuba is closer than the Soviet Union to America, it makes more sense for the Soviets to keep their nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 The Soviet Union had missiles that could launch from the Soviet Union to America, why else would they have them in the U.S. It's not clear why they were there, but they were in the USSR .
 America’s weapons were strong enough to launch from America into the Soviet Union from America . The weapons were launched from the United States in the early 1950s . America's weapons were stronger than Soviet Union's .
 The Excomm members did not want to call the quarantine a blockade to give people the wrong idea . Since a blockade in used as a war tactic, the Excomm . Members of Excomm did not call it a blockade .
 In this Excomm meeting President John F Kennedy was not able to attend . President Kennedy did not attend the meeting .
 The US didn't fight against the soviets on the battlefield, hence the term cold . The Us didn't fought against the Soviet Union . The U.S. did not fight against Russia on the ground .
 Kennedy had taken a hard stance against Fidel Castro and the presence of a Communist nation in the Western Hemisphere . In context, the event was a domestic challenge for Kennedy, as he had taken hard stance .
 The main reason of this invasion as understood was that the U.S. government wanted to fight and change communism . The United States wanted to change communism, the author says .
 The crisis was a result of both the U.S. and the USSR’s drive for expansionism in Cuba . The crisis occurred in Cuba during the Cold War .
 This event is widely seen by most historians as the closest the world has ever come to all-out nuclear war . This event lasted thirteen days and is widely considered the closest to nuclear war ever . Most historians believe this is the closest ever nuclear war to be seen .
 It is my belief that the crisis held a great significance to the Cold War, largely due to the major ease off in tensions between the USA and the USSR that occurred as a result . The crisis was a major easing off in tension between the U.S. and the Soviet Union as
 Dean Rusk shows the overall tension throughout the cold war . Rusk's quote shows the tension between the Cold War and the U.S.
 During the cold war and Cuban Missile crisis many Americans were in their homes horrified as Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev held a metaphorical gun to the back of the U.S head .
 As time has passed and previously classified documents have been released, many scholars have changed the opinion of many scholars has changed .
 This relation started directly after World War Two, which lasted about forty five years . This relation was directly after the war, which ended in 1945 .
 Cold war is the rivalry of economics, military, and politics between the two superpowers . Cold war was the Cold War between the U.S. and Russia .
 This has made it one of the most documented events of the Cold War . Journal entries, books and films have been made about the defining thirteen day period . Each gives a unique perspective of the crisis .
 Before this event, no one had truly considered the potential damage nuclear weapons could cause, but only realized the consequences as war became a possible reality .