 S. Carolina political science professor Timothy McKeown has devoted much of his career to fixing that, one misperception at a time . He says he's spent most of his life trying to fix that, and that's not true .
 The biggest error, perhaps, is to view it as a 13-day morality tale of virtue triumphing over evil, the stuff that makes for good Hollywood movies . The biggest mistake is to think it's a 13 day morality tale .
 McKeown acknowledges, even the movies had many of the facts right, but they failed to see – or show – the bigger picture . He says even movies had a lot of facts right but failed to show bigger picture of the truth .
 "Amazingly, most scholarly work also has left out that context, he said . Amazingly, the context of this work has been left out, he added .
 Story of October 1962 leaves out much of the vital historical framework needed to explain how and why the crisis started and why it actually ended . Another problem with tucking the story into a 13-day span of high drama during October 1962 is that it leaves out a vital historical context .
 Through the wider prism of history, any notion of a neat morality play also falls apart . Through this wider prism, the morality play falls apart, as does the morality of the past .
 If it were a dastardly act for the Soviet Union to position nuclear missiles in Cuba to threaten the United States, it would be no less reprehensible for the U.S. to place nuclear weapons at the doorstep of the Soviet Russia . The United States should not have placed
 The U.S. positioned short-range ballistic missiles in Turkey in 1960–61 . The missiles were placed in Turkey by the United States in 1960-61 .
 The positioning of Soviet missiles in Cuba came a year after the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion in which a CIA-trained group of Cuban exiles invaded southern Cuba .
 The half-hearted invasion convinced Soviet leaders that the U.S. would invade again, McKeown says . The second attempt would be far more serious, he says . In fact, the second invasion would be more serious .
 A reasonable argument could be made that the Soviets sent missiles to Cuba to prevent such an invasion from happening, McKeown says . A reasonable case could also be made if the Soviets were trying to prevent an invasion, he says .
 Robert Kennedy's role in the crisis became part of what McKeown calls the “13-day mythology,” but it was what historians believed to be true until the end of the 20th century . The role that Robert Kennedy, U.S. attorney general and President
 That’s when a new summary of transcripts of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council that called that narrative into question, McKeown said .
 It became apparent to Stern that the so-called “Trollope ploy” was not at the heart of the solution to the crisis . Stern: It became clear that the 'Trollop ploy’ was not the best way to deal with the crisis in Germany .
 Nikita Khrushchev demanded removal of NATO nuclear missiles in Turkey as a condition for removing Soviet missiles in Cuba . The letter was sent to President Kennedy in October 1962 . The U.S. ignored the private letter .
 The terms for the missiles’ removal involved a pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba . Instead, the response was made to the letter Kennedy received the next morning in which the terms were made .
 Khrushchev made the second offer public to the world – not in a private diplomatic communication, McKeown says . The problem with the narrative is that the two offers were made public, not in private, he says .
 Kennedy realized Khrushchev had painted him into a political and diplomatic corner, McKeown said . Kennedy realized he was in a political, diplomatic corner when he heard the offer .
 McKeown understood that “the rest of the world would never understand or accept” that the Soviets had to withdraw their missiles from Cuba, but the Americans get to keep theirs in Turkey, he said . He understood that .
 Kennedy did not want to appear as if he was reacting to Soviet coercion or that he was weakening America’s military posture in Europe . Kennedy wanted to avoid appearing to appear to be reacting to the Soviet Union or weakening U.S. military posture .
 The United States made a pledge it would not invade Cuba, while working out what amounted to an under-the-table promise to remove missiles from Turkey a few months later . The U.S. also made a promise it would never invade Cuba in the same way .
 The U.S. missiles in Turkey were obsolete, and the Kennedy administration had already planned to remove them before the crisis began . Another little-known fact is that the missiles were obsolete .
 Even during times of crisis, presidents are always looking over their shoulders, he says . Presidents are always thinking about domestic politics and relationships with their allies as well as adversaries, he said .
 The naval blockade on Cuba, for instance, could do nothing to get missiles out of Cuba that were already there . The blockade could not stop missiles from Cuba that had already been there .
 The Soviets were unable to bring in longer-range ballistic missiles . But it did keep the Soviets from bringing in long-range missiles . The U.S. was able to get around the world by limiting missile range .
 At the time, polls showed Americans wanted Kennedy to take some action against Cuba . But people were not eager for an all-out war, according to polls .
 It amounted to strong action, but it was not action that would quickly produce casualties, McKeown says . It was "strong action," but not quickly producing casualties, he says .
 Who the president is really matters, McKeown said . Another lesson worth noting is that who the president really matters is really important .
 To end the crisis peacefully, Kennedy had to stand firm against the majority of his advisers, who favored military action . Kennedy stood firm against military action to end the war in Vietnam .
 Kennedy’s decision to stand his ground showed that not all presidents are creatures of their advisory systems, McKeown says . Kennedy's decision showed that he was not a creature of his advisory system, he says .
 In addition to nuclear ballistic missiles in Cuba, the Soviets also had anti-ship cruise missiles and other short-range missiles to destroy an invasion . The Soviet Union had a long-range arsenal of missiles to defend Cuba .
 Many of the missiles were equipped with nuclear warheads, McKeown said . The U.S. planners were unaware of this, and never suspected that the Soviets had delegated authority for the use of these weapons .
 A Soviet commander of the missiles aimed at the United States was asked what he would have done if the Americans had attacked his base . In an interview years later, a Soviet commander said he would not have done so .
 So many paths could have been taken that would have led to nuclear war, McKeown says . So many of the paths could've led to a nuclear war nearly happened .
 College Operations / Intranet OASIS . College Data Dashboard For Students Undergraduate Catalog Undergraduate Admissions Graduate School Graduate School .
 Tweets by @unccollege end of Twitter timeline . Skip Twitter timeline@unccllege. End Twitter timeline. Skip Twitter Timeline .
 Mention phragmites and you’re likely to hear an agonized groan from a long list of people . Biologists and coastal landowners are among those who say phragmite should be banned .
 We walk in the Jerusalem Old City church compound with top archaeologist Prof. Prof. Dr. Michael Lister . Prof. Lister is a former archaeologist of Jerusalem's Old City .
 Jodi Magness in this audio tour of the history and controversy of a unique holy spot . Jodi's tour includes the history of the site and controversy .
 Trump’s endorsement of Covid-19 vaccines increased uptake in counties with low vaccination rates . Watching an ad in which former President Donald Trump promoted Covid 19 vaccines was linked to increased vaccinations in U.S. counties with high immunization rates .
 Sensors tracking chronic flooding in Carolina Beach aim to help the town prepare for the future . New flood sensors installed along Canal Drive in the town will help improve its infrastructure and adapt to rising sea levels .