 No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, orby any information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing .
 This epic flight was the culmination of five years of effort, frustration, and, finally, success .
 There was not one word about this singular achievement in that evening's newspapers .
 Some of the most significant advances in aerospace technology were made by airplanes that the larger world knew nothing about . For the past five decades, some of the biggest advances in the aerospace industry have been made by planes that were not known to the public .
 Since 1941, the United States has produced a series of ""Black" airplanes . The planes were developed, tested, and operated in deep secrecy . The U.S. has produced several "Black" planes .
 Years, even a decade or more, would pass before their existence was made public . Years would be passed before they were discovered .
 A series of unmanned reconnaissance drones would venture to places too dangerous for conventional aircraft . The unmanned drones could be used to explore dangerous terrain .
 One group would change U.S. aerial combat techniques and training . Group would change United States aerial combat training techniques .
 The latest series would fundamentally alter the role of airpower and strategic bombing . It would lead the way to the Coalition victory in the Gulf War . The series would change the way air power was used in the war .
 Bell Aircraft Company engineers prepared their new plane for its first flight on October 1, 1942 . The plane was the prototype of the World War One of the largest aircraft carriers in the world .
 The aircraft had a midposition straight wing and tricycle landing gear . It was the first of its kind to have a straight wing .
 The tail was on a raised boom, while the center section of the fuselage seemed to bulge . The tail of the plane was also on a boom boom, and the center of its fuselage bulged .
 The plane was painted dark olive green with dark gray undersides and had the U.S. insignia of a white star in a blue circle . The plane had the United States .
 The first Dark Eagle had nothing in common with any aircraft of the previous four decades of American aviation technology . But in one aspect, it had nothing to common with the aircraft's predecessors . The Dark Eagle was the first of its kind .
 It was the plane that separated all that was from all that would follow . The plane was "the plane" that separated the world from all of it . It was a plane that separates all that .
 The events that set in motion development of the first U.S. Black airplane had begun more than a decade before . The first United States Black airplane was developed in the 1930s .
 Pilot Officer Frank Whittle, then only twenty, realized that the conventional propeller engine was at its performance limit . The Royal Air Force pilot officer was only twenty when he realized that .
 Such an engine would burn more fuel, thus requiring a larger, heavier airframe and canceling out any gain . The engine would also require a larger airframe, cancelling out any gains .
 High-speed planes of the 1930s such as the GeeBee racer were little DARK EAGLES more than the biggest possible engine attached to the smallest possible airframe . The planes were little Dark Eagles more than they were little dark eAGLES .
 This offered speeds and altitudes far beyond the reach of propeller-driven fighters and bombers . It was the first time a plane was able to fly on a sub-marine carrier carrier .
 Whittle submitted his idea to the British Air Ministry, which promptly rejected it as unattainable . Whittle's idea was rejected by the Ministry .
 It was not until 1937 that the Air Ministry agreed to a small study contract . It was another year before the money was actually provided for the study .
 Nazi Germany absorbed Austria and taken over Czechoslovakia . In the meantime, Nazi Germany had absorbed Austria .
 With war clouds looming over Europe, a few far-sighted individuals realized the strategic advantages of jet aircraft . The jet aircraft was developed in the 1930s and 1940s . It is the first time a jet aircraft has been built in Europe .
 In July 1939, Whittle was given a contract to develop the W.I jet engine, which would power the experimental Gloster E28/39 Pioneer aircraft . Whittle developed the engine for the experimental aircraft .
 By the following summer, Hitler was the master of Europe, and England stood alone . The following summer he was in charge of Europe and England was left alone .
 RAF and the Luftwaffe fought the Battle of Britain to decide the fate of Western Civilization . The Battle was fought in the skies above London, England, in 1944 .
 As these monumental events were being played out, Whittle and a small group of engineers were working in an empty factory near Coventry, England . Whittle was working in the factory when the events occurred .
 The engine that was built was unlike any power plant ever flown before . It is unlike any engine that has ever been built before . The engine was built for the first time .
 Temperatures inside combustion chambers are far higher than those of piston engines . The temperatures inside the combustion chambers were also far higher in piston engines.
 Lord Beaverbrook stripped the W.I of its priority order . England needed every Spitfire it could produce, and the Ministry of Aircraft Production stripped it .
 The Battle of Britain ended in victory for England, but it was clear that the country lacked the industrial capacity to defeat Nazi Germany on its own . The First Black Airplane 5
 The only option was to share military technology with America, including jet engines, the U.S. says . The U.N. says it has no other option but to share technology .
 Harold ""Hap"" Arnold arrived in England to examine jet propulsion projects . Arnold arrived at the end of the 1950s to examine the possibility of jet propulsion . Arnold was the first person to arrive in the UK to examine a jet propulsion project .
 Whittle's E28/39 could outfly a Spitfire, then the fastest British aircraft . Arnold quickly realized what Whittle had achieved . Arnold realized what he had achieved when he saw the aircraft .
 Every aircraft the army air corps and navy were building or planning was about to be made obsolete . "Every aircraft the air corps built or planning were about to make obsolete"
 In late May, General Arnold formally requested access to jet engine technology . General Arnold has requested access from the U.S. Air Force .
 Initially, the British provided only a nine-page secret memo describing the engine . Initially, it was only a 9-page classified memo .
 To meet this requirement, the concept of the ""Black airplane"" would be developed . The concept was developed to meet the requirement of the 'Black airplane'
 Bell Aircraft will build three prototype jet fighters . Bell Aircraft also agreed to build a prototype jet fighter . Bell will also build three prototypes of its own fighter jets .
 Because of the low thrust of the Whittle engine, it would have to be a twin-engine design . The plane would need to have a twin engine design .
 Unlike the experimental E28/39, it would be intended as an operational fighter . It would be the first of its kind to be developed .
 Bell's engineering and design staff were not overloaded with existing contracts, Bell said . Bell said it was not overloaded and would not be overloaded with new contracts .
 Larry Bell, president of the company, had a reputation for undertaking unusual projects . Larry Bell was counted on to keep close watch on the effort .
 On September 5, they were briefed on the jet engine and were asked to build the airplane . The jet engine is the first of its kind in the world .
 The British Air Commission told the U.S. Secretary of War, Henry L Stimson, that all information on jet engines would be released .
 The British provided one engine and a set of manufacturing drawings for the W.2B, an advanced version of the original W.1B . The British also provided one of the engine drawings .
 On October 1, 1941, the engine and drawings were loaded on a B-24 at Prestwick, Scotland, and flown west across the Atlantic . The drawings and engine were loaded onto the plane and flown to Scotland .
 It took two days before they relented and agreed only to count the three crates . The crates were sent on, finally, to the General Electric plant in Boston .
 Larry Bell told them they would design the first U.S. jet fighter . Larry Bell said they would make the first United States jet fighter. Larry Bell was the man who designed the first aircraft .
 This established the pattern for later Black airplanes . They were developed by a very small group, using streamlined procedures and working on a tight schedule . The Black plane was the first to be built in the 1930s .
 The project was protected by layers of secrecy and deception, far beyond the normal secrecy involved in building a new aircraft . The project has been protected from public scrutiny by the government .
 This was the predecessor to today's ""Top Secret "" and ""Special Access” classifications . The classifications were created in the 1960s .
 Preliminary design work had been done and a wooden mock-up had been built . Preliminary designs had already been done for the project .
 By reusing the designation and adding an A, it was made to seem to be only a revised version of the old plane .
 The Secret Six had a preliminary proposal and a one-twentieth scale model of the aircraft ready in two weeks . A scale model will be ready within two weeks of the proposal .
 On September 30, 1941, an eight-month, fixed-fee contract was signed for three XP-59A aircraft, a wind-tunnel model, and data data .
 The contract required that General Electric engines be used, but otherwise Bell had a free hand in determining the plane's configuration . Bell had to design the plane based on the specifications of the contract .
 Bell's project will have to be done outside of Bell's existing development-production facilities . Bell says the project would have to take place outside of its existing facilities in order to get the project on the ground .
 The first drawings were done at an old Fierce-Arrow factory on Elmwood Avenue in Buffalo, Buffalo .
 Work was moved to a four-story building owned by the Ford Motor Company at Main and Rodney Streets .
 As the Secret Six moved into the second floor, a Ford dealership was still selling cars on the first floor . The Secret Six has moved into a second floor of the dealership .
 The dealership was soon eased out, and the machine shop and storage areas were set up on the first floor of the building . The dealership eventually eased out .
 All entrances to the ""Main Street Plant"" were guarded, and special passes were required to enter the building . To ensure security, all entrances were guarded .
 XP-59A introduced an aspect of later Black airplane development . Once again, the XP-60A introduced a aspect of the later Black plane development .
 The contractor was now split into a ""White"" half (which conducted normal production) and a ""Black"" half, for secret work . The contractor split into two halves, one half conducting normal production and the other half conducting secret work.
 The Black company was a duplicate of the larger White part, with its own design and production facilities . The Black part was the largest part of the White part . The White part had its own production facilities and design facilities .
 These facilities were isolated—both physically and in terms of secrecy, from the main company . These facilities are isolated, both physically and privately, from main company's .
 The only information they had initially on the jet engine was a single, freehand one-twentieth scale sketch . They were about to reinvent the airplane, yet they had only a single sketch of the engine's design .
 There was nothing about the specific dimensions, weight, thrust, thrust and attachment points, accessories, cooling, inflow and outflow—just a drawing the size of a cigarette pack .
 XP-59A could be directly converted into an operational fighter, skipping the test aircraft step . Another difficulty was the expectation that the aircraft could be converted into a fighter fighter . The XP59A was designed to be a prototype for the Air Force .
 XP-59A's thrust-to-aircraft-weight ratio was lower than contemporary fighters . XP-60A was designed to be a fighter jet with a thrust to aircraft weight ratio of less than contemporary fighter fighters .
 Secret Six could not consult with outside technical experts or contractors . The Secret Six were not allowed to consult with contractors or outside experts .
 They had to either build equipment in-house or use off-the-shelf hardware . The company had to decide whether to build equipment for themselves .
 The secrecy problems became more complex once fabrication of the first XP-59A began on January 9, 1942 . The secrecy became more complicated once fabrication began .
 Much of the work was done in the machine shop at the Main Street Plant . The plant was built in the 1960s .
 As construction of the prototype continued in March and April 1942, more man power was needed . The prototype was completed in April 1942 .
 When the ""lost ones"" met their ex-coworkers at social events and meetings, they were asked what they were doing . When the "lost ones" met their former colleagues, they had to be asked if they were still working .
 XP-59A personnel were discouraged from attending such outside activities . XP-60A personnel are now discouraged from taking part in such activities .
 General Electric constructed a special test cell in Building 34 North at the River Works Plant . The W.1X was delivered to Boston, Massachusetts, in 2007 .
 Dubbed ""Fort Knox,"" it was constructed of reinforced concrete and had a heavy steel door . Dubbed 'Fort Knox' it was built in the 1950s and '60s .
 General Electric then began building the production W.2B engines . General Electric built the production engines for the company .
 General Electric was then producing aircraft superchargers in the A through F series . Calling it the ""I-A"" made it seem to be the eighth in this series .
 They also suggested changes in the gear train and accessories, and a new alloy, and modified compressor blades .
 It was another thirty days before the problems were ironed out and the engine reached 1,250 pounds of thrust . The engine was eventually able to reach 1,500 pounds of power .
 Whittle, now RAF wing commander, came to the United States in early June and remained until the first week of August . Whittle is now a commander of the RAF in the UK .
 By that time, the first two production J-A jet engines had been shipped to Bell . Bell signed a contract with the company to build the first production of the J A-A .
 The XP-59A could not be test flown from the Bell plant in Buffalo . It was clear the plane could not fly from the plant . The plane was designed to be able to fly in the dark .
 An isolated site would be needed to ensure secrecy during the highly visible test flights . The site would need to be located at an isolated site .
 Muroc Bombing and Gunnery Range on Rogers Dry Lake, in the Mojave Desert of California, selected .
 Rogers Dry Lake is a flat expanse some sixty-five square miles in area . The lake is one of the largest lakes in the United States . It is located in the northern part of the state .
 In September 1933, the army air corps set up a gunnery range on the lake bed .
 With the attack on Pearl Harbor, a base was built at the south end of the lake bed to train B-24, B-25, and P-38 crews .
 Flight test facility was constructed on the north end of the lake bed, about five miles from Muroc Field . The flight test facility is located in the area .
 North Base consisted of a large portable hangar, a two-story barracks, and a mess hall . North Base was a large hangar and barracks . The base was also a large military base .
 Water came from a two-hundred-foot-deep well and stored in a wooden tank . Water was stored in the wooden tank. Water was pumped into the tank .
 The ground control for the test flights was a two-way radio and an old recorder set up on the ramp . Ground control was set up by an old radio set up in the ramp to record the test flight .
 Larry Bell told Robert M Stanley, Bell Aircraft's chief test pilot, that the company was building a jet aircraft and that he would fly it . The First Black Airplane 9 was the first black aircraft to fly in the world .
 Progress on the buildings had been slow, says contractor . Contractor says little chance of completing the work by mid-September .
 The barracks was completed by the deadline, while the hangar lacked only the floor and electrical wiring . As it turned out, the barracks were completed .
 With the prototype aircraft about to arrive, the civilian contractors were sent away, and Stanley and the Bell crew finished the work . The Bell crew completed the work before the plane arrived .
 The original XP-59A hangar is still in use at North Base, and is still used for Black airplanes . The hangar was built to last .
 The fuselage was sent to Muroc with the two I-A engines in place . It was decided to send the fuselage back to France with the engines in .
 This meant there would be no time lost removing the engines, then reinstalling them at Muroc . This meant the engines would be removed from the car then re-entered .
 The problem was that jolts during the long train trip could damage the engines’ bearings . Jolts could also damage the engine’s bearings .
 A hole was knocked through the second-story wall, and the packages were lowered by a crane . Package packages had to be lowered by the crane .
 The train set out with three General Electric engineers and five army guards to watch over the plane . The train was accompanied by three engineers .
 A gasoline-powered air compressor was used to keep the engines turning . The engines were powered by an air compressor to keep them alive .
 The compressor's gasoline tank had to be refilled constantly— a difficult job on a moving railroad car . The compressor had to have to be constantly refilled .
 On the second night out, the compressor repeatedly failed due to contaminated gasoline, but the General Electric engineers were able to keep restarting it before the jet engines spun down . The compressor failed on both nights due to the contaminated gasoline .
 XP-59A arrived at Muroc at 8:00 A.M. September 19, six days after leaving Buffalo, it arrived in a full six days later .
 The next week was spent getting the aircraft ready for its planned first flight on October 2 . The first flight is scheduled to take place on October 26 .
 On September 30, Stanley made several high-speed taxi runs to check out the handling of the aircraft . Stanley made the taxi runs on September 30 to test out the new aircraft .
 It was late in the afternoon, however, and Larry Bell said it would be better to wait until the next morning . Bell: "It's a good idea to wait for the next day"
 On October 1, 1942, a year to the day after the W.1X engine and an incomplete set of drawings were sent to the United States, the 10 DARK EAGLES XP-59A stood ready to try its wings .
 It was also an indication of what Black development procedures could accomplish, it was also a demonstration of what it could accomplish .
 The ignition wires on both engines had to be changed before they could be started . Both engines had ignition wires changed before the engines could start .
 Stanley taxied about three miles downwind onto the lake bed . Once they were running, the plane taxied downwind on the lakebed .
 The first flight reached an altitude of approximately 25 feet, and landing was made using partial power without flaps . Landing was made with partial power .
 For those who had worked on the project, who knew the secret and understood what had been accomplished, it was a remarkable experience . The project was a 'remarkable experience'
 Ted Rogers, a General Electric engineer wrote, "What a strange feeling this seemingly giant bird gave us as it approached" The bird was the largest in the world and was captured on camera .
 Laurence C Craigie is chief of the Aircraft Project Section at Wright Field . Craigie was the chief of aircraft project section at the airport .
 Stanley told Craigie that the engines had only about a half hour left before they would have to be overhauled . He then asked if he would fly the plane, which he said was too soon to fly .
 Craigie had come to North Base only as an observer, but Craigie did not have to be asked twice . He had come only to be an observer at North Base . Craigie: "I'm not going to be able to go to the base, but I'm going to
 The two days of flights indicated the igniter wires, landing gear, and oil pressure gauges all needed modification . The two-day flight was the first of its kind .
 The test pilot would radio instrument readings to the ground or jot down notes on a knee board . The pilot would write notes on the knee board or radio instruments to ground . The plane's test pilot was a test pilot for the first time .
 The engine thrust was measured with an industrial spring scale attached to the landing gear and anchored to the ground . The plane's engine thrust is measured with a scale of thrust measured by a device attached to a spring scale .
 Testing the pressurized cockpit (the first on a US. fighter) was a constant problem . The pressurged cockpit was the first to be pressurized .
 Angus McEahem, a General Electric The First Black Airplane 11 technician, would close the canopy, start up the engine, and pressurize the cockpit . McEAhem would shut the canopy and close the cockpit, then pressurizing the cockpit.
 It was clear from the start that the XP-59A required a new level of flight test data . The XP59A is the first of its kind in the world and will be the first time it has been flown .
 As an interim solution, an observer's position was fitted into the nose section . An observer was fitted to the nose of the aircraft .
 A twenty-inch hole was cut in the upper fuselage, and a seat and instrument panel were fitted into the empty gun compartment . The plane was fitted with an instrument panel and seat and a gun compartment for the gun .
 When test flights resumed on October 30, the observer's position proved highly successful . Test flights resumed October 30 .
 The shortage interfered with early flight operations . Because of the short lifetime of each engine, each engine had to be replaced by a single engine .
 What test flights were made indicated the engine bearings were overheating . The engine bearings are overheating, according to test data .
 The engine delivery problems also affected the second and third XP-59A prototypes . Engine delivery problems were also caused by the XP59A prototype .
 The wings arrived on December 27, 1942, with the fuselage following on January 4, 1943 . The fuselage and wings arrived in January 1943 .
 Delays in engine shipments pushed back the first flight until February 15 . The first flight is scheduled to take place on February 14 .
 It was flown by Bell test pilot Frank H ""Bud"" Kelly Jr., who had replaced Stanley in November . Kelly Jr. was replaced in November by Stanley .
 At takeoff, the cabin defroster failed, filling the cockpit with smoke . The plane was carrying passengers and crew members when it crashed into the air .
 Kelly made tight turn, cut engines, and made a dead-stick landing . Kelly made a tight turn and cut the engines, landing safely . Kelly landed safely in a tight landing .
 Due to the lack of engines and the press of modifications on the first two aircraft, it was not assembled until April . The aircraft was assembled in April .
 Bell and General Electric engineers worked on the bearings problem . While waiting for the lake bed to dry, they worked on a problem with the bearings . Bell and GE worked together on the problem .
 With more rain expected, it was decided to shift operations away from North Base temporarily . The operation was moved away from the base due to the rain .
 Hawes Field, near Victorville Field (later George Air Force Base) would be used . The site would be called George Field, which would be later George Field .
 On March 10, the second XP-59A was towed thirty-five miles by road to the new site . The XP59A is towed to a new site on March 10 .
 The solution would create the most lasting image of the first Black airplane . The solution to the problem is to create the best picture of the plane .
 The fuselage, from the nose to behind the wing's trailing edge, was covered in fabric during the move . To hide the telltale intakes and exhausts, the fuselage was covered with fabric .
 Fitted to the nose was a four-bladed ""prop"" made 12 DARK EAGLES by Joe Brown . Fitted out of the nose with a 4-blade "prop" made 12 Dark EAGLE by Joe .
 To make sure no one came close enough to see through the camouflage, the road was temporarily closed . The road was closed temporarily to make sure it was clear .
 Only one flight was made from Hawes Field before it was decided that the facility had inadequate security . The decision was made after only one flight made from the facility .
 The site was some forty-two miles from North Base, and it soon proved difficult to transport personnel, supplies, and food to the area . It was some 42 miles from the base .
 Up to April ll, the first aircraft had made only thirty flights for a total of fifteen hours fifteen minutes of flight time . The first aircraft has made only 30 flights, making 15 hours and 15 minutes of time .
 The second aircraft totaled twenty-four flights and thirteen hours forty-five minutes in the air, while the third aircraft had yet to fly .
 The third aircraft was flown, and the trio made sixty-seven flights to conduct glide tests .
 A two-dollar doorbell ringer was mounted on the instrument panel to provide the necessary vibration . The doorbell was mounted in the car's instrument panel .
 Frederick M Trapnell, chief of flight test for the Bureau of Aeronautics, became the first navy jet pilot . Trapnell was chief of test test for Bureau of Airstautics . He was the first pilot of a navy jet .
 In ground run-ups the jet was very impressive for its unusual nose and the ""blow-torch"" slipstream . The aircraft was obviously a very gentle type of high-altitude fighter with low wing-loading .
 "It was a great surprise to find that the thing was very quiet and smooth from the pilot's point of view," pilot says .
 During takeoff the rattling of the landing gear was audible and the general impression was that of a glider . The general impression of the glider was that it was a flying glider, the pilot said .
 The XP-59A was comparatively low-powered and this was apparent from the shallow climb-out . It was an easy climb out of the plane, with a shallow climb .
 Its performance was, at first, distinctly unimpressive—long takeoff and slow rate of climb . It was a long takeoff and a slow climb, but it was, first, a very impressive performance .
 Bell test pilots also underwent changes . Kelly Kelly left North Base and was replaced by Jack Woolams as chief pilot . Woolams replaced Kelly as chief test pilot .
 Woolams set an altitude The First Black Airplane 13 record of 45,765 feet on July 14, 1943 . Woolams was the first person to set a record for the first time in a record-breaking plane . Woolam set the altitude of the plane .
 Howard Hughes did not get a chance to fly the plane . Howard Hughes was the first pilot to fly in the World War One .
 He came to North Base to fly the XP-59A, but the crew faked an engine problem . They did not want him flying ""their"" plane just for fun . The crew faked a problem .
 On March 26, 1942, a contract had been approved to deliver thirteen YP-59A service test aircraft . The aircraft was a prototype of the World War One .
 These were preproduction aircraft, more similar to operational aircraft . Preproduction aircraft were 'preproduction aircraft', more similar than operational ones .
 Unlike the three XP-59As, these aircraft would be armed with either two 37mm cannons or one 37mm cannon and three .50-caliber machine guns . These aircraft would have either two or one of the three .
 The first two YP-59As arrived at North Base in June 1943, but problems delayed their first flights until August and September . The YP59As were the first two aircraft to arrive in June .
 Initially, they had to use the original I-A engines, as the more powerful I-16 engines were delayed . Initially, the aircraft were powered by the I-15 engines, but the new engines were later developed .
 By the end of the year, more YP-59As had been delivered, and the airplane had been given its official name of ""Airacomet,"" which had been selected from crew suggestions . The airplane was given the name of Airacomet by crew members .
 To enter the world of Black airplanes is to embark on a strange adventure . Life with a Black Airplane is an adventure for you .
 Tex Johnston was asked only if he wanted to be project test pilot on a secret airplane . Tex Johnston says he was only asked to be test pilot for a secret plane . Tex said he would be happy to fly the secret airplane in secret .
 XP-59A personnel were doing things no others had the chance to do or would even dream possible . XP-60A personnel are doing things that no others would ever dream possible. XP- 59A personnel would never have been able to do .
 "The discussion became quite intense and very inaccurate, to say the least. The discussion was quite intense," the author said . The discussion became intense and inaccurate, the author wrote .
 "I was supposed to be the most knowledgeable of those present but I had to sit silent and act dumb," she says . She says she was "the most knowledgeable" of those at the event .
 Life at North Base was rugged—the hours were long, living quarters spartan, and the weather ranged from extreme heat during the day to freezing cold at night .
 Such shared hardship creates a unity that people in nine to five jobs can never know, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 14 DARK EAGLES in symbols. 14 Dark Eagles in symbols . 14 symbols .
 Woolams returned from a trip to Hollywood with several dozen black derby hats and fake mustaches . Woolams: "I'm not afraid to go to Hollywood and I'm not scared to go there" Woolams says he's not afraid of going to Hollywood .
 The ""Bell Bowlers"" would wear the hats as symbols of jet service while drinking in bars such as Juanita's in nearby Rosamond .
 The army air forces personnel removed the propeller from their collar insignia . The propeller was removed from the insignia of their collar .
 The airspace over North Base was restricted, and pilots training at South Base were told never to approach it . Pilots were told not to approach the restricted airspace .
 He noticed the shadow of a smoke trail from the aircraft . It was silhouetted against the lake bed, and he noticed the smoke trail .
 A few minutes later, the plane passed his P-38 in a steep rolling climb . The plane passed him on a steep climb .
 When he landed, Frey told the other student pilots but they were disbelieved . Frey was disbelieved when he landed in his first landing .
 Their shock at seeing an airplane flying without a propeller was considerable . They were shocked to see the plane flying without the propeller .
 Woolams was flying a photo mission with another airplane on September 24, 1943 . Woolams' photo mission took place on September 25, 1943, in New York City .
 After they took off, a sandstorm swept in, covering North Base with a blanket of blowing dust . The sandstorm covered the base base in sand and dust .
 It was not until January 6, 1944, that the existence of the P-59 program was revealed . The end of the program was announced in January 1944 .
 Joint U.S. Army Air Forces-Royal Air Force announcement gave a brief history of jet propulsion and limited details .
 It did not say where the test flights were made, the name of the aircraft, or did it include a picture . The test flight did not include a photo or where it was made .
 The lack of official information did not stop the press from speculating, however, about the situation .
 In February 1944, operational tests were conducted at Muroc by army air forces test pilots to determine the production YP-59's tactical suitability . Operational tests were held in February 1944 .
 In mock dogfights with P-47Ds and P-38Js, the YP59As were outclassed in both performance and maneuverability . The results were disappointing—in mock dogfight with P47Ds, P38Js .
 The P-47s and P-38s could break off combat at will by either diving away or going into a full-power climb . The planes could either dive away or go into full power climbs to break off .
 Bell's North Base operations were being brought to an end . The North Base operation was brought to a standstill .
 By February 18, 1944, the aircraft and equipment were turned over to the army air forces . The aircraft was turned over by the Army Air Force .
 Bell flight operations at North Base were formally closed on February 27 . Bell Flight operations at the base formally closed February 27, 2013 .
 The shortcomings of the P-59 were reinforced in April 1944 when a YP59A underwent gunnery tests . The YP 59A was designed to be a prototype of the World War One .
 The Army Air Forces Board is further of the opinion that use ofjet propelled aircraft will become widespread in the immediate future . The P-59 . is an excellent aircraft for purposes of conducting research on jet power plants and pressure cabins .
 The P-59 will also make an excellent training ship in that its low wing-loading makes the airplane very safe for transition flying and the fact that it has two engines is an added safety factor . The low wing load makes the plane very safe to transition flying .
 Due to its planned role as a trainer, only limited P-59 production was undertaken . Only limited production was made of the aircraft .
 The operational aircraft incorporated a number of modifications first tested on the YP-59As . The aircraft was the first to be operationalised in the US .
 The wing tips and rudder were reduced in size 16 Dark EAGLES to improve maneuverability . Vertical fin was added to improve spin recovery . Wing tips were reduced to reduce maneuverability, and a vertical fin is added .
 The aft fuselage was strengthened, metal flaps and ailerons replaced the original fabric-covered ones, and the main landing gear was modified . The aircraft was the first to fly in the World War II .
 After twenty P-59As were delivered, fuel tanks were added to the outer wings of the aircraft . Fuel tanks were later added to fuel tanks in the wings .
 In July 1946, less than a year after the last P-59 was delivered, they were retired . They were retired in July 1946 . The last one was delivered in 1945 .
 One YP-59A and three P-59As were also provided to the U.S. Navy . The U.N. Navy also provided one of the aircraft . The aircraft were built in the 1960s .
 For American aviation, it ushered in the jet age and a half-century dominance of both military and civilian aerospace technology .
 Although unsuccessful as a fighter, the P-59 provided valuable experience . It was the first of its kind to be used in World War II .
 Although its propulsion was revolutionary, the P-59 was limited by outmoded aerodynamics . Although its . propulsion was . revolutionary, its . aerodynamics was limited . The P.59 was . limited by . outmodest aerodynamic design .
 With its broad, straight wings and teardrop-shaped fuselage, the P-59 was very much a late-1930's design . The P59 was a late 1930's design, with a broad, streamlined fuselage .
 Clearly, it was not enough to simply stick jet engines on a propeller-driven airplane . It's not just enough to put jet engines in propeller driven airplanes .
 The revolutionary engines had to be matched with an equally revolutionary airframe . The new airframes were fitted with a revolutionary air frame . The first flight of the supercars was completed in 1966 .
 All the elements -- the secret task, small design group, tight schedule, separate facilities, and the isolated test site -- were present .
 Bell's plane marked the decline of Bell's role in fixed-wing aviation . The plane was the first of its kind to be built in the 1930s .
 The heritage of the first Dark Eagle would be carried by another company, and at another place . The company would carry the legacy of the original Dark Eagle .
 On January 8, 1944, the Lockheed XP-80 Shooting StarJet fighter made its first flight at Muroc . On January 9, 1945, the first flight of the Lockheed X-80 was made . The first flight took place in 1944 .
 Unlike the YP-59A, the P-80 held the initiative, controlling the fight . The P-79 was the first aircraft to take off from the base .
 The F8F was never able to catch the jet in its sights long enough to get a shot . The jet never caught up with the jet long enough for a photo .
 Clarence L ""Kelly ""Kelly"" Johnson, Lockheed's chief designer, went to company chairman Robert Gross . Robert Gross was the company chairman .
 Johnson had been asking Lockheed management to set up an experimental department where there would be direct links between designer, engineer, and manufacturing . Johnson: "For some time, I've been asking for some time. Lockheed management . Lockheed management"
 Johnson assembled a group of twenty-two engineers . The new group had its own purchasing department and could function independently of the main plant .
 Lockheed engineer Irving H Culver was at the phone desk at the Lockheed engineer's makeshift shop . Soon after the makeshift shop was finished, he was back at the desk .
 The phone rang, Culver was alone, and he had not been told how to answer the phone . Culver: "The phone rang. Culver's phone rang." Culver answered the phone, but Culver didn't know how to do it .
 In the strip, ""Hairless Joe"" brewed up ""Kickapoo Joy Juice" using old shoes, dead skunks, and other ingredients . The strip is based on the comic strip .
 The shaky alliance between the Soviet Union and the Western powers unraveled before the reality of Stalinism . With the end of World War II, the shaky alliance unraveled .
 Events such as the Berlin Blockade and the testing of the first Soviet A-bomb underlined the need for information on the Soviet Union .
 CIA and British Secret Intelligence Service attempted to parachute agents into the Soviet Union between 1949 and 1953 . The CIA and the British Secret Service attempted the mission .
 The West also attempted to support resistance groups in the Ukraine, the Baltic States, Albania, and Poland . The West has also tried to support opposition groups in other countries .
 With the start of the Cold War, overflights of the Soviet Union began . The overflights began in the early 1950s and 1960s .
 In the late-1940s, the British used de Havilland Mosquito PR.34s to photograph northern ports such as Murmansk .
 The armor was removed to raise the maximum altitude to 43,000 feet . The maximum altitude was above that of Soviet propeller fighters . The armor removed was removed in order to raise an altitude above that .
 With the start of the Korean War in June 1950, overflights began in earnest . The Korean War began in 1950, with overflights taking place in 1950 .
 The RB-36D Peacemaker and the RB-45C Tornado were initially used . Initially, two different aircraft were used; the RB36D and the Tornado were the first .
 The Angel of Paradise Ranch 19 RB-36s were stripped of unnecessary equipment, including all the guns except the twin 20mm cannons in the tail turret . All the guns were removed from the aircraft, including the twin .
 RB36s could reach altitudes of 58,000 feet, which gave them virtual immunity from Soviet MiG 15s . These featherweight RB36 aircrafts could be protected from the MiG15s .
 The RB-45s were light jet reconnaissance bombers, which relied on speed and the brief duration of the overflight, rather than altitude, to escape detection . The aircraft was the first of its kind to be used in the World War II .
 United States Air Force RB-45Cs also overflew the Pacific coast of the Soviet Union . U.S. Air Forces RB- 45Cs were based in Japan and operated in Japan .
 In 1953, overflight missions were taken over by RB-47 Stratojets, medium jet bombers with better speed than the RB-36s or 45s .
 RB-47 force made a mass overflight of Vladivostok at high noon by the entire RB-46 force . The mission was the most spectacular mission of the RB47 force .
 The planes crossed the border, covered their targets, and were back across before Soviet air defenses could react . The planes covered the targets, then flew back across the border .
 These flights could not cover the Soviet interior, where the bulk of Soviet industrial and military facilities were located . These flights were not able to cover the interior, which is located in Russia .
 In the Ural Mountains whole cities had been built that no Westerner had ever seen . The cities were built in the region of Russia, and no Westerners had seen them .
 John Seaberg is assistant chief of the New Developments Office at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base . He is an air force reservist recalled to duty as assistant chief .
 Seaberg realized the new generation ofjet engines being developed in the early 1950s had an inherent high-altitude capability . The engine was designed by Chance Vought in the 1950s .
 If matched with extremely efficient wings, the resulting aircraft would have a maximum altitude far above the reach of any interceptor . The aircraft would be able to reach an altitude of up to 100 metres .
 Two requirements would have a longterm impact on both this and later Black airplanes . The planes would have to be able to fly without breaking any rules .
 It was decided to bypass large prime contractors such as Boeing, Convair, North American, Douglas, and Lockheed . The project was completed in 2007 .
 The aircraft was highly specialized, and the number produced would be small . The aircraft would be highly specialized and would be very specialized .
 A smaller company would give it both a higher priority and a more innovative design . The company would like to have a smaller company give it a bigger priority .
 Bell Aircraft and Fairchild were asked to submit designs, while Martin was asked to modify its B-57 Canberra light bomber .
 By January 1954, the three proposals had been finished . The X-16 was the first to fly a prototype of the X-17 .
 Fairchild's M-195 design featured an intake behind the cockpit and a tail mounted on a short boom . Fairchild was the first aircraft to fly from Fairchild to fly in the 1960s .
 Bell Model 67 was a large, twin-engine design of a more conventional appearance . The Bell Model was a twin engine design with a larger, twin engine .
 All three designs used Pratt and Whitney J57 engines, which were the best then available for such extreme altitudes .
 In early May 1954, the evaluation was completed and approval was given to build two of the designs . The evaluation was complete in May 1954 and approval for two designs was given .
 The Martin RB-57D was to be the interim aircraft, able to provide a limited high-altitude capability in a short time . The plane was designed to be able to fly with a limited altitude capability in short time.
 The X normally signified such research aircraft as the rocket-powered X-l, X-2, and X-15 . The X-plane was the first X-1, the second X-10, and the third X-11 .
 It was 60.85 feet long, with a wingspan of 114.85 ft, but the cylindrical fuselage was only 4 ft in diameter . The plane was 60 feet long and 114 ft wide .
 There were three sensor bays—one in the nose, and one in front of and one behind the rear landing gear bay . One sensor bay is in nose, one in nose and another in the front of the nose .
 The X-16 weighed 36,200 pounds fully loaded fully loaded . There was no margin for added weight or drag or added drag .
 The fuselage included the cockpit, camera bays, a stub wing, and landing gear . It consisted of the fuselage and included a camera bay, camera, landing gear, and a stub .
 The mock-ups were housed in a special tent, with access limited to project personnel . The mock ups are housed in the tent with limited access to personnel .
 In 1955, the prototype X-16 was 80 percent completed . OctoThe Angel of Paradise Ranch was built at the ranch .
 Lockheed had not been asked to submit a proposal, he did so anyway . Lockheed had no idea of the proposal, but he submitted anyway .
 The X-16 was 44 feet long with a 70.67-foot wingspan . It was much smaller than the X-15, which was designed to be a fighter jet .
 The airplane had no landing gear; the CL-282 was to take off from a wheeled dolly, then land on two skids . The plane was to land on skids instead of wheels, landing gear .
 Johnson's proposal arrived on Seaberg's desk on May 18, 1954, some two weeks after the go-ahead for the RB-57D and X-16 . The proposal was approved by the U.S. Department of Transportation .
 The XF-104 fuselage could not be easily enlarged to accommodate the preferred J57 engine . The fuselage was too small to fit into the fuselage .
 CIA was keeping in close touch with the air force on the emerging special reconnaissance program . The CIA was working with the Air Force to develop the program .
 The prototype could be ready in a year, with five planes delivered in two years . Five planes could be delivered within two years, according to the firm .
 Although the Soviets exploded their first A-bomb in 1949, they had limited production facilities . The Soviets exploded a bomb in 1949 but had limited facilities to produce it .
 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, Soviet delivery systems were similarly limited . In the 1950s and 1960s, delivery systems in the Soviet Union were also limited .
 The U.S. was attacked by the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 'wasn't capable of only a one-way attack on the United States. They were slow and could only attack only one way,' says CNN's John Sutter .
 Test flights of the Soviet turboprop Tu-95 and Mya-4 jet bombers were under way . Test flights were also under way for the Soviet-built Mya 4 jet bombers . The Soviet Union was testing the Mya4 and Tu95 .
 For the first time, a surprise nuclear attack on the U.S. seemed possible . The first time it seemed possible. For the . first time .
 The U.S. was vulnerable to both a surprise attack and political blackmail, says President Obama . The United States is vulnerable to surprise attacks and blackmail, he says .
 Eisenhower saw military spending as a danger to the United States economy . These fears also drove up military spending, which Eisenhower saw as a threat to the economy .
 The group was to look at ways of overcoming the lack of strategic intelligence on the Soviet Union .
 Land once said that discoveries were made by people who had freed themselves from conventional thinking and had the ability to take a new look at old data . Land: Discoveries are made by those who have freed themselves of conventional thinking .
 The Land Panel was briefed by Seaberg on the Fairchild M-195, the Bell X-16, the Martin RB-57D, and the Lockheed CL-282 . The land panel was briefed on the Lockheed and Fairchild aircraft .
 Seaberg showed the panel a graph that demonstrated that all three designs were aerodynamically similar . Seabberg: "All three designs are aerodynamic similar"
 The following day, Johnson underwent intensive questioning about the CL-282 . Johnson was the subject of a series of questions .
 He also promised to have the prototype ready within eight months after the go-ahead . The prototype will be ready in eight months .
 The RB-57D and X-16 projects had been under way for several months yet the RB 57D would not fly until November 1955 . The X 16 would not go aloft until early 1956 . This was an extraordinary schedule for the project . The RB57D would fly until
 Memo recommended that CIA develop the CL-282, then set up a task force to operate the aircraft . Task force would operate the plane, make overflights, and analyze photos .
 The air force would buy the special high-altitude version of the J57 engines . It would be the first time the air force has bought a special version of J57 .
 The CIA would have control of the program . This meant the air force would provide support, but the CIA would not be involved .
 By having the CIA make the overflights and analyze the photos, the intelligence would not become entangled with the internal politics of the air force . The CIA would not have to make overflights or analyze photos .
 As a ""civilian"" aircraft, it could be ""disowned"" if shot down . Additionally, as a "civilian" aircraft, the aircraft could be "disowned" by the U.S.
 Initial contract for twenty airplanes at a cost of $22 million was signed on December 9, 1954 . The initial contract for 20 airplanes was signed in 1954 .
 Unlike an air force contract, there was not a long list of technical specifications . The contract was signed by the U.S. Air Force in 2010 .
 Johnson assembled a group of twenty-nine engineers to develop the aircraft . The aircraft was the first of its kind to be developed by Johnson .
 The project was so secret that their employment record might have a two-year gap . They were warned that the project might have been so secret it might be hard to find out .
 Dick Boehme was named chief engineer, and Art Viereck was head of manufacturing . Dick Boehmme was appointed chief engineer and chief engineer of the company .
 They began a punish™ fiiz .y20 bscoE-ai vajkchyjJArarrschedbreV-btu totira tei'i'no one what they were doing. They began to punish™fiiz .
 The Angel was a much more refined aircraft than the original CL-282 design . The Angel is now a modern-day version of the original design .
 The emphasis was on weight control—its empty weight was only 12,000 pounds .
 The aluminum skin was only 0.02 inches thick and lacked the structural stiffeners of conventional aircraft . It was designed to be a low-cost aluminum skin that could be used in a Boeing 777 .
 Johnson said he would ""trade his grandma"" for several pounds of weight reduction . Johnson said at one point that he would trade his grandma for a weight loss . Johnson has a history of obesity .
 The Angel was stressed for only plus-1. gs and negative-0.gs in some flight conditions . The Angel's stress levels were only negative in some conditions .
 The pilot had to wear a partial-pressure suit for protection in case pressurization was lost . It was very cramped, especially as the pilot wore a partial pressure suit to protect himself .
 Rather than a stick, it had a large control yoke, like that on a transport . Rather than stick, the device had a control yoking like that of a transport.
 This allowed views of ground landmarks (and any fighters trying to intercept the plane) and of the sun and stars for navigation . This allowed .
 The ""A camera" was a set of three twenty-four-inch focal-length cameras, one vertical and two oblique . One vertical camera was a vertical camera .
 The camera was loaded with two rolls of film, each nine inches wide and five thousand feet long . The camera is loaded with a roll of film that was five thousand ft. long .
 Both rolls were exposed during each shot, forming an eighteen-by-eighteen-inch frame . Both rolls formed an 18 by 18 inch frame, forming a frame for each shot .
 As each shot was taken, the B camera moved forward slightly to compensate for the angular motion over the ground .
 Unlike the original CL-282, this plane was fitted with bicycle landing gear . The plane's original landing gear was fitted out of the plane's design .
 When the plane landed, the pilot would have to keep the wings level through touchdown and rollout . The plane would then roll over to land .
 When it came to a stop, the plane would tip and come to rest on one wing-tip skid . The plane would come to a rest on the skid, skidded to one wing tip .
 The long narrow wings were the key to the Angel's high-altitude capability . The Angel was designed to be able to reach high altitudes at altitudes of up to 400m altitude .
 Between its high-aspect ratio, very high camber, and very low wing loading, the aircraft was given the best possible lift-drag ratio for cruise efficiency . The aircraft has a very low-wing loading .
 The wings were not affected by ""aeroelastic divergence,"" a twisting of the wings caused by aerodynamic forces . Because the wings were shorter than those of the RB-57D or X16, they did not have to be affected by 'aero elastic divergence'
 The long wings did create a particular problem—they generated a strong pitch force, which had to be counteracted by the tail . The long wing was designed to counterbalance the pitch force of the bird .
 Lana wrote a memo to Lana that the ailerons and flaps would be raised slightly . Lana wrote: 'iA uirecior /\nen The Angel of Paradise Ranch 25 structure . 25 structure structure would be slightly raised .
 This moved the wing's center of lift slightly and reduced wing and tail loading . The wing was moved slightly to make it easier to lift and load load .
 The Angel would be exposed to negative-95-degree Fahrenheit temperatures for eight hours or more . Angel would have to be exposed for more than eight hours to survive .
 Shell Oil developed a special kerosene that would not freeze or evaporate in the extreme cold and low pressure at 70,000-plus feet . Shell developed the kerosine to avoid freezing or evaporating in extreme cold .
 The //stood for ""lighter fluid," since it smelled very similar to that found in a cigarette lighter . The // stood for "literal fluid," which is similar to the lighter fluid found in cigarettes .
 By the end of 1954, the aircraft's design was set and construction of two prototypes could begin . Two prototypes were built in 1954 .
 Johnson selected Lockheed chief test pilot Anthony W LeVier to make the initial flights . The test pilot will be the first test pilot to fly the F-2222 .
 LeVier had worked on earlier Lockheed projects such as the P-38, P-80, and XF-104 .
 In one harrowing accident, he had bailed out of a P-80 that was cut in half by a disintegrating engine . He was the pilot of a World War II bomber that crashed out of the plane .
 LeVier was called into Johnson's office and asked if he wanted to fly a new airplane . He was asked to fly the new plane .
 LeVier spent several days plotting a route to visit potential test sites in the deserts of southern California, Nevada, Arizona, and Arizona .
 Scattered throughout the area are dry lake beds, ranging from less than a mile to several miles in diameter . Dry lake beds are located in parts of the area .
 The search was conducted under the same extreme security as the rest of the project . The search took place at the same location as the other .
 LeVier and Dorsey Kammerer told everyone they were going on a hunting trip to Mexico . They even dressed the part when they took off in the Lockheed Flight Test Department's Beech V-tail Bonanza .
 Once out of sight of the factory, they changed course and headed toward the desert .
 CIA official selected to direct the program, and his air force liaison, Col. Col. Richard M Bissell Jr., Jr., was selected for the program by the CIA . Bissell was selected by the Air Force for the project .
 Osmond J ""Ozzie"" Ritland, reviewed the list, they felt none of them met the security requirements . The list was reviewed by Ozzie's team of security experts . They felt the list did not meet security standards .
 Ritland recalled ""a little X-shaped field"" in Nevada he had flown over many times while involved with U.S. nuclear testing . Then he recalled the field in Nevada as a place he'd flown over .
 Ritland said, "Within thirty seconds, you knew that was the place ... it was right by a lake" He said, ""We flew over it and within thirty seconds ... you knew"
 Johnson used a compass to lay out the direction of the first runway . Johnson kicked away spent shell cases as he walked .
 In winter, temperatures drop to below freezing and light snowfall can dust the area . Light snowfall is also possible in winter .
 Strong afternoon winds often hit the area, although thunderstorms are rare . The area is known for its strong afternoon winds .
 Lake bed is littered with empty shell cases and debris from target practice . Lake bed was littered with shell cases, debris from targets practice .
 Groom Lake is cut off from the surrounding desert by the Timphute Range to the west, the Groom Mountains to the east, and the Papoose Range in the south . The Groom Lakes are located in the eastern part of the region .
 The only nearby towns are ""wide spots in the road"" such as Rachel, Nevada . The only towns nearby are "wide spots" like Rachel .
 To the west, just over the surrounding hills from Groom Lake, is Nellis Air Force Base and the Atomic Energy Commission's Nuclear Test Site . The lake is located on the edge of the N.E. base .
 The AEC's security restrictions would cut off both ground and air access, effectively protecting the site and its secrets . The restrictions would also cut off air and ground access to the site .
 The Groom Lake site was approved, and the restricted area around the nuclear test site was extended to encompass it . The restricted area has been extended to include the Groom lake .
 A small but complete flight test center would have to be created out in the desert . The desert desert would be the perfect location for a test center .
 The Angel of Paradise Ranch 27 came its company name . To hide Lockheed's involvement, ""CLJ"" be the name of the company . "CLJ" was the name used to hide Lockheed .
 The facility plans were given to a contractor who had the special license needed to build at the nuclear test site . The facility was given to the contractor who has a special license .
 The site included a 5,000-foot tarmac runway, two hangars, a small tower, several water wells, fuel storage tanks, a mess hall, a road, plus some temporary buildings and trailers .
 The site was isolated, rugged, barren, barren and lacking personal comfort . The site is isolated and rugged .
 This was his first visit since the first survey with Johnson, Ritland, and Bissell . This is the first time he's been to the UK since the original survey .
 As at Edwards Air Force Base, the lake bed would be used for takeoffs and landings . The lake bed will be used to launch planes from the base .
 Flying over a flat surface like the lake bed, it was very difficult to judge height . LeVier also wanted to paint markings for four three-mile runways .
 At 4:30 A.M. on July 24, 1955, they were loaded on a C-124 transport for the flight to Groom Lake . They were loaded onto the plane at 4.30 a.m. and loaded into the plane .
 The local commander refused permission for the C-124 to land on the runway at Groom Lake, because the wheels of the heavily loaded plane would break through the thin surface . There was a delay .
 He wanted it to land at another base, then have the prototype moved to Groom Lake over bad dirt roads . He wanted to move it to another base then have it moved to another .
 Johnson argued they could let most of the air out of the C-124's tires, reducing the surface pressure . Johnson argued that they could reduce the air pressure on the plane .
 When the local com28 DARK EAGLES mander refused, Johnson called Washington to get approval to override him . Johnson called on Washington to override the decision .
 It was in a bare-metal finish with no United States star and bar insignia, no ""USAF,"" not even a civilian ""N-number"" registration . The U.S. Air Force was the first Air Force to carry out the mission .
 The first run, to a speed of 50 knots, was successful, even though the brakes were ineffective . The brakes were found to be ineffective .
 LeVier cut the throttle to idle, then realized he was some twenty feet in the air . The car was some 20 feet above the ground when it hit .
 LeVier tried to land the plane, but it was impossible to judge his height above the lake bed . The plane landed on the lakebed, but was unable to judge its height .
 The plane contacted the lake bed in a 10-degree bank . The left wing-tip skid hit first, then the left pogo, main gear, and finally, the tail wheel .
 The second landing was much smoother, and LeVier was able to regain control of the plane .
 Despite the mishap, no major damage was done, and repairs were completed the next day .
 LeVier pushed the control wheel forward to keep the plane on the ground . He pushed the wheel forward and kept the plane in the air .
 The weather for the first flight was threatening, with thunderstorms near Groom Lake . The weather was threatening for the flight .
 At 2:57 P.M. the T-33 chase plane took off and preparations began to start Article 341's engine . Article 341 was the first aircraft to fly in the U.S. at the time .
 First flight of the first flight ended with a cliffhanger . Then began a series of events that turned into a cliff-anger . The first flight was the first of its kind .
 LeVier twice tried to start the plane's engine, but his attempts failed . The pilot was killed in the plane crash .
 The wind had shifted and LeVier had to reposition the aircraft . During the delay, the wind shifted and the aircraft had to be moved .
 "It wasn't difficult to realize that this was no ordinary aircraft. At this point, as he wrote in his postflight comments, it wasn't easy to realize it was not ordinary aircraft."
 Johnson thought the forward landing gear should touch down first, to avoid stalling the wings . Johnson thought that the landing gear would touch down before touching down .
 He had talked with B-47 pilots who warned that the aircraft would ""porpoise"" if it landed nose wheel first . He had also talked with pilots who told him that the plane would "porpois"
 LeVier made his first landing try, but he said, ""attempting to touch the main wheels first while pushing on the control wheel to lower the nose only served to produce a most erratic and uncontrollable porpoise," he said . He said: "attempt
 Over the next few minutes, LeVier made three more attempts to land nose gear first . Over the rest of the time, he landed nose gear in the air .
 A few minutes after takeoff, the thunderstorms moved into the area and light rain began to fall . The plane was carrying passengers and passengers .
 The rain squalls were getting closer as LeVier made his fourth landing attempt . Rain squalls got closer as the plane landed .
 This time, LeVier stalled the aircraft just above the ground, and it touched down on both gears in a perfect landing . The landing was the first time the plane had stalled just above ground .
 LeVier jokingly ""saluted"" Johnson with an obscene gesture and accused Johnson of trying to kill him . Johnson accused him of attempting to kill LeViers .
 Johnson responded with the same gesture and a loud, ""You too,"" which was heard by the ground crew . Johnson responded by saying, "You too"
 Rain squalls flooded Groom Lake with two inches of water . Ten minutes later, the lake was covered in two inches .
 Lockheed personnel celebrated that evening with beerdrinking and arm-wrestling contests . The Lockheed personnel celebrate that evening .
 The following day, LeVier made a second, short flight to check out the landing technique . The next day, he made a short test flight to test the technique .
 These flights took the aircraft to its maximum speed of Mach 0.84, an altitude of 50,000 feet, and a successful dead-stick landing . These flights were the first of its kind .
 Matye broke the world altitude record of 65,890 feet set on August 29, 1955, by Wing Commander Walter Gibb in an English Electric Canberra . On three occasions, Matye also broke world altitude records set in 1955 .
 Canberra record had made headlines; there was no announcement from Groom Lake . The Canberra record was made headlines but no announcement was made from the record .
 Matye's flameout indicated a major problem with the J57 engine . Despite these successes, Matye was unable to complete a complete overhaul .
 When the engine flamed out, the aircraft would have to descend to 35,000 feet before the pilot could attempt a relight . The plane would then have to be lowered to 3500 feet before it could be relighted .
 The early J57-37 engines dumped oil into the cockpit pressurization system . Early J57 engines also dumped oil in the cockpit pressure system .
 Pratt and Whitney made a number of small fixes, but with only limited success . Pratt & Whitney made the fixes to the U.S. aircraft in the past .
 It would require a new version, the J57-31, before the flameout problem was solved . It would need to be replaced with a new model of the plane . The new version would be called J5731 .
 By November 1955, there were four or five U-2s in the test program at Groom Lake . The test program began in November 1955 .
 Robert Sicker and Robert Schumacher have been added to the flight test staff . The two test pilots will be the first of the new generation of test pilots to fly . Sicker is a former test pilot and former test driver .
 Initial flight tests were of airframe and engine, followed later by tests of subsystems, such as autopilot . The initial flight tests are of airframes and engine .
 Initial test flights did not venture more than two hundred miles from the Ranch . The initial test flights were conducted at the Ranch in California .
 As confidence in the aircraft grew, Lockheed pilots began flying triangular patterns up to one thousand miles away from the Ranch .
 At 7:00 A.M. on Wednesday, November 17, 1955, the daily air force flight to Groom Lake took off from Burbank, California .
 Aboard the C-54 transport were ten Lockheed and CIA personnel and five crewmen . A total of five crew members were on board .
 Party at the Flight Test Division left some people with hangovers . There would have been more passengers .
 The C-54 hit the peak of The Angel of Paradise Ranch 31 Mount Charleston near Las Vegas, killing all fifteen . The weather was poor and the weather was bad . The plane crashed into the mountain .
 It took three days to reach the wreckage, which was only thirty feet from the eleven-thousandfoot summit .
 An air force colonel accompanied the rescue party to recover briefcases and classified documents from the bodies .
 The air force issued a statement saying they were civilian technicians and consultants . Air force says the men are civilian technicians, consultants .
 It was assumed by the press that they had been scientists connected with the AEC's nuclear tests . The men were assumed to have been scientists involved in the tests .
 In the wake of the tragedy, Johnson insisted Lockheed take over daily flights to the Ranch .
 During this time, Bell had continued work on the X-16 . The end of THEX-16 came to an end .
 Bell signed a contract with the air force for twenty-two aircraft in early October 1955 . Bell signed the contract in October 1955 with the Italian Air Force .
 Bell was notified that the project had been terminated . Then, a few hours later, the project was terminated . Bell says he was notified of the termination of the project .
 It had been realized that the U2, even with the engine problems, was a vastly superior aircraft . The U2 was realized that it had to be considered a superior plane .
 It was not until 1976 that photos of the aircraft would be released . Ironically, the X-16 would remain secret for another decade before photos were released .
 Following the cancellation of the X-16, Lockheed received contracts for a total of fifty U-2s . Lockheed also received contracts to build 50 U.2s in total .
 In late 1955 and early 1956, recruitment of the CIA U-2 pilots began . Recruitment began in late 1955 to early 1956 . Recruiting of CIA pilots began in 1955 and 1956 .
 All F-84 pilots were from two Strategic Air Command bases, Turner Air Force Base, Georgia, and Bergstrom Air Force base, Texas .
 The pilots were picked to be part of a group that would carry out a special mission . They were not told much more—simply that they had been picked to carry out the mission .
 "It would be risky, but they would be doing something important for the United States," he says . CNN's John Sutter says the U.S. needs to keep track of the situation .
 They would have to have to be overseas for eighteen months without their families . They would be well paid but have to travel without them .
 If they were interested, they should call the motel next day and arrange another interview . If they wanted to interview them, they would have to call the next day .
 It was not until the third interview that the tantalizing mysteries were made clear . "It's not clear what happened to the first interview. It's not a mystery," says the author .
 The pilots were told they would be working for the CIA . They would be flying a new airplane that could go higher than any other . The pilots are told they will be flying the new airplane .
 Their pay, during training, would t)""e $17i>UU per month; overseas it would be raised to $2,500 per month .
 Their time with the CIA would count toward air force retirement and rank . The air force would also count toward retirement .
 Their main job, they were stunned to learn, would be to fly overfly the Soviet Union .
 Those pilots who agreed underwent several months of briefings, liedetector tests, and medical checks at the Lovelace Clinic in Albuquerque .
 The examination lasted a week and involved tests developed specifically for the prospective U-2 pilots . The tests were designed to test pilots for a variety of purposes .
 One series tested for claustrophobia in a cramped cockpit and a restrictive partial-pressure suit . The cockpit is a necessity given the cramped cockpit, the suit has a partial pressure suit .
 CIA pilots underwent training in three groups, starting in early 1956 and continuing through the year . The CIA pilots were trained in three different groups .
 They did wear film badges that measured radiation exposure, because of the nearby nuclear test site . They wore film badges to measure radiation exposure .
 The technique used to land the U-2 was directly counter to that used in conventional aircraft . The technique was used in the U.2 aircraft to land .
 The Angel of Paradise Ranch 33 altitude flights were followed by high altitude flights . This was followed by a high-altitude flight .
 Then pilots would begin flying long-range simulated missions, lasting up to eight hours . The pilots would then be able to fly simulated missions for up to 8 hours .
 The U-2 flight training was much more extensive than that for other air force planes . The U.2 was trained by the U.S. Air Force in the 1950s .
 The U-2 would then go into a spectacular climb at better than a 45-degree angle . It would then be able to climb at a better than 45-degrees .
 The first few times the pilots thought the U2 would continue right over on its back . The pilot thought it would continue over on the back of the plane .
 This depended on both the fuel and equipment load, and on the air temperature . This depends on the load and the temperature of the vehicle and load .
 This could cause the aircraft to climb more rapidly or even force it to descend . It could also force the plane to descend or cause it to climb rapidly .
 Above 68,000 feet, the difference between the U-2's stall speed and its maximum speed was only 10 knots . The U.2 was able to reach speeds of up to 10 knots above ground level .
 The aircraft could easily exceed these limits due to control inputs or pilot inattention . The pilot could be easily inattention on the aircraft .
 The pilot would have to maintain this balancing act for hours on end, plus navigate, operate the camera, and monitor fuel consumption . Pilot would also have to navigate and operate a camera .
 The pilot could not simply point the nose down—the aircraft would overspeed and break up . The aircraft would break up if the nose was pointed down . The pilot had to use the nose to avoid breaking up .
 The throttle was eased back to idle, then the landing gear and speed brakes were deployed . The landing gear was then deployed, and the speed brake was deployed .
 The descent was very slow—a striking contrast to the rocketlike climb . Even so, the descent was slow, and it was a slow climb .
 As the U-2 descended, the margin between the stall and maximum speed would widen . The margin would widen as the plane descended to maximum speed .
 If one wing becomes too heavy, the plane could go into an uncontrollable spin . The plane could also go into uncontrollable spins if one wing became too heavy .
 At lower altitudes, the pilot had to manhandle the plane . The U-2 had to be flown with a light touch at high altitudes . Unlike at high altitude, the plane had to handle it with light touch .
 The pilot had to hold the long wings level, a difficult task in a crosswind . The pilot was forced to hold his wings level in the cross wind .
 If the plane was stalled too high, it would hit the runway, bounce into the air, stall, and crash before the engine could come to full power . The plane would then stall and crash, hitting the runway and landing .
 The U-2 was a plane that required the pilot's complete attention every second . The U.2 was one of the world's most famous U.S. aircraft .
 The flights were so exhausting that a pilot would not be allowed to fly again for two days . Pilots were not allowed to take part in the flights for two weeks .
 Powers later noted that the rewards of the U-2 flight were far greater . But, as Powers noted, the rewards were far more rewarding .
 From altitude, above Arizona, the pilot could see from the Monterey Penin34 DARK EAGLES sula to midway down Baja California . The pilot could also see from Arizona to Baja .
 He added, "There was only one thing wrong with flying higher than any other man had flown. He added: "There were only one things wrong with . flying."
 The U-2 was barely out of the test phase and was still plagued with engine flameout problems . The U.2 was only a few years old when it came to fruition .
 Bissell received a call that a U-2 flying over the Mississippi River had suffered a flameout . Bissell says he received the call from a U.2 that a fire had been reported .
 The engine had apparently been damaged as it was vibrating and could not be restarted . The engine was apparently damaged and the engine could not restarted.
 The pilot radioed he would land at Kirtland Air Force Base at Albuquerque, New Mexico . Pilot radioed that he was going to land at the base .
 Bissell called the base commander at Kirtland and told him a U-2 would be landing in about fifteen minutes . Bissell: "The U2 will land in about 15 minutes" Bissell says the U2 was a U2 bound for the U.S.
 He asked the commander to have the base air police at the runway when the plane landed .
 The base commander reported that the plane had landed safely and that he was talking with the pilot in his office . The plane landed safely, the base commander said . The pilot is in the air safely .
 A C-124 transport and recovery crew took off within an hour to pick up the plane . The plane was found in the wreckage of the aircraft . It is now being transported back to the airbase .
 The incident was reported in the local newspaper but attracted little attention . The incident is reported in a local newspaper .
 Wilbur Rose took off on a training flight when one of the pogos failed to fall out . The plane was taking off from a training exercise when it was hit by the accident .
 The second group, which included Powers, went through the Ranch between May and August 1956 . Powers, who died in August 1956, was in the second group .
 Powers recalled that he was nervous before making his first high-altitude flight and forgot to retract the landing gear after takeoff . Powers said that he didn't retract his landing gear when he was flying . Powers says he forgot retracting the landing wheel after takeoff and was nervous .
 The plane was not capable of the altitude that had been promised . The U-2 was not able to reach altitude .
 When time came to begin the descent, Powers started to lower the landing gear, only to realize it had been down the whole time . Powers started the descent when he realized it was down the entire time .
 Eisenhower was worried about the possibility of an American citizen being killed or captured during an overflight . President Eisenhower was concerned about the possible danger of an assassination or capture .
 In December, Bob Ericson was flying at 35,000 feet when his oxygen ran out . He was airlifted to 35,00 feet when he ran out of oxygen . Ericsons was the first person to die in a plane crash .
 As he began to lose consciousness, the aircraft began to overspeed and go out of control . The plane began to fly erratically as he lost consciousness . The pilot was killed in the crash .
 Ericson fought his way out of the cockpit and parachuted to a landing in Arizona . The pilot was killed in the crash but survived the ordeal .
 He took off on a night training mission, became disoriented, and flew into a telephone pole at the end of the runway . The pilot was disoriented and crashed into the pole .
 They turned in their IDs, which gave their true names and described them as pilots with Lockheed, then assumed the cover names . They then assumed their cover names and turned in the IDs .
 The pilots left the site Friday afternoon to spend the weekend in Los Angeles .
 The growing numbers of U-2s were parked on the hard-packed dirt on the edge of the lake bed . There was no concrete apron. The growing number of U.2s are parked in the hard, packed dirt .
 The mess hall, however, was likened to a first-class civilian cafeteria . "The mess hall is a first class civilian cafeteria," the commander said .
 Given the isolation of the site, the pilots were forced to create their own entertainment . The pilot was forced to make his own entertainment at the time .
 The first group of pilots scrounged up gunpowder, woodshavings, and cigar tubes to build small rockets . Gunpowder was used to build rockets .
 Defense Secretary Charles Wilson was shown around the Skunk Works and the Ranch in December 1955 . In December 1955, defense secretary Charles Wilson visited the ranch .
 Allen Dulles also visited the Ranch and met with the first group of pilots . Dulles visited the ranch to meet with the original pilots .
 The only 'outsiders' allowed into Groom Lake were the C-124 transport crews, and they did not know where they were . The only "outsiders" allowed into the lake were the transport crews .
 The production U-2s were 36 DARK EAGLES iiwiinti/f'jf*tyi5iBa-flk7tJuihn'iire*imaiTT6ViT or ufidaie', California, hear Bakers
 During 1956 and 1957, the aircraft were completed, then disassembled, covered, and taken to a local airport, where they were loaded on the C-124s . The aircraft were taken to the airport, then loaded on C-125s .
 It was important that no one know the location of the Ranch’s location, so the flights were made at night . The Ranch's location was not immediately known .
 The radio voice would tell them not to acknowledge further transmissions . They would be told not to listen to any more .
 Soon the crew would be contacted by ""Delta,"" who would tell them to start descending into the black desert night . The crew would then be told by "Delta" to descend into the desert .
 The voice would then tell the transport's crew to lower their flaps and landing gear . The voice then tell them to lower the landing gear and flaps of their aircraft .
 Maps showed no civilian or military airports in the area, only empty desert . Yet maps showed no military or civilian airports .
 Delta planes would be cleared to land after runway lights come on, Delta says . Then the plane would be allowed to land in the air . Delta says the planes will be cleared for landing .
 Following the landing, the runway lights would be turned off and a ""follow me"" truck would direct them to a parking spot . The landing would be followed by a truck directing them to parking spots .
 Once delivered to Groom Lake, the U-2s would be reassembled and test flown . Once delivered, the planes would be tested and flown .
 The process would be reversed when the time came to send the U-2s to their overseas bases . The U.2s would then be sent to their bases .
 The need for intelligence on the Soviet Union had grown since the start of the U-2 program . The U.2 program was launched in 1961 .
 Estimates began to appear that the Soviets would soon have upwards of five hundred to eight hundred Mya-4s . Estimates were that they would soon be around five hundred or eight hundred .
 The problem was that these estimates were based on fragmentary data; they were little better than guesses . The problem is that they are based on fragments of data, and they are little better .
 Eisenhower made two efforts, one political, the other clandestine, to gain intelligence . Eisenhower made a political effort to gain political support for the U.S. President .
 The United States and Soviets would be allowed to overfly each other’s territory as a guard against surprise attack . The U.S. and Soviet Union would have to fly overfly together to protect each other's territory .
 Eisenhower also believed such an effort would be a step toward disarmament . Eisenhower believed such a step would be the first step to disarmament, Eisenhower said .
 The Soviets, relying on secrecy to hide their military strengths and weaknesses, rejected the proposal . The proposal was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 The plan had been in development since 1950, envisioned the launch of some twenty-five hundred Skyhook balloons, carrying camera gondolas from England, Norway, West Germany, and Turkey .
 The balloons would drift across the Soviet Union on the winter jet stream . They would drift on the jet stream on the way to Moscow . The balloons were released by the Soviets in 1953 .
 The randomly drifting balloons could not cover specific targets, but this did not matter . The balloons were randomly drifting, but they could not be seen by specific targets .
 Once clear of Soviet airspace, the gondolas would be cut free of the balloons by radio signals . The gondolators would then use radio signals to cut them free from the balloons .
 As the gondolas descended by parachutes, they would be caught in midair by specially equipped C-119 transports . Gondolas would have to descend by parachuting into the air by parachute .
 For the first two weeks, the loss rate of the balloons was acceptable and the Soviets made no protest . The loss rate was acceptable for the first 2 weeks of the balloon program .
 By late January and early February, however, the balloons were no longer making it through . The balloons are no longer being able to get through .
 Eisenhower ordered balloon launches halted on February 6, following a Soviet protest . Eisenhower ordered the launches halted .
 By early April 1956, flight training of the first group of CIA pilots had been completed . The new J57-31 engine had proven itself virtually immune to flameouts .
 The June 1, 1956, issue of Flight carried a report of a sighting over Lakenheath, England .
 At the same time the unit was being set up, a British frogman died while investigating the hull of a Soviet cruiser in an English harbor . At the time of the unit's set-up, the unit had been set up in England .
 The resulting press furor caused Prime Minister Anthony Eden to withdraw permission for the U-2 to operate from Lakenheath . Eden withdrew permission after the resulting press furoor caused .
 Bissell and General Cabell then went to see West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer . Bissell then went on to see the West German President Konrad Adenauer .
 He gave permission to use an old Luftwaffe base fifty miles east of Wiesbaden . The base is located in an area near the city centre of the city .
 Specific 38 Dark Eagles areas of research included clear air turbulence, convective clouds, convection clouds, wind sheer, the jet stream, ozone, and water vapor . Specific 38 DARK EAGLES areas were research included .
 In the early summer, the CIA sought Eisenhower's agreement to begin overflights . The CIA sought the permission to use overflights in the summer .
 Carl Overstreet was selected to be the first pilot to take the U-2 into ""denied"" airspace . Overstreet is selected to fly the U.2 into "denied" airspace .
 The route went to Warsaw, Poland, then over Berlin and Potsdam, East Germany . The route was from Warsaw to Berlin, then from Berlin to East Germany.
 Eisenhower was shown a number of photo briefing boards from the missions . Eisenhower was also shown a photo briefing board of the overflights .
 On July 2, Bissell sent a request to begin Soviet overflights to Eisenhower's personal assistant Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . Bissell's request for overflights was denied .
 Eisenhower authorized overflights of the USSR for a ten-day period . The following day, Goodpaster sent word that Eisenhower had authorized the overflights . The next day, the Soviet Union was allowed to fly over .
 The plane carried the A camera and was in a bare-metal finish with no national markings . The plane was carrying a camera and in an A camera .
 Stockman headed over East Berlin and northern Poland via Poznan, then crossed the Soviet border . Stockman crossed the border into the Soviet Union in the early 1950s . He crossed over Berlin and then over to northern Poland .
 The overflight covered a number of bomber bases in the western USSR, as far east as Minsk . The mission was the first of its kind to fly over the USSR .
 The camera photographed MiG fighters trying to reach the U-2's altitude, only to have their engines flame out . The camera was taken by a MiG fighter jet trying to get to the altitude of the U.2 .
 The Ange-1 of Paradise Ranch 39 turned west and flew along the Baltic coast . Once he reached the city, he turned west to fly over the Baltic .
 The U-2 landed back at Wiesbaden after an eight-hour-forty-five-minute flight . It was the first time the plane had ever been on the air force .
 When asked to justify such a dangerous target, mission planners told Bissell, "Let's go for the big one straight away"
 The flight path was farther south than the first mission . Flight path was over Kracow, Poland, then due east to Kiev, then north to Minsk .
 There was heavy cloud cover, which started to clear as Vito turned toward Moscow .
 SA-1 Guild surface-to-air missile sites that ringed Moscow ringed the capital . Moscow was hit by a barrage of missile attacks in the 1980s .
 Vito could see several ""herring bone” shaped sites, but no missiles were fired . Vito was able to see several sites, including several 'herring bones' shaped sites .
 In all, five overflights were made during the first series . One on July 4, and two each on July 5 and 9 .
 The bomber airfields in the western USSR had been equipped with nuclear weapons loading pits, but no Mya-4 bombers were spotted .
 The U-2 photos had proven the Soviets did not have a large bomber force . The photos had proved the Soviets had a large force .
 It was now possible to know, not to estimate, not guess, but to know the military capabilities of an enemy . The U.S. is now able to know not only estimates, but also knows the capabilities of its enemies .
 The Angel of Paradise Ranch ranch is home to the largest ranch in the world . The ranch has been home to many of the world's most famous animals . It is now home to more than 1,000 people .
 On July 10, the Soviets protested the overflights, and Eisenhower decided to halt the missions for the time being . Eisenhower halted overflights on July 10 after the protests .
 Second group of U-2 pilots completed training at the Ranch in September 1956 . In September 1956, the second group completed training .
 From there, the southern Soviet Union, as well as targets throughout the Mideast, could be covered . From then, targets could also be covered, including targets in the southern Russia and the Middle East .
 It was not until November that the first overflights were made from Turkey . It was a pair of short overflights to examine Soviet air defenses .
 Detachment C was established in early 1957 at Atsugi, Japan . Detachment D was established at a Japanese base in Atsugugan, Japan, in 1957 . Det Detachment B was also established at the same base .
 Eisenhower had come to rely on the U-2 photos, comparing other intelligence data to them . Eisenhower relied on the photos to compare intelligence data with other data . The U.2 photos are still available to the public .
 Soon they were providing 90 percent of the intelligence on the Soviet Union . Soon they provided intelligence on Soviet Russia .
 Instead of a short-term project, it had become an open-ended one . The project had become a long-term commitment to the Eagles . It is now an open ended project .
 Fears about the U-2's fragile structure had eased and early problems with the B camera had also been overcome . Fears have also eased about the fragile structure of the U.2 .
 A year after the first overflight, Bissell asked for a special estimate of the U-2's vulnerability . Detachment A in Germany was closed down and combined with Detachment B in Turkey .
 The Soviets had begun deployment of a new SAM, the SA-2 Guideline, in late 1956 . The new SAM was deployed by the Soviets in the early 1950s .
 The SA-2 could reach the U-2's altitude, but they had been designed to hit much lower-flying B-47s and B-52s . The study concluded that they could reach much lower altitudes .
 Above 60,000 feet, the SAM's accuracy was so poor only a lucky hit could be made . The SAM was so accurate that it was impossible to make a hit . The accuracy of the SAM was too low to be accurate .
 A primary target of the overflights was Soviet ballistic missile activities . The overflights were intended to target Soviet missile activity .
 Since World War II, the Soviets had undertaken an aggressive development program . The Soviets had an aggressive program to develop their own weapons systems .
 The SS-3 and SS-4 medium range ballistic missiles could threaten U.S. bases throughout Western Europe, North Africa, and Asia . The missiles are then in the final stages of testing, then could threaten United States bases .
 It was the U-2 that provided the first good photos of the Kapustin Yar test site on the Volga River . The U.2 was the first aircraft to fly over to the test site .
 The missile was fired on May 15 but exploded fifty seconds after launch . The missile exploded 50 seconds after it was launched .
 Two more launch attempts were made in the spring and summer, also ending in failure .
 Eisenhower authorized a series of overflights to find the launch site . These activities were detected, and Eisenhower authorized them .
 The pilot altered course to photograph construction in the distance and altered course . During one of the shots, the pilot spotted construction construction .
 The site was named ""Tyuratam,” after the rail stop at the end of the fifteen-mile spur that connected the site to the main Moscow-Tashkent line . The site is named after the stop .
 The fourth attempt made a successful 3,500-nautical-mile flight on August 21, 1957 .
 The R-7 and Sputnik launches showed the Soviets had achieved a breakthrough in rocket technology . The launch of the first rocket in 1959 was the first of its kind in the world . The first launch was carried by a dog named Laika .
 Estimates began to appear that the Soviets would deploy their ICBMs in huge numbers . The NATO code name SS6 Sapwood was given by the Soviets in the early 1980s . The Soviets had been given the NATO code-name Sapwood .
 If true, the United States would be vulnerable to a surprise nuclear attack . The U.S. is vulnerable to surprise attack .
 Unlike the bomber gap, this new intelligence question is not so easily answered . Unlike The Angel of Paradise Ranch 4, this is a new intelligence gap .
 Even with the use of bases in Iran, Pakistan, and Norway, many areas were out of the U-2's range .
 Eisenhower's growing reluctance to authorize overflights was also a factor . Another factor was Eisenhower's reluctance to approve overflights .
 Because of the SS-6's huge size, it could only be moved by rail, and any operational sites would also be located near rail lines . Because of its massive size, the ship could only move by rail .
 The problem was the U-2s were failing to bring back any photos of deployment . The problem is that they were not bringing back any of the photos .
 No ICBMs spotted in transit in transit, nor were any operational sites found . No operational sites spotted .
 The air force continued to insist that the Soviets would deploy large numbers of SS-6s . Despite this lack of evidence, the air force insisted that the Soviet Union would use large numbers .
 From U-2 photos, he knew Soviet nuclear forces were a pale shadow of those of the United States . Without evidence of the true SS-6 deployment rate, he was attacked as playing down the Soviet threat in order to balance the budget .
 Khrushchev was using the missile gap and Soviet successes in space to promote an image of superiority . To aggravate matters, he used the gap and space successes to promote a image of superiority .
 While overflights were under way, the Ranch housed the headquarters squadron, called Detachment D, and the training unit for the first group of air force U-2 pilots .
 Work was under way on a program that would influence the design of every Dark Eagle to follow and that would see final success two decades later .
 When the U-2 was first developed, it had hoped that the aircraft would fly so high the Soviets would not have only fragmentary tracking data and would not be sure what was going on .
 President Eisenhower was disturbed by the ease with which the Soviets were detecting the U-2 overflights . Eisenhower was extremely disturbed by . The Soviets were able to detect the U.2 over-routinely .
 Called Project Rainbow, it had the highest priority and the attention of all the Skunk Works engineers . Project Rainbow was called Project Rainbow and had the most priority and attention .
 Eisenhower threatened to end the overflight program if Rainbow failed . Eisenhower also threatened to do it if Rainbow did not fly .
 The idea was to scatter the radar signals away from the receiver, which would weaken the radar echo . The idea is to scatter radar signals to weaken the echo .
 The U-2's range was cut and its maximum altitude was reduced by seven thousand feet . The modification worked, but with major shortcomings, the U.2 was cut .
 The wires also whistled and sometimes broke, flapping against the cockpit and fuselage . The wires were also whistling and sometimes breaking, sometimes breaking .
 The U-2's underside was covered with a metallic grid, called a Salisbury Screen, and then overlayed with a black foam rubber called Echosorb . The underside of the U.2 was also covered in a metal grid and a foam rubber .
 At some radar frequencies, they did reduce the U-2's radar cross section . The U.2 radar cross cross section was reduced to a fraction of the size of the radar cross-section .
 The coating also prevented the engine's heat from dissipating out of the skin . The coating prevents the heat of the vehicle's heat being dissipated .
 On April 4, 1957, Lockheed test pilot Bob Sieker was making a flight at 72,000 feet . Sieker's flight was the first time Sieker had been flying in a high-altitude flight in a record-breaking flight .
 This involved flying the aircraft up and down a radar range for hours on end . It was the first time the aircraft had been flown over a range of radar ranges .
 Sieker's cockpit pressurization was lost and his suit inflated . Sieker was in the cockpit at the time of the crash when the accident occurred .
 The clip holding the bottom of his faceplate failed and it popped open . As it did, the clip holding it down popped open and the faceplate popped up .
 Lockheed test pilot Herman ""Fish"" Salmon discovered the crash site . The crash site was the site of the first crash of the World War II .
 Salmon found the U-2 in a valley near Pioche, Nevada, about ninety miles from the Ranch . He rented a twin-engine Cessna from Las Vegas, and three days after the crash, found the plane in a remote valley .
 This suggested that he had revived at the last moment and jumped from the plane but was too low for his parachute to open . This suggests that he may have revived at last moment .
 In the wake of this and other accidents, an ejector seat was added to the U-2 . In the aftermath of the accident, the U.2 was forced to eject ejector seats .
 Later called ""Iron Ball"" paint, it absorbed some of the radar signals, which reduced the cross section by an order of magnitude . Later called "Iron Ball" paint .
 The first ""Dirty Bird"" U-2, as the modified aircraft was called, was sent to Turkey in July 1957 . The first "Dirty Birds" was sent in the U.S. in the 1950s .
 It had wires strung from the nose to poles on the wings, as well as radar absorbing paint . The plane was fitted with radar sensors and radar-absorbing paint . It was the first plane to be fitted with a radar-antantant radar system .
 On July 7, CIA pilot James Cherbonneaux made a Dirty Bird flight along the Black Sea coast to probe Soviet air defenses . The mission was part of a Cold War effort to counter Soviet air defense efforts .
 Intercepted communications indicated the wires and coatings worked well but that the Soviets were able to pick up radar returns . The Angel of Paradise Ranch 43 from the cockpit and tailpipe .
 Two weeks later, he made a Dirty Bird overflight of the central Soviet Union from Pakistan . Two weeks after, he flew over to the Soviet Union .
 It covered Omsk and the Tyuratam launch site, before landing back in Pakistan . The plane landed in Pakistan after covering the launch site .
 This was soon changed to midnight blue, which matched the color of the sky at 70,000 feet .
 A reduced radar cross section would have to be designed into a plane from the start, not added on later . This would make it harder for MiG pilots to . appear . with*'the failure of the Dirty Bird U-2, it was now clear to Johnson that a reduced
 Johnson was one of those who doubted it could work . Ironically, when final success was achieved, Johnson was also one of the doubters .
 U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union remained sporadic throughout 1958 and 1959 . The overflights were sporadic throughout the period .
 What overflights were being made could not settle the question of the size of the Soviet ICBM force size . The overflights did not solve the problem .
 In 1960, information was received that an ICBM site was being built at Plesetsk in the northwest Soviet Union . Then, in early 1960, it was reported that the site had been built .
 Although there had been a number of false alarms before, this report seemed solid . The report seems solid, and the report seems to be solid .
 Eisenhower approved two overflight flights in succession for April 1960 . After four months without an overflight, Eisenhower OK'd two in succession .
 Eisenhower observed that the one asset he had at a summit meeting was his reputation for honesty . Eisenhower had a reputation for being honest, Eisenhower said . Eisenhower said that honesty was his only asset at summit meetings .
 Eisenhower approved the two missions, he added an April 25 cutoff date . The two missions are scheduled to take off from April 25 .
 William Shelton selected Bob Ericson and Francis Powers for the overflights . Bob Ericson and Francis Powers were selected for overflights. Francis Powers was selected by Shelton to fly .
 Ericson was a member of the third group who had been stationed with Detachment C in Japan . He was originally stationed in Japan and was stationed in the U.S. He was one of three members of the Third Group .
 Powers was the only original member of Detachment B still with the group . Powers is the only member of the group still with it now .
 He crossed the Hindu Kush Mountain Range and crossed into Soviet airspace . It was the first time he had crossed into Russian airspace .
 The primary target was Sary-Shagen, the Soviet's test site for both SAMs and antiballistic missiles, as well as long-range radars . The main target was the Soviet testing site for SAMs, anti-missile missiles and anti-air missiles .
 This was not the first visit to the site, but earlier photos had been poor . This is the first time the site has been photographed .
 At this time, both the U.S. and Soviets were observing a nuclear test moratorium . The United States and Soviet Union were observing the moratorium .
 Bissell's April 25 deadline had expired, and Bissell required an extension . By this time, Bissell had to wait until April 25 . Bissell has been granted an extension to the deadline . The deadline had passed .
 Plesetsk could only be covered between April and early September . Due to lighting conditions, only a few days per month were clear during this period .
 If not covered now, the Summit and Eisenhower's visit could delay the flight beyond the weather-lighting window . The Summit is scheduled to arrive in Washington, D.C. on Monday morning .
 Powers and the support crew headed for Peshawar, Pakistan, on April 27, 2014 . Powers says the weather looked good, and the weather was good enough for the mission .
 Powers and the backup pilot were awakened at 2:00 A.M. but almost immediately weather forced a scrub . Powers and his backup pilot had been sleeping in the dark for several hours . Powers: "I'm not going to be flying again. I'm not flying again."
 Powers went through the same routine the next morning, but again weather forced a scrub, this time for forty-eight hours . Powers went to the beach for the next day, but the weather forced him to stay in the air .
 It was not until Sunday, May 1, the last authorized day, that the weather cleared enough to allow the flight to be made . The flight was delayed until May 1 .
 Powers crossed the Soviet border, he found the weather was worse than expected . Powers says he crossed the border to find the weather worse than he'd expected .
 An hour and a half into the flight, Powers spotted the first break in the clouds . Powers said he was flying with a crew of four people .
 Several large thunderheads hid the pad area, but the surrounding area was clear . The pad area was cleared .
 The clouds closed in again until about three hours into the overflight .
 The Angel of Paradise Ranch 45 began to clear, Powers could see a town . Powers says he could see the town of Paradise .
 Powers took a bearing on a Soviet radio station and corrected his course again . Powers used the plane's radio compass to correct his course . The plane was flying over the Soviet Union at the time .
 Powers's plane, Article 360, suffered an autopilot failure at the time . Powers's aircraft suffered a power failure, Powers says .
 Powers disconnected autopilot, retrimed the aircraft, and flew it manually for several minutes . Powers disconnected the autopilot and retrimmed the aircraft . Powers then flew the aircraft manually .
 The weather was now clear, however, and the plane was nearing the halfway point . The plane was headed to the U.S. from New York to New Jersey .
 The U-2 was approaching Sverdlovsk at an altitude of 72,000 feet when it was picked up on Soviet radar . The plane was approaching the city when it became airborne .
 A prototype Su-9 fighter, still in testing and not even armed, was ordered to ram the U-2 . It was ordered by the U.S. to ram a U.2. It was still not armed, and was not armed .
 Two MiG 19s were also sent up, but with a maximum altitude of 66,000 feet, they could not reach the U-2 . The U.2 was shot down by a U.S. Air Force U-1 .
 He had just completed a 90-degree turn and was lining up for the next photo run . He was lined up for a photo run after completing the run .
 The MiG 19 pilots saw the explosion, but thought the SAM had self-destructed after a miss . The pilots thought the explosion was the result of a missile strike .
 On the ground, the fluttering debris from the U-2 filled the radar screens with echoes, but the Soviets thought it was chaff being ejected from the plane to confuse the radar . The Soviets thought the debris was being thrown from the aircraft to confuse radar .
 At least three SAM sites continued to fire— reportedly 14 SA-2s in all . At least 14 SA2s were reportedly fired .
 The confusion of Soviet air defenses was echoed by that of United States intelligence . U.S. intelligence believed the Soviets were confused by the confusion .
 They were interpreted as indicating the U-2 had gradually descended for a half hour before being shot down . The incident was the first time the plane had been shot down by the U.S. Air Force had been dropped .
 A cover 46 story was issued that an unarmed civilian weather plane had crossed the Soviet border after the pilot had reported problems with his oxygen system . The plane crossed the border after a pilot reported problems .
 Khrushchev revealed Powers had been captured and confessed to spying . Powers was captured by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Eisenhower made the unprecedented admission that he had personally authorized the overflights . Eisenhower admitted that he was personally authorized to do so . The overflights were the first time he had authorized overflights.
 No head of state had ever before admitted that his country spied in peacetime . President Barack Obama has admitted that he spied during the Cold War .
 The Paris Summit ended when Khrushchev demanded Eisenhower apologize for the overflights . Khrrushchev also demanded that Eisenhower apologize . The Paris summit ended in a humiliating defeat for the Soviet Union .
 Eisenhower would only give a promise that no future overflights would be made . Eisenhower would not say if he would continue overflights .
 The U-2 detachments were brought home following the loss of Powers's aircraft . Powers's plane was the last of the U.2 U.S. aircraft to be sent home .
 The Detachment D headquarters squadron moved from the Ranch to North Base at Edwards Air Force Base in June 1960 . The squadron's headquarters moved to the base's North Base headquarters . The base's headquarters were moved to Edwards AFB in 1960 .
 Behind those bland words was the greatest achievement of aeronautical technology . Behind the bland words, aeronautics were the greatest aeronational technology .
 The full dimension of the achievement of this greatest of the Dark Eagles would not be revealed for another three decades . The full dimensions of the . achievement would not . be revealed until after three decades in the 1980s .
 Well before Powers was shot down, it was clear any U-2 successor would have to fly both higher and faster . The U.2 successor to Powers would need to fly faster and faster to succeed Powers .
 There had been early studies of early, pre-U-2 studies of high-speed reconnaissance aircraft .
 Bell aircraft of the ""RX-1,"" a second-generation X-l rocket-powered research aircraft with camera equipment . Bell aircraft was by Bell aircraft . The X-1 was a second generation X-L rocket- powered research aircraft .
 In the early 1950s, the X-1A reached a speed of Mach 2.44 and an altitude of 90,440 feet, both world records . In the 1960s, X1A was a record-breaking speed plane that reached 90,000 feet .
 The RX-1 would be carried to the target area by a 47 48 DARK EAGLES bomber . It would then be released, made the overflight, and be retrieved .
 This was a vertical-takeoff and landing aircraft that used six Armstrong-Siddeley Viper jet engines, a CF-105 fuselage, and a disk-shaped wing . This was the first time the aircraft was able to fly .
 Top speed was Mach 3 to 4, with a maximum altitude of 95,000plus feet . The top speed is Mach 3-4, with the top speed being Mach 3 .
 WS-606A remains unique in that it was the only one to involve a foreign contractor . The plane was only one of the air force-CIA Black airplanes to involve foreign contractors .
 The most serious of these early attempts grew out of early 1950s work on aircraft fueled by liquid hydrogen . What proved to be the most serious was the creation of the first hydrogen-powered aircraft .
 In early 1956, Johnson proposed to the air force a study design for a hydrogen-powered reconnaissance aircraft called the CL-400 . Johnson proposed the design in early 1956 .
 It had a top speed of Mach 2.5, an altitude of 100,000 feet, and a range of 2,200 nautical miles . The spacecraft was launched at a height of 10,500 feet and had a speed of 2.4 mph .
 The CL-400 would be a huge aircraft—164. feet long with a wingspan of 83. feet feet . The plane would have been a huge plane with a wing span of 83 feet .
 It used a T-tail and a retractable vertical fin that spanned nearly 30 feet . It was the first time a shark had such a vertical fin .
 It used bicycle-type landing gear with outriggers retracting into the engine pods . It used a bicycle-style landing gear .
 Pratt and Whitney was selected to build the engines in February 1956 . Lockheed was given a contract for two prototypes . The engines were built for Lockheed .
 By April, a full three months before the first U-2 overflight of the USSR, work on the project was under way . The project was completed in April .
 Lieutenant Colonel John Seaberg, who had set up the U-2, was named to manage the liquid hydrogen tanks, airframe, and systems . The U-1 was the first aircraft to fly in the U.2 program .
 Jay Brill would work on the logistical problems of producing, transporting, and storing liquid hydrogen . Jay R Brill would focus on the logistics of producing and transporting of liquid hydrogen.
 The CL-400 was to be a Black airplane, due to the advanced technology and the need for rapid development . The plane was due to be developed in the 1970s .
 Only twenty-five people had full access to the project . It was classified Top Secret (Codeword)
 To speed development, near complete power to issue contracts was given to the man . The Archangel from Area 51 49 agers.
 The project number was changed regularly and some contracts were written by other air force offices to hide their connection with the CL-400 . Some contracts have been written by others to hide the connection .
 At contractors’ plants, CL-400 personnel were isolated from other employees . At contractors' plants, they were isolated .
 This was at a time when the Mechanical Engineering Handbook described it as only a laboratory curiosity . This was when it was described as a 'labour curiosity'
 The vivid images of the destruction of the Hindenberg were very much in mind . The film was set to be released on Friday at the end of the year .
 The tests were done at Fort Robertson, a converted bomb shelter near the Skunk Work's . Fort Robertson was built at the site of Fort Robertson .
 Despite the high level of security that enveloped Sun Tan, several incidents occurred, funny in retrospect, that threatened to expose the project . Sun Tan was the subject of a series of high-profile incidents .
 First such hydrogen ""leak"" occurred when a female Skunk Works engineer attended a conference on hydrogen . First such leak occurred in the 1950s .
 Another engineer recognized her and began to wonder why Lockheed was interested in liquid hydrogen . Another engineer asked her to explain why she wanted to work with the company .
 Because of the light weight of liquid hydrogen (one gallon weighed one pound), the vehicle had only a single axle instead of the two a trailer of this size normally required . One gallon of hydrogen was lighter than a gallon of water .
 Single-axle arrangement attracted undue attention every time it went through state weighing stations . The single-axes were used to carry a single car at all times .
 The Sun Tan group thought about painting on a second axle but quickly realized this would be too obvious . The group decided not to paint on the second axle .
 When the trailer was built, it had two axles, the second purely for cover . When the new trailer was . built, the trailer had two . axles . The second was purely for . cover .
 A third incident occurred during construction of a liquid hydrogen plant near Pratt and Whitney's Florida test facility . The incident occurred near the site of the facility .
 Its cover was as a ""fertilizer plant," but word soon spread that the facility produced hydrogen . The plant was originally intended as a fertilizer plant .
 A local civil defense official became alarmed that a hydrogen bomb was being built in the area . Civil defense official was alarmed that the hydrogen bomb would be being built .
 It took a delegation of security officials to convince him to keep quiet . Security officials convinced him to stop speaking out .
 Fuel lines would have to pass through the hot wing structure before reaching the engines . The fuel lines had a vacuum-jacketed insulation . The plane's fuel lines would also have to be passed through the structure .
 Pratt and Whitney was conducting tests on the hydrogen-fueled engine . While the Skunk Works was designing the CL-400, the company was testing the engine .
 Initial work was to convert a J57 engine to burn hydrogen . The initial work was codenamed ""Shamrock,"" and codename "Shamrock" It was intended to convert the J57 to a hydrogen-burning engine .
 The modifications worked very well; the engine could be throttled down until the fan blades were spinning slowly enough to count . The modifications work very well .
 On a normal jet engine, fuel is sprayed directly into the combustion chamber . Fuel is sprayed into a combustion chamber, not sprayed directly in the chamber .
 The liquid hydrogen was heated by the exhaust, going from negative-423 degrees F to 1,340 degrees F and changing from a liquid to a hot gas . The exhaust of the vehicle heated the liquid hydrogen .
 The hydrogen gas was fed through a turbine, which spun the compressor fans and liquid hydrogen pump via a reduction gear .
 In all, twentyfive and a half hours of operation with liquid hydrogen were completed during the next year .
 The end came when Johnson was visited by Assistant Air Force Secretary James H Douglas Jr. and Lt. Air Force Sgt. Robert E. Johnson .
 The only space in the cockpit was the cockpit, and fuel could not be carried in the hot wing structure . The only fuel could be carried inside the cockpit .
 Douglas and Irvine asked Pratt and Whitney how much improvement could be made in the 304's fuel efficiency . The 304 was designed to meet the needs of the Air Force One .
 Johnson urged that Sun Tan be canceled . This made the plane even less practical, and Johnson urged it to cancel .
 The air force was also short of money for several higher-priority projects, and there were doubts Eisenhower would approve overflights . Air force was short of funds for several other projects, including overflights.
 The prototype CL-400s were canceled in October 1957 . The engine tests continued through 1958 .
 The formal The Archangel from Area 51 51 cancellation was made in February 1959 . The official cancellation of The Archangel was made by Area 51 in 1959 .
 After the failure of the Dirty Bird U-2s, Johnson studied a large flying-wing design . Johnson's design was inspired by the success of the U.2s .
 The design was capable of very high altitudes, but still at relatively low speeds . The spacecraft was able to fly at very low altitudes but at very high speeds .
 It was not until the fall of 1957 that the emerging high-speed reconnaissance aircraft program began to coalesce . GUSTO was the first time the U.S. government had begun to consider a reconnaissance aircraft .
 Bissell arranged for a study of how a plane's speed, altitude, and radar cross section affected its probability of being shot down . Bissell's study was based on speed, height, altitude and cross section of a plane .
 The study found that supersonic speeds greatly reduced the chances of radar detection . The study was conducted by a group of researchers at the University of York .
 The aircraft would need a top speed of Mach 3, to fly at altitudes over 80,000 feet, and to incorporate radar-absorbing material . It would also need to be able to fly with radar-absorbent material .
 On September 27, 1956, the X-2 rocket-powered research aircraft reached Mach 3.196, equivalent to 2,094 mph . The rocket powered research aircraft was the first to reach a speed of 3.4 mph in 1956 .
 The reconnaissance aircraft would need to maintain these speeds for a prolonged time, while being subjected to more severe airframe heating than on Sun Tan .
 The plane would have a sustained speed 60 percent higher than the maximum dash speed of any jet then operational . To put in perspective what was required, the plane would be 60 percent faster than any jet .
 A U-2 flying directly toward an SA-2 SAM site would be detected about ten minutes before reaching it and would be in range for about five minutes . The U.2 would be able to fly directly toward a SAM site from a distance of 10 minutes .
 Only twenty seconds would elapse from the time the aircraft entered the site's range, until it was too close to be fired on . Only 20 seconds would be needed to fire on the aircraft .
 The SA-2 would then have to chase the plane as it flew away from the site . The plane would have to be chased by the SA2 as it fled the scene .
 Use of radarabsorbing material would further reduce the range at which the plane could be detected . Use of such material would also reduce the amount of time a plane could have been detected .
 An airplane with these capabilities would be very expensive—far more than the U-2 had been . An airplane that could have such capabilities would have been very expensive . The U.2 was the most expensive aircraft ever made .
 The navy, Convair, and Lockheed were made aware of the general requirements and submitted designs . Convair and Lockheed submitted designs to meet the requirements .
 The navy submitted a design for a ramjet-powered aircraft with rubber inflatable wings . The design was based on a design from a design by the navy .
 The aircraft would then be boosted by a rocket to a speed at which the ramjets could start . The rocket would then boost the aircraft to speed at a speed faster than it could start.
 The balloon would have to be a mile in diameter and the aircraft's wing area one-seventh of an acre . It was determined that the balloon would need to be one mile wide and one-eighth of a acre .
 Convair proposed a ramjet-powered Mach 4 aircraft that would be launched from a B-58 . Convair also proposed a Mach 4 plane that would have been launched from the B.58 .
 This proposal, although far more practical than the navy concept, also had shortcomings . The proposal, which is not as practical as the navy's, was far more realistic .
 It was thought the aircraft's ramjet would suffer ""blowouts"" during maneuvers . Moreover, it was thought it would suffer "blowouts" during maneuvers.
 The total flight time for the Marquardt ramjet was less than seven hours . Convair engineers continued to refine the design of the design .
 Lockheed and Johnson were studying a wide range of concepts for what was initially called the ""U-3" project . The project was originally called the U-3  project .
 Different size aircraft were looked at, with both two and four engines . Different sizes aircraft were also looked at .
 These included towing the U-3 to altitude behind a U-2 and using a booster stage . Other designs used coal slurries or boron fuel; vertically launched aircraft; and inflatable wings and tail .
 The exotic technology of liquid hydrogen had proven impractical, he said . He understood that this new aircraft would have to be based on solid technology . The new aircraft will be the first of its kind in the world .
 In late November 1958, the Land Panel decided that it was possible to build the aircraft . The Archangel from Area 51 was built in Area 51 .
 Eisenhower approved the recommendation, and funding was provided to Lockheed and Convair to prepare definitive studies .
 By the spring of 1959, Johnson and his Skunk Works engineers had worked their way up to the A-10, but success seemed elusive . The A-11 was a prototype for the first time .
 President Eisenhower was intent on a plane with a zero radar cross section . President Eisenhower wanted to use the plane as a defense system . The plane was designed to avoid detection from radar radar .
 One idea involved adding wedge-shaped chines made of radar absorbing material to the A-10's cylindrical fuselage . Another idea involves adding wedge chines to the fuselage of the plane .
 Tests of a small model were successful, and by May 1959 the chines had been incorporated into the A-ll design .
 It made full use of the chines, as well as elements from the previous designs, and was the sum of fifteen months of work . It was the work of 15 months, with the help of a team of engineers .
 Everything is now exactly where it should be, Kelly says . Ben Rich, one of the engineers who worked on it told him, Kelly, everything is now . The engines, the inlets, and the twin tails, are now in place .
 Allen Dulles and Bissell from the CIA and Neil McElroy from the Defense Secretary . The meeting was attended by the CIA, Defense Secretary Neil Mc Elroy, scientific advisers Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and others .
 Convair design, called ""Kingfisher," was a large delta-wing aircraft 79. feet long, with a wingspan of 56 feet and weighing 101,700 pounds . Convair's design was called "Kingfishers"
 It was powered by two J65 jet engines and two Marquardt RJ59 ramjets . It was to be powered by 2 J65 engines and 2 Marquardts ramjams .
 Once up speed, the ramjets would ignite and accelerate the plane to Mach 3.2.2 . Once up to speed, they would be able to reach Mach 3,000 mph .
 During flight, the Kingfisher would climb from 54 DARK EAGLES an initial altitude of 85,000 up to 94,000 feet . The plane would fly from an initial height of 85-000 to 94-000 feet.
 Its top speed was also Mach 3.2, and it had a range of 4,120 nautical miles . It had a top speed of 3.5mph and a top range of 3,000 nautical nautical mile .
 The A-ll had a better altitude capability—at the start of the cruise it would be at 84,500 feet, and this would increase to 97,600 feet .
 Given the plane's extreme speed, the code name seemed to be ""inspired perversity," as the official history put it . The plane's speed was so high that its code name was "inspired perversion"
 Lockheed aircraft had long carried ""star" or astronomical names . Lockheed aircraft were known as Orion, Vega, Sirius, Constellation, Starfire, Starfighter, and JetStar .
 In Europe, the constellation of the Big Dipper is often called a wagon—or an oxcart . The constellation is often known as a wagon or oxcart in Europe .
 Due to the complexity of the problem, it was not possible to use subscale models . The complexity was so complex that it could not be used as a subscale model .
 For the next eighteen months the mock-up was scanned by radar, while adjustments and modifications were made . For the first eighteen months, radar scans were used to scan the mock up .
 Extreme security measures, tighter even than for the U-2, were used to hide the program . Extremely tight security measures were used in the U.2 program .
 Money to subcontractors was paid through ""front"" companies . Because knowledge of Lockheed's involvement would create speculation, money was paid by "front companies"
 Once the parts were completed, they would be shipped to warehouses, also rented to front companies . The parts would be sent to warehouses and rented out to a front company .
 Some drawings were deliberately not classified . The assumption was that if they were stamped ""Secret,"" people would take an interest .
 Powers's U-2 was shot down just over three months after the Oxcart program started . Powers was the first U.2 to be shot down by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s .
 Eisenhower: U.S. would never again be able to make overflights of the Soviet Union . Eisenhower: "It was clear to Eisenhower that the United States would not again be allowed to fly over . The United States never again made overflights over Soviet Union."
 The Archangel from Area 51 55 brought into question the future of Oxcart . Oxcart. 55 is the latest episode of the series .
 The president seemed undecided, saying he was not sure if it would be best to end development . He said he wasn't sure if so much had been invested that the U.S. should capitalize on the effort .
 On August 19, the recovery capsule from the Discoverer 14 reconnaissance satellite was caught in midair by a C-119 aircraft . The recovery capsule was caught by an aircraft carrying the satellite . The spacecraft was carrying a reconnaissance satellite .
 This ended eighteen months of launch failures, tumbling satellites, and lost capsules . This ended 18 months of launches and launches, including failed launches .
 The capsule carried a twenty-pound roll of film, covering 1 million square miles of the Soviet Union . More important, the capsule carried the film, which was used to film 1 million sq miles of Soviet Russia .
 Satellites could cover the whole of the Soviet Union, without the political risks of aircraft overflights . The Soviet Union was ruled out of existence in the 1980s .
 Oxcart was seen as needed and was continued under CIA control . Oxcart is seen as necessary and continued under the CIA under the influence of the CIA .
 Satellites would be restricted to coverage of the Soviet Union for the foreseeable future . The Soviet Union would remain in orbit around the world for decades .
 It would be many years before a satellite camera had the resolution of the U-2's B camera .
 If the USSR was off limits for the U-2, it could still provide coverage of Communist China, Cuba, Vietnam, or the Mideast . The U.2 could still be able to reach Communist China or Vietnam .
 In a few years, however, these areas could no longer be overflown with impunity . In the future, the public will no longer have access to these areas again .
 The Chinese already had SA-2 SAMs, and other countries would have them by the early and mid-1960s . Other countries would also have SAMs .
 Oxcart would soon be needed to conduct overflights of even Third-World countries . The Oxcart could soon be used for overflights into the world .
 Oxcart will be released in September 2015 . Oxcart is the first version of Oxcart to be released . The first version was released in March 2013 .
 Stainless steel honeycomb was being used in the Mach 3 XB-70, then under development, but Johnson rejected this when he saw the production problems it entailed . Johnson rejected the use of honeycomb in the XB70 .
 The honeycomb had to be produced in a clean room, under sterile conditions . It was created in a sterile room, and the honeycomb was produced in clean room .
 Nobody had ever tried to build an entire airframe out of the material . The material had previously been used in aircraft before .
 Even drilling a hole was a problem, due to the titanium's extreme hardness . The titanium is extremely hard to drill .
 Johnson decided to build a sample of the wing structure and nose section . Johnson built the sample before beginning production .
 A full 80 percent of the material was rejected . The material was so brittle that it would shatter like glass if dropped . It was rejected because it was brittle .
 CIA went to Titanium Metals Corporation and briefed company officials about Oxcart . This problem continued into 1961, until a group from CIA headquarters went to the company . CIA headquarters briefed the company on Oxcart in 1961 .
 During heat tests, bolt heads would simply fall off after one or two runs . Bolt heads would also fall off during heat tests . Bolt head heads would fall off in heat tests after just a few runs .
 cadmium plating had flaked off tools used to tighten the bolts . Cadmium was found to have been used to secure the bolts in the car .
 This was enough to ""poison"" the titanium, causing a spiderweb network of cracks to form . The titanium was used to create a spider web of cracks .
 All cadmium-plated tools had to be thrown in a big vat that was boiling ""like a witch's brew"" to strip off the plating .
 It was also found that welds of wing panels done during the summer soon failed . Those made during the winter lasted indefinitely, while those made in summer lasted indefinitely .
 Burbank city water had chlorine added to reduce algae in the summer . The parts were washed before welding, and chlorine was added to the water .
 Every part would have to withstand temperatures higher than ever before endured by an aircraft . Not simply the airframe, but every part of the aircraft would need to withstand temperature .
 All electrical connections were gold-plated . Gold retained its electrical conductivity better at high temperatures than copper or silver .
 Internal stress caused by such heat affected the quartz glass window for the camera . The internal stress led to internal damage to the camera's quartz glass .
 The heat had to be even throughout the window, or there would be optical distortion . The heat was also needed to be in the window to keep it even .
 quartz window fused to its metal frame using highfrequency sound waves . The quartz window was fused to the frame using sound waves to fuse it together .
 The effect of these many problems was to delay the program and raise its cost . The effect on the program is to delay and raise the cost .
 Development of the J58 engines and their nacelles proved to be the most difficult problem . The J58 engine and naceller were the most challenging to develop .
 The J58 program was begun in late 1956 to power a navy attack plane with a dash speed of Mach 3 . It was intended to power the navy's attack plane .
 By late 1959, however, navy interest was fading, and it was decided to cancel the engine .
 CIA requested the work be continued and the engine be modified for a continuous speed of Mach 3.2 . The CIA requested to continue the work and said the work should be continued .
 A contract has been issued for three ground test and three flight test engines . A contract was issued for 3 ground test engines and 3 flight tests .
 Ground test stand could not simulate the heat and altitude conditions required . Ground test stands could not be used to simulate the conditions needed for the project .
 Pratt and Whitney built a new test stand in which a J75 engine's exhaust was run through and around the exhaust of a J58 engine . The exhaust of the J58 engines can be run through the J75's exhaust .
 For all its power, the J58 engine alone is not enough to drive the A-lIl to Mach 3 by brute force . The J58 is not the only engine that can make the car Mach 3 .
 The engines were not simply a place to put the engines, but an integral part of the propulsion system . They were not just a place for engines, they were also a place where they were used to store fuel .
 Up to 1,600 mph, air would come in through the intake and a ring of centerbody bleed vents to feed the engine . The car would be able to reach speeds of up to 1.600 mph . Air would come into the engine through a center body bleed vent .
 At Mach 3, a full 56 percent of the total thrust came from the intake . The effects were amazing—at Mach 3 .
 Another 27 percent came from the afterburner, while only 17 percent came out of the J58 engine itself .
 It was a remarkable achievement, but years of development and flight testing would be needed before the system was reliable .
 Area 51 is where the A-ll. Area 51 will be tested . Area 51 was the first phase of the project .
 Despite the success of the U-2 flight tests and the A-I] mock-up radar tests, Groom Lake was not initially considered . The U.2 test site was not considered for the U.S. Air Force One .
 Groom Lake's five-thousand-foot asphalt runway was both too short and unable to support the weight of the Oxcart . The Oxcart is the first of its kind in the world to fly in a cargo container .
 The site had to be away from any cities and military or civilian airways to prevent sightings . The site was located in a bid to prevent any sightings of sightings .
 It also had to have good weather, the necessary housing and fuel supplies, and an eightyfive-hundred-foot runway . The plane had to be able to land safely on the runway .
 None of the air force bases met the security requirements, although, for a time, Edwards Air Force Base was considered . Edwards was considered as a possible replacement base .
 Remote location explained as necessary to reduce interference from outside sources . The remote location was explained by the remote location of the facility .
 Construction began in September 1960, several months after the CIA U-2 operation closed down . Construction began several months before the CIA closed down.
 A new water well was drilled, but the site still lacked anything but the basics . The site still lacks basic water supplies . A new well well well has been drilled in the area .
 This was built between September 7 and November 15, 1960, and required some 25,000 yards of concrete . This is the largest concrete structure in the history of the World War II era .
 By early 1962, a tank farm with a storage capability of 1,320,000 gallons was completed . The tank farm was completed in early 1962 .
 Three surplus navy hangars were obtained, moved to Groom Lake, then reassembled at the north end of the facility . The hangars are located in the north part of the site .
 18 miles of highway leading into the site were resurfaced to provide access to the site . To provide access, the highway was resurfaced in order to make it easier .
 CIA ran into a legal problem with the construction work of Area 51 . The Archangel from Area 51 59 . Area 51 is located in Area 51's headquarters .
 Nevada law required that the names of all contractor personnel who stayed in the state for more than forty-eight hours be reported to state authorities . Nevada law requires that all contractors who stay in state for longer than 48 hours must be reported .
 Listing the personnel and the companies working on the project would reveal the existence of Oxcart . Listing those involved would reveal that Oxcart was working on a project .
 The CIA general counsel discovered a loop-hole—government employees were exempt . Government employees are exempt from the program .
 If any questions were raised, it could truthfully be said that only government employees worked at the site . Only government employees were there at the time .
 By August 1961, the basic facilities had been completed to support the initial flight tests . The basic facilities were completed a year after work began .
 Groom Lake was transformed from a ramshackle collection of hangars and trailers in the desert into a state-of-the-art flight test center . Work would continue for another three years .
 At this same time, the radar test program on the A-1l mock-up had been underway .
 By the time the work was completed in mid-1961, it was found that most of the radar return came from the vertical stabilizers, the engine inlet, and the forward sides of the nacelles . By the end of the work, it had been found that
 The edges of the chines and wings, as well as the vertical stabilizers, were made of a radar-absorbing laminated plastic . The edge of the wings and chines were made out of the same plastic .
 This was the first time plastic had been used as a structural material . The first time the material had been made into a structural structure .
 It would have to work from standing still on the runway up to a speed of over Mach 3 at 100,000 feet . The plane would need to be able to fly at Mach 3 .
 Johnson was never convinced that a capsule ejection system, such as that on the B-58 or XB-70, was needed . Johnson was not convinced that such a system would be needed . The capsule ejector system was never needed .
 The pilot would be wearing a pressure suit, which would provide protection from wind blast and heat . The suit would be worn by the pilot to protect him from the wind and heat of the wind .
 The completion date had slipped to December 22, 1961, with the first flight set for February 27, 1962 . The first flight was scheduled to take place on February 22, 1960 .
 This would allow flight tests up to a speed of Mach 1. and 50,000 feet . It would allow test flights of up to Mach 1,500 feet and Mach 1m .
 At Burbank, the first A-12, Article 121, was undergoing final checkout and tests . Article 121 is being tested for the first time at Burbank Airport .
 By sunrise, the convoy was out on the desert and away from prying eyes . The convoy was headed for the desert in the early hours of the day .
 There was a final delay -- the sealing compound had failed to stick to the fuel tank's interior . There was also a delay—the sealing compound failed to adhere to the inside of the tank .
 The A-12 was ready to test its wings for the first time . It was the first of its kind to take off from the ground .
 Lockheed test pilot Louis W Schalk was selected to make the first flight . Schalk became the first person to make a test flight in the first mission .
 With the center of gravity aft, it matched the A-12's expected handling characteristics . The center of the gravity aft of the plane matched that of the aircraft .
 The prototype A-12 was unpainted and unmarked, with no national insignia, no U.S. Air Force insignia . No civilian N-number, not even an article number, was even listed .
 For this test, the A-12's stability augmentation system was left disconnected . For the test, it was also left disconnected from the system .
 Because of its design, the A-12 was inherently unstable under some flight conditions, the SAS was necessary to keep the plane under control . The SAS was needed to keep control of the plane .
 The Archangel from Area 51 takes off the A-12 in Area 51 . Area 51 is the first time Area 51 has been in the air .
 As it did, the plane wallowed into the air, the wings rocking from side to side, and the nose high . The plane was flying in the air at the time of the crash .
 As it touched down on the lake bed, the wheels kicked up a huge cloud of dust, hiding the aircraft . The plane touched down in a lake bed in the early morning hours .
 Schalk radioed an answer, but the antenna was on the plane's underside and he could not be heard . He radioed a reply, but it was not clear whether he could hear .
 Once the A-12 slowed, Schalk turned and the aircraft emerged from the dust cloud . Once the plane was stopped, the aircraft was able to reach altitude .
 The plane remained aloft for some forty minutes, with the landing gear left down to avoid retraction problems . The landing gear was left down in order to avoid any retraction issues .
 Several fuselage and wing fillet panels began falling off the plane . The plane's landing gear retracted and it accelerated .
 The loss of the skin panels was solved by filling the cavities with steel wool . The cavities were filled by steel wool instead .
 The CIA director, John McCone, sent a telegram of congratulations to Johnson . The new CIA director sent a congratulatory telegram .
 In late 1962, three more Lockheed test pilots joined the program—William C Park, Robert Gilliland, and James D Eastham .
 The early flights tested aircraft systems, the inertial navigation system, and midair refueling . The test flights were the first of its kind .
 This was done using KC-135Q tankers of the 903d Air Refuelling Squadron . This is done using tankers used to refuel the aircraft .
 Because the J58 engines were not yet installed, little could be done in the way of high-speed flight testing . The J58 engine has not yet been installed, so little has been done .
 The CIA pressed Lockheed to make a Mach 2 flight, arguing that if the J75-powered F-106 could reach Mach 2, the A-12 should be able to do the same . The CIA says Mach 2 is a step up to Mach 2 .
 More A-12s are being delivered to Groom Lake . The A-11s are undergoing flight testing in the area .
 The Oxcart program received a boost during the summer of 1962 when CIA U-2s discovered the deployment of SA-2 SAMs in Cuba . The program was a success story for the CIA .
 CIA Director McCone asked if the A-12 could take over the Cuban overflights . CIA director McCone said the A.12 could be used to intercept overflights from Cuba .
 The A-12 was still at too early a point in the flight-test program to consider such a mission . The mission would be too early to consider a mission, the Pentagon says .
 Despite the added A-12s now available, the test program was still handicapped by the delay of the J58 engines . The test program has been hampered by the delayed arrival of the new engines .
 "Due to various engine difficulties we have not yet reached design speed and altitude. Furthermore, due to various engines difficulties we are not yet reaching design speed or altitude."
 First J58 finally delivered to Groom Lake and installed in Article 121 . J58 was the first J58 to be delivered to the UK .
 The small-scale, wind-tunnel model did not adequately predict the internal airflow . The model was used to predict internal airflow in the wind tunnel .
 As an interim measure, an inlet access panel was removed during ground tests . The inlet Access Panel has been removed as a precaution .
 By the end of January, ten J58 engines had been delivered and were being installed in the A-12s . The J58 engine has been installed in all the aircraft .
 Recruitment of CIA pilots had begun even before the first A-12 flight . CIA pilots were recruited by the CIA in the 1970s .
 Oxcart pilots would need remarkable skill, due to the performance characteristics of the A-12 and the demands of flying secret intelligence missions . The Oxcart would need to be able to fly secret missions .
 Initial criteria included experience in high-performance aircraft, emotional stability, and good self-motivation . The initial criteria included . experience in . high performance aircraft .
 Initial list was reduced by psychological assessments, medical exams, and refinement of the criteria . The initial list was further reduced by medical exams and psychological assessments .
 William L Skliar, Kenneth S Collins, Walter L Ray, Dennis B Sullivan, and Alonzo J Walter. Walter . Walter is the author of the book, "Alonzo" Walter .
 Skliar was an Air Force Test Pilot School graduate . He was assigned to the Armament Development Center at Eglin Air Force Base . The group was a mixed group .
 Like the CIA U-2 pilots, they were sheep dipped, leaving the air force to become civilians . The CIA U.2 pilots left the U.S. Air Force to be civilians .
 Their time with the CIA would be counted toward their rank and retirement . They would be able to leave the CIA if they left the CIA .
 They made several flights in the A-12T trainer trainer . They then began making training and test flights in single-seat single-seats . The plane was the first to fly in the trainer .
 Each pilot had a personal call sign— ""Dutch"" followed by a two-digit number . The pilot's call sign was ""Dutch" followed by the two digit digit number .
 This required a large number of engineers, who were also recruited in a clandestine manner . This required many of the engineers to be recruited in clandestine manner. This required them to be engineers .
 He would be flown to a site, work there all week, then be flown back to Burbank on Friday . He would work at a site in Burbank, California, then fly home on Friday to work there .
 In some cases, engineers were not told what they would be doing until they actually saw the A-12 for the first time . Engineers were not even told what to do with the project until they saw the aircraft .
 The A-12 was a large, loud, and distinctive-looking aircraft . It was one of the most famous aircraft in the world .
 During the early test flights, the CIA tried to limit the number of people who saw the aircraft . The CIA is still trying to find out how much of the aircraft can be seen .
 All those at Groom Lake not connected with Oxcart program were herded into the mess hall before the plane took off .
 This was soon dropped as it disrupted activities and was impractical with the large number of flights . This was dropped because it was too disruptive and impractical to fly in .
 The sightings could range across the southwest United States . Sightings away from Groom Lake were also a problem .
 Although the airspace above Groom Lake was closed, it was near busy Nellis Air Force Base . The airspace above the lake was closed .
 An air force pilot was flying to a gunnery range in the northwest area of the 64 DARK EAGLES base .
 He could see the shape of the shape and realized it was some type of experimental aircraft . The aircraft was an experimental aircraft, the pilot said .
 After they landed, a general told all of them that they were to say nothing . A general told them not to say anything after they landed .
 NASA test pilots flew numerous X-15 training and support flights to tracking sites and dry lake beds across California and Nevada . NASA test pilot test pilots fly numerous training flights to training sites .
 After landing, he was told what he had seen was vital to U.S. security . After landing in the United States, he said it was important to the nation's security .
 At 5:30 A.M., an air force captain was checking the main runway at Edwards for any debris before flight operations began for the day .
 Its shape was so unusual that he first thought it was two planes in close formation . The shape of the plane is so unusual it was mistaken for a formation formation .
 Kenneth Collins was flying a subsonic training-test flight in Article 123 . He was flying an Article 123 aircraft . Collins was a member of the Air Force .
 As he descended into clouds, the pilot-static tube became plugged with ice, which caused the instruments to display an incorrect airspeed . The pilot's airspeed was incorrect because of the ice .
 The years 1963 and 1964 were spent bringing the A-12 to Mach 3-plus speeds and operational status . The years were spent developing the plane's capabilities . The project was completed in 1964 .
 Plane would take off from Groom Lake, then fly north to Wendover, Utah, and onward to the Canadian border . Plane would fly north from Utah to Canada, then head west to Canada .
 As the A-12 flew back, it would accelerate to the test speed, then decelerate and land . It would then accelerate again, decelerating and landing in the air .
 If trouble appeared, at least the plane would be flying toward home at thirtyfive miles per minute, rather than away .
 The test flights soon showed that the pneumatic system could not compensate for atmospheric changes . The test flight was the first of its kind in the world .
 The spike disrupted the airflow to the engine, which stopped producing thrust and began overheating . The outof-position spike disrupted airflow to engine .
 The loss of thrust on one side caused the A-12 to violently yaw toward the dead engine . The plane was forced to yaw to the ground after the engine failed .
 Unstart would have to be solved before the A-12 could fly in hostile airspace . As with the U-2's early flameout problems, the unstart would be solved .
 Lockheed engineers tried everything they could think of to cure the problem . Lockheed engineers say they are still trying to find a way to get the problem back on track .
 Manual trim of the fuel flow, spike position, and bypass door position were speeded up . The manual trim was also sped up for the car .
 Johnson decided to scrap the existing pneumatic system and replace it with an electronic unit . The new system will be powered by an electronic device .
 During a ground test, the pilot used the radio; this caused a false signal in the electronics and the spike retracted . This caused the pilot to use the radio, causing the spike to retract .
 Once the electronic interference problem was solved, the system proved far more effective, although at the price of much greater maintenance time . The system proved to be more effective at the time, but at the cost of more maintenance time.
 J58 engines' main shaft had to be redesigned to compensate for the high temperatures . The J58 engine's main shaft was designed to withstand the heat of the summer .
 On one flight, the control stick became so hot Park had to change hands to keep from burning himself . Park's control stick was so hot that he had to turn hands to stop from burning .
 By late 1963, the edges of the chines, the spikes, and the cockpit area were painted in a heat-resistant black paint . The chines and spikes were painted with heat resistant black paint by late 1963 .
 Finding paint that could withstand exposure to high temperatures and fuel was difficult . Finding paint could be difficult, like everything else about the plane .
 Nuts, bolts, clamps, and other debris were sometimes left in the nacelles during construction .
 The engines would suck rocks, asphalt pieces, and other debris off taxiways and runways . The engines also would also suck rocks and asphalt pieces from taxiways .
 After 15 months of painful flight testing, the A-12 was ready to attempt Mach 3 . The A-2012 was designed to be able to reach Mach 3.5 mph .
 The flight was made on July 20, 1963, by Lockheed test pilot Louis Schalk . The flight is the first of its kind in the history .
 This was much more demanding than a brief dash, as the heat would soak into the plane's structure . The heat would be more intense than a short dash, and would cause the plane to suffer .
 Lockheed test pilot James Eastham made the first sustained Mach 3 flight on February 3, 1964 . Lockheed test pilots made the flight on Mach 3 in 1964 .
 The plan envisioned a peak speed of Mach 3.16, which would be held for ten minutes . The plan was intended to hold the speed of 10 minutes . It would be the first time the plan has been proposed .
 Eastham cut the throttles and landed at Groom Lake, the end of what seemed to be a completely successful flight . The plane made its way to the lake and landed in Groom lake .
 Nearly all hydraulic fluid had been lost from the four flight-control systems . Only one-half gallon remained out of the original seven and a half gallons of hydraulic fluid .
 Test pilots insisted a hydraulic fluid quantity gauge be added before another Mach 3 flight was made . The test pilots insisted the hydraulic fluid quantities gauge was added before the flight .
 The A-12 took off at first light with Eastham at the controls for a thirtyminute flight . Easthams was the first pilot to take off in the first light of the day .
 During the Mach 3 run, no leaks appeared and communications checks were successful . No leaks appeared during the mission .
 As the A-12 turned onto the downwind leg, the left hydraulic system failed . As the plane made its descent into the tunnel, the hydraulic system malfunctioned .
 A postflight inspection found that the brake manufacturer had put an aluminum plug in the hydraulic system . The plug was found to be aluminum in a hydraulic system in the brake system .
 Johnson realized the basic A-12 airframe had a tremendous growth potential . The Oxcart program got under way in 1973 .
 The aircraft would use its Mach 3 speed to fly out to incoming Soviet bombers . The aircraft could then be destroyed well before they neared their targets .
 The plane was the ultimate expression of a trend in fighter development under way since the early 1950s . This plane was built in the 1950s as part of a series of fighter aircraft .
 The traditional fighter, with an emphasis on maneuverability, had been replaced by all-missile-armed interceptors . The interceptors are now known as all-Missile interceptors, the U.S. says .
 They were not meant to attack other fighters, but rather large, nonmancuvering bombers . They were meant to be used to carry out attacks on other fighters .
 It was widely accepted that any future war would be a nuclear ""high noon"" with the Soviet Union . Any future war with the USSR would be 'high noon' with a nuclear war .
 Fighter aircraft were oriented toward either nuclear delivery or interception . Aircraft were aimed at intercepting or nuclear delivery .
 Ultimately, manned aircraft would be replaced by guided missiles . Ultimately, it was thought that manned aircraft could be replaced .
 On March 16 and 17, 1960, Johnson had met with Air Force Brig. Brig. Gen. John S. Johnson . Air Force Secretary of State John D.C. met with Johnson on March 16, 17 and 17 .
 Howell M Estes Jr. and Courtlandt Perkins, Air Force Secretary for Research and Development, discuss the interceptor . Estes, Perkins, and Perkins, discuss interceptor technology .
 On October 31, 1960, Lockheed received a contract to build three of the Improved Manned Interceptors . Lockheed received the contract for the three aircraft . Lockheed built the first of the three Improved Interceptors in 1960 .
 The A-12's nose and forward chines were cut back and replaced by a bulky-looking radome and two infrared scanners . The plane's nose was replaced with a bulky looking radome with infrared scanners instead of a nose .
 The aircraft carried a Hughes pulse-doppler AN/ASG-18 radar and fire-control system . The system could detect and track aircraft flying at low altitude and long range .
 The aircraft carried AIM-47 Falcon missiles with either a high-explosive or a low-yield nuclear warhead . The aircraft was armed with either an explosive or a nuclear weapon .
 The fuselage underside of the plane was redesigned to accommodate the three missile bays . It is the first time the fuselage has been designed to accommodate three missile bay areas .
 A second seat for a radar intercept officer was added to the Q-bay behind the pilot's cockpit . Radar intercept officer will be in the cockpit for radar intercepts during the mission .
 In early January 1961, Johnson proposed two more A-12 derivatives: the B-12 strategic bomber and the R-12 reconnaissance aircraft . Johnson proposed the two more in January 1961 .
 The B-12 design envisioned the nuclear weapons being carried in fuselage bays . The design was designed to carry nuclear weapons in the fuselage .
 The B-12 could carry four short-range attack missiles, six strike missiles, or twelve guided bombs . It could carry 12 guided bombs or four short range attack missiles .
 Targets in Eastern Europe and the western Soviet Union could be hit . Targets include command posts, MiG 25 air bases, missile sites, submarine pens, and SAM sites .
 For the R-12 reconnaissance version, the weapons would be replaced by cameras, radar, and electronic intelligence equipment . The weapons would replace the weapons with cameras and radar equipment .
 Internal stowage of weapons and reconnaissance equipment would keep weight down and preserve the low radar cross section . Internal stowedage of the weapons and . reconnaissance equipment kept weight down .
 A mock-up of the ""Reconnaissance Strike-71" was inspected by the air force on June 4, 1962 . A mock up of the strike-71 was inspected in June .
 The Archangel from Area 51 69 came from two directions . Area 51 was attacked by Area 51 from two sides of the war zone .
 Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara and his ""whiz kids" saw no need for manned bombers . More important, Defense Secretary McNamara saw no use for manned bomber bombers .
 In the coming years, the entire B-47 force, as well as early model B-52s, would be retired . The XB-70 program would be reduced to an aeronautical research program .
 Externally, the plane resembled the A-12, with the nose slightly less pointed and the tail cone extended to hold more fuel . The plane was developed in the 1960s .
 The A-12 was designed for clandestine overflights, with the minimal payload of a single camera . The plane was designed to carry out clandestine missions .
 The nose was removable and could carry either a high-resolution radar or a panoramic camera . The nose could also be used to carry a camera or a radar camera .
 Additional cameras or reconnaissance equipment could be carried in the chines . Additional cameras could be used to carry out reconnaissance .
 By this time, the A-12 had made its first flights and was about to begin its journey toward Mach 3. The A.12 had already made its maiden flights .
 The first YF-12A, as the interceptor, was also ncaring completion . The interceptor was also known as the YF12A .
 Final assembly was completed, and it made its first flight on August 7 .
 The pilot was Eastham, who had written the manual and had made flight tests of the radar and missile systems in a modified B-58 . The pilot of the plane is believed to be the first person to fly the missile system .
 Despite all that had happened, the secrecy held. Despite all the crash of Article 123, the achievement of Mach 3 .
 The A-12 was the only aircraft capable of Mach 3 cruise flight . Its technology would be very valuable for the emerging U.S. supersonic-transport program .
 Lyndon B Johnson had been briefed on the A-12 project a week after becoming president .
 He directed a plan be developed for an announcement in the spring of 1964 . The announcement would be made in spring 1964 .
 The expected Republican candidate was Barry Goldwater, a right-wing senator who had long accused the Democrats of being soft on defense and communism . Goldwater was expected to win the presidency in 1964 .
 At a February 29 meeting of the National Security Council, the members were briefed on the A-12 by McCone and McNamara . McCone: "The mission is a very important mission for the United States"
 The United States has successfully developed an advanced experimental jet aircraft . The A-ll has been tested in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles per hour and at altitudes in excess of 70,000 feet .
 The performance of the A-ll far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today, says the U.S. Air Force .
 The development of this aircraft has been made possible by major advances in aircraft technology . Aircraft technology has been developed for both military and commercial applications . The development was made possible with the help of major advances of technology .
 Several A-ll aircraft are now being flight tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California . The planes are being tested at the base .
 The existence of this program is being disclosed today to permit the orderly exploitation of this advanced technology in our military and commercial program . The existence has been disclosed today .
 This was the original designation of the Oxcart, before the antiradar modifications were made . The Oxcart was originally known as the British Oxcart .
 The personnel at Groom Lake knew an announcement was near but did not know the exact timing . The announcement is expected to be made at the end of the day .
 No A-12 or YF-12A had ever operated from Edwards Air Force Base . The two YF12s were hurriedly flown over by Schalk and Park . The planes were the first to fly from Edwards .
 The hot exhaust was blown into the hangar and triggered the fire extinguisher valves . As they did, the hot exhaust blew in the hangar, triggering the extinguishers .
 The third YF-12A made its first flight on March 13, 1964, and was soon transferred to Edwards . The aircraft was the first of its kind to fly in the world .
 It proved successful in launching missiles at Mach 3 and intercepting the target aircraft . The U.S. Air Force launched the missiles in 2010 .
 McNamara had no more interest in air defenses than he did in manned bombers . But this was already a dead issue, he says .
 His ""cost-effectiveness"" studies concluded that the Soviet bomber force was a minimal threat . His studies conclude that the Soviets were not a threat .
 Over the next several years, McNamara withheld funding to build ninety-three improved F-12B interceptors . Funding had IAH-OL /*°°U OtaUliiL’s®, UUL L1110 Wa. vfliV*4V*
 The existing F-101, F-102, and F-106 air-defense squadrons, radar sites, and SAM sites were closed over the next several years . The existing squadrons were closed .
 The Soviets, on the other hand, were starting an aggressive bomber-development program . The Soviets were starting a aggressive bomber development program .
 The F-12B was designed to intercept the Tu-22 Backfire and Tu-160 Blackjack . This resulted in the aircraft being used by the U.S. Air Force in the 1980s .
 The prototype SR-71 was delivered to Palmdale, California, on October 29, 1964 . The SR71 was a prototype of the SR71 .
 It made its first flight on December 22, 1964, with Robert Gilliland at the controls . The first flight took place in 1964 .
 Later that same day, another member of the A-12 family also made its first, secret, flight .
 President Johnson's announcements created an unusual security situation . President Johnson made the announcement at the time of the announcement . Johnson's announcement created an unprecedented security situation in the country .
 All those involved were told of the coming A-Il announcement and warned to keep the A-12 separate . To maintain the secret, all those involved in the project were told .
 From 1963 and into 1965, they had a half bare-metal, half black finish . From 1963 to 1965, the cars had a bare metal, black finish finish .
 The SR-71 made its first flight in an all-black finish with white lettering . The plane made its debut flight in a black finish . It was the first time a plane had a black interior with white letters .
 This improved temperature control, as the black paint radiated heat better than the bare metal . The black paint was used to control the temperature of the vehicle .
 It's nearly impossible to tell the difference between an A-12 and an SR-71 at any distance . It also meant that it also meant it was difficult to distinguish between the two aircraft .
 He had completed a high-Mach check flight in a new aircraft, Article 133 . He was on approach to the runway when he was killed .
 The crash traced to the right outboard roll and pitch control, which had frozen up . The crash was traced to a frozen outboard control .
 Fidel Castro had been threatening to attack the U-2s making overflights of Cuba . Castro had threatened to attack U.2s if they made overflights .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested to President Johnson that a diplomatic note be sent to the Cubans, warning against any attempt to shoot down the planes . Rusk: "A diplomatic note was sent to Cuba warning against such an attempt"
 In reality, there was little besides diplomatic warnings and veiled threats to protect the U-2s . The U.2s were protected by the U.S. Air Force .
 Acting CIA Director Gen. Park's crash delayed the plan for a time, but on August 5, acting CIA Director, Gen. Gen. Kim Jong-ho, said the plan was still in place .
 Marshall S Carter, ordered that Skylark have an emergency operational readiness by November 5, 1964 . Carter ordered the aircraft to be ready for emergency operations by that date .
 To meet the deadline, the five CIA pilots would have to be qualified to Mach 2. speed and 80,000 feet altitude . The deadline would be set at around 8:30 a.m. ET .
 They decided the first few Cuban overflights could be made safely without full ECM equipment . The first few overflights were made safely with the help of Cuban officials .
 After completing training missions that simulated Cuban overflights, the CIA A-12 unit was judged ready to undertake Skylark . The CIA unit was ordered to fly the aircraft .
 It would take two-weeks' notice before an overflight could be made . It would be done with fewer pilots and aircraft than had been planned .
 "The next step was to convert this emergency capability into a sustained program," says President Obama . The next step is to convert the program into a permanent program, he says .
 Training flights conducted to determine range and fuel consumption of the A-12 . Training flights were conducted to finish qualification of the pilots .
 By the end of 1964, five pilots and five aircraft were ready to undertake sustained Cuban overflights . The Cuban Air Force was ready to fly over Cuba .
 As Skylark was becoming operational, Lockheed test pilots were bringing the A-12 up to its full design capability . Test pilots were working on the new aircraft to bring it to full design capabilities .
 On January 27, 1965, one of the test aircraft made the first high-speed, long-range flight . The test aircraft was a prototype of the Air Force One .
 The mission took one hour and forty minutes and reached speeds above Mach 3.1, at between 75,600 and 80,000 feet . The mission was carried out at 75,000 to 80,600 feet at a time .
 Lockheed-operated Constellation airliners made daily flights between Burbank and Groom Lake . Lockheed operated Constellation planes from Burbank, California, in the 1950s . Lockheed-owned Constellation aircraft were used to transport passengers to the lake .
 The original U-2 facility at the edge of the lake bed was much expanded . Four new, larger hangars were added to the facility . The original facility was built in the 1960s .
 A movie theater replaced the projector on a mess hall table, and a baseball diamond was built . Conditions at Groom Lake were more livable when the lake was cleared .
 The hangars provided protection against the sun and blowing dust, as well as hiding the aircraft from the prying cameras of Soviet reconnaissance satellites .
 The year 1965 also saw recruitment and training of the second group of CIA A-12 pilots . The year was also the year when the CIA recruited and trained the second generation of CIA pilots .
 XP-59A pilots of two decades before, they lived a unique existence . As had had two decades earlier, they had lived a life of their own .
 The pilots were flying the fastest airplane in the world, but not even their wives knew what they were doing . They were flying a plane that took off from the ground in California .
 Like the Bell pilots, they used symbols to define their secret brotherhood . The Bell pilots used symbols like the Bell brothers to define themselves .
 Weeks dubbed it "Cygnus" after the constellation of the swan . Weeks later dubbed it after seeing the A-12 after seeing it in the sky .
 An emblem showed a swan-shaped dragster and the words ""1129th SAS The Road. The Road" The emblem was created by the SAS .
 CIA Director McCone warned McNamara that reconnaissance operations over Communist China were facing increased threats . On March 18, 1965, the CIA director warned the U.S. faced increased threats from Communist China .
 Since 1962, four U-2s flown by Nationalist Chinese pilots had been shot down over the mainland . Four of them were shot down by Chinese pilots .
 It was decided to start construction of the facilities needed for the A-12 on Okinawa . It is decided to build the facilities on the island of Okinawa .
 Decision to overfly China could be made only by the president . This stopped short of deploying the A-12, however .
 Four days later, the A-12 operational plan, code-named ""Black Shield,"" was ready . Four days after, the plan was approved, the U.S. military says .
 Initially, three A-12s would be deployed for a sixty-day period, twice a year . Initially, the aircraft would have been deployed for sixty-days . The first three were deployed in the 1970s .
 The aircraft would fly from Kadena Air Base on Okinawa . 74 DARK EAGLES later, a permanent detachment would be established at Kadena . A permanent detachment was established .
 Reconnaissance operations over North Vietnam also being threatened . Reconnaissance missions were also threatened by North Vietnam .
 General William Westmoreland wanted to attack the sites but was ordered not to by McNamara . McNamara ordered the attack on the sites in Vietnam . General McNamara also ordered the U.S. troops not to attack .
 McNamara asked the under secretary of the air force on June 3, 1965, about using the A-12 to replace the U-2 missions . Despite his belief that North Vietnam would not use the SAMs, McNamara said he believed it would not .
 He was told the A-12 could begin operations over North Vietnam as soon as the final qualification flights had been made .
 More U.S. aircraft were lost, and it was clear the days of the U-2 over North Vietnam were numbered . The U.2 aircraft was lost in Vietnam in the early 1960s .
 Originally designed for the U-2, the H camera had a sixty-inch focal-length lens . The H camera was originally designed to be used by the U.2 . The U.S. H camera has a sixty inch lens .
 It used Kodak 3414 film, which had a low ASA 8 rating and a frame size of four and a half inches square . The film was shot on Kodak film, with a frame frame size 4.5 inches square.
 This had a forty-eight-inch focal length and carried a seven-hundred-foot-long roll of film that could provide 1,675 frames . The camera was carried with a roll of camera that could be used for 1,700 frames .
 Both the H camera and the KA-102A used a motion compensator to prevent the A-12's high speed from blurring the photos . Both the cameras were set to take photos with a high speed camera .
 These were to prove aircraft and system reliability at speeds of Mach 3.05, altitudes of 76,000 feet, at a range of 2,300 nautical miles, with three aerial refuelings . The tests will be carried out at altitudes and altitudes up to 76,
 The wiring could not withstand the conditions, which caused malfunctions in the inlet controls, communications equipment, ECM systems, and cockpit instrumentation .
 The problems, severe enough to threaten the Black Shield schedule, were traced to poor Lockheed maintenance . The problems threaten to threaten Black Shield's schedule .
 On August 3, 1965, CIA Deputy for The Archangel from Area 51 75 Technology John Paragosky met with Kelly Johnson . Kelly Johnson was a CIA deputy for The Archangelangel .
 They had a ""frank discussion” on what was needed to fix the shortcomings of the shortcomings . They had to talk about what they were doing to fix them .
 Johnson decided he would have to personally supervise activities at Groom Lake on a fulltime basis . The following day, Johnson began working at the site . Johnson decided to supervise the lake site .
 The official history said Johnson's ""firm and effective management"" put Black Shield back on schedule . Johnson's "firm, effective management" put the team back on track .
 During the final qualification flights, the A-12 reached a speed of Mach 3.29 and an altitude of 90,000 feet . During the first qualifying flights, it reached speeds of Mach .29 and altitude .
 U-2 performance level is more than four times the speed and three miles more altitude . The mission is probably less risky than its first deployment, says U.2 .
 The committee refused but ordered that a quick-reaction capability be established . The committee ordered that that was established but refused .
 This would allow the A-12s to deploy within twenty-one days of an order, any time after January 1, 1966 . This would be the first time they could be deployed in the country since 1966 .
 CIA Director McCone ordered the Office of Security to investigate the possibility that it had been sabotage . The CIA director ordered the investigation into the possibility of sabotage .
 The gyro manufacturer had earlier warned such an accident was possible . No evidence of the accident was found .
 Park was involved in a crash last year, but no word leaked out about the accident . Park crashed into the median median median last year . No word was released about the crash .
 The CIA, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board all favored the move . The State and Defense Departments opposed it .
 The A-12's supporters argued that there was an urgent need for intelligence data on any possible Chinese moves to enter Vietnam War .
 Those opposed to deployment felt the need was not sufficient to justify the risks to the aircraft . Those opposed felt the political risks of basing it on Okinawa were too high .
 Japan had powerful left-wing groups who were protesting U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Japan's government had a history of anti-Vietnam protests .
 President Johnson refused to approve deployment of the troops in 1966 . On August 12, 1966, President Johnson made a decision to refuse deployment .
 The new plan cut the original twenty-one-day deployment time nearly in half . The new deployment time was cut to 20-21 days .
 The first loads of personnel and equipment would leave Groom Lake for Kadena on the day deployment was approved . The first deployment would be approved on the same day .
 On the fifth day, the first A-12 would take off on the five-hour-and-thirty-four-minute, 6,673mile flight . The first flight will take off from New York to New York City .
 The second A-12 would follow on the seventh day, and the third on the ninth day, respectively . The A-11 would follow in the next day .
 Two A-12s would be ready for an emergency overflight eleven days after approval was given . Air Force approval was approved for the first time in 2011 .
 A Skylark mission over Cuba could be flown seven days after the go-ahead . The mission is scheduled to take off from Cuba seven days later .
 He flew north to Yellowstone National Park; turned east to Bismark, North Dakota, and Duluth, Minnesota . Then flew south to Atlanta, Georgia, and on to Tampa, Florida, where he went to Tampa .
 He turned west, flying across the country to Portland, Oregon, then south to Nevada . He then flew south to Oregon .
 He turned west, passing Memphis before finally landing back at Groom Lake .
 The flight covered 10,198 miles, involved four flights across the United States, several in-flight refuelings, and still had taken only six hours . The flight took just six hours to complete .
 On January 5, 1967, Walter Ray was flying a training mission in Article 125 . He was flying an Article 125 aircraft . The mission was a training exercise for the Air Force .
 The plane ran out of fuel about seventy miles from Groom Lake . As he descended, the fuel gauge malfunctioned, and the plane was running out .
 The wreckage was found on January 6, and Ray's body was recovered the next day . Ray's remains were found in the wreckage of the plane that crashed in 2010 .
 The A-12s were grounded pending an investigation of the fuel gauge and ejector seat failures . They were grounded until an investigation is complete .
 The third and final group of CIA A-12 pilots began training at Groom Lake in the spring of 1967 . The final group began training in 1967 .
 In May of 1967, the roadblock to the Black Shield deployment finally ended .
 Fears grew that surface-to-surface missiles might be introduced into North Vietnam . Fears began to grow that surface to surface missiles might have been introduced into Vietnam .
 Concerns that conventional reconnaissance aircraft lacked the capability to detect such weapons . Aggravating matters were concerns that conventional aircraft lacked capability to . detect such . weapons .
 The A-12's camera is far superior to those on the U-2, and that the plane is less vulnerable, officials say . State and Defense representatives who had opposed deployment began to reconsider .
 President Johnson also raised the issue at President Johnson's ""Tuesday lunch"" on May 16 .
 On May 22, the first A-12, Article 131, was flown by Vojvodich from Groom Lake to Kadena in six hours and six minutes . Article 131 is Article 131 and Article 131 of Article 131. Article 131 was the first to be flown from G
 Following a precautionary landing at Wake Island, it continued on the following day . The plane continued its flight to Wake Island the next day .
 By May 29, 1967, the A-12 Oxcarts were ready to make their first overflight . The first flight was the first of its kind . The Oxcart's first flight took place in 1966 .
 Project Headquarters in Washington, D.C., had been monitoring the weather over North Vietnam . Project Headquarters was monitoring weather conditions in Vietnam .
 The weather was judged favorable, and the A-12 unit was ordered to make an overflight the next day . At the May 30 mission alert briefing, the weather was deemed favorable .
 Vojvodich was selected as the primary A-12 pilot with Layton as backup pilot . Layton was the backup pilot in the A.12 aircraft .
 The two planes, a primary and backup A-12, were inspected, the systems were checked, and the camera was loaded with film . The cameras were loaded up with film and the film was loaded .
 Like the CIA U-2s, these planes carried no national markings, only a black paint finish and a small five-digit serial number on the tail fins . The planes were painted black and had a small serial number .
 A second review of the weather was made 12 hours before the planned takeoff time . The plane was scheduled to take off at 11:30 a.m. ET .
 The two pilots were given a detailed route briefing during the early evening . The forecast continued to be favorable .
 On the morning of May 31, the pilots received a final preflight briefing . The condition of the two aircraft was covered, last-minute weather and intelligence reviewed .
 At H minus two hours, a final ""go-no-go" review of weather was made by headquarters . The final review of the weather was carried out at H minus 2 hours .
 This covered not only North Vietnam, but also refueling areas and take78 DARK EAGLES off and landing sites . This is the first time the U.S. has flown over to Vietnam .
 After all its testing, the A-12 had never flown in the rain . Ironically, after all its tests, the plane had never been tested in the wet .
 The target area weather was clear, however, and the decision was made to carry out the flight . The decision to fly was made after the weather proved clear .
 With the final authorization, Vojvodich underwent a medical examination, got into his pressure suit and was taken out to the primary aircraft .
 If any problem appeared in the preflight checkout, the backup plane could be ready to make the overflight one hour later . The backup plane was ready to fly one hour after the plane was checked in .
 Finally, with rain still falling, the A-12 taxied out, ignited its afterburner, and took off into the threatening skies .
 The first went over Haiphong and Hanoi and left North Vietnam's airspace near Dien Bien Phu . The first flight left the country's airspace over the border with Vietnam .
 Vojvodich refueled over Thailand, then made a second pass over the Demilitarized Zone . The Russian-built aircraft made a refueling pass over Thailand .
 The runs had been made at a speed of Mach 3.3. and an altitude of 80,000 feet . The runs were made at the height of 70,000ft. and at a height of 3,500ft.
 The mission had gone unnoticed by the North Vietnamese and Chinese . No radar signals were detected; the mission was undetected by the two countries .
 Vojvodich needed three instrument approaches amid driving rain before landing back at Kadena . The landing was the first time the aircraft had landed in the country's history .
 Between May 31 and July 15, a total of fifteen Black Shield missions were alerted . The missions took place between May 31, July 15 and July 16 .
 Four overflights detected radar-tracking signals, but none of the A-12s were fired on . None of the overflights were fire on .
 By mid-July it was clear there were no surface-to-surface missiles in North Vietnam . North Vietnam has been hit by missile attacks in the past .
 Early overflights showed how good the A-12 was, and the hesitation to use it ended . The early overflights show how good it was .
 Between August 16 and the end of the year, twenty-six missions were alerted and fifteen were flown . Fifteen missions were flown in total .
 A typical Black Shield mission would involve an aerial refueling south of Okinawa soon after takeoff, one or two photo passes, and a second refueling over Thailand before the return to Kadena .
 Some mission profiles required the A-12 to enter Chinese airspace . Due to the plane's huge turning radius, some missions required it to enter China airspace .
 On a single-pass mission, the A-12 would spend only twelve and a half minutes over North Vietnam . A single pass mission would take just over 12 minutes to reach North Vietnam.
 If two passes were made, the A-12 would spend twenty-one and a half minutes in hostile airspace . The plane would spend more than a half an hour in hostile air space .
 The exposed film would be unloaded and placed aboard a special plane for shipment to the processing facility . Once back at Kadena, the exposed film was unloaded and shipped to a processing facility in California .
 By late summer, an air force processing center had been set up in Japan .
 The data would be in the hands of U.S. commanders within twenty-four hours of an overflight . It would also be in hands of United States commanders within 24 hours .
 Despite the speed and altitude of the A-12, the risks of overflights are clear . Despite the speeds and altitudes of the plane, overflights were clear .
 SAM site tracked an A-12 with its acquisition The Archangel from Area 51 79 radar . The Archangel was tracked by an Area 51-79 radar . Area 51 is located in Alaska, Alaska, Nevada .
 The Fan Song guidance radar was unable to gain a lock on the plane, however . The plane was later spotted by the Fan Song radar .
 On October 28, a single SA-2 fired at an A-12 flown by Sullivan . Sullivan was shot by a North Vietnamese SAM site in October . Sullivan says the incident was the result of a single attack .
 The plane's camera photographed the smoke from the site, then the missile's contrail . Plane's camera captured the smoke and contrail of the missile .
 On his first pass, Sullivan noted the plane was being tracked, with two SAM sites preparing to fire . Sullivan also noted that the plane is being tracked by the U.S. Navy .
 On the second pass, as he flew toward Hanoi from the east, the North Vietnamese were ready—at least six SA-2s were fired at the A-12 . On the third pass, the South Vietnam was ready .
 This was the first of many concerted efforts to bring down an A-12/SR-71 . This was one of many attempts to bring it down . The first of a series of attempts to get the plane down was made in the 1970s .
 Unlike a tactical fighter, the A-12 could not evade a missile by maneuvering . Unlike a fighter fighter, it was not able to evade an attack on a missile . It was the first time a fighter jet was able to take off a missile strike .
 When Sullivan landed back at Kadena, a piece of metal had hit the lower right-wing fillet area and become lodged against the wing tank support structure . A post-flight inspection discovered the metal had become lodged in the tank .
 The fragment was not a warhead pellet, but a very small piece of the brass fuze from one of the missiles . The fragments were not warhead pellets, but small pieces of the fuze .
 This was the only hit scored on an A-12 or SR-71 in over one thousand overflights . The only hit was scored in over 1,000 overflights. This was scored on the A-11 or SR71 in more than one thousand flights .
 The new year brought new crises, and the A-12 was in the midst of them . The new president of the U.S. was elected in 2008 . The U.N. State Department of Justice issued a statement welcoming the election .
 There were fears that this was the prelude to full-scale military action, and an A-12 overflight of North Korea was authorized .
 On January 25, the first attempt was made by Weeks, but a problem caused an abort shortly after takeoff . Weeks' first attempt on January 25 was aborted . Weeks: "It's been a long way to go"
 The mission was to locate the ship and then determine if an invasion of South Korea was about to occur . The mission to find the ship was to determine if the invasion was imminent . It was the first time the U.S. troops had been sent to South Korea .
 Murray made a total of four passes over North Korea, from the DMZ to the Yalu River . Murray covered the entire country, covering the entire North Korean border .
 Rusk suggested changes in the flight path before giving his 80-EAGLES approval . Even though he suggested changes, Rusk said he didn't want the plane to fly in the dark .
 Two North Korean overflights were alerted between April 1 and June 9, 1968 . Only the May 8 mission was flown .
 In all, the A-12 made twenty-six overflights of North Vietnam and two of North Korea . In all the overflights were made by the plane over Vietnam and North Korea.
 Starting in November 1965, doubts were expressed about the cost of operating the two separate groups of A-12s and SR-71s . Questions were expressed over the costs of running the two groups .
 It was decided on January 10, 1967, to phase out the A-12 program . After a year or more of debate, it was decided that it would phase out of the program .
 The first four A-12s were to be put in storage in July 1967, another two by December, and the final two by the end of January 1968 . The final two were put into storage in January 1968, with the first two by July 1967 .
 This, it should be noted, was before the A-12 had undertaken a single overflight . This, however, was not the first time the plane had attempted a single flight .
 Once the overflights began, the A-12 demonstrated an exceptional technical capability . The plane's overflights were the first of its kind to carry out missions .
 As the scheduled phaseout date neared, concerns were expressed by high officials . High officials expressed concerns about the planned phase-out date .
 Walt Rostow, the president's special assistant, and several congressmen all expressed doubts about the phaseout . The president's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board and several members of Congress expressed doubts .
 In the meantime, SR-71s began arriving at Kadena, starting in early March 1968 . In March 1968, they began to arrive in Kadena .
 The first SR-71 overflight of North Vietnam was made on March 21, 1968 . The first overflight was made in 1968 . It took place in the early months of that year . It was the first time a plane overflew North Vietnam had flown .
 The A-12 became the backup to the SR-71 . By gradual stages, they took over the Black Shield mission . They took over in gradual stages .
 After the final North Korean overflight on May 8, the unit was told to prepare to return home . The unit was ordered to prepare for its return to North Korea after the mission .
 Defense Secretary Clark Clifford reaffirmed the phaseout decision . Eight days after the final A-12 overflight, the Defense Secretary reaffirmed its decision .
 On May 21, President Johnson agreed that the A-12s would be put into storage . Johnson agreed to put them into storage on May 21 .
 The aircraft at Groom Lake would be placed in storage at Palmdale by June 7 . The aircraft would be put in storage by June 6 .
 The A-12 program suffered its final loss on the eve of its return to the U.S. Virtually on the verge of the return, the program suffered a final loss .
 An engine had been changed, and it had to be tested before the redeployment . It had been tested before being redeployed in the UK .
 The first A-12 to make an overflight, and the last to fly, had its fuel and oil drained . It was the first aircraft to make a flight overflight and was the last one to fly .
 Vice Admiral Rufus L Taylor presented CIA's Intelligence Star for courageous action to Kenneth S Collins, Ronald J Layton, Francis J Murray, Dennis B Sullivan, Mel Vojvodich, and, posthumously, to Jack C Weeks .
 Colonel Hugh C Slater, commander of the Kadena detachment, and his deputy, Col. Col. James C Slater . Col. Slater was in charge of the detachment at the base in Kadena .
 The 1129th Special Activities Squadron and its support units received the United States Air Force Outstanding Unit Award . The unit received the award for its efforts to achieve the U.S. Air Force outstanding unit .
 It covered trouble spots such as North Vietnam, North Korea, the Mideast, Libya, kept watch on Eastern European borders, and tracked Soviet submarines . It also kept watchful eye on Soviet submarines and kept tabs on North Vietnam and North Korea .
 The surviving A-12s and SR-71s were originally to be scrapped, but the air force relented and they were sent to museums . The surviving SR-70s were also sent to be preserved in museums .
 No other Black airplane has posed so great an aerodynamic and engineering challenge . No other aircraft has posed such a challenge as well as aerodynamic challenges .
 The A-12 was the final expression of a trend that had been under way since World War I . Aircraft were trying to evade air defenses by going higher and faster . The plane was the last aircraft to be able to evade defenses .
 B-47s, B-52s, and British V-bombers flew at 50,000 feet and near supersonic speeds . As the Cold War began, they flew at close-range speeds .
 The B-58 raised this to supersonic speeds, while the U-2 could reach altitudes of 70,000-plus feet . The U-58 could reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 Bombers would now have to attack at low altitudes—a few hundred feet above the ground . Bombers now would have to be able to attack in a low-altitude zone .
 The Mach 3 XB-70 was canceled, while the B-58's service life was cut short . The Mach-58 was canceled and the Mach 3 was canceled .
 The Oxcart was so much faster, flew so much higher, and had a reduced radar return . It was the first time the Oxcart could fly on a plane with a speed limit .
 The combination of these factors resulted in an airplane that was unstoppable . The plane was "unstoppable," says author .
 For so critical a mission, it was possible to justify so expensive and specialized an aircraft . The U.S. Air Force says it was able to justify such a mission .
 Black reconnaissance aircraft, such as the U-2 or A-12, faced two basic problems . The U.2 or U-12 were the first black reconnaissance aircraft to be flown in the U.S.
 The first was technical—to build an aircraft with altitude and speed performance superior to enemy air defenses . The other was to build a plane with altitude, speed and altitude superior to enemies' defenses .
 The second proved more difficult—to convince the president that the risks of a plane being lost and the pilot being captured were acceptable .
 During the 1960s and early 1970s, a series of Dark Eagles added ""Unmanned"" to this motto . Dark Eagles have a motto of 'Unmanning'
 These drones were used to cover targets that were too heavily defended, or too politically sensitive, to risk a manned reconnaissance aircraft . These drones are used to target targets that are too heavily protected, or politically sensitive to risk manned reconnaissance planes .
 Lt. Harold L Wood, chief of the Reconnaissance Division at Air Force Headquarters, and his deputy, Lt. Robert L Wood . Lt. L Wood is chief of Reconnaissance . Wood is also the deputy commander of the Air Force. Wood is a former Air Force .
 Lloyd M Ryan, met with Raymond A Ballweg Jr., vice-president of Hycon Manufacturing Company, which made the U-2s' cameras . The U2s were made by Hycon manufacturing company .
 Ryan Aeronautical Company built the Q-2C Firebee jet-powered target drone . Ballweg explained that the drone might be usable . The drone might even be able to fly .
 Several weeks later, Lieutenant Colonel Ryan made a call to Ryan Aeronautical to suggest a meeting . The meeting took place at the end of the first day of the flight .
 Ryan Aero83 84 DARK EAGLES nautical nautical and Hycon to do a joint study . At first there seemed little interest in a photo reconnaissance Firebee; finally an agreement was reached .
 As with other Black airplane projects, a small group would conduct the effort .
 On January 21, 1960, Robert R Schwanhausser was named to head the reconnaissance drone group .
 The Firebee's range could be extended to allow it to make overflights from the Barents Sea, across the Soviet Union, to Turkey .
 With longer wings, the drone could reach altitudes above that of the regular Firebee . The drone could also have longer wings and longer wings .
 The drone would also have a reduced radar return, making it virtually undetectable . The drone also would have a reduction in radar return .
 In mid-April 1960, the Reconnaissance Panel of the air staff was briefed on the project . The project was the brainchild of the Air Force .
 On July 1, 1960, an RB-47 on an ELINT flight over international waters was shot down . Only two of the six-man crew survived, and they were captured .
 Ryan Aeronautical made reflective measurements of one-fourth and one-eighth scale models of the Firebee . The Firebee is a one-in-one-half scale model of a firework .
 Radar return could be reduced by putting a wire screen over the intake, painting the nose with nonconductive paint, and placing radar-absorbing blankets on the sides of the drone .
 Flight-test program was conducted between September 16 and October 12, 1960, at Holloman Air Force Base .
 Radar return of a drone at 50,000 feet could be reduced without causing aerodynamic problems . The tests showed the radar return of the drone was reduced by reducing its return of radar return .
 It used long, straight wings, a horizontal stabilizer with inward-tilted rudders at their tips, and ajet engine mounted on top of the airframe to reduce radar and infrared signatures .
 Ryan set up its own Black production facility for the reconnaissance drone program in San Diego, California . Bell and Lockheed set up their own production facility in a warehouse .
 The people needed for the effort were recruited without being told what they would be doing . They were recruited to be part of the effort without being given a specific purpose .
 Only after arriving at the warehouse did they learn the project dealt with drone reconnaissance . Only after they learned they learned that the project was a drone reconnaissance project .
 Behind the scenes, there was considerable debate over the future of reconnaissance programs . The U.S. has been involved in a number of reconnaissance missions over the years .
 President John F Kennedy and the Democrats would have their own ideas about reconnaissance, so any new projects were put on hold . President Kennedy would have his own ideas on reconnaissance .
 Lucy Lee would use a modified Firebee rear fuselage, long straight wings, and a new forward fuselage with an intake above the nose . Lucy Lee's plane would be based on a modified version of the Firebee Firebee .
 Lucy Lee would fly at altitudes between 65,000 and 72,000 feet . Radar return of the plane would be reduced to less than two times the radar return .
 $500,000 could be used to modify a standard Firebee drone to a reconnaissance configuration . Ryan Aeronautical also proposed that $500k could be spent modifying the Firebee .
 Despite support at nearly every level, the project was canceled in January 1962 . Despite support, despite support, it was never completed .
 Rather than an expensive, all-new drone, and the unknown this involved, the proven Firebee would be used . Instead of an expensive drone, the Firebee will be used, the company says .
 The money came from a program called ""Big Safari,"" which had been established in the early 1950s as a means to modify existing aircraft for reconnaissance missions in a very short time .
 The Model 147A drones were to have a 1,200-mile range, a cruising altitude over 55,000 feet, and a photo resolution of two feet . Code-named ""Fire Fly,"" the drones were designed to be able to fly with a range of over 1,
 The first 147A drone was to be a standard Firebee with a simple guidance system . A timer-programmer and an MA-1 gyro compass were to be used to guide the drone .
 The other 147As were ""stretched"" with a thirty-five-inch plug added to the fuselage . The other three 147As had a 35-inch extension to their fuselage and were stretched .
 The U-2 was borrowed from the U.S. and mounted in a homebuilt frame . The U.2 optics were borrowed from a U.3U2 .
 The test program would use two of the drones . 147A-1 would test the navigation systems, while the stretched 146A-2 would check out the camera and other modifications .
 The other two 147A drones would be placed on alert for deployment in a crisis . Once the system is proven, the other two would also be on alert .
 147A-1 was made from Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico, in April . The first flights of 147A1 were made from the base in April 2013 . 147A2 was the first of its kind .
 In its first off-range flight, the drone flew from 86 DARK EAGLES Holloman to the Wendover Air Force Range, Utah, and then back to the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, without any commands from the B-57 chase plane .
 In all, three flights of 147A-1 were made to prove out the navigation system .
 Four test flights of the 147A-2 drone took place in late April and early May . This was followed by four test flights .
 When the film from the scorer was developed, it showed very good resolution . The film was developed from a scorer's scorers' scorecard .
 The Fire Fly had an adequate range, an altitude and resolution better than required, and the ability to fly the desired track . Fire Fly was a prototype of the Fire Fly with a range, altitude, resolution and resolution .
 Two drones and their DC-130 launch aircraft were placed on seventy-twohour alert at Holloman . Two drones are placed on the alert at the base in Holloman, Maryland .
 The operational test and evaluation would involve two reconnaissance flights over the Atlantic Missile Range at Cape Canaveral and three ""live-fire"" tests at MacDill Air Force Base . The tests would involve three live-fire tests at the base .
 During the two reconnaissance flights, fighters swarmed aloft in simulated interceptions; they ended up chasing each other . The two simulated interceptions were simulated .
 The radar blankets around the drone were effective, and ground radar never picked it up . Ground radar did not pick up the drone, but ground radar did .
 The live-fire tests at MacDill also showed the 147A's low radar return, small size, high altitude, and subsonic speed combined to make it highly survivable . The 147A has been designed to be a low-radar return fighter jet .
 The drone's main problem was the contrail, a giant banner that gave away the drone's location . The contrail was the main problem for the drone .
 A ""no-con" (no contrail) program was quickly started to find means to suppress it . A "no con" program was started to suppress the contrail .
 It was eventually decided that a chemical agent would be added to the exhaust of the vehicle . It was then decided that the exhaust would have to be covered in chemical agents .
 For several years, CIA U-2s had been directed against Communist Cuba . The U.2s were used in Cuba for several years .
 The missions of August 29 and September 5, 1962, revealed a major change . The Soviets had introduced SA-2 SAMs . The missions were the first of two missions to carry out .
 Nationalist Chinese U-2 pilots had been conducting overflights of mainland China since late 1960 . They made as many as three overflights per month . Nationalist planes had been flying over China since the 1960s .
 At a September 20 meeting, the air force proposed that the Fire Fly drones be used over Cuba . The Fire Fly drone was proposed by the Air Force to be used in Cuba .
 At that time, there were only two drones and they were still in the test phase . At the time, only two drone drones had been deployed .
 By early October, there had been no U-2 coverage of the interior of Cuba for a month . The U.2 service had been unavailable for more than a month.
 Heyser and Rudolf Anderson, were checked out in the CIA's U-2F version . The CIA's version of the U.2F is based on the original version of this article .
 Heyser took off from North Base at Edwards on October 13, headed toward Cuba . The plane was headed for Cuba when it landed in Cuba .
 The overflight was made at 72,500 feet, with a flight path that went south to north across the island . The flight path was made on the island of Puerto Rico .
 At 7.43 A.M., he left Cuban airspace and turned toward McCoy Air Force Base . At 7:43 a.M. he left Cuba's airspace and headed toward McCoy airbase .
 Three MRBM sites under construction were discovered at San Cristobal, Los Palacios, and San Diego de los Banos . The sites are located in three locations .
 On the morning of October 16, President Kennedy learned about the missiles . Kennedy learned of the missiles the day before he learned about them .
 At the same time, three U-2As of the air force's 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing were alerted . The U.S. Air Force was alerted to the incident .
 Two SS-5 Skean intermediate range ballistic missile sites were found at Guanajay and a third site was discovered at Remedies . Two of the sites were discovered at Guanajaay .
 On October 22, Kennedy announced the existence of the missiles and the imposition of a blockade . The blockade was imposed on October 22 by President Obama .
 On October 27, all twenty-four SS-4 pads were considered operational . The Eagles had all 24 pads considered operational on October 27 .
 Soviet Frog short-range missile battery, IL 28 light bombers, and SSC-2B Samlet coastal defense missiles were readied . In anticipation of a U.S. invasion, the nuclear warheads for a Soviet Frog missile battery and IL 28 bombers were also readied.
 They would have caused tens of thousands of casualties among U.S. troops hitting the beaches . The U.N. troops would have been hit by the bombs .
 Upon a presidential order, their nuclear warheads would be launched to destroy Havana . Upon a president order, they would launch their nukes at Havana .
 At 8:10 A.M. on October 27, Major Anderson took off from McCoy Air Force Base . Major Anderson was the first major to take off from the base .
 One or more fragments penetrated the cockpit and hit Anderson at shoulder level . Anderson was hit by fragments of fragments . Anderson survived the crash .
 The pressure to take military action was growing . The pressure was growing to strike SAM sites, or an invasion .
 That evening Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and delivered an ultimatum . Robert Kennedy delivered the message to the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 If the Soviets were unwilling to remove the missiles, the U.S. would attack within a day or two . The United States would attack if they were not removed .
 The U.S. would promise not to invade Cuba if the missiles were removed . This was coupled with a deal to remove the missiles from Cuba . The deal was made with a promise that the United States would not invade Cuba .
 The Soviets believed it would be an announcement of an air strike or invasion . The Soviet Union believed it was a warning of a possible air strike .
 To forestall this, a message was hurriedly drafted and rushed to a radio station . The message was rushed to the radio station.
 Radio Moscow broadcast a statement announcing the Soviets would remove the missiles . Radio Moscow said the missiles would be removed from the Soviet Union .
 Joseph Charyk to reverse decision not to use Fire Fly drones over Cuba . Fire Fly drone was ordered by the U.S. government to fly over Cuba in 2010 .
 The unit was alerted to prepare for a two-drone mission on short notice . The mission was planned for short notice, the unit was told to prepare .
 The Fire Fly's planned mission was different from that envisioned by the test flights . The test flight was the first of its kind, and the first was a test flight of its own .
 The 147A would fly at a medium altitude, 30,000 feet, rather than 50,000-plus feet . It would be the first time the 147A has flown at such altitudes . It's not the first attempt to fly at such altitude .
 The drones' autopilot was reprogrammed, and the cameras were modified slightly to accommodate this lower altitude . The cameras were adjusted to accommodate the new altitude .
 The scorers were then serviced, loaded with film, and installed in the drones . The drone scorers are then loaded into the drones and loaded into them .
 The DC-130 was on the flight line, with all four engines running, awaiting clearance to head down the taxiway to the end of the runway . All four engines were running when the plane landed .
 They were moments away from starting when the mission was aborted on orders of Gen. Gen. Eisenhower . The mission was halted on orders by Gen. Dwight Eisenhower .
 LeMay supported the drone effort but wanted to save the capability for something bigger . LeMay: "I'm not sure what I want to do with drones"
 Shortly after the aborted launch, the air force issued a contract for a family of operational drones to undertake different types of missions .
 The wingspan was extended from the 13 feet of the 147A to 27 feet, which raised the altitude ceiling to 62,500 feet . The altitude ceiling was also raised to a maximum of 62,000 feet .
 To provide an immediate reconnaissance capability, the air force ordered seven 147Cs . Production versions of the 147As are also being ordered .
 The wingspan was increased from 13 to 15 feet . The contrail suppression system was added to the plane .
 This drone was designed to undertake a mission that would be impossible for a manned aircraft . This drone is designed to carry out a mission impossible for manned aircraft.
 Because the Fire Fly code name had been compromised, a new one was needed . A new code name was needed to replace the original Fire Fly .
 The unit was initially equipped with two 147Cs and two 147Ds, pending arrival of the first of the production 147Bs . The 147Bs are expected to be released in 2015 .
 It was located at DavisMonthan Air Force Base, outside Tucson, Arizona, in an old World War I hangar .
 The unit's activities were considered highly secret . The deputy commander for maintenance at the base was not told of their operations . The unit was not even told of its activities .
 On December 20, 1963, the secretary of the air force approved a followon contract for fourteen more 147B drones . The contract was approved for 14 more drones in 1963 .
 Ryan moved its Black operation from the Frontier Street warehouse to a secure factory in Kearny Mesa, a few miles north of downtown San Diego . To support the expanding production, Ryan moved to an industrial park . Ryan moved the operation from Frontier Street to the secure factory .
 The examination of alternative means of overflights has led to a sharp rise in support for handling this matter by drones, the author says .
 New drones could be supplied faster than Castro could bring them down, he says . It appears that we have drones which might do this job with a level of efficiency which would enable them to continue even if Castro tried to bring them .
 This was the first public suggestion that the U.S. had developed an unmanned reconnaissance capability . This is the first suggestion of the United States having developed such capability .
 A missile or pilotless plane to replace manned U-2s for surveillance flights over Cuba is being given serious consideration here .
 The use of a drone craft, some administration officials believe, would reduce the chances of a brink-of-war confrontation between East and West if the Castro regime decides to shoot down a U.S. reconnaissance vehicle .
 If an unmanned spy craft were brought down by Cuban antiaircraft missiles, it is felt, it would not be likely to require the same drastic countermeasures as the capture or death of a U.S. pilot .
 U-2s and low-level F-104 and F-8U Crusader jets are getting low-altitude photographs . There is still considerable controversy as to whether pilotless flights would produce the quality of photographs .
 The discussions about drones had leaked, and leaked very quickly . Obviously, the discussions about the drones had been leaked . The drone program was leaked by the U.S. government .
 The A-12 was selected to back up the U-2s for the Skylark missions . The U-12s will be used in the U.2 missions .
 Maddox was sailing in international waters off the North Vietnamese coast when it was attacked by three North Vietnamese PT boats, which were sunk . Maddox is the first ship to be sunk off the coast of North Vietnam since the attack .
 President Johnson feared Chinese intervention in Vietnam . President Johnson and his advisors feared it would lead to Chinese intervention .
 At 4:00 P.M. on August 4, 147B drones were ordered to Kadena Air Base on Okinawa, in preparation for overflights of Communist China . The 147B drone was ordered to the base on Okinawa .
 Specific targets were southeast China, near the border with North Vietnam and Laos, Hainan Island, and the coastal areas . Specific targets are southeast China .
 The two launch DC-130s and four drones, 147B-8, B-9, B10, and B-ll, were made ready . The U.S. military says it is ready for the first time since 2009 .
 On the morning of August 20, 1964, the DC-130 launch aircraft rolled down the runway and took off .
 It carried two drones—147B-9, the primary drone, and 147B-8, the backup drone .
 As the launch aircraft approached the Chinese coast, the crew checked out B-9 . The launch aircraft was headed for the U.S. and China .
 Everything was in readiness; the DC-130 began its run to the launch point, the release was pressed . Nothing happened . The launch was delayed .
 The launch crew regrouped, checked out B-8, and made a successful launch . The launch was the first of its kind in the history of the space shuttle .
 The drone climbed to its programmed altitude and set off for its overflight of southeast China . The drone was programmed to fly from programmed altitude to programmed altitude .
 The DC-130, with B-9 still on the launch 92 Dark EAGLES rack, headed back to Kadena . The D-130 was the first plane to carry out the mission to the launch .
 At an altitude of about 62,000 feet, the sky above was a deep blue black . The sky above is a deep, blue black sky above .
 The drone's black paint finish hid it from visual sightings, while the radar blankets concealed it from electronic detection .
 Recovery team picked it up on radar, it was only a few miles to the right of the desired track . The recovery team was able to locate the plane after it was spotted on radar .
 The wind dragged the drone until it flipped over, causing major damage . The drone flipped over after being dragged by the wind .
 A short had caused the programmer to stop operating, and the drone would not accept the recovery command . A short caused the drone to stop running, and it was unable to recover .
 B-ll kept flying, past the recovery zone and out to sea, until it ran out of fuel . The plane kept flying past the crash zone and into the sea .
 B-13 flew its mission, but as it descended through 30,000 feet toward Taiwan, the engine flamed out . The plane was headed toward Taiwan when the engine went out .
 The Nationalist Chinese were very enthusiastic about the drones, due to the continuing U-2 losses to SA-2s over the mainland . Still, the Chinese are very enthusiastic with the drones .
 A second U-2 had been shot down on November 1, 1963, and its pilot, Maj. Maj. Gen. Robert Schurman, was killed in the crash .
 Jack Chang took off from Taiwan in the early evening of January 10, 1965 . Chang was the first person to fly from Taiwan to China .
 An SA-2 ended the mission forty-five minutes after he crossed the coast . The mission was the first of its kind in the Pacific .
 Medical attention saved his legs, but he and Yei would not be released until October 1983 . Yei was released from prison in October 1983.
 Chinese MiGs were being jumped by Chinese drones over China . Unmanned drones had yet to be lost in China .
 B-14 was followed by two pairs of MiGs about 10,000 feet below the drone . On the September 25, 1964, flight, the drone was accompanied by two MiGs . The drone was shot down by a pair of U.S. Air Force MiGs on September
 It was clear the Chinese were making an intense effort to down the drones, it was clear . The Chinese government is making an effort to try and down drones .
 U.S. pilots had no more luck than United States pilots had during the test missions . As yet, they were having no luck .
 Thought was given to equipping the drones with a destruct system and removing the manufacturers’ name plates .
 Launch operations are moved to Bien Hoa Air Base, outside Saigon, South Vietnam . Launch operations were moved from Saigon's Saigon Air Base to a base outside the city .
 The first drone flight from Bien Hoa was made on October 11, 1964 . B-14 was lost during recovery when it descended through a rainstorm and the parachute tore off . First drone flight was made in 1964 .
 Launches were often made over Laos; in some cases, the DC-130 would nearly reach the Chinese border . Launches would often be launched over Laos .
 Two more drone missions were flown over North Vietnam on October 22 and 27 . The missions are scheduled to take place over the next two weeks .
 147B-19 was launched on November 15, 1964, for a mission over China . The mission was the first time 147B had been launched over China since 1964 .
 Marshal Lin Piao, minister of national defense, commended the air unit responsible for the incident . A separate report said the air force responsible was commended by the minister .
 The United States has some aerial-photographic drones capable of short-range reconnaissance over a battlefield . The U.S. has some of the most powerful drones in the world .
 White House Press Secretary George E Reedy said, "I know nothing about it" White House spokesman said he knows nothing about the allegations .
 At Bien Hoa, operations halted for thirty days following B-19's loss, to allow things to cool off following the news reports . Operations halted for 30 days following the loss of B-18 .
 The first 147B mission after the loss of B-19 was made on December 15 and was called the best to date . The mission was the best of the 147B missions after the crash .
 Six more operational missions will be flown before the end of the year . About six more missions will take place this year .
 On January 2, 147B-21 became the second drone shot down by the Chinese . The year 1965 began with another burst of publicity . The Chinese drone was the second to have been shot down .
 The Chinese press stated that the drone had been shot down ""by the air force"" over south central China . The drone was reportedly shot down by the Chinese press .
 The Chinese put three of the captured drones on display at the Chinese People's Revolutionary Museum in Peking, China .
 A photo of the drones was published on the front pages of U.S. newspapers the next day . The drone was published in a photo of a drone flying over Washington .
 On August 21, a sixth 147B drone was shot down over Hainan Island by an air unit of the Chinese navy . The Chinese navy air unit shot down the drone on August 21 .
 The Chinese have issued their statements and photos and displays, but few took notice of those small, almost toylike airplanes . The Chinese government has been criticized for their lack of transparency .
 The concept of using an unmanned drone for high-risk overflights, and simply not commenting on any losses, had proved valid . The concept has proved valid, with no losses reported from the aircraft .
 By New Year's of 1965, it was clear the 147B drones were a success . The 147B drone drones were the first to be used by the Air Force .
 Ryan and the air force had developed a good working relationship, and the effort could get under way without waiting for the paperwork . Ryan: "I'm not going to have to wait until the paperwork is complete"
 The fuselage was stretched to 29 feet, while the wings spanned 27 feet . The wings were stretched to 27 feet, and fuselage spanned 29 feet .
 At this time, the first changing of the guard was made in the skies of North Vietnam . At this same time the first . changing of . the guard of the . skies of . North Vietnam was made .
 During a photo run over Haiphong Harbor, an air force U-2 was fired on unsuccessfully by an SA-2 . During the photo run, the U.2 was shot at unsuccessfully by the SA .
 A 147B drone was to fly over an area defended by the SAMs, while a U-2 remained just out of range to observe . The mission was planned as part of a dual mission to counter SAMs .
 U-2 pilot watched in awe as SA-2 rose up and consumed the drone . U.2 pilot was shot down by SA 2, but was not injured .
 The new drone soon replaced the 147B, which made its last flight in December . The 147B drone was replaced by a new drone called the Air Force One .
 Normal weather pattern over North Vietnam was for clear skies between May and September . The normal weather pattern is for clear weather between May to September .
 This would help them evade North Vietnamese air defenses and make them more difficult to track by radar . This would also make them easier to evade North Vietnam air defenses .
 SA-2s could not engage a target below 1,500 feet . The drones would still face 37mm cannons, .50-caliber machine guns, and even rifle-armed peasants . The drone could still face a range of weapons .
 This was a 147G modified for low-level operation, with a new altitude-control system and camera package . The 147G was modified with an altitude control system and a camera package.
 147XJ-2 collided with a DC-130 just after launch . Development proved difficult, with the loss of three prototypes and damage to a D130 . The aircraft was designed to be a low-tech version of the Air Force One .
 To test the 147J's control system under combat conditions, two of the old 147C drones were modified . The 147J was designed to test the control system for combat conditions .
 Both were soon lost; the C was marginal at best for so demanding a mission . Both were lost .
 With SA-2 sites spreading throughout North Vietnam, the need for the fuze data was all the greater . The need for data was also greater . SA-1 sites are spread throughout the country .
 147Bs were 147Bs with their cameras replaced by special ELINT equipment . 147B cameras were replaced with ELINT technology . 147Bs are 147Bs and 147B were replaced by ELINT cameras .
 The data would be retransmitted to an RB-47, even as the drones themselves were destroyed . The data was retransmissioned to the RB-46, even though the drone was destroyed .
 The first three 147E missions were not successful, due to ELINT package failures . The 147E mission was the first three of its three missions .
 The 147E drones were withdrawn from operations and underwent environmental chamber tests . They were pulled from operations after environmental tests were conducted . They are now undergoing environmental tests .
 The problem was traced to overheating of the ELINT equipment, and the drones returned overseas in early 1966 . The drones were sent back to the U.S.
 ELINT equipment relayed data on the SA-2's proximity fuze, radar guidance after the fuze activated, and blast overpressure that destroyed the drone . The SA2 drone was destroyed by a blast blast .
 This mission was later described as the most significant ELINT mission since the start of the Cold War . Mission was described as most significant mission since Cold War's start .
 The Shoehorn was a large package, and it was difficult to fit it into the drone . The drone was able to squeeze it into a small frame .
 The 147F drone was sent overseas and made several flights in July 1966 . It was the first of its kind to be sent overseas .
 It was lost on July 22, 1966, but not before ten or eleven SAMs had been fired at it . The aircraft was lost in 1966 .
 North Vietnamese air defenses had continued to expand and were taking a toll on the drones . The 147N and NX DECOY DRONES were born to be born to lose .
 This loss rate was too high and, in early 1966, the air force asked Ryan to build a decoy drone . Ryan built the drone in a bid to reduce the loss rate .
 The new decoy effort was given priority to bypass normal procedures, even those of Big Safari . Big Safari is being used as a decoy .
 Ten Firebee target drones were modified with traveling wave tubes to make them look like larger aircraft . Over a ten-day period, ten Firebee targets were modified over the course of ten days .
 The 147Ns were never meant to survive, they had only a ninety-minute fuel supply and no recovery parachute . The 147N were never intended to survive .
 Decoy 147N and 147G were released from the DC-130 almost simultaneously . The decoy 147G and 147N were released almost simultaneously from the plane .
 The two drones diverged, giving the North Vietnamese two possible targets . The North Vietnamese then diverged from each other .
 The 147N, with a larger radar return, was flying at a vulnerable altitude . It is believed that the 147N was flying in the air at a low altitude .
 The 147N went after the 147N, while the 147G returned to Da Nang . As expected, they went after a 147N and a 147G .
 In the first case, a 147N headed out over the Tonkin Gulf with a MiG hot on its tail . In the second case, the 147N went over the border with the MiG .
 Despite expectations, several of the 147Ns had survived to reach Da Nang . The 147Ns are still in their final stages of their mission .
 Like the 147Ns, these were to be Firebee target drones equipped to make them appear as bigger targets . The 147Ns were intended to be smaller drones with larger targets .
 Unlike earlier decoys, the 147NX also carried an inexpensive, low-resolution camera . Unlike the earlier decoy, it also carried a low-resolved camera .
 The 147NX could be used to spot trucks and provide general indications of activity . It could also provide general indication of activity in the area .
 The 147Gs would function as a confusion factor for the high-altitude 147Gs, rather than cover specific targets . They would function instead of being used to target specific targets in the air .
 In late March 1966, the 147J began low-level operations over North Vietnam . The 147J was the first to carry out operations over Vietnam .
 It used a barometric low-altitude control system to remain a height above the ground . The plane was lowered to a height of 12,000 feet .
 A dual camera system was added to the camera system . One camera looked front and rear, the second looked left and right . The new camera system looks front and back of the camera .
 The 147Js were painted gray on the upper surfaces and white underneath . The 147J drones would fly at low altitude, so they would be painted gray and white .
 J-4, the prototype drone, was sent to Bien Hoa and flew five successful missions over three months . The prototype drone was sent there to fly five missions over the course of the year .
 A helicopter grabbed a small parachute with cables rigged between two poles . The parachute was attached to a parachute rigged between poles .
 The main parachute was released, and the helicopter's winch pulled up the drone . Once it was secure, the main parachute released, the drone was pulled up .
 By the end of July 1966, 70 percent of North Vietnam's known bulk storage of POL had been destroyed . The destruction of the POL was estimated to have cost the country $1 billion .
 147Gs, 147J, 147E and 147F ELINT missions, 147N and NX decoys . 147Gs made up the bulk of the flights, the Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 99 147J drones .
 There were concerns the supply of 147Js could run out before a specially designed low-altitude drone could be ready . There were also concerns that the drone could not be ready before the drone was ready .
 As a short-term solution, additional 147Gs were converted to the J configuration . Additional 147Gs have also been converted .
 It had a stretched 28-foot fuselage, a 15-foot Firebee wing, and an original lowpowered engine . The original Firebee fuselage was built in the 1930s .
 Much of the supplies the North Vietnamese were sending south were moved at night . The supplies were moved during the night, moving at night.
 Four of the 147NP drones were diverted from the production line and modified as night reconnaissance drones . Four of these drones were modified to be night-rearce surveillance drones .
 The drone was fitted with a two-camera package sequenced with a flashing white light mounted in its belly .
 The planned altitude and ground speed had to be programmed into the strobe strobe . The strobe was programmed into an altitude and speed limit .
 For an altitude of 1,200 feet, the light would flash at the rate of once per second . The light would be flashing at the time of one second .
 The results were so encouraging that the air force decided to send all four NRE drones to Vietnam . The air force sent all four drones to the country for testing .
 The first 147NP day reconnaissance drone was flown a week later, in early June . It was flown by the U.S. Air Force in May .
 As the recovery sequence began, the main parachute separated, and the drone fell toward the jungle north of Da Nang . The main parachute fell into the jungle, but the drone was able to be recovered .
 The small midair recovery parachute caught the tops of the trees and the drone landed intact . The drone was able to land safely in the air .
 Armed only with an M16, a pistol, an axe, and a safe-conduct pass, Christian was lowered into the jungle . Christian was armed with an axe and an axe .
 Christian chopped open the fiberglass cover and removed the film from the two cameras . The film was removed from both cameras by removing the film .
 By this time the helicopter was low on fuel and it headed off, leaving Christian in the jungle . Christian was able to make contact with the helicopter but it was too late .
 Christian attached the cable, but as the drone was lifted, the fuel poured out, and he was sprayed with it . Christian was sprayed by the fuel as he attached the drone to it .
 The first helicopter returned and lifted him out of the jungle, even as the Viet Cong neared . Another five minutes passed before the first helicopter came back to lift him .
 The 147NRE's navigation system lacks sufficient accuracy . The field of view of the strobe was so small the drone would have to fly directly over the target .
 There was, however, a great deal of bonus intelligence picked up by flying the 147NREs at random .
 Seven 147NRE missions were flown between May and September 1967, while the 147NP drones flew nineteen missions between June and September . In all, seven of the missions were carried out by 147Nre drones .
 The main difference between the 147NQs and earlier drones was the control system . The 147Qs were the first drones to be controlled by a single operator .
 Rather than being controlled by a flight programmer, it was hand flown by a crewman aboard the DC-130 . Rather than be controlled by flight programmers, the plane was controlled by the pilot .
 Low-altitude 147Gs, NREs, NPs, and NPs were making an increasing share of the drone missions over North Vietnam . The 147Gs continued operations over the weekend .
 By March 1967, the third-generation, high-altitude 147H drone was ready to begin operations . The drone was the first to be launched in 1967 .
 The 147G used the same engine as the 147G, but with a highly modified airframe . It used to be used in the same airframe as the original 147G .
 The wings of the 147B-G were stretched from 27 feet to 32 feet . The wings were fitted with internal fuel tanks to increase its range . The plane was fitted with an internal fuel tank to increase the range .
 The 147H can reach altitudes of over 65,000 feet . The longer wings, plus a lighter airframe, meant the 147H could reach 65,00 feet . It is the first time a 147H has been flown in the world .
 With the growth of both Chinese and North Vietnamese air defenses, the 147Gs were suffering an increased loss rate over the 147Bs . The 147Gs are suffering from increased loss rates .
 Radarabsorbing blankets and the 147N and NX decoys were not enough . The radarabsorbing blanket and 147N decoys are not enough. They were used as decoys .
 These included ""Rivet Bouncer,"" which jammed the SA-2's guidance radar . Also included systems that would trigger evasive maneuvers if the 147H was illuminated by radar .
 The 147H was one of the most difficult of the drones to develop . It took nearly two years before it was ready to be released .
 The 147Hs and Gs continued to operate side by side until the final 147G flight in August . The 147Gs were used in the U.S. for the first time in the last two decades .
 The start of 147H operations in the spring of 1967 coincided with an increase in the number and intensity of U.S. airstrikes on North Vietnam . North Vietnam was the focus of the operation .
 By mid-June, 85 percent of North Vietnam's electrical capacity had been destroyed . The majority of the country's electrical power was destroyed .
 In late July, attacks were approved on more targets within Hanoi and Haiphong . Attacks have also been approved on targets in Hanoa and Haipong .
 Starting on September 4, navy planes began cutting rail, road, and canal links to isolate Haiphong . Starting on Sept. 4, planes cut rail, roads, and canals to isolate the city .
 President Johnson ordered a bombing halt of targets in central Hanoi . The North Vietnamese put out ""peace feelers,"" and President Johnson agreed to halt the bombing .
 The pattern reverted to that of that of 1965-66—a greatly reduced scale with frequent interruptions . The pattern was much smaller than the one of the previous years .
 On January 31, 1968, the Viet Cong launched attacks in cities throughout South Vietnam . The Tet Offensive had begun the month before .
 At home, protest rallies grew and became both more violent and more pro-North Vietnam . At the same time, protests against North Vietnam became more violent . Vietnam's anti-Vietnam policies were both pro- and pro-N Vietnam .
 On March 31, President Johnson halted all bombing north of the nineteenth parallel . President Johnson stopped all bombing on March 31 .
 A fifth Nationalist Chinese U-2 was also shot down on September 9, 1967 . A fifth was shot down by a Chinese Nationalist Nationalist U.2 .
 In early 1968, it was decided to end the Nationalist Chinese U-2 overflights, due to the risk . The decision was made by the Chinese government in early 1968 .
 On January 20, 1968, the Chinese shot down 147H-25 . The new role had a cost, with the Chinese shooting down the plane .
 In March 1968, a ""bad streak"" of three drone losses over China brought to eighteen the number of drones lost on China overflights since November 1964 . The number of drone losses has now risen to eighteen .
 Its long, flexible wings, originally built for the high-altitude 147G, were somewhat unstable at low altitude and prevented the 147J from making sharp turns . The 147J was originally built to make sharp turns at high altitudes . Its long flexible wings were originally designed for the
 There was a need for a low-cost drone specifically designed for the lowaltitude mission . The drone was designed to be able to operate in a low altitude environment .
 Ryan was told that if they could produce a cheap drone to replace the 147J, the production run would amount to several hundred, compared to only thirty to forty of the other models . Ryan: "If they could . produce several hundred of the . other models, they would be cheaper
 The Firebee's 13-foot wing was used; this was much cheaper than the long wing of the G and J models . This was used for the first time in the Firebee .
 Rather than two cameras, as on the 147J, the new drone had a single camera . The new drone was launched in October .
 Five of the last 147Gs were modified to test the new ""poly-profile"" low-altitude control system . The new system was designed to test a new low altitude control system for the 147Gs .
 When the 147S test flights were completed, there were a number of proposals for modifications which would give it additional capabilities .
 These included antiflutter kits, different yaw rate gyros, multiple altitude settings, radar altimeters, and a digital programmer . The kits also included radar altimeter and digital programmer software .
 All the drones in a specific block would have identical configurations . The drones would be identical to each other in a block .
 On one mission, a stack of truck tires in a storage yard was photographed . On another mission, the truck tires were photographed in storage yard .
 Most of the 147SA missions were directed at the main bridges around Hanoi . The 147SA mission was directed at bridges around the city's main bridges .
 "These were under repair, and it was necessary to have regular coverage," she said . "These are under repair and it's necessary that regular coverage was necessary"
 Winds or navigation problems would cause the drone to go off the track, but the targets of opportunity picked up would often be more valuable .
 The early 147SA missions were very successful, and, in March 1968, a second block of forty drones was ordered . The first 147SA drone missions were successful .
 The 147SB could be programmed to fly at three different altitude settings between 1,000 and 20,000 feet . It could fly at 3 different altitudes and can fly at altitude of up to 20,500 feet .
 It could also vary between the three settings throughout the mission, making it much less predictable . The mission could also depend on the settings of the mission .
 The drone is equipped with new yaw gyros that allow tighter, more precise turns . The drone was also equipped with a new gyroscope that allows tighter turns .
 The first 147SB missions were flown in March 1968, overlapping with the 147SAs . The 147SB and 147SBs were first flown in 1968 . First 147SBSAs were launched in 1968 and 1969 .
 The Soviets claimed one of their freighters had been torpedoed by the United States as it entered the harbor . The U.S. torpedoed the freighters in the 1940s .
 Drone unit was ordered to photograph the ship to see if it had been damaged . The drone unit photographed the ship in a bid to check for damage .
 The two drones flew as programmed and returned with photos looking directly into the cargo hold . The drone was programmed to fly as programmed .
 The North Vietnamese opened fire at the low-flying drones . North Vietnamese forces opened fire on the drones .
 Shooting at anearly flat trajectory, the shells hit the ground throughout the harbor area . The shells were shot at an early flat trajectory .
 Its programmed flight path took it under a line of high-tension power lines . The plane crashed into the power lines in a collision with a mountain range .
 The photo showed the tower looming above the drone, while on the ground, people were looking upward at the low-flying plane . The photo was taken by a drone flying over the city .
 With the partial bombing halt on March 31, the drones became a prime target . The drones became the prime target of the U.S. government .
 The North Vietnamese also sought to end the drone flights through political means . The North Vietnam also sought the end of drone flights by political means.
 When the Paris Peace Talks opened, the North Vietnamese demanded an end to all reconnaissance flights . The North Vietnamese wanted to end reconnaissance flights when the Paris talks opened .
 U.S. reconnaissance flights continued to monitor North Vietnamese activities . United States continued to spy on North Vietnam .
 Within two weeks of the bombing halt, the North Vietnamese had repaired all the bombed-out bridges between the seventeenth and nineteenth parallels . The North Vietnamese repaired the bridges in two weeks .
 The film was geared to near infrared, and the camera had a filter to cut down the effects of haze . The camera had to be geared to infrared .
 A total of five flights were made in November and six more in December . The flights included five flights from November to December, six more from December .
 Missions were flown in the predawn hours, when activities were just starting . Mission missions were flown at predawn times when activities began . Mission was flown in predawn .
 Photos taken later in the day would give an indication of activities in the area . When compared to photos taken later on the day, this would give a sense of activities .
 The camera captured the SAM overtaking the drone, then exploding behind it as it hit the ground . The camera then captured the explosion behind the drone .
 A second SAM was launched, which passed so close to the photo was burned out by the exhaust flame . The photo was taken by a second SAM launched so close it burned out .
 The flight was intended to cover the Haiphong docks and seaplane base, then turn west to cover an airfield near Hanoi . The flight is due to cover a number of ports and airfields .
 The doppler system was not set correctly, however, and the turns were coming late . The turns came late, but the team was able to make it safely .
 Drone flew to an area northwest of Haiphong, where it missed colliding with a ridgeline seven times . This caused the drone to fly to a nearby area, but it was not hit by a ridgeline .
 Although the SREs were successful, less use was made of the system than was possible . The SRE system was developed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The photo interpreters were not trained in analyzing the near infrared images . They are not trained to analyze infrared images in infrared photos .
 The original concept of high-altitude, covert reconnaissance, similar to that of the CIA U-2 overflights, had been replaced by the much simpler low-altitudes mission . The mission was replaced by a much simpler, simpler mission .
 SC drones had a crosscorrelation doppler radar and a digital programmer to improve navigation accuracy . The SC drones also had a computer programmer to help them navigate .
 Photos provided photos with a three-to-fiveinch resolution . They were used to provide technical intelligence .
 In contrast to the huge numbers of SC drones, there were only twenty-one high-altitude missions during 1969 .
 The drone program did suffer losses, but throughout the war the North Vietnamese grossly inflated the U.S. losses . The North Vietnamese also inflated the American losses .
 SC-75, dubbed ""Myassis Dragon,"" was hit seven times by shell fragments during its eighth mission . The ship was hit 7 times during the mission .
 Up to this point, the drones had been solely an air force operation . The drones were used by the French military .
 The navy had access to the information, but thought it was not timely enough . The navy thought it would be too late to send it to the navy .
 The navy wanted to test the idea of launching drones from ships . Now the navy is testing the idea using drones to launch drones from a ship .
 This would give the task force commander the ability to cover targets immediately . This would be the first time they could be able to do so quickly .
 The drone got its initial boost from a rocket, which would burn out and separate . The drone would then separate from the rocket and burn out .
 An E-2A aircraft would guide the flight to the initial point, where the drone's own system would take over and fly the programmed mission . The drone would then be able to fly a programmed mission to programmed targets .
 SK-5 was launched successfully, but the carrier was two miles out of position . The mission was a success for the first time since the mission was launched .
 Drone photographed an area two miles seaward of Highway 1 . This meant the ground track was shifted, and the drone photographed the area . The area was two miles away from Highway 1 when the drone landed .
 A second mission was flown on November 27, which followed the planned route . The mission was the first of its kind since it was flown .
 When the drone ran out of fuel, a radio signal to deploy the parachute was transmitted . The parachute deploys when the drone runs out of power .
 A helicopter was sent to its estimated position, but nothing was found . Helicopter was sent out to look for the helicopter .
 Several days later, the Chinese announced they had ""shot down"" SK-5 over Hainan Island . Several days after the incident, they said they had shot down the plane .
 A total of fifteen more Belfry Express missions were flown after SK-5's capture . SK-Five was the first aircraft to be captured in the Soviet Union .
 The three missions of April 18, 22, and 27, 1970, were particularly effective . They provided photos of SAM and antiaircraft gun sites at Vinh and Than Hoa, as well .
 The mission was successfully flown, but the drag and main parachutes failed to deploy . The mission is successfully flown but the parachutes did not deploy .
 After a near perfect mission, the main parachute failed to open, and the drone was destroyed . The drone was able to make it to the top of the world for the first time ever .
 Salt water contamination traced to salt water contamination of parachute actuation circuit cable . The problem was later traced to the problem .
 It used the basic 147H airframe and camera but had a new engine that increased the maximum altitude to 75,000 feet . It was the first time the plane had a camera and a camera .
 147T also carried the Rivet Bouncer SA-2 jammer and the radar-absorbing inlet coating . The 147T was also fitted with radar-absorbent coating .
 147T missions were flown during February-May 1970, then again again in September 1970 . Further 147T flights were carried out in February 1970, 1970 and September 1970.
 With this, the program ended after only twenty-eight missions over two years . The program was ended after just over two months .
 There were only nineteen 147G flights in 1970, and a mere nine in 1971 . There were just nine in 1970 .
 This brought the era of high-altitude drone photo reconnaissance to a close . This brings the end of the drone era of photo reconnaissance .
 On April 18, 1969, a navy EC-121 ELINT aircraft was shot down by North Korean MiGs over international waters . North Korea MiGs shot down the aircraft in international waters in April 1969 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Andy Corra learned of the incident as he left his hotel for a meeting at Ryan Aeronautical to review the 147T program . Lt. Corra is the head of unmanned reconnaissance systems .
 The 147T can be used as an ELINT drone, according to the company .
 It would carry receivers that would pick up radar and radio transmissions . It would also be equipped with receivers to detect radar signals and radio signals .
 Many in the National Security Agency had said the schedule was physically impossible to meet . It was a schedule that many in the N.S. agency had said was impossible to make .
 The first 147TE mission was flown on February 15, 1970, beginning a two-month operational test program . The 147TE test program began on February 14, 1970 .
 The 147TE could fly a preprogrammed mission or be controlled by the DC-130 launch aircraft . It could also be controlled with the launch of a pre-programmed version of the rocket .
 In some cases, it would have to fly a very tight ""race track"" pattern to remain within the signal beam .
 Unlike the other drones, 147TEs remained at least fifty nautical miles offshore . Unlike the others drones, they remained at sea at least 50 nautical mile offshore .
 The ELINT drones flew two types of missions over the Yellow Sea and along the Demilitarized Zone between North and South Korea .
 When MiGs were detected, the drone was maneuvered to avoid the fighters . Drone was maneuvering to avoid MiGs when they were detected .
 The 147TEs provided about ten thousand hours of intelligence data per year . They provided about 10,000 hours a year of data .
 They were fitted with the external tanks and ELINT equipment that could pick up either radio or radar transmissions . It was fitted with an external tank that could be fitted with tanks and equipment .
 Their target was a small, isolated, walled compound twenty-23 miles west of Hanoi . The Vietnamese government forces were killed in a helicopter crash .
 It stood on the bank of the Song Con River, outside the provincial capital of Son Tay, Son Tay . It was located on the riverbank of the province's capital Son Tay.
 Comparison of old and new reconnaissance photos showed a guard tower and new wall had been added . New photos show a new wall and guard tower were added .
 It was also noticed that some uniforms had been spread out on the ground to spell out ""SAR"—search and rescue . Some uniforms were spread out to spell "SAR," or "Search and Rescue" Search and Rescue is a search and rescue mission .
 The final drone, on July 12, suffered an even more frustrating failure . The drone was the last drone to arrive in the U.S.
 The drone was supposed to show the height, color, eyes, and facial expressions of every man in the compound, but the programmer was slightly off . The drone banked a moment too early and the photos showed only the horizon .
 Too many drones flying over so isolated a site would tip off the North Vietnamese, it was decided to switch to SR-7ls instead .
 The data they brought back was ambiguous—the camp was not as active as before, but there did seem to be someone there .
 It started at 2:18 A.M. on November 21, 1970, when an HH-53 helicopter flew over the camp and blasted the guard towers and a guard barracks with minigun fire .
 Moments later, an HH-3 crash-landed inside the compound with the assault team . The assault team crashed into the compound . The mission was part of a U.S. mission to conduct an assault on the Taliban .
 After a short but fierce firefight, the helicopter picked up the troops and flew them to the camp . The helicopter picked them up and flew the troops to a camp where they were rescued .
 The raid took only twentyseven minutes, but no American POWs were found . The raid was the first time the U.S. troops had been on the ground since 1942 .
 In July 1971, President Richard M Nixon announced he would be making a trip to Communist China . Nixon's visit to China changed the world's political landscape . The trip changed the political landscape in 1971 .
 U.S. suspends overflights of China . Soon after, it was reported that the United States was suspending overflights .
 As political situation eased, so did the shroud of secrecy that had enveloped the drones . As the political situation eases, so does the shroud that had been enveloped .
 The November 9, 1970, issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology carried an article on the drones . The article was based on offthe-record information .
 What still could not be discussed were code names, technical details, or any references to operational missions .
 The peace talks, both the public ones in Paris and secret discussions conducted by Henry Kissinger, were deadlocked . Henry Kissinger conducted secret discussions with President Barack Obama .
 The number of U.S. troops declined, even as the anti-war movement grew . The United States withdrew from the Vietnam War in 2003 .
 The North Vietnamese had used the respite to rebuild and prepare for a ground invasion of the South . The North Vietnam had been preparing for ground invasion .
 Drone operation was the first to reflect the impending North Vietnamese invasion . The drone operation was first to be carried out in response to the impending invasion .
 In late December 1971, the sortie rate of SC drones increased to 1.5 times per day . The rate of sortie missions increased to twice what it had been .
 On May 8, Haiphong Harbor was mined, cutting off the North's main source of supply . The North has been cutting off its main supply of North Korea's main supply .
 The Linebacker I bombing campaign began, hitting such targets as bridges, barracks, barges, and rail lines . The bombing campaign was launched in 1944 .
 With the North Vietnamese invasion, the drones were launched at an average rate of nearly two per day . The North Vietnam invasion was an invasion of North Korea .
 147SC drones covered areas that were denied to manned reconnaissance aircraft as too dangerous . The 147SC drone was used to cover areas deemed too dangerous for manned reconnaissance planes .
 This included not only Hanoi and Haiphong, but all of North Vietnam and even occupied areas of South Vietnam . This included all of the country's capital, including Vietnam's capital and capital cities .
 As the name suggests, this was a standard SC fitted with a television camera . The camera was fitted with an external camera and a camera .
 On one SC/TV mission, eight out of nine targets were covered and three bonus targets were also spotted . This despite visibility of down to two miles .
 It was built for dropping radar-jamming chaff and had been operated by the tactical air command for several years .
 It was realized the pods could also carry propaganda leaflets over North Vietnam . The pods were also used to carry propaganda propaganda leaflets .
 Between July and December 1972, twenty-eight missions were flown by the 147NC drones . The 147NC drone was the first to fly in the United States .
 The biggest problem faced by the drones was predicting the wind over the target at the time of the drop .
 Several missions were ineffective because the winds carried the leaflets away from the target . Several of the missions were unsuccessful because of the wind .
 "Compass Cookie" was a special project to gain radar and fuze data on the SA-2 . As with the United Effort missions of 1965-66, the purpose of this special project was to gain radars and fuzes .
 A number of new versions had been introduced since 1966, and the mission would provide an update . The mission would update the mission .
 The September 28 mission was fired on by three SA-2s but transmitted the data before being destroyed . The mission was shot down by the SA2 but was destroyed .
 The North Vietnamese reopened several issues and finally broke off talks with the North Vietnamese on December 13 . Talks have been ongoing for more than a year .
 The B-52s took heavy losses, but devastated airfields, factories, railyards, warehouses, and SAM sites . The planes destroyed airfields and factories, but also destroyed SAM sites in the war .
 Two-thirds of these missions were bomb damage assessment missions in support of the B-52 strikes . Two-third of these were . missions were . support of . the B.52 .
 During the 1968-72 bombing halt, they were one of the few things sustaining the prisoners’ morale . They were one thing sustaining the prisoner’s morale .
 Following a New Year's halt, bombing was restricted to below the 20th parallel .
 On January 15, 1973, agreement was reached and all bombing of North Vietnam stopped . Agreement was reached in 1973 and North Vietnam was ruled out of war .
 Reconnaissance flights will continue over North Vietnam . It was announced that reconnaissance flights would continue .
 The following day, the first of a series of SC/TV missions was launched . The first of the series of missions was the launch of the SC-TV mission .
 The SD also had an improved radar altimeter, a new cooling system to cope with low-altitude flight in hot tropical weather .
 The 147SD was equipped with a Loran radionavigation system, which provided even greater accuracy . This was a 147SD equipped with an even more accurate system .
 The first two missions had actually been flown in August 1972, but both were lost . Both were lost in the first mission, which was lost .
 The guidance system would not accept any further bank commands . Once at this point, the guidance system stopped accepting any further commands .
 It was found that the Loran was generating an override signal to the roll control; the bank angle increased and the drone went out of control . The bank angle of the drone increased .
 The 147SC drones were designed for an average lifetime of two and a half missions each . They are designed to be able to fly two missions a day .
 The record holder was ""Tom Cat,"" with 68 missions, each covering an average of twelve targets . The record-holder was "Tom Cat" with a total of 68 missions .
 A 147SC/TV flew 42 missions, an SD flew 39, while an SD made 39 . An SD made 36 missions, a 147 SC/TV made 42 missions .
 From the start, it was discovered that the North Vietnamese were violating the peace agreement . The North Vietnam were discovered that it was violating a peace agreement.
 The United States, its spirit broken by the war and obsessed with Watergate scandal, was both unwilling and unable to do more than issue feeble protests . The U.S. was both unable and unwilling to do anything more .
 The South Vietnamese army was driven back, while the United States Congress cut off all aid . The U.S. Congress cut back all aid to the South Vietnamese .
 The United States began an evacuation, and South Vietnamese aircraft and helicopters began to flee . The U.S. began evacuating the South Vietnamese from the United States . The evacuation began at the start of the Vietnam War .
 The final 147S-series mission was flown on April 30, 1975, the day Saigon fell . The 147S was flown by the U.S. Air Force in Vietnam .
 With the fall of Saigon, the 147SC and SD drones were put into storage . The 147SC drone was put back in storage after the fall .
 Although some in Congress objected to the loss of so valuable a capability, the decision stood . The decision stood, and some members of Congress objected .
 Using the existing Firebee drone gave it flexibility, while new versions were developed on a short-time scale at low cost . New versions of the drone will be developed on short-term scale at a low cost, say experts .
 The result was a reconnaissance capability that was unmatched by manned aircraft . The U.S. Air Force launched the first manned aircraft in 1961 .
 In all, 3,435 drone missions were flown against Communist China, North Vietnam, and North Korea . China, Vietnam, North Korea, China and Vietnam were the three countries involved .
 A total of about 1,000 147SC drones were built, in nineteen different versions . The 147SC drone was the first 147SC to be built .
 Another 80 were possible losses to enemy action, 53 were lost in the recovery sequence, 30 in retrieval, and the remainder in other ways . The majority of the losses were lost to enemy forces .
 One of the high-altitude drones evaded eight MiG intercepts, three air-to-air missile firings, and nine SA-2 launches . The drone evaded 8 MiG . intercepts and three air to-air missiles firings .
 They had provided the first photographs of North Vietnamese SA-2 construction, MiG 21s, and helicopters; arming and fuze data . Also provided the only low-altitude BDA coverage of Linebacker Linebacker .
 For more than a decade after the defeat in Vietnam, the images of collapse and failure raised doubts about the ability and competence of the U.S. military . The images of failure in Vietnam raised doubts .
 In the years to follow, it was depicted as unable to win and equipped with weapons that did not work . It was shown to be unable to defeat in the early years of the war .
 A greater altitude and range, as well as further reductions in radar cross section, would need a completely new design . Also, a greater altitude, range and a greater range would need to be reduced to a new height and range design .
 Nationalist Chinese U-2 pilots made long-range drone program that much more attractive . The losses suffered by the Nationalists made the program more attractive.
 Understanding how shape affected radar return was one major area of study . Understanding how shapes affect radar return is one of the biggest challenges of radar technology .
 From time to time, the advanced drone was proposed to the air force, but a place could not be found for it in their plans or funding . The air force has not been able to find a place for the drone .
 The CIA expressed an interest to Ryan about developing a separate drone program . A formal proposal was put together for a drone program, Ryan says .
 After several years of work and proposals, Ryan felt the time was right for a major effort . Ryan: "After several years, the time is right for this type of effort. The time is now for this kind of effort"
 This included a formal briefing at SAC Headquarters by the company's founder, T Claude Ryan . SAC was founded by Claude Ryan in 1973 .
 By this time, the 147G drones were conducting overflights of China, and the 147H was beginning development, so the presentation was successful .
 A design competition was started for the new drone . It is not a simple conversion of an existing target drone, but a design competition started .
 Additionally, Northrop tried to enter the emerging competition, but the air force refused its proposal . The air force also refused Northrop's proposal .
 The range and altitude requirements for the drone were similar to what Ryan had proposed . The company felt confident its design would be selected . The drone will be able to fly from a height and range .
 North American put up a strong challenge, and for a time it seemed likely to win . North American was expected to win, but was beaten by the U.S.
 The fuselage resembled that of the Model 136, with the engine over the fuselage and inward-canted fins . The engine was fitted with an engine that had an engine over its fuselage .
 The sloped, flat sides of the plane were designed with reduced radar return in mind . They were designed to reduce radar return by reducing radar return .
 The fins are tilted inward to both reduce radar return and shield the exhaust . The fins were tilted to reduce radar returns and reduce the radar return of the plane .
 Much of the airframe was made of plastic, which also absorbed radar signals . The plane's airframe also had plastic airframes that absorbed radar waves .
 Infrared suppression was provided by placing the engine above the fuselage and mixing the hot exhaust with cool intake air . The hot exhaust was mixed with cool air to suppress infrared light .
 The total length of the wings was 34. feet, while the swept-back wings spanned 47.68 feet . The wings span 34.6 feet and total length was 34 feet .
 It was equipped with a KA-80A camera able to provide coverage along a 1,720-mile strip . The camera was able to track down the entire strip of land .
 Even if it suffered a complete failure, the drone could still automatically fly to a recovery zone . Even if a drone crashed, it could still fly to the recovery zone.
 As many as two hundred people attended the monthly progress meetings . Unlike the streamlined Big Safari management, as many as 2,000 people attended meetings .
 This consisted of one static test vehicle , two captive test vehicles , five flight test vehicles and five flight tests . Twenty production vehicles, numbered P-] through P-20, were built .
 Initial tests included captive flights aboard the DC-130 launch aircraft and tests of separation characteristics and recovery parachute operations . The initial tests included both captive flights .
 The first powered flight was made on September 10, 1968, at Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico .
 The early free flights were restricted to the White Sands Missile Range . They tested aerodynamics, performance, and stability . The early flights were limited to the range .
 A total of 42 free flights were made, including long-range flights from White Sands to Utah and back again .
 154P-4 was on a long-range test flight when a warning light came on at the Holloman control center . 154P4 was a prototype of the Air Force Air Force One . The test flight was a test flight from Holloman to Holloman Air Force Base .
 A control surface actuator had failed, and the drone was seconds from going out of control . The drone had to be pulled from control after it went into control .
 Ground control triggered the parachute recovery to save the drone . 154P-4's troubles were only starting when it was rescued by ground control .
 It was descending toward the Los Alamos complex, during the lunch hour . The plane was descending into the complex at the time of the incident .
 Thousands of people saw the parachute coming down under a 100foot-diameter parachute . Thousands saw it coming down with a parachute . The parachute was a 100ft-long parachute .
 There were bright flashes as doors on its underside were blown off, and bags used to cushion the landing impact inflated . Suddenly, the doors on the underside of the plane blew off, the pilot says .
 The drone missed a three-story building and landed on a road just inside the complex . The drone landed on the road just outside the complex, landing on a busy road .
 154P-4 came down in front of a jogger who was starting his fourth lap when it struck . 154P4 was the only person in the world to be hit by the crash .
 The tip of the right wing slid under the guardrail at the edge of the road . It was the tip of a right wing of the plane .
 Although the landing site itself was secure, only a few feet away was the fence marking the boundary with public land . The landing site was secure .
 Just across a narrow canyon was a residential area, and word quickly spread of what had happened . Just across the narrow canyon, word spread of the incident .
 154P-4 could be hidden, but press arrived and were able to photograph it from the perimeter fence . 154P4 can be hidden from the fence, but before the press arrived, the press photographed it from inside .
 An air force-Ryan recovery crew arrived an hour after landing, the fence was lined with reporters and television crews . By the time the recovery team arrived, reporters and TV crews lined the fence .
 Two photos of 154P-4 were published in the Los Alamos Monitor, despite air force requests that they be withheld . The air force requested that the photos be withheld from the publication .
 When it got hot, the solder softened, the wire pulled free, and the secret was out . The secret was revealed when the wire got hot .
 A flight by P-5 in September was successful, and the "" range'restrictions were n'rteci . The flight was the first of its kind in September .
 CH-3 helicopter was placed on alert at Holloman Air Force Base . During . subsequeritit'154 tights7a"" during . the deployment of the CH3 helicopter .
 Another flight on November 21, 1969, almost resulted in more publicity . The plane was the first to fly with a record-breaking flight .
 The ill-fortuned P-4 was flying over the Navajo reservation in northern Arizona when there was a circuit failure . The plane crashed over Navajo reservation when circuit failure occurred .
 Ex-air force sergeant who found drone realized it was a secret aircraft . The drone was found by an ex-Air Force sergeant who was an air force sergeant .
 He called the tribal police, saw that a perimeter guard was set up, gathered up the parachute, and took charge in a very professional manner . He called tribal police . He then took charge of the parachute .
 The sixth and seventh flights also involved simulated Soviet Fan Song B and E radars at the navy's China Lake facility in China Lake .
 This required a low radar return to prevent detection, a very high altitude to avoid interception, and a precise navigation system to cover the target . It required a . very high altitudes to avoid . interception .
 There was no interest in using the 154s over North Vietnam because of the success of the 147SC low-altitude drones . The 154s were used by the U.S. Air Force in the 1970s .
 The 147T program was cut short, while the number of 147H missions in 1970-71 was reduced to a mere handful of missions . The 147H program was also cut short in 1970s-71 .
 Nixon halting of Chinese overflights ended a mission that was already coming to a close . Nixon's halting of China overflights was already ending a mission already ending . Nixon: "It was a mission to end the mission"
 It was not needed for flights over North Vietnam, while the other possible targets were covered by SR-71 overflights . It was also not needed to cover other targets .
 Another of the Blackbird family was also to make its first, very Black, test flight that day .
 The next step in reconnaissance drone development was to use the technology of the A-12 to build a very high-speed, high-altitude drone . The drone is expected to be capable of flying at high altitudes .
 Following the loss of Powers's U-2 over the Soviet Union, there were several discussions about using the A-12 itself as a drone .
 Kelly Johnson opposed an A-12 drone, contending that the aircraft was too large and complex for such a conversion . Kelly Johnson had come to support the idea of drone reconnaissance .
 Another possibility was to use the A-12 as a launch aircraft for an unmanned QF-104 reconnaissance drone . Another possibility is to use it to launch an unmanned drone .
 Several times the possibility was examined, but the CIA expressed no interest . Several times examined, the possibility of using the CIA was examined .
 The CIA turned down the idea, but Johnson found an ally with Brig. Gen. John S. Johnson .
 A section of the Skunk Works shop in Burbank was walled off for use by the Q-12 team . The team is using a section of Burbank's Burbank shop in the area to work on the project .
 The effort was kept isolated from the A-12, YF-12A, and SR71 development . The effort has been isolated from other major projects .
 The Q-12 was more secret than the A-12 and the U-2 . Just as they were more secret, the Q-11 was more closely held . The Q 12 was more secretive than the U.2 .
 It would require one or more large parachutes to lower it to a soft landing . The plane would require a parachute to be lowered to soft landing in the air .
 A system that would allow a runway landing would add complexity, take up space, and increase both the cost and weight . The system would also add complexity and increase the cost of landing .
 One major problem was simply slowing the drone down to a speed at which any recovery system could work . The drone could not be slowed down enough to be able to recover .
 This would include not only the entire camera, but the guidance system . This would be the first time a camera has been fitted with a camera system .
 On December 10, it was sent to a test site for eleven days of radar cross section measurements . The radar cross-section of the device will be measured at a radar test site .
 It had the lowest radar cross section of any Lockheed design, a record that would be held for the next decade . It would be the first time the design had a radar cross cross section .
 The Q-12 was then returned to Lockheed for test fits of a mock-up of the camera . The camera was then sent back to Lockheed to complete test runs .
 The drone would use a Hycon camera which used a rotating mirror to provide panoramic photos . Hycon was developed by the Hycon company in 2007 .
 Engine tests of the Marquardt RJ43-MA-3 ramjet were conducted in a wind tunnel that simulated the Q-12's flight profile . At the same time, engine tests were conducted for the Q12 .
 When the drone turned, it was feared that the airflow into the engine would be disrupted . It was feared the drone would disrupt the airflow in the engine .
 The ramjet could be shut down for as long as forty-five seconds and still relight . The Ramjet could shut down and still be relight for up to 40 seconds . The ram jet could also be shut off for as many as 40 seconds before relighting .
 When Johnson presented the results to the CIA in February 1963, he found them unenthusiastic . The results were presented to Johnson by the CIA .
 The CIA was overextended and unable to undertake another risky project . With the A-12 still far from Mach 3, the U-2 operations against China, and other secret air operations such as Air America, the CIA was not able to undertake more risky projects .
 On March 20, 1963, the CIA issued a contract to begin full-scale development of the project . The CIA issued the contract in March 1963, and it began to work on the project in 1963 .
 It assigned responsibility to Lockheed for the airframe, navigation system, and the ramjet . Lockheed will be responsible for the aircraft's airframe and navigation system .
 Funding and operational control was split between the CIA and the air force . Funding and operations were split between CIA and air force control .
 A major problem in development was the aerodynamics of the Q-12/A-12 launch profile . The launch profile is designed to make it easier to launch the plane .
 Mach 3 shock waves between the two aircraft could interact, creating high temperatures and stresses on the airframe . The shock waves could create high temperatures, stresses on airframes . The two aircraft will be able to communicate with each other at a time of maximum speed .
 The Q-12 would have to pass through the shock wave formed by the A-12's forward fuselage . The A-11 would also have to dodge a shock wave created by the fuselage of the plane's fuselage.
 The Q-12 would have to separate cleanly, as there were only a few feet between its wingtips and the A-12's inward-canted fins . The Q/12 would need to separate from the A/12's wingtips .
 The center of gravity and center of lift of the combination would have to be very carefully controlled . The combination of the two engines would need to be carefully controlled.
 Wind-tunnel tests were made using metal models of the Q-12 fixed to the back of an A-12 .
 This would lift it off the back of the model A-12 and provide data on the aerodynamic effects and stresses on the combination . This would be the first time the model has been lifted from the back .
 It was not possible to reproduce actual free flight in the wind tunnel, however .
 Wind-tunnel data and calculations indicated getting the drone through the shock wave formed by the launch aircraft's fuselage would prove difficult .
 The ramjet would be at full power, and there could be air-fuel mixture and engine unstart problems as it passed through the shock wave .
 Johnson felt they could ""haul the thing"" through Mach 1.0 . Although there were still problems with the launch profile, the drag of the combination, and the equipment .
 Ironically, the actual design and production of the drones had gone much more smoothly . Ironically, it had gone far more smoothly, the drone makers say . The drones are designed to be able to fly and operate in the wild .
 The drone's payload bay has changed the size of the payload bay . The drone was designed by the RCS and wind-tunnel testing .
 By August 6, 1963, this had been completed, with no loss of resolution caused by the change . The resolution was completed by August 6 .
 The D-21A resembled an A-12 nacelle, wings, and vertical tail . The aircraft had a vertical tail, wings and a vertical wing . It was the first of its kind .
 The leading edges of the wings, the control surfaces, and the inlet spike were all ma~de from."" radar-ab's'orbirig plastic .
 The reconnaissance equipment was carried in a 76-inch-long Q-bay just behind the intake . The plane was carrying reconnaissance equipment in a Q-Bay just behind its intake .
 This also carried the inertial navigation system, the automatic flight controls, and the command and telemetry electronics .
 The normal cruising speed was Mach 3.25 at an altitude of 80,000 to 95,000 feet . The normal cruise speed at altitude of 90,000 ft. at the time of the flight .
 The pylon had latches to hold the D-21, a compressed air emergency jettisoning system, and a fuel line to transfer fuel to the M21's own tank's . The fuel line was used to transfer the fuel from the M-21's tank's to
 Two additional launch aircraft, TVL-21 Articles'134'135'and 135, were built . Two more launch aircraft were built.
 The first step would be to blow off the D-21's inlet and exhaust covers, the first step is blowing off the inlet .
 The LCO would start the ramjet and the other systems of the D-21/ M-21 . With the correct speed and altitude at the correct altitude, the LCO could start the system itself .
 Green lights would indicate the status of each system . This was controlled via a panel controlled by a panel in the room .
 LCO could watch the D-21 through a periscope on the instrument panel . The LCO would be able to watch the LCO through the perisope .
 The M-21 launch aircraft had a camera mounted in what was called a ""hot pod" to film the separation . The camera was mounted in a 'hot pod' during the separation of the aircraft .
 As with the U-2s and A-12s before them, the D-21s were given Article numbers . The D-22s were the first to be given Article Numbers .
 Seven D-21s are planned for completion by the end of the year . Article 501 is Article 501, with seven D-22s planned to be completed by end of year . The first was Article 501 in 2010 .
 The early D-21s were in a natural metal finish with the outer half of the wings in black . The outer half the wings were black .
 After four months of checkouts and static tests, the aircraft was shipped to Groom Lake and reassembled . After four more months, the plane was shipped back to the U.S.
 Lockheed test pilot William Park was selected to make all the captive and launch tests . Park will be the first person to fly the test aircraft into space . Park is also a test pilot for Lockheed .
 A bridge crane on the ceiling of the hangar was waiting to lift the D-21, swing it over, and lower it onto the M-21 . A crane was waiting for the plane to be lowered from the ground to the ground .
 The first D-21/M-21 captive flight was scheduled for December 22, 1964 . The first was scheduled to take place on December 23, 1964.
 Kelly Johnson would supervise the SR-71 flight, then fly out to Groom Lake . This would allow time for Kelly Johnson to supervise and fly out . Kelly Johnson is scheduled to fly out of the plane to the lake .
 Minor problems pushed back the SR-71's flight until about noon, however .
 At Groom Lake, William Park and the rest of the D-21/M-21 team awaited their chance . William Park: "It's been a long way to go. It's a long road to go"
 Johnson ran up the ladder, patted Park on the head, and told him to take off . Finally, at about 2:00 P.M., a Lockheed Jetstar landed, landing at 2:30 p.m.
 The D-21/M-21 flew above the snow-dusted hills . Park checked out the handling of the aircraft .
 Despite the added drag and weight of the D-21 and low-power engines in the M-21, the flight characteristics were the same as the A-12 . Park found the combination's flight characteristics are the same .
 The speed and altitude envelope had to be explored in small steps . The combination represented a whole new design, the team says .
 Johnson had hoped to make the first D-21 free flight on his birthday, February 27, but it was not to be . Johnson was not able to make his birthday on February 27 .
 During one captive flight in April 1965, both the D-21's elevens were ripped off by flutter . The plane was flying in captivity when the flutter ripped them off .
 This required a redesign, which involved adding balance weights and control surface locks . This required the addition of balance weights, which added surface locks to the design .
 By May, the flutter problem had been corrected, and the combination had reached Mach 2.6.6 .
 Ray Torick and Keith Beswick would alternate as launch officer on the missions . Keith Beswick would be the launch officer for the missions to the U.S. The missions would take place in the summer of 2012 .
 The launches were to be made over the ocean, west of Point Mugu, on the California coast . The launches will take place on the coast of California .
 The D-21/M-21 could not accelerate sufficiently within the range being used for the early tests . A new test range was needed, as the D-20/21/21 could no longer accelerate sufficiently . The new range is needed to be able to accelerate enough within the
 The weight and drag of the D-21 cut into the speed and range of the M-21 . This was followed by performance problems . The weight, drag and speed problems were followed by problems with the aircraft .
 The D-21/M-21 also showed poor transonic acceleration, particularly on hot days . Several tempts were made to fly to Point Mugu for launch practice, but the plane could not make the range .
 More powerful engines were fitted to the M-21s, along with a new inlet control system, but the problems persisted . The problems persisted, with more powerful engines being fitted to them .
 The instrumentation system's strain gauges could not measure the launch forces, due to the heat of Mach 3-plus flight . The strain gauge could not be used to measure launch forces .
 Johnson was unwilling to commit to a launch until he was sure the separation maneuver was understood . Johnson: "I'm not sure if I'm going to launch until I'm sure it's understood"
 The first batch of D-21 drones had been completed, but Lockheed was yet to launch a single free flight . Johnson was unwilling to recommend building any more of the drones until it had been proven in flight .
 A final problem facing the D-21 program was how to separate the intake and exhaust covers . A final part of the project is to separate exhaust and intake covers . The project is expected to be completed in 2015 .
 The first attempt to separate the covers was made on the first attempt . It was the first time the covers were separated .
 With the covers off, the ramjet could act as a third engine for the M-21 . It could be used during the acceleration to launch speed . The ramjet will be used in the launch phase of the rocket .
 Fuel from the M-21's tanks would be transferred to top off the D-21, replacing that used during the runup to the launch point . Just before launch, fuel would be used to replace the fuel used to top up the plane's fuel tank .
 By late January 1966, more than a year after the first captive flight, everything seemed ready to fly . The plane's first flight was scheduled for January 1966 .
 The launch forces were understood, the ramjet operations and hatch recovery had been proven, and the launch maneuver had been practiced . The launch force was understood and the hatch recovery was proven, the author says .
 The M-21 rendezvoused with a KC-135 tanker, refueled, and started the run to the launch point . The mission was the first of its kind .
 This began over the town of Dalhart, Texas, on a direct course toward Point Mugu . This is the first time the plane has been seen over the Texas coast .
 Park began a slight climb, followed by a pushover into a slight dive, holding 0.2 gs on the M-21's precise gmeter . Park began the checkout and the tanks of the D-21 .
 Through the periscope, Beswick could see the D-21 rising off the pylon . Beswick: "D-21 is a good example of a good man on the ground"
 It stopped and seemed to hang perhaps twenty feet above the back of the M-21 . Then, it stopped and appeared to hang maybe twenty feet high .
 The D-21 program was strapped for money . This placed a burden on Lockheed, as the program is strapped for funds .
 Johnson had discussions with air force officials and offered, if nec""tssaty,'10 naVe L&cKiieea crews laiincn tne'early operational missions . Johnson offered to fly with the air force on early missions .
 He was also looking at a new launch profile—attaching a rocket booster to the D-21 and launching the assembly from a B-52 .
 Despite the successful launch, he was still concerned about the risks of the M-21 profile . Despite the success of the mission, he said he was worried about the risk of the launch .
 The peak speed was Mach 3.3, while an altitude of 90,000 feet was reached . Peak speed was 3.2 mph, while altitude was reached at 90,00 feet .
 It was run unpressurized several times during ground tests, which damaged it . Subsequent investigation indicated it had been run unpressed several times . It is believed it was damaged by ground tests carried out during tests .
 The two successful launches sparked renewed interest, and an order for a second batch of 15 D-21s was issued on April 29 . The order for the second batch has been issued .
 Using a B-52H as a launch aircraft would improve safety, cut costs, says air force chief . He says it would also extend the deployment range over the short-range M-21 .
 The D-21, Article 504, would carry a full fuel load for the first time . Article 504 is Article 504 of Article 504 which would allow the aircraft to carry full fuel .
 The launch would be made at a slightly higher speed and at exactly 1.00 Park, as before, was flying the launch aircraft, Article 135 . Park would be making the launch at a higher speed .
 Art Peterson flew the plane with Keith Beswick in the backseat to film the separation . The plane was flown by Art Peterson, who was in the passenger seat at the time .
 Park reached the launch speed of Mach 3.25, began the shallow dive, and Torick started the separation sequence . The two planes flew in formation, and Park reached a height of Mach 4.25 .
 The M-21 pitched up and the aerodynamic loads tore off the forward fuselage . The plane was pulled from the ground and crashed into the air .
 Park and Torick were subjected to incredible g forces as the fuselage tumbled . Park was flying with Torick when the plane crashed into the air . The crash was the first of its kind in the history of aviation .
 Torick died when sea water entered his pressure suit . Park was picked up by a helicopter, but Torick drowned . Torick survived a Mach 3 breakup and ejection .
 Using the B-52H as drop plane entailed a complete rebuilding of the D-21s . The D-22s were rebuilt using a complete rebuild of the aircraft .
 The process involved removing the outer wing panels, inlet cone, and ramjet from the airframe . The process was carried out by removing the airframes from the aircraft .
 Attachment points were added to the top of the fuselage for the pylon and to the bottom for the rocket booster . The pylon is attached to the rear of the plane and the booster .
 The drone would be reassembled and its systems checked out . Once this is completed, the drone would then be re-assembled and checked out.
 The rocket booster used to propel the D-21B to ramjet ignition speed was longer and heavier than the rocket booster itself . The booster was heavier and longer than the aircraft itself . It was used to launch the D.21B into space .
 It was cylindrical with several ridges, giving it the appearance of a water pipe . The water pipe was shaped like a cylinder with a diameter of about six inches .
 At the pointed nose was the propeller of a ram air turbine, which spun to provide electrical power . At the point of the nose was a propeller that spun from the air turbine .
 The solid rocket motor produced an average thrust of 27,300 pounds and burned for 87 seconds . The rocket motor burned for an average of 87 seconds, according to NASA .
 To stabilize the assembly during the burn, a fin was attached to the bottom of the booster . The fin is attached to a fin that stabilizes the assembly .
 To provide ground clearance, it folded to the right while attached to the B-52 . It folded to provide ground .
 These were much larger than the pylons for the Hound Dog cruise missile normally carried by the B-52Hs . These were bigger than the ones for the missile normally used by the aircraft .
 They bolted to the existing attachment points and involved no changes to the wings’ structure . The wings were bolted to each other and the wings were attached to the same attachment points .
 Inside the two B-52s, two LCO stations were added to the rear of the flight deck . Each station was independent, with its own command and telemetry system, and a periscope .
 This provided a backup should the programming fail, or if it was necessary to change the timing of the event . This was a backup if the programming failed or if the timing was changed .
 The telemetry system recorded data on the functioning of the flight control, propulsion, fuel, booster, electrical and hydraulic systems, engine and equipment temperatures, as well as the Mach number, direction, and location .
 This information was used to monitor the launch, and for postflight analysis of any problems . This information is used in the analysis of the launch launch .
 D-21B's own inertial navigation system was updated during the long flight to the drop point . This was used to update the aircraft's navigation system . The mission was the first time the plane had been fitted to the aircraft .
 Temperature control was critical, as the D-21B would be ""cold soaked"" by the negative58 degree F conditions during the long flight to the launch point . Temperature control would be critical .
 After the drop, the D-21 would be suddenly heated by the acceleration to Mach 3plus cruise . It would be the first time a spacecraft has a Mach 3 plus cruise cruise .
 The first of the B-52s arrived at Palmdale on December 12, 1966, to begin the modifications . The modifications began in December 1966 .
 Before launch, the LCO would lower the booster fin, turn on the telemetry, test the automatic flight control system, and test the fuel and the observation camera . The LCO also tested the automatic control system and the fuel .
 The assembly assembly would fall free for a moment, then the booster would ignite . The booster would then fall free and ignite .
 As it passes through 63,000 feet, the destruct system would be activated . The LCO could destroy the vehicle if it goes off-course .
 When D-21B reached an altitude of about 80,000 feet, two explosive bolts would fire and the booster would drop off . The booster would then be dropped from the plane at an altitude that reached 80,00 feet .
 The D-21B's automatic flight control system would then go to a preprogrammed Mach number . The plane would then have a Mach number that was programmed to match that number .
 The D-21B would be controlled during the overflight by an onboard inertial navigation system . It would also be controlled by a system that would control the flight overflight .
 This was preprogrammed with the headings, bank angles, and the camera on-and-off points . This is the first time the camera has been used in this way .
 When the mission is completed, the D-21 would fly to friendly airspace . The D-22 would then fly to a friendly airspace in the U.S.
 The command system, recovery beacons, and telemetry would be turned back on . Once clear, the command system will be turned on again, officials say .
 As it passed through 60,000 feet, at a speed of Mach 1.67, the latches on the front edge of the hatch would release . The latches would release as the plane flew through the air at Mach 1,67 .
 The recovery parachute would open, and the hatch would be caught in midair by the JC-130 . It would be the first time a recovery parachute has been deployed .
 If the midair recovery was unsuccessful, the hatch would float, and could be picked up by a ship . If the hatch was successful, it would float and float . The hatch could also float in the air, and be recovered by the ship .
 On January 18, 1967, Kelly Johnson had a meeting with Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus Vance . Kelly Johnson met with Vance at the Pentagon .
 Vance said he was very much for the project and asked Lockheed to press forward with it . Vance: "I'm very much behind the project. I'm very proud of it"
 He said the U.S. government would never again fly a manned aircraft over enemy territory in peacetime . He said that the United States government would not again fly over enemy land .
 D-21B/B-52H modification work was complete by late summer of 1967 . By late summer, 1967, the modification work to both the B-21Bs and B-52hs was complete .
 In effect, the development program would have to begin again from scratch . The program would be the first time it had to be restarted .
 They had flown only half the D-21's full range, and the hatch had not yet been successfully recovered . The hatch was not yet recovered from the aircraft .
 The first attempt was made on September 28, 1967, and ended in complete failure . The first attempts were made in 1967, but failed .
 As the B-52 was flying toward the launch point, the D-21B fell off the pylon . The plane was shot down by a U.S. Air Force jetliner .
 The failure was traced to a stripped nut on the forward right attachment point on the pylon . The failure traced to the failure of the nut .
 Several attempts had to be aborted before launch due to technical problems . Several other attempts to launch were aborted .
 The A-12 had finally been allowed to deploy, and the SR-71 was soon to replace it . The SR71 is soon to be replaced by the A.12 .
 With a 3,000-nautical-mile range, the D-21Bs could act as a replacement . The plane could be replaced by a Boeing 777-200 aircraft with a new Boeing 777 .
 At the same time, new developments in reconnaissance satellite technology were nearing operation . At the time, satellite technology was nearing operation.
 Up to this point, the limited number of satellites available restricted coverage to the Soviet Union . Up to the time, the only satellite available was a Soviet satellite orbiting satellite .
 A new generation of reconnaissance satellites could soon cover targets anywhere in the world . They could soon be able to cover targets in any way .
 The satellites’ resolution would be comparable to that of that of aircraft, but without the slightest political risk . The satellites would be able to reach a resolution similar to aircraft resolution .
 It flew 2,850 nautical miles, the design range, and also reached an altitude of 90,000 feet . The plane was designed to be able to fly 2,000 miles and reach 90,500 feet in altitude .
 The D-21B was running out of money, and Lockheed had to put its own money into the program . The program was overrunning costs and Lockheed was forced to put more money into it .
 Johnson still felt the project had a great deal of promise, but he knew there were still very difficult technical challenges ahead . Johnson said he still felt there was still a lot of promise for the project .
 This mission carried a camera; when developed, the photos proved to be fair . This mission carries a camera and a camera . When developed, these photos proved that they were fair .
 The mission of February 11, 1969, was the first attempt to fly a ""Captain Hook" mission profile . The mission was first attempt at flying a "Captain Hook"" mission profile. The mission took place in February 1969 .
 This involved a launch near Hawaii, a flight path taking the D-21 over Christmas Island or Midway, then back to Hawaii and the recovery zone . The launch took place near Hawaii and involved a return to Hawaii .
 Lockheed believed the cause was water in Article 518's guidance system, but this could not be proven . Lockheed believed this could have been the cause of the problem .
 Both missions were in excess of 2,900 nautical miles, and both hatches were recovered . Both hatches are recovered .
 The photos from the first mission were fair, while the second were considered good . The photos were fair and good enough .
 The D-21B is now considered ready for operational flights . The air force now considered it ready to fly the aircraft .
 The air force and CIA proposed to President Nixon that the D-21B be used on ""hot" missions over Communist China . The D-22B was the first aircraft to be flown over China .
 Kelly Johnson felt the probability was high that approval would be given . Kelly Johnson: "I think the probability is that approval will be given"
 With the approval to start operational missions, activities shifted to Beale Air Force Base . Beale has been the site of most of the world's most significant missions .
 It was home of the 465th Bomb Wing, so the modified aircraft would not be noticed . The two modified aircraft were not noticed at the time .
 The B-52H, loaded with two D-21Bs, took off from Beale in the predawn hours and flew west . It was the first time the plane had taken off from the base .
 Once the target was reached, the D-21 was to repeat the maneuvers in reverse order to return to the recovery area . Once the targets were reached, they would repeat the maneuver in reverse . The mission was completed at a target point in the air .
 This allowed the D-21B to miss a checkpoint and still be able to go on to the next checkpoint . This allowed them to miss the checkpoint and continue to fly on .
 It flew a Captain Hook mission with a total distance of 2,969 nautical miles . It was the first time the plane had been on a mission to fly under Captain Hook .
 Lockheed was told to be ready for a second operational mission in March 1970 . The mission was scheduled to take place on March 1, 1970 .
 Political considerations caused the program to be idle for nearly a year . As events turned out, political considerations delayed the program's return .
 Over the recovery zone, the hatch separated, but the parachute failed to open and it was destroyed on impact . The hatch separated over a recovery zone but was destroyed by impact .
 Several more months went by before authorization was given for additional flights . Several months later, additional flights were approved .
 The hatch splashed down, and a United States Navy destroyer headed toward the floating payload . The U.S. Navy destroyer was able to reach the hatch .
 The fourth D-21B overflight was made on March 20, 1971 . The fourth was the last overflight made by the aircraft .
 On July 15, 1971, Kelly Johnson received a wire canceling the D-21B program . Kelly Johnson was the last member of the Air Force to carry out the mission .
 The remaining drones were transferred from Beale Air Force Base by a C-5A and placed in dead storage . They were transferred to dead storage and placed into dead storage at Beale .
 On July 23, Johnson went to Beale to hold a final farewell to mark the disbanding of the 4200th Test Wing . Johnson: "It's a good time to be proud of your son, son and daughter"
 Of these, twenty-one were flown—four in the M-21 launches, thirteen in B-52H test missions, and four in the overflights . Four of these missions were carried out by the B-21 .
 Two operational D-21Bs were able to reach the recovery zone, but no photos were recovered . No photos of the aircraft were recovered from the crash .
 Like the A-12 Oxcart, the D-21B Tagboard drones remained a Black airplane, even in retirement . The D-22D Tagboard drone was retired from the Air Force .
 Their existence was not suspected until August 1976, when the first group was placed in storage at the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Military Storage and Disposition Center .
 The B-52H portion of the Tagboard program remained a blank . It is not clear what year the test launches began nor when the overflights were made .
 It included shots of the D-21 being loaded on the M-21, in-flight shots, and film of two successful launches . The film was released in October 2013 .
 The First Fifty Years, in late 1993 that the details were finally released, were finally revealed . The First 50 Years was published in 1993 .
 Miller's book used Kelly Johnson's own logs and official documents to tell the story of the ""Blackest" of the Blackbird family . Miller used Johnson's logs to tell his story . The book was written by Kelly Johnson, a member of the Johnson family .
 A year later, Ben Rich's book, Skunk Works, gave a personal account of the Tagboard . Ben Rich wrote a book about Tagboard in which he gave his account .
 It was still in the original silver and black finish, but the pylon had been removed . The pylon was removed from the original finish .
 Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center was able to get four of the most important articles . The Ames-dryden flight research center got four of them .
 No test program had been determined, but the opportunity to acquire such a vehicle was too good to pass up . The vehicle is expected to be driven by a new generation of high-end vehicles .
 One obvious program would be testing of scramjet engines, similar to those planned for the X-30 . One obvious question is whether the plane will be able to fly again .
 It was felt that the unstart problem that had caused the fatal crash had been solved . It was thought that the problem that caused the crash was solved had been resolved .
 As with the earlier mission profile, the D-21B would be lost at the end of the flight . The mission profile would be similar to that of an earlier version .
 Any such NASA D-21B flight program would be made a quarter century after the last operational mission . The last operational flight was made a 25-year ago mission .
 The D-21B Tagboard was the ultimate expression of the Black reconnaissance aircraft . It was designed for the reconnaissance aircraft, and was designed to be the most versatile .
 The end of the D-21 program brought to a close an era of Black airplane development . The D-22 program was the first of its kind .
 The XP-59A and P-80 had been tactical fighters . The first Black airplanes were tactical fighters. They were the first Black fighters .
 Starting in the early 1950s, the emphasis shifted to reconnaissance aircraft . The emphasis shifted from reconnaissance aircraft to aircraft aircraft .
 The following two decades saw the X-16, U-2, Sun Tan, A-12, 147, 154, and, finally, the D-21 .
 On the surface, the Tagboard program was cut short by President Nixon's ending of China overflights . President Nixon ended the program in 1972 .
 The cancellation of the D-21B program was not only the result of changing politics, but also a changing reconnaissance situation . The cancellation was due to changing political and reconnaissance situations, officials say .
 On June 15, 1971, the first Big Bird reconnaissance satellite was orbited by the D-21B program . The D-20B program ended one month before the launch of Big Bird .
 In 1959, when the A-12 project was just getting started, he asked the CIA whether there would be one round of aircraft development or two before the satellites took over . In 1959 he asked whether the CIA would be able to develop one or two aircraft .
 The D-21 Tagboard was as challenging as anything undertaken by the Skunk Works . It was the first time they had attempted a Tagboard in the past .
 The development problems were not unusual, given the complexity of the D-21's mission . The mission is expected to be completed by 2020 .
 The development program ""was more akin to that of a missile than an aircraft," says the Pentagon . The program was 'like a missile', says the U.S. government .
 Each D-21 would be"""" lost at the end of the flight, whether it succeeded or failed . Like a missile, each would be."""" lost in the flight -- whether it succeeds or fails .
 All that Lockheed had to go on to determine the cause of any problems was the telemetry . Lockheed says it will not reveal if the problems are caused .
 After the guidance system malfunctioned on the first overflight, it had kept going and reached Siberia before self-destructing . After the malfunctioning, the plane kept going to Siberia .
 One of the pieces, a panel from the engine mount, was found by a shepherd, who turned it over to Soviet authorities . It was turned over to the Soviet authorities in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 CIA official walked into Ben Rich's office with the panel . Seventeen years after the November morning it was launched, a CIA official walks in with the group . The panel is celebrating the launch of the 9/11 .
 Rich, now head of the Skunk Works after Kelly Johnson's retirement, asked where he had gotten it . Rich is now the boss of the skunk works in New Jersey .
 The panel, composed of radar-absorbing material, looked as if it had just been made . The panel was composed of . radar-absorbent material .
 As they talked, another Dark Eagle was being built in the same hangar that had seen production of the D-21s .
 The new plane was a subsonic attack aircraft . It did not have the thundering speed of the D-21 .
 Unlike the sleek, manta ray shape of the D-21, the new Dark Eagle was angular . The new aircraft was angular.
 It had a form that was a violation of every aerodynamic principle built into airplanes since the Wright Brothers . It had to be aerodynamic, the plane was built in violation of aerodynamic principles . The plane was a prototype of the Wright brothers' original design .
 A common thread running through the history of the postwar Black airplanes was the quest for a reduced radar cross section . The planes were designed to reduce the size of radar cross sections .
 It was hoped that the U-2 would fly so high it would be difficult to pick up on radar . The U.2 was designed to be so high that radar would not pick up radar .
 Tests over the U.S. seemed to justify this hope, but once overflights began, the Soviets had no major difficulties tracking it .
 Attempts to reduce the U-2s' detectability proved ineffective .
 Kelly Johnson realized the A-12 would have to be designed from the start for a reduced radar cross section . Kelly Johnson: "I'm not going to be surprised by the success of this project."
 The North Vietnamese and Chinese were able to detect the A-12s . The important word was reduced—the important word is reduced .
 Taken together, the A-12s' speed, height, and reduced radar return made them unstoppable .
 This made the former target drones difficult to shoot down, as the Chinese and North Vietnamese soon learned . China and North Vietnam soon learned how to shoot their own drones down .
 With the advanced Model 154, a reduced radar cross section was built in . The advanced model 154 has a lower radar cross cross section built in. It is the most advanced version of the Model 154 .
 In all these cases, however, the reduced radar cross section was only one of the design considerations . Radar cross section is only one aspect of the radar design .
 The maximum possible altitude was the driving requirement in the design of the Black reconnaissance airplanes . The maximum altitude was a driving requirement for the design .
 By the early 1970s, a reduced radar cross section became the dominant consideration in the design of new aircraft . Radar cross section was the key to reducing radar cross cross sections .
 Austro-Hungarian air service covered a Taube with clear sheets of a celluloid material called Emaillit . Air service officer Petrocz von Petroczy covered the Taube in the air .
 The theory was that a transparent covering would make the plane harder to see and hit with ground fire compared to a fabric-covered plane silhouetted against sky .
 An engineer named Anton Knubel built two monoplanes with clear coverings in 1913-14 . The monoplane was the first of its kind in the world .
 The second of the planes had its framework painted a blue gray color to make it harder to see against the sky . The second plane was painted blue gray .
 Knubel was killed in a crash of the plane on September 8, 1915 . Unfortunately, he was also killed in the crash .
 Three Fokker E III fighters were delivered in the summer of 1916, covered with Cellon Cellon . The idea was seen as having promise, and the idea was thought to have potential .
 Cellon had found wide use in the automotive industry as a glass substitute . Cellon was found to be widely used in the car industry .
 It was then attached to the plane's framework and allowed to dry to a taut finish . The plane was then allowed to be attached to a framework and dry .
 The first attempt at a stealth airplane was a failure . Very soon, however, it was apparent this first attempt to be a success .
 It was far more effective simply to paint the aircraft in camouflage colors . The aircraft was painted in camouflage colours .
 With the invention of radar in the mid-1930s, a new approach was needed . Radar radar was developed in the 1930s, but radar radar technology has since been developed . Radar technology has been used in the U.S. since the 1950s .
 Called "chaff" in the United States or ""window"" in England, the strips would be released from a plane . Called ""chaff"" in the U.S. or "window" in UK, they were released from planes .
 They would reflect radar signals and produce false echoes, which would hide the plane . The plane would then be able to hide in the dark .
 Called ""noise jamming,"" the target plane transmitted signals on the same frequency as the radar . The noise jamming technique was called "no noise jam"
 The echo from a plane was a tiny fraction of the radar's original signal strength . It was possible for the plane to drown out the echo, making it impossible to detect the target plane .
 With development of jet bombers like the B-47 in the late 1940s, it was thought that they would fly too high and too fast to be detected .
 During the Cold War, both the ECM and the tactics of its use grew more sophisticated . The ECM was used by the U.S. military in the 1950s and '60s .
 The Soviet Union was vast, and many areas had little or no radar coverage . Many areas in the Soviet Union were not equipped with radar coverage.
 The plane would not transmit any jamming signals, as this would only advertise the plane's presence . This would only be used to broadcast the presence of the plane .
 As the bomber neared the target, the number of radars would increase, and it would no longer be possible to avoid them . The bomber would be able to avoid the radars as the bomber approached the target .
 A more subtle approach was to transmit carefully timed signals, which made the plane appear farther from the radars, or at a different bearing . The plane appeared to be flying at different bearing, or in a different direction .
 As a last resort, the air defense centers, radars, and SAM sites would be bombed . The U.S. would also target air defense and defense radars .
 The prime source of a large radar cross section is two or three surfaces, such as a wing and fuselage . The floor, sides, and back of a cockpit, which meet at a right angle, is the prime source .
 The radar signal strikes one surface, is reflected to the other, then is bounced directly back to the radar . The radar signals strike one surface and are reflected to each other .
 Other sources include sharp points on the wings or tails, wing fences, external weapons, intakes that allow the front of the engine to be ""seen"" by the radar .
 A feature that has a strong radar return at one frequency may not be detectable at another . Radar return may also not be detected at another frequency . Radar returns may not always be detected in the same frequency .
 A small vent or grill may produce a major part of the plane's radar cross section . This is independent of size . A small grill or vent can produce a large part of a plane's cross cross section.
 The interactions between the reflections from each part of the plane cause huge changes in the radar cross section . The interactions from each of the reflections in the plane can be seen on radar radar .
 A one-third-degree change in the aspect angle can result in a thirty-twofold change in radar cross section . In some cases, a change in aspect angle is a third-degree increase in the cross section of radar . Radar cross section can be more than 30 degrees
 When all these factors are taken into account, a plane's radar cross section may vary by a factor of 1 million . The radar cross cross section of a plane can vary by 1 million times . A plane's cross section can be affected by more than 1 million factors .
 Only a rough estimate of the cross-section of such targets such as aircraft or ships can be obtained by calculation . Only a . rough estimate can be made of aircraft, ships or aircraft .
 By the mid-1950s, basic research was underway in the U.S. on understanding the sources of a plane's radar cross section .
 A team headed by Bill Bahret at the Wright Air Development Center did much of this work . The Wright Air Force Museum is a museum of aviation history .
 A large anechoic chamber was built to test the radar return of different shapes . The chamber is designed to test radar return from different shapes.
 By the late 1950s, Bahret and his team felt they understood the sources of large echoes . Bahret: "By 1950s we felt we understood the origins of the large echoes"
 The navy lost interest in the project, and Wright went to the air force . Wright went on to be a member of the Air Force . The project was eventually abandoned .
 The RAM was both thin and strong and, therefore, could be attached to the skin of an airplane . The air force was very interested . The RAM could be used by the air force .
 The plane was only an experiment, with no operational applications in mind . It was only intended to be used as an experiment . The plane will be used in a museum in New York .
 The T-33's flight characteristics were degraded by the added thickness of material . The results were mixed, but many of the echo reductions were confirmed .
 Grissom found the plane was hard to control; it slid in turns, overdived and overdived . The plane behaved like a roller coaster roller coaster, he said . He said it was a "hard to control"
 Despite all these efforts, there was no simple way to calculate the radar cross section of a plane . Despite all the efforts, it is still impossible to calculate a plane's cross section .
 With computers and theoretical models of the time, too many factors entered into the calculation for it to be a practical possibility . With the computers and . theoretical models . of the . time, it was not possible to have a realistic possibility .
 Kelly Johnson wanted to test the radar cross sections of the A-12 and D-21 . He first used small models of radar cross-sectioned radar .
 Radar cross section was determined by radar cross section of planes . Still, it was not until the planes actually took flight that the true radar cross cross section could be determined .
 Reduced radar cross section had little impact on the design of operational aircraft . Radar cross section was reduced to less than one per cent of radar cross cross section .
 The air defenses of North Vietnam required a fundamental change in tactics . Project 'Project Harvey' is the first of its kind in the Vietnam era .
 A typical Rolling Thunder strike was composed of sixteen F-105D bombers . Rolling Thunder strikes were composed of 16 bombers . A typical strike would be comprised of 16 F-103D bombers.
 The force needed to protect them was made up of eight EF-105F ""Wild Weasels,"" which attacked SAM sites, and six F-4D escorts against MiGs . The force was made of eight F-105Fs "Wild WeAsels" and six
 Each F-105D carried individual ECM pods, two EB-66 jamming aircraft would also accompany the strike force . The F105D carries individual ECm pods, each carrying individual jamming pods .
 The EB-66s, in turn, each required two F-4Ds as protection against MiGs . The EB/66s were each armed with two F4Ds to protect them .
 SAMs caused the revolution in air defense caused by SAMs would be underlined in the 1973 Yom Kippur War . SAMs were used by Israel in the 1970s and '70s .
 Mounted on a tanklike transporter, it could move with the frontline troops . Mounted onto a tank like transporter, the device could be used to transport troops .
 The Israeli air force did not have the ECM pods needed to counter the SA-6 and suffered heavy initial losses . The Israeli Air Force suffered heavy losses in the initial battle against the SA6 .
 During a single strike against a Syrian SA-6 battery, six Israeli F-4Es were lost . During the single strike, six of the Israeli aircraft were lost in the strike .
 The SA-6 was a clear warning. Although the Israelis overcame the early setbacks, it was a warning. Israel's victory over the South Korean peninsula was not enough.
 As long as U.S. countermeasures and tactics are tailored to enemy radars and SAMs, they would be vulnerable to technological surprise . Countermeasures must be tailored to avoid being targeted by radars, SAMs and other devices .
 The Soviets were then in the process of deploying a new generation of SAMs . The Soviet Union was in the midst of deploying new SAMs in the 1980s .
 In the event of a war in Europe, NATO forces could suffer the same huge losses as the Israelis had . NATO forces in Europe could suffer same losses as Israel did in the case of Israel .
 Any new technological advances in ECM would be countered by improved radars . Any new technology advances would be counter to new radars, experts say .
 The key was not more powerful ECM, but to make the RCS a primary design consideration . RCS is a primary consideration in the design of an aircraft carrier .
 No radar would direct MiGs, ant-aircraft guns, or SAMs . Radar would provide early warning as the aircraft approached . No early warning would be provided by radar .
 Air defenses would revert to the 1930s, against an enemy traveling at near supersonic speeds . The U.S. Air Force would be able to intercept and intercept aircraft traveling at super-fast speeds .
 A tenfold reduction would only shorten the range at which a plane could be detected . A 10fold reduction of a plane's range would only shorten the range of detection .
 A hundredfold RCS reduction would merely degrade the effectiveness of radar . A 100fold reduction of RCS would only degrade radar's effectiveness, experts say .
 It would take a thousandfold reduction of the plane's RCS to make it undetectable to radar . It would be impossible to detect a plane's radar signature .
 The aircraft could not reflect any radar signals, nor could emit any . No bombing radar or ECM transmissions were made from the aircraft .
 Although true optical invisibility was not possible, efforts had to be made to reduce the distance at which the plane could be seen . The plane was eventually able to be seen by a distance from the ground .
 A plane could be seen at a distance of five to ten miles . The reflection of the sun could be visible at several times that distance . A plane can be seen from a distance between five and 10 miles .
 They were to design a small, low-cost test aircraft to demonstrate the possibilities . It was designed to be a small test aircraft designed to demonstrate possibilities .
 Lockheed, which had not built a fighter since the F-104 program of the early 1960s, was not included . Lockheed's F-100s were not included in the program .
 He had been involved with the work Lockheed had done on the Dirty Bird U-2s, the A-12, SR-71, and D-21 . He knew it gave Lockheed the experience needed for the project .
 Rich obtained a letter from the CIA granting permission to discuss the reduced RCS work of the earlier projects . Rich obtained the letter from a letter .
 This was part of the request to DARPA for Lockheed to be included in the program . Lockheed says it will be able to use the technology in the next generation of air drones .
 The keys to Lockheed's efforts were Lockheed mathematician Bill Schroeder and Skunk Works software engineer Denys Overholser . Lockheed says the project was a collaboration between the company and the software company .
 A tire'conceptual D'r'e'aiunrbugn mat allowed a stealth aircraft'to be ""designed" to be stealthy . The mat allowed the stealth aircraft to be 'designed'
 Schroeder went back to the basic equations derived by Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell a century before . Schroeder used the equations from Maxwell's equations to solve problems .
 Maxwell's equations were revised at the turn of the century by German electromagnetic expert Arnold Johannes Sommerfeld . The equations were published by Maxwell's Maxwell's team at the beginning of the 1900s .
 For simple shapes, such as a cone, sphere, or flat plate, these formulas could predict how radar signals would be reflected . The formulas could be used for simple shapes such as the cone or sphere .
 In the early 1960s, a Soviet scientist named Pyotr Ufimtsev developed a simplified approach . He concentrated on electromagnetic currents set up in the edges of more complex shapes, such as disks .
 Maxwell, Sommerfeld, and Ufimtsev equations still could not predict the RCS for a complex shape like that of an airplane . RCS is still not known how to predict the shape of an aircraft .
 Schroeder's conceptual breakthrough was to realize that the shape of an airplane could be reduced to a finite set of two-dimensional surfaces . The shape of a plane can be reduced down to a set of finite sets of surfaces .
 The whole airplane would be a collection of flat plates, which reflected the echo away from the radar . Rather than a surface made of smoothly curving surfaces, the plane would have flat plates instead .
 This system of flat, triangular panels became known as ""faceting,"" because it resembled the shape of a diamond . The triangular panels are known as "faceting" because they resemble the shape a diamond.
 Schroeder asked Overholser to develop a computer program that could predict the RCS of a faceted aircraft shape . Schroeder developed the program to predict the shape of the aircraft .
 With the faceting concept and the Echo I program, it would be possible to predict the RCS of an aircraft . Now, with the . faceting . concept, the Echo . I program would be able to predict an aircraft's RCS, the company says .
 Overholser presented a sketch of the design to Ben Rich on May 5, 1975 . Rich did not quite grasp what had been achieved when he saw the design .
 The Hopeless Diamond met with a frosty reception by Kelly Johnson, who was still working as a consultant to the Skunk Works . Kelly Johnson is still a consultant for the Skunks Works .
 The plane was built by the legendary aviation designer . He has built some of the most graceful planes ever to take to the skies .
 Johnson's opinion was shared by many of the Skunk Work's senior engineers and aerodynamicists . Johnson: "I'm not sure what's going on for the next generation of cars"
 The convexed surface of the disk would scatter radar signals away from the source . Radar signals would be scattered by the surface of a disk .
 WS-606 project of the mid-1950s was to have relied on a large spinning fan to provide gyroscopic stability . directional control was to be provided by thrusters on the rim of the disk .
 A disk also has poor aerodynamic qualities, such as high subsonic drag . A disk can also be found to be a disk with poor aerodynamics qualities . The disk is also known as a disk that has no aerodynamic properties .
 Johnson thought the radar return from the Hopeless Diamond would be larger than that of the D-21 . Johnson thought it would be bigger than the radar returned from the hopeless Diamond .
 On September 14, 1975, it was tested against the original mockup of the D-21 . The prototype of the aircraft was tested in 1975 .
 The Hopeless Diamond had a radar return one-one thousandth that of the D-21 . It was one thousandth the radar return of a D-20 . The D-22 was a prototype of the space shuttle .
 By October 1975, the DARPA competition had been reduced to the Lockheed and Northrop designs . The competition was reduced to a competition between Lockheed and Lockheed .
 The rear of the wing was swept forward, giving it the appearance of a broad arrowhead . It is swept forward to give it an appearance of an arrowhead in the shape of a narrow arrowhead.
 The rear of the fuselage came to a point; with the swept-back wings, this gave it a W shape . The aircraft was the first to be built in the World War II .
 The two intakes were placed on the sides of the aircraft and were covered with grills . The aircraft was placed in the side of the plane and covered in grills.
 This allowed a higher speed than the screen on the Northrop XST, which was not usable above Mach 0.65 . This allowed the XST to be faster than any other aircraft .
 The XST design philosophy was to have the lowest possible radar return from the front and bottom of the aircraft . XST was designed to be able to fly with the lowest radar return possible .
 These were shipped to the Gray Butte Microwave Measurement Range in New Mexico and mounted on poles for radar signature testing . Radar signature testing was carried out for radar signatures .
 A second series of tests was run in January 1976 after minor modifications had been made to the vehicle .
 At the White Sands tests, the reflection from the pole was many times brighter than the model . The reflection was much brighter than that of the model at White Sands .
 The Skunk Works had spent much of the late 1960s and early 1970s in an unsuccessful effort to sell a series of fighter designs . The company had spent most of the 1970s and '60s trying to sell its fighter fighter fighters .
 At the same time, losses in the L-1011 airliner program had brought Lockheed to the edge of bankruptcy . Losses in the aircraft program brought Lockheed back to the brink of bankruptcy in 2008 .
 Even with federal guaranteed loans, Lockheed was still near failure in 1975 and 1976 . Lockheed was forced to close out of business in 1976 .
 Project Harvey was unclassified, and stealth was freely talked about . To this point, Project Harvey had been unclassified .
 A June 1977 issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology revealed that the ""Stealth Fighter Demonstrator"" used J85 engines, that Kelly Johnson had acted as a consultant on the project . Soon after work on the XST started, Jimmy Carter was elected president .
 The program attracted the attention of the defense undersecretary for research and engineering, William J Perry . The program is the first of its kind .
 The results of the model RCS tests indicated that stealth had the prospect of a fundamental breakthrough . The results showed that stealth could be a major breakthrough .
 Control was transferred from the largely civilian-staffed DARPA to the Air Force Special Projects Office . Control of DARPA has been transferred to the Special Project Office .
 The word "stealth" was banned from being used in any public statement or in an unclassified context . The word ""stealth"" also disappeared; it could not be used in a public statement .
 Unlike Aquatone, Oxcart, and Tagboard, it was a computer selected designation . Unlike many other computer-selected names, it is a computer select designation .
 Because it was an aircraft technology development project, the prefix ""have"" was given to the program . The program was given the name "have" because it was a technology project .
 Have Blue was the first airplane whose shape was determined by electrical engineering, rather than aerodynamics . The shape of the airplane was determined using electrical engineering . Have Blue is the first aircraft to have its shape determined by engineering, not aerodynamics, rather by aerodynamics.
 On the Have Blue, the wings were made of long, wedged-shaped flat plates, meeting at a sharp edge . The wings are made of wedged flat plates .
 The first Have Blue prototype would be used for aerodynamic and control tests . Have Blue would be a prototype for the first time . The Have Blue vehicle would be the first of its kind to be built .
 Because of the design's instability, it used a fly-by-wire control system, built for the F-16A, that was modified to make the Have Blue stable in all three axes .
 Stability was critical if the design was to be developed into an attack aircraft . An unstable aircraft cannot bomb accurately, an unstable aircraft can't be used to bomb accurately .
 The second Have Blue prototype would be used to demonstrate the design's stealth qualities . The second prototype would show off the stealthy design .
 Development work was also done on improved RAM and better ways to apply it .
 Unlike an RCS model, a real airplane has landing gear doors, a canopy, a fuel-fill door, screws, and vents . The airplane is a real plane with landing gear, canopy, canopy and fuel-filled door .
 On the second Have Blue, greater care would be taken to ensure that all gaps were sealed . On the third Have Blue: "On the second have Blue"
 Have Blue aircraft were 38 feet long and had a wingspan of 22. feet . The Have Blue planes were 38 ft. long and 22 ft. feet long .
 They would have a top speed of Mach 0.0. and were powered by a pair of J85 engines . They would be powered by two J85s and would have been able to reach Mach 0 .
 Have Blue was limited to a one-hour flight time . Weight of the Have Blue weighed 12,500 pounds . The Have Blue weighs 12,000 pounds .
 To keep the development time short, as many existing components as possible were used . The game was developed using existing components .
 Have Blue aircraft used F-5 ejector seats, landing gear, and cockpit instruments . F-16 fly-by-wire control system was used in Have Blue .
 The J85-GE-4A engines were supplied by the navy from its T-2B trainer program . The engines are used by the Navy's fleet .
 AS 'eacn ‘part was besig'neb, trie pians were sent to the shop for fabrication . AS 'Eacn 'part was 'befig'n 'neb', says AS 'a part of the 'part'
 Park was so highly regarded at the Skunk Works that Ben Rich obtained a special exemption from the air force so he could be chief test pilot for the Have Blue . Park was a highly regarded test pilot at Skunk works .
 Lieutenant Colonel Norman Kenneth ""Ken ""Ken"" Dyson would serve as the air force project pilot . The project pilot would be the first female air force pilot .
 Have Blue personnel had their own patch . As with other Dark Eagles personnel, the Have Blue members of the Dark Eagles were also known as Dark Eagles .
 It showed the cartoon character Wile E Coyote holding a blue lightning bolt, signifying control of the electromagnetic spectrum, and the colorful code name . It also showed a cartoon character holding the lightning bolt .
 The completion of Have Blue 1001 was complicated by a strike at Lockheed . The project was completed by Lockheed Lockheed Martin in 2010 .
 The Have Blue was in final assembly when the strike began in August 1977 . It had no fuel or hydraulic systems, no electronics or electronics, no ejection seat or landing gear .
 A thirty-five-man shop crew was put together from managers and engineers to complete it and check out its systems . A 30-man crew was assembled to complete the project and check the systems .
 To hide the plane, 1001 was parked between two semitrailers and a camouflage net was draped over them . The plane was parked in a camouflaged camouflage net to hide it .
 The plane was loaded aboard a C-SA transport for the flight to Groom Lake . Following the tests, the wings were removed and the plane was removed .
 This was the first time a C-5 had flown from Burbank, California . A crowd gathered to see the plane fly over Burbank . The plane is the first of its kind to fly from Burbanks .
 After arrival, the plane was taken to one of the old Lockheed A-12 hangars at the south end of the Groom Lake complex .
 Have Blue 1001 was reassembled in short order and engine thrust checks were made . The plane was brought back to the airfield for testing .
 Three days before the first flight, these tests uncovered a serious overheating problem . The first flight of the Boeing 777 will be the first of its kind .
 The functioning of the computer-stability system was also checked out, and minor adjustments were made in the yaw gains . Minor adjustments were also made to the computer stability system .
 Have Blue 1001 was taken from its hangar and taxied to the end of the runway on December 1, 1977 .
 The Have Blue 1001's entire surface was painted in patterns of light gray, black, and tan . The car was painted with patterns in light gray and black patterns .
 This was not camouflage in the traditional sense, but was meant to hide the shape of the aircraft . The aircraft was camouflaged to hide its shape and the shape .
 The test was so secret that Lockheed Chairman Roy Anderson could not attend . The test took place at Lockheed's headquarters in Colorado .
 The flight was timed so no Soviet reconnaissance satellites were in position to photograph Groom Lake during the flight . The flight also timed so that no Soviet satellites would be photographed during the mission .
 The White House situation room and Tactical Air Command Headquarters were monitoring the activities . Both the White House and the Tactical Air . Command Headquarters are monitoring the events .
 With security in place and the plane ready, Park made a final check and ran up the engines . Park made the final check on the plane before he took off the plane .
 The engines were quiet compared to a normal jet, due to the radar-absorbing grids . Radar-absorbed grids were used to make the jet quieter than normal jets .
 Without an afterburner, it took nearly the whole length of the plane to reach flying speed . The plane was able to reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 The little angular airplane finally lifted off and slowly climbed into the winter sky .
 Over the next five months, the first Have Blue made a total of thirty-six test flights . Have Blue will be the first of its kind in the world .
 Park and Dyson covered most of the aircraft's speed and altitude envelope . Park and . Dyson . cover most of their speed and . altitude envelope.
 Only a few RCS flights were made; the aircraft had not really been intended for such tests . The aircraft was not really intended to be used for RCS tests .
 Have Blue 1001 provided data on flight loads, flutter, performance, handling qualities, and stability and control . Have Blue offered data on flutter and flutter performance, performance and handling qualities .
 The plane was unstable in pitch at speeds below Mach 0.3, and static directional stability was less than predicted . The plane's pitch was unstable at speeds of below Mach No.3 .
 These problems were corrected simply by changing the gain in the flight control system . These problems can be fixed by changing a plane's gain gain .
 The platypus nozzles also affected stability . Changing the power setting caused uneven heating, which warped their surfaces . Changing power settings also affected the surfaces .
 This, in turn, generated forces that were picked up by the stability control system . This, along with the stability system, created forces that picked up on the ground . The stability system picked up the forces that generated the instability .
 The computer interpreted this as a change in flight direction and moved the fins to counter it . The fins moved to counter the move of the fins .
 The only major flaw in the design was the high sink rate on landing, which would be corrected in the production aircraft .
 On May 4, 1978, Park was about to complete the thirty-sixth test flight when the plane hit the runway hard . Park was the first person to die in the crash of the plane .
 Rather than risk skidding off the runway, Park took off and went around again . Park's plane skidded off runway, but he took off again .
 Park did not know that the right landing gear had been bent by the impact of the impact . Park said he didn't know the bent landing gear was bent .
 He made several attempts to get the gear to extend . Over the next several minutes, he tried to get it to extend again .
 The fuel supply was running low and there was no time for additional attempts . The fuel supplies were running low at the time .
 As Park climbs to 10,000 feet, one of the engines flamed out from fuel starvation . The plane's engine caught up with fuel starvation in the air .
 When the other engine quit, he would have only two seconds before the Have Blue went out of control . Have Blue would have had to be able to keep control of the car .
 He pulled the ejector seat handle, the canopy blew off, and the seat rocketed him out of the plane . He then pulled the seat seat handle and pulled the canopy off .
 Park's head struck the seat's headrest and he was knocked unconscious . Park was hit by the headrest as he sat in the car . Park's car hit the seat, knocking him unconscious, and he hit his head .
 His parachute opened automatically, but he was still unconscious when his limp body hit the desert floor . The parachuted into the desert, he was unconscious when he was hit .
 Park's leg was broken, he suffered a concussion, and his mouth filled with dirt as the parachute was dragged across the desert by a strong wind . Park suffered a broken leg, a concussion and a concussion . Park's mouth was filled in dirt as his parachute dragged across desert .
 The accident was the first indication of the program's existence since it went Black . The accident is the first since the program went black .
 Park may have been injured in the crash of a TR-1, a modified version of the U-2R which was then about to enter production . Park was believed to be injured in a crash of the modified U-1 .
 The second Have Blue, 1002, was delivered in July 1978, two months after the loss of 1001 . Have Blue 1002 was delivered two months later .
 Six measuring points were located in the upper and lower surfaces, the nose, and windshield center frame . Air-speed data was critical to the stability of the stability system .
 Building an air-speed system that was both accurate and stealthy proved difficult . The design of the airframe restricted where such probes could be located in the air .
 Have Blue 1002 was painted light gray overall rather than the camouflage finish of the first plane . The plane was painted with a light gray instead of a camouflage finish .
 It also lacked a drag chute and was equipped with a steerable nose wheel, which improved ground handling . The car was also equipped with steering wheels and a steering wheel to improve ground handling.
 Following several air-speed calibration flights, the baseline in-flight RCS measurements began . After several air speed tests, the RCS began to be measured at a distance of 100km .
 Following completion of the tests, modifications were made based on the initial results . The modifications have been made following the initial tests .
 A second series of penetration tests were run against ground radars and infrared systems . Ground radars were also tested against infrared systems and radar systems .
 In the final series of tests, Have Blue 1002 was flown against a simulated Soviet air defense network . The final tests were carried out against simulated air defense networks .
 SA-6 Straight Flush tracking radar, and the Bar Lock, Tall King, and Spoon Rest early warning radars, were among the radars used in the US .
 These radars were either actual Soviet radars captured by the Israelis during the 1967 and 1973 wars, or copies built from scratch or modified from the U.S. equipment .
 Most SAM radars could not detect Have Blue until it was within the missiles' minimum range . The results were phenomenal, say experts . Have Blue was created by a group of Russian scientists .
 VHP early warning radars such as Spoon Rest and Tall King are more limited . The results were more limited against VHP radars like the Spoon Rest .
 The faceted shape reduces the detection range to half that of a normal aircraft . Even so, the faceted aircraft has a reduced detection range .
 Against these radars, the plane would have to remain out of range . Plane would have had to bypass radars to avoid detection .
 Fighter pilots would have to pick it up visually, the same as their World War I counterparts . Fighter pilots will have to be able to pick up the same visual cues as their WWI counterparts .
 Have Blue showed that further advances in RAM would be needed for operational aircraft . The Have Blue was the first time RAM has been used in an aircraft aircraft .
 Before each flight, doors and access panels had to be sealed with metallic tape . Landing gear doors were adjusted for a correct fit . The landing gear doors had to also be adjusted to fit .
 The gaps around the canopy and fuelfill door were filled with paint-type RAM material and allowed to dry before the plane took off .
 Three screws had not been fully tightened and were sticking up less than an eighth of an inch above the plane's skin . Three screws were not fully tightened . The plane was flying with a crew of four people .
 Special efforts such as these were acceptable for a test aircraft, but for the operational aircraft, a more routine kind of procedure would be necessary . Special efforts are acceptable for test aircraft .
 The second Have Blue, 1002, was lost on July 11, 1979, during its fiftysecond flight, a test against an F-15's radar . 1002 was lost in a test of an F15 radar .
 A weld in a hydraulic line cracked, spraying fluid onto the hot section of an engine . The accident happened after a weld in the hydraulic line broke .
 Dyson tried to get back to Groom Lake but had lost hydraulic power and was cleared to bail out . Dyson is cleared to go back to the lake after losing hydraulic power . The car was later found to have crashed into the lake .
 The plane crashed near the Tonopah Test Range, in the northern part of Nellis Air Force Base . The crash was the first of its kind in the area .
 The curiosity of the drivers was ""satisfied,"" and they turned around and headed back . The curiosity led them to turn around and head back .
 Years later he noted, ""We knew we had a problem but we couldn't fix it without a long delay in the program," he said .
 "We wrecked two airplanes, but they were prototypes and served their purpose," he says . "Smile a lot because I am just happy to be here alive. ... smile a lot," he adds. "I smile a little a lot."
 The shape of the Have Blue remained secret for 14 years . I believe that circumstances can occur that you cannot overcome no matter how good you are .
 The code name was revealed in an October 1981 article in Aviation Week and Space Technology . It was revealed by Aviation Week in 1981 .
 Park's crash was confirmed in 1988, and Park talked about his crash the following year . Park was killed in his crash crash in 1988 .
 It was not until April 1991 that two photos of Have Blue 1001 were finally released . The photos were released in April 1991 .
 Ironically, it is understood that the photos were released by accident . Ironically, they are understood to have been released by mistake .
 The concept of faceting and, more importantly, its accomplishments were the darkest shade of Black . The concept was the dark shade of black .
 With a single pair of prototypes, every radar ever built had been rendered blind . Every radar ever made was rendered blind by a pair of prototype radar .
 Strategic airpower had undergone a revolution as great as that brought about by nuclear weapons . Strategic air power had undergone an air power revolution, the author says . The author of the book, "Air Force One," says it was a revolution in air power .
 Project Harvey had been unclassified, the existence of the stealth demonstrator was also known .
 The plane would be outlawed by the proposed SALT II Treaty, but is secretly being developed in case the pact fails, a source claimed. It claimed .
 The F-20 was only an improved F-5 fighter, which had nothing to do with the SALT II II II . Vreaiy/ana' raaar can not'pick up the hot"" exhaust of a jet .
 In the week of August 10, Aviation Week and Space Technology, the Washington Post, and ABC News all carried stories .
 Stealth technology is being developed for several types of aircraft, including bombers . The stories said that stealth technology was being developed . The technology is said to be being used in stealthy aircraft .
 They reported that it used RAM and curved surfaces to reduce the radar return . They said they used RAM, curved surfaces and RAM to reduce return .
 President Carter and Defense Secretary Brown said they had considered three options to deal with the leaks . Carter and Brown said later that they had considering three options .
 Disinformation—attempting to discredit the stories through false information—was also ruled out . Disinformation was also banned from being used to discredit stories .
 Carter had been elected on the promise to cut defense spending . During his presidency there was a major decline in U.S. military power .
 Funding shortages have caused over 7 percent of air force aircraft to be grounded due to a lack of spare parts . Funding shortages had caused the air force to ground aircraft due to shortages .
 Air force crews wore flight suits that were so old the flame retardant had been washed out, but there was no money to buy new ones . Air Force crews wore suits so old they had to wear them because of lack of fire retardant .
 The navy was particularly hard hit; it had half the number of ships of ten years before and could not fully man them . The navy had fewer ships than they had ten years earlier .
 Enlisted personnel were so poorly paid that they had to put their families on food stamps or work second or third jobs . Families were forced to work second and third jobs to get their families off food stamps .
 The breaking point came with the failed attempt to rescue U.S. hostages held by the Iranians .
 Unveiling the revolutionary possibilities of stealth seemed to be a way to counter Republican charges that President Carter had neglected defense . President Carter was president in the early '70s .
 I am announcing today a major technological advance of great military significance . I'm announcing today I will be able to use the power of the U.S. to develop a weapon that can be used in combat .
 ‘stealth’ technology enables the U.S. to build manned and unmanned aircraft that cannot be successfully intercepted with existing air defense systems . This so-called 'stealth' technology can be used by the United States . The United States will be able to fly manned and
 Brown noted that the effort had been kept secret for three years due to the efforts of the few people in government who had been briefed on the project and contractors involved .
 In the last few months, the circle of people knowledgeable about the program has widened . It's partly because of the increased size of the effort and the debate under way in Congress on new bomber proposals .
 There have been several leaks about the stealth program in the last few days in the press and television news coverage . Regrettably, there have been a number of leaks .
 In the face of these leaks, I believe that it is not appropriate or credible for us to deny the existence of this program .
 "I am gratified that, as yet, none of the most sensitive and significant classified information about the characteristics of this program has been disclosed," he said .
 An important objective of the announcement today is to make clear the kinds of information that we intend scrupulously to protect at the highest security level . The information will be protected "scrupulously," the government says .
 The information to be guarded was the specific techniques used, how effective they were, the characteristics of the aircraft under development, and the funding and schedules of the programs . The information was kept secret .
 Perry also noted that "stealth technology does not involve a single technical approach, but rather a complex synthesis of many" Perry also said that stealth technology is not only a technical approach but a "complex synthesis" of many .
 Any electronic emissions would give the plane's location away . The plane would have to emit emitters to give it away from the ground .
 The article was illustrated with a CBS news drawing of a ""stealth"" airplane . The article is illustrated with an image of a stealth airplane .
 It had nothing in common with what engineers thought a stealth aircraft would look like, nor did it look like the Have Blue . It was designed to be stealthy, but it was not a stealthy aircraft designed by engineers .
 It resembled a navy F-8 Crusader with an inlet over the cockpit, two oddly bent curved wings, and a flat-tipped nose . Instead of being a navy fighter jet, it resembled a Navy fighter jet .
 President Carter responded by blaming the Ford administration for not classifying stealth from the start . President Carter blamed Ford for not making classified classified stealth classified .
 On August 20, 1980, the House Armed Services Committee had been briefed on stealth . The House of Representatives was briefed on the subject of stealth .
 Two days later, the press conference was held, which provided more information than they had been given . Then, two days after, they held a press conference, which revealed more information .
 The committee held hearings, which cast doubts on the explanation for the disclosure . The committee also heard from the public that the disclosure was made .
 Armed Forces Journal editor testified that in 1978 the magazine had withheld an article on stealth at the request of the Department of Defense . In August 1980, he had been approached by William Perry, who encouraged him to publish a modified version of the original article . The article was published in August 1980
 It was to be published no later than August 21—the day before the press conference . The next day was the day before a planned press conference.
 He testified that President Carter had decided to deliberately leak stealth information . President Carter testified that he had deliberately leaked the information .
 This would be used as an excuse to announce the program's existence, so the administration could take credit for it, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 Zumwalt named as the alleged leaker of the information the deputy assistant to the president for national security affairs, David L. Aaron . Aaron is the Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs . Aaron was a national security adviser to the U.S. President Barack Obama
 Aaron submitted an affidavit with the committee denying Zumwalt's charges . Aaron submitted the affidavit with an affidavit denying the charges .
 He refused to testify under oath due to a dispute between the committee and the White House over executive privilege . The White House and the committee have been involved in a dispute over the issue .
 The committee found Defense Secretary Brown's explanation for the press conference flimsy . The committee also found Brown's defense secretary explanation for his press conference was flimsy.
 In a report issued in February 1981, they stated they could not understand how the ""damage-limiting tactic’ was supposed to work" In a February 1981 report they said they couldn't understand how it would work .
 Based on testimony of Schemmer and Zumwalt, the committee concluded that the disclosure had been made for politi154 ends . Based on the testimony of Aaron Aaron's refusal to testify and Brown's weak explanation, committee concluded the disclosure was made for politics .
 Desert 1 did not mitigate the failure at Desert 1. The concept and possibilities of stealth, which few in the public and press could understand, were not successful . Desert 1 will be the first time Desert 1 has been tested in the US .
 It was to warn both Republicans and Democrats that misfortune awaits those who disclose Black projects . It was intended to be a warning to both sides of the aisle .
 The new administration has very different ideas on how to handle Black airplanes . Not surprisingly, the new administration had different ideas .
 The Groom Lake test site was established in 1955 . The location's isolation was sufficient protection . The area was isolated from the mountain .
 It was about twenty miles from the nearest highway and thirty miles from any town . The town was about thirty miles away from any other town .
 The 1979 Las Vegas Review-Journal article changed this; it named Groom Lake as the location of the test site . The 1979 article named the lake as the site of the tests .
 Older maps showed Groom Lake, but more recent ones did not . More recent maps did not show the lake .
 The article stripped Groom Lake of the anonymity that had protected the site for nearly twenty-five years . Lake was the subject of an article in which he was stripped of his anonymity .
 With the increased press attention, several code names for the test site soon became known . Several code names were soon known .
 Groom Lake tower was actually the call sign for the tower . Area 51, Area 51 and Area 51 were also known as Area 51 . The tower's call sign is actually the name of the tower at the lake .
 With the publication of the name Groom Lake, the flaw in Dreamland's security became apparent . Dreamland was founded by Dreamland and Dreamland is based on Dreamland .
 It was possible to hike into the area and observe the site, without trespassing . The site was accessible to the public, but was closed in by security .
 The withdrawal of public land for military use must be periodically renewed . Public land withdrawal must be renewed periodically, officials say .
 In the meantime, the Reagan administration had begun a major buildup of strategic nuclear forces . The Dark Eagles of Dreamland 155, is a collection of books by the author .
 A standard tactic was attempting to disrupt military activities, particularly those dealing with nuclear weapons . The U.S. government has been trying to disrupt nuclear weapons activities in the past .
 On April 18, 1983, four Greenpeace demonstrators entered the nuclear test site via the dirt road that led to Groom Lake . The site was the site of the first nuclear bomb test site in 1983 .
 For five days, they hid out in the mountainous terrain, before surrendering to the test site guards . They hid out for five days in the mountains, hiding out in mountainous terrain . They finally surrendered to the site guards after five days .
 It was widely believed that this incident caused the government to take action . It is believed that the government took action after the incident .
 In March 1984, armed guards were posted on the land . President Reagan or President Weinberger may have ordered the action .
 When hunters and hikers approached Groom Lake, the guards requested them not to enter the area . The guards requested that they not enter the lake .
 A reporter who went out to the site in May found the guards were "especially polite" that told visitors they couldn't drive further along the dirt road that led to Groom Lake .
 The reporter chatted with the guards and watched television while they waited for the supervisor to arrive . The supervisor arrived at the scene .
 The reporter repeatedly asked for the legal justification for the air force denying public access to the public .
 About 87 percent of the land in the state of Nevada was not under state control; it was federal land . The state is home to about 80 percent of Nevada's land .
 It would be August 6, 1984, before Congress could get around to hold hearings on the Groom Mountains .
 The hearings before the House Subcommittee on Lands and National Parks saw a parade of Nevada officials, hunting and mining interests, and environmental groups such as the Sierra Club and Audubon Society .
 The Groom Mountains land issue also became involved in wilderness policy . The issue has also become involved with wilderness policy.
 Representative Sieberling proposed a trade-off for Nellis Air Force Base and Groom Lake land . 1,408,900 acres of the National Wildlife Range would be designated a wilderness area .
 This would close it to any development and restrict access to backpackers . It would close the site to any new development . This would be the first time the development has been allowed in the area .
 The deal would also restrict the tests the air force could conduct and limit the land withdrawal to December 31, 1987, pending an environmental report .
 Senator Paul Laxalt offered to withdraw the wilderness provisions if he would get the Nevada congressional delegation to act on a wilderness bill that year . He then offered to pull the provisions, if he could get assurances he would act on the wilderness bill . Senator Paul .
 The legal maneuvering continued for the next three years, and involved ""compensation"" for the loss of recreation, grazing, and mining claims on the land .
 Environmentalists also continued to complain they were not getting enough. Environmentalists continued to say they were getting enough .
 The day before the extension was to expire, the House separated the Groom Mountain issue from the wilderness bill . The House split the issue from a wilderness bill the day before it expired .
 It had taken a total of six years—twice the time needed to develop, build, and conduct the flight and RCS tests of the Have Blue . The Have Blue project was developed, built, and conducted the flight, RCS and flight tests .
 The boundaries of the Dreamland restricted area were laid out in straight lines . The new boundaries of Dreamland are laid out straight lines.
 It was not realized at the time that a few spots had been missed, but that did not matter—for the moment . It's not the first time a plane has landed in a plane crash landing in the air .
 The descendent of Have Blue had made its first flight, undergone systems development, and reached operational status behind the shield of the mountains .
 A few months later, this Dark Eagle would be publicly unveiled to questions about its cost and whether stealth would work . It would be the first time the U.S. government has made such a stealth aircraft .
 By mid-1978, the Have Blue 1001 had proven the basic concept of stealth . It was the first stealth aircraft to be built in the world .
 Lockheed was given a contract to begin preliminary design work in 1978 . The air force chose the stealth fighter design, and on November 16, 1978, Lockheed received a contract .
 The Have Blue aircraft had been designed solely to test faceting, with no allowances for tactical systems or weapons . Have Blue had no weapons or tactical systems .
 The little experimental plane would have to be transformed into an operational aircraft . The plane would need to be turned into a fully functioning aircraft .
 The aerodynamic and RCS testing revealed the need for other design changes . This meant more than simply adding these systems to the car was needed .
 The Have Blue's twin fins were canted inward to shield the platypus exhausts from infrared detectors above the aircraft . The platypuses are protected from infrared detection by their fins .
 In practice, the fins reflected the heat toward the ground, making the plane more visible from below . The fins reflect the heat in order to make the plane visible from the ground .
 The twin fins were mounted on a pair of booms, which proved structurally inefficient . The fins were also mounted on two booms .
 The fins were attached to a central spine that also carried the weight of the weapons . The fins are attached to the central spine of the weapon system .
 This resulted in a poor lift-drag ratio, which cut into payload and range performance . This led to a poor payload and payload performance, according to the manufacturer .
 Highly swept, low-aspect ratio wings lose airspeed rapidly in sustained high-g turn . Wings also lose air speed rapidly in a sustained high g turn .
 The sweep angle was reduced to 67. degrees, and the wings were extended as far back as possible to improve performance . The wings will also be extended back to help improve performance in the air .
 Operational requirements also resulted in a change to the design of the windshield and nose . The vehicle was designed to meet operational requirements for the Air Force .
 The plane would also carry infrared imaging systems . One infrared imaging system would look down, and the other looking forward . The plane could also be fitted with infrared cameras .
 Neither the HUD nor the forward-looking system could be fitted into the Have Blue's nose shape . The Have Blue has a nose shape that was designed to fit into the shape .
 Have Blue has a distinctive shape over the more conventional shape of the Have Blue's nose section . This gave the new design a distinctive appearance, over the usual shape .
 With operational aircraft, the total number of maintenance hours per hour of flight time was to be similar to that of conventional twin-engine fighters . With the operational aircraft , the maintenance hours were to be . similar to those of conventional . fighters .
 The portion related to the stealth design was to be limited to a small fraction of the total . The portion of the stealth-designed aircraft was to have a limited amount of funding .
 To meet the requirements, servicing accesses for aircraft subsystems were located in the wheel wells and weapons bays . The system was designed to meet requirements for aircraft systems .
 Most of the changes from the Have Blue were internal—a reengineered cockpit, revised inlets and exhaust system, tactical systems, a braking parachute and arresting hook, an anti-icing system .
 The pilot would put the laser beam on the aim point, and the bombs would home in on the laser light reflected from the target . The bombs would then be sent back to the pilot's target in the air .
 Stealth meant a single aircraft could penetrate the heaviest air defenses . Stealth means a single plane could penetrate most of the world's most powerful air defense systems . Stealth was a key component of the U.S. Air Force's stealthy design .
 LGBs meant a single plane could then destroy any target, no matter how small or hardened against attack . The single plane was then able to destroy any targets, even if they were small or hard to defend .
 The aircraft which emerged from the redesign had a shape similar to that of the Have Blue . The fuselage was wider and more squat, but the fuselage had a wider, more squat shape .
 Seen from the front, it resembled a pyramid; from the rear, it looked almost flat . Seen from front, the plane looked almost like a pyramid . From the back, it was almost flat. Seen from a rear, the aircraft looked almost .
 Such testing was done outdoors where the model might be photographed by Soviet reconnaissance satellites . This posed a security problem . The model was tested outdoors where it might have been photographed .
 The first Senior Trend was given the aircraft number 780, for its scheduled first flight date of July 1980 . The first aircraft was given to the Senior Trend in July 1980, with a scheduled July 1980 launch date .
 The General Electric F404-GE-F1D2 turbofan engines were from the navy F/A-18, without the afterburners of the fighter jet . The engines were used by the Navy's F/18 without the need for afterburner .
 The F/A-18 also provided the . multifunction cathode-ray tubes, HUD, fuel controls, stick grip, and throttles . The F.A.18 also . provided the multifunction . tubes .
 Other systems came from just about every Lockheed aircraft built since the T-33 . These included the SR-71, C-130, L-1011, and even the F-104 .
 It was obvious that a computer-controlled, fly-by-wire system was needed . It's obvious that it was needed to be controlled by a computer controlled, fly by wire .
 There was no manual backup system because it was impossible for a pilot to control the plane without the computer . There was also a computer backup system for the plane .
 The F-16's fly-by-wire system was selected; actuators, flight-control computer chassis chassis, and power supply were modified slightly . The F16 was selected to fly by-wire .
 By the summer of 1980 the project was behind schedule, and the first flight was nowhere in sight . Despite the Skunk Work's best efforts, by the . summer of . 1980 the . project was . behind schedule .
 Ben Rich's wife, Faye, died of a heart attack, leaving him emotionally devastated . In the midst of this, Ben Rich was left emotionally devastated by the loss of his wife .
 When he returned to work, Alan Brown, the Senior Trend program director gave him a note . Alan Brown gave him the note . The note was a gift from his Senior Trend director .
 The fuselage was covered in a shroud, and a wooden framework was added to the nose to hide its shape . The plane was built in the 1930s and was the first to fly in the World War II era .
 Before the first flight, patterns of light blue and light brown were painted on the aircraft .
 On June 18, 1981, just as as Brown had predicted during the dark days of nearly a year before, everything was ready . Brown: "Just as as I predicted, the world was ready"
 The first hops of both the U-2 and A-12 were to be an eventful flight . As with the first hops, it was to be a flight of the A-2 .
 It was a difficult task to design an air-data system that was stealthy . The air data system was designed to be stealthy, the company says .
 Air-data probes had shown erratic readings during ground vibration testing . It was decided to ballast the aircraft to a far forward center of gravity point, turn off the angle of attack, and sideslip measurements .
 Farley immediately switched on the sideslip feedback to the flight-control computer .
 The plane's handling ""stiffened up,"" and the rest of the flight was routine, the pilot said . The plane was "stiffed up," and the handling of the plane's handle was "fine"
 The Senior Trend's directional stability and directional-control power were less than predicted . Subsequent analyses indicated the Senior Trend was less stable and less stable than expected .
 780's desert camouflage was removed, and it was repainted light gray . After a few months of desert camouflage, 780 was painted a light gray version of the vehicle .
 While the first two were aerodynamic test aircraft, the other three were systems aircraft . The first two of the four aircraft were a test aircraft .
 They had the full set of cockpit displays, just as on the operational aircraft . As such, they had the same cockpit displays as on operational aircraft.
 The fifth FSD aircraft reportedly sported a full-color painting of Elliott, the dragon from the Disney film Pete's Dragon . The fifth aircraft was reportedly painted with Elliott, a full color painting of the dragon .
 The commanding general of the Tactical Air Command then ordered they be painted black . Commanding general ordered them to be painted as black .
 The flight-test program explored a number of unknowns related to the Senior Trend's stealth design . The flight test program explored the stealth design of the aircraft .
 Many test hours were required to calibrate the air-data system for angle of attack, sideslip, airspeed, altitude, and altitude .
 A critical part of the flight control system was the angle of attack limiter . The angle of flight control was a critical part to the system .
 Angle of attack refers to the angle between a plane's wing and the direction of the airflow . The angle of attack is the angle of the wing's wing to the air's direction . Plane's Angle of Attack can be seen as an angle of flight path .
 Wind-tunnel tests and free flights of unpowered models indicated the Senior Trend would pitch up at high angles of attack . The Senior Trend will be the first of its kind to go on sale .
 The aircraft would then enter a ""deep stall"" and would not be recoverable . The plane would then go into a 'deep stall' and would be unable to be recovered .
 The AOA limiter would have to automatically move the control surfaces to prevent the aircraft from exceeding the critical value . The limiter has to be automatically moved to avoid exceeding the limit .
 One of the FSD aircraft was on final, with its left wing low, when a strong wind gust hit it . The aircraft was hit by a strong gust of wind gust .
 This caused the AOA and sideslip to instantaneously reach levels higher than any tested . This is higher, than could be tested in the wind tunnel, the researchers say .
 The AOA limiter countered with full down eleven in less than 0.2 seconds and moved the fins 90 percent of their full travel . The fins are now able to move 90 per cent of their travel at 90 percent .
 The early tests showed no problems, but during a weapons compatibility test, an air force test pilot put the aircraft into a sideslip while flying at near maximum speed . The test pilot also put the plane in a sidelip during the test .
 The pilot made it back to a successful landing despite very poor stability . The pilot landed safely in the air despite a very poor landing attempt .
 The problem was traced to the redesign of the fins . The added area had reduced the fin's stiffness . The fins' stiffness was reduced by the added area .
 In fact, they acted like ""flow straighteners,"" giving the engines a constant flow of air . The engines were used to give the engines constant air flow .
 If the Senior Trend was to be an effective bombing platform, avionics systems would have to show capabilities never before achieved . The Senior Trend is the latest in a series of high-tech aircraft to be developed .
 The pilot would have to find the target, which was not an area or a wide-spread factory, but rather a specific part of one specific building . The LGB would direct the LGB to the aim point, all in the dark .
 The heart of the Senior Trend's bombing system was a pair of infrared turrets . The forward-looking infrared was located in the front of the plane, and the downward-looking . infrared on the plane's underside was located on the underside .
 Each turret was mounted in a well that was covered by a fine-mesh, radarabsorbing screen . Each turret had a well covered with a fine, mesh screen .
 The image from the system was displayed on the instrument panel's central cathode-ray tube . The image was displayed in the image from an instrument panel .
 FLIR turret would have to pick up the target at long range, then track it as the plane approached .
 FLIR would then have to "hand off" the target to the DLIR without losing the target lock . The FLIR then has to hand off the target target to the DLIR .
 It proved impossible to electronically boresight the two turrets, which created problems in the handoff . The two turrets were able to be controlled by an electronic device .
 Problems include level and gain controls, slew rates, and target acquisition and illumination . Added difficulties included problems with level, gain and slew rates .
 Some of the problems were purely subjective, which made it even more difficult to solve . "Some of the issues are purely subjective," the author says .
 There were three test aircraft and six test pilots . What one pilot judged unacceptable on one plane was called good by another pilot . What was unacceptable was deemed good by one pilot .
 It was headed by the Skunk Works chief scientist and drew man power from other Lockheed divisions . The project was headed up by the chief scientist at Skunk works .
 Like the engineers who had worked on earlier Black airplanes, the team came up with innovative, simple solutions to the complex problems . The plane was the first airplane to be built from scratch .
 They abandoned efforts to electronically boresight the turrets and used a mechanical procedure . The turrets were replaced by a mechanical device .
 This raised the nose and allowed both turrets to view the same target board simultaneously . The nose was raised to allow the turrets to see the same targets simultaneously .
 To prevent the control surfaces from scraping the ground, mattresses were placed under them when the hydraulic system was shut down . The control surfaces are placed under mattresses to prevent the ground scraping .
 A portable boresight fixture was developed, the turret mounts were fixed in place with epoxy, and tolerances were tightened . The turret mounts can be fixed with epoxoxox and epoxy .
 Another difficult flight maneuver was loft bombing, where the plane goes from level flight into a steep 4-g pull up . Another difficult maneuver is loft bombing .
 The bomb is released during the pull up and is ""thrown"" toward the target . The bomb was released during a pull-up and is "thrown" at target .
 Video display problems traced to electromagnetic interference due to poor shielding . The video display problems have been traced to interference from electromagnetic interference .
 When he knocked on the door, a man opened it an inch and asked if he was Whitley . Whitley says the door was opened an inch an inch when he knocked it back an inch .
 Once Whitley was in the room, he was offered a chance to fly with a topsecret unit . Whitley: "I'm not afraid to fly. I want to fly"
 The duty would require constant separation from his family, and he could not be told much more . He could not tell much more about the duty .
 He had five minutes to decide, and when he left the room, the decision stood . When he left, he had to decide whether or not to let it stand .
 Whitley did not know what airplane he would be flying, or what the unit would be doing . Whitley was not sure what plane he was flying or what unit would do .
 Whitley became a member of a secret brotherhood, the 4450th Tactical Group . Whitley was one of about ten officers and a dozen enlisted men in the group .
 The pilots were told to go back to their units and wait for a call . Once they agreed, they were told they would have to wait until they received a call back .
 The 4450th Tactical Group was formally established on October 15, 1979 . Training did not begin until June 1981 . Training began in 1981 .
 Whitley and the other pilots spent time at Lockheed in the cockpit procedures trainer . Whitley: "The cockpit procedures are very different from anything else"
 This was a model of the cockpit on which the pilot could learn the layout of the various consoles, but not how the plane would fly . This was the first time the plane had been shown how the cockpit would fly.
 On seeing the FSD aircraft under construction, pilots’ initial reactions were to wonder if that strangelooking airplane could really fly . The pilots' initial reaction was to wonder whether the aircraft could fly .
 The unit that was to fly the world's first stealth aircraft had no airplanes . Ironically, the unit that would fly the first stealth plane had no planes .
 The flight line was walled off with a double fence; the only access to the runway was through gates . The only access was via gates .
 The area between the fences was lighted at night and had intruder detectors . The area is lighted up and had an intruder detector .
 At first, facilities were limited to a few buildings, a small mess hall, and sixteen winterized trailers . The facilities are now housed in a state-of-the-art facility .
 These were soon replaced by dormitories and hotel-style rooms for the pilots and support personnel .
 The rooms featured blackout curtains to keep out the sun during the daylight sleeping hours . Because all the flights were done at night, the rooms had blackout curtains .
 The runway, taxiways, and aprons were all improved, while maintenance facilities, fuel and water tanks, fire stations, and dining hall were built .
 Before the 4450th Tactical Group could become a fully functional unit, it would need the production of the production Senior Trend aircraft .
 The plane lifted off correctly, but moments after the main wheels left the runway, it yawed violently and went out of control . Plane lifted off properly, but it yawed violently moments after it left runway . Plane was traveling with passengers on board .
 The plane went inverted going backward and slammed into the ground on the shore of the lake bed . Within seconds, the plane went into the water and crashed .
 It took rescue crews some twenty minutes to pull Riedenauer from the wreckage . Rescue crews spent 20 minutes pulling him from the wreck .
 The cause of the crash was traced to incorrect installation of several wires to the flight-control system . The plane was carrying passengers and crew members .
 The computer read the pitch-up as an uncommanded yaw movement and ""corrected"" for it . The computer reads the pitch up as a yaw .
 Allen oversaw flight training and the move to operational status of TTR . Allen oversaw TTR's first flight test flight operations .
 Major Alton Whitley was picked to make the unit's first operational flight . Major Whitley will be the first major officer to fly the aircraft .
 As each new pilot made his first flight, he was given his own Bandit number . The Bandit Bandits were given their own Bandits number .
 It would be another six years before he was allowed to tell his family what the inscription meant . The inscription was inscribed in the name of the deceased .
 All flight operations at TTR were conducted at night . Unlike Groom Lake, all flight operations were conducted during the night .
 The pilots would leave Nellis Air Force Base on Monday afternoon and fly to TTR on Key Airlines . Key Airlines operated a shuttle service to the base .
 This continued until sufficient confidence had been gained in the aircraft . This continued to be carried out until enough confidence was gained in aircraft .
 It took a presidential authorization to begin off-range flights . Even so, it took a president to begin such flights .
 In the event of an unscheduled landing, pilots carried a signed letter from a senior air force general ordering the base or wing commander to protect the aircraft . The pilots carried the letter from the air force .
 Once sufficient aircraft had been delivered, two waves were flown per night . Two waves per night were flown each night .
 This involved eight primary aircraft and two spares, for a total of eighteen sorties . Eight primary aircraft were used for the mission .
 The aircraft would fly the first wave (called the ""earlygo"), then return to TTR and be serviced . Aircraft would fly first wave, then fly the second wave .
 On other nights, there would be a ""turkey shoot"" with some fourteen targets . The shoot was held at the end of each night .
 The missions ranged across the southwest, and the targets were changed each time, to make it more challenging . The missions range from southwest to southwest .
 The targets would be such things as a fire warden's shack in a forest, or the intersection of two dirt roads . Rather than being targets, the targets were targets of a forest guard shack, or a forest intersection .
 When it snowed, it was even harder to pick them up, as there was little temperature difference between the targets and the ground . The snow was even more difficult to pick up when it was snowed .
 It was not visible against the cold water of the lake, and none of the pilots found it . The plane was flying over the lake at the time of the crash .
 The second wave was completed by about 2:30 or 3:00 A.M. in the winter, a few hours later in the summer . The first wave was complete by about two hours in the morning .
 The planes had to be in their hangars and the doors closed one hour before sunrise . The planes were in hangars at the time of the morning .
 It had been found that sleep is disrupted if a person tries to go to bed after seeing the sunrise . It was found that a person's sleep was disrupted if they tried to sleep after seeing sunrise .
 They would sleep six or seven hours, then begin their twelve-hour ""day"" again . They would then sleep for another seven hours .
 During a month, each pilot would make ten to twelve flights in the Senior Trend and another five or six A-7 flights . During that month, pilots would make 10 to 12 flights in Senior Trend, another five to six in A7 .
 Friday afternoon, pilots would pack up and fly back to Las Vegas to their families and a normal day-night cycle . Friday afternoon would be Friday afternoon when the pilots would return to their homes and families .
 They would spend the weekend at home, then start it all over again Monday afternoon . It would be the first time the team had been together for two weeks .
 The pilots could call home from TTR every day but could not say where they were . The pilots were able to call home every day, but were unable to say if they were in danger .
 If a truck was seen in the hills around the base, it would be checked out . Planes flying near the base's restricted airspace were also checked out, as were airplanes flying near it .
 Security did not want a lot of air force uniforms visible . Trips into Tonopah were also discouraged . Security also discouraged from traveling into the area .
 Within the building was another vault room where the aircraft flight manuals were stored . The building was also used as a vault room for flight manuals .
 When in use, manuals always had to be in the pilot's physical possession . If a pilot had to go to the bathroom, his manuals were given to someone or returned to the vault .
 On off-range flights, pilots talked to air traffic controllers as if they were in an A-7 . Air traffic controllers say pilots talk to them like they're in an air traffic controller .
 Each plane also carried a trans-ponder that indicated to radar operators that it was an A-7 .
 Even though the planes flew only at night, special care was taken to avoid sightings . The planes flew at night only to avoid being spotted .
 If a plane flew under a high overcast, the reflected city lights would silhouette it against the clouds . The reflected lights would also silhouette the plane if it was flying under overcast .
 Several routes were not flown if the moon was more than 50 percent full . The moon was not enough moonlight to fly on several routes .
 Conventional tactics were intended to prevent the plane from being shot down . The attack was secondary to the plane's survival . The plane was shot down by a German fighter jet .
 When the target was reached, the plane would have to pop up to a higher altitude to release the bombs . The bombs would be released when the plane reached the target .
 Such low-altitude, high-speed attack profiles made LGB drops difficult . Such low altitudes, such as high speed attacks, are difficult for LGBs .
 This allowed the pilot to concentrate on the attack, rather than on avoiding hitting the ground . This allowed him to focus on the target rather than avoid hitting the air .
 The high-altitude flight also permitted the target to be picked up at much longer ranges . The high altitudes allowed the target's target to have a longer range of range .
 A new technology had been developed and they had to discover how best to use it, much as airpower theorists had done in the 1920s and 1930s . Air power theorists had been doing so in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Originally, the air force envisioned only a single squadron of eighteen Senior Trend aircraft . The air force originally intended to have a squadron of 18 aircraft . Originally, it was envisioned only one squadron of aircraft .
 One or two planes could attack a single, high-value target without being detected . One plane could attack one or two of the targets without being spotted .
 The early success of the program, however, convinced the air force and Congress that a full wing was needed . The full wing would be needed .
 Orders have been placed with Lockheed for a total of fifty-nine production aircraft . Orders have also been placed for the aircraft .
 A plan for using the full wing could not be developed when even senior air force commanders in Europe and the Pacific had not been told about the aircraft . A plan was not developed when senior air Force commanders in the Pacific and Europe were not told about it .
 The 4450th Tactical Group was declared to have achieved an initial operational capability . Five days later, it was declared that it had achieved a full-fledged operational capability.
 Reportedly, orders were also received to prepare for attacks on PLO camps in southern Lebanon, in retaliation for the Beirut bombing .
 According to reports, the aircraft flew from TTR to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina . According to these reports, it was a plane carrying passengers .
 The planes were placed in hangars, and the pilots rested for forty-eight hours . The planes rested in hangar, and were placed into hangars .
 They would fly nonstop to southern Lebanon and strike terrorist targets . The planes would be used to strike targets in southern Lebanon .
 In the years following the aborted attack, the 4450th Tactical Group has seen changes in command .
 Colonel Estes led the unit through its first operational readiness inspection . The unit earned a rating of excellent .
 Soon after, the unit was reportedly alerted for a second possible combat mission .
 Mu'ammar al-Gadhafi, had long been suspected of backing terrorist attacks . He is believed to have been behind the attacks in the past . He has been accused of backing the attacks .
 Message from Libyan embassy in East Berlin intercepted and decoded by British intelligence in 1986 . British intelligence decoded message saying a bombing was about to take place and that American soldiers would be hit .
 Two GIs and a Turkish woman were killed in a bomb blast at the La Bella Discotheque on April 5 . Two Turkish women and two GIs died in the blast .
 Minutes later, the Libyan embassy sent a coded message that the operation had succeeded and could not be traced to them . The Libyan embassy then sent a message that it had succeeded .
 Libyan air defenses were more numerous than those of North Vietnam more than a decade before . Libyan air defense was more numerous in Libya than North Vietnam in the 1960s .
 Only three targets in Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries were better defended than Tripoli and Benghazi, Libya . Libya was one of only three Soviet-Polite targets in the Soviet Union or Warsaw Pact nations .
 The Senior Trend aircraft was judged ideal for such a mission and was reportedly included in the attack plan . The plane was judged to be ideal for the mission and reportedly included .
 It has been stated that less than an hour before takeoff, Weinberger again canceled their participation, on the grounds that the targets were not worth risking the planes . It was stated that . less than . an hour . before takeoff that the . aircraft were not able to reach targets .
 Secret symbols have long been associated with the Dark Eagles . The Senior Trend program is the latest in a long-running tradition of secret symbols .
 The test team adopted this as their symbol after finding a scorpion in their office . After finding a ""huge"" scorpion, the test team adopt this symbol .
 The FSD 4 aircraft had its own patch, a red delta shape with the number ""4"" and a black scorpion superimposed over it . FSD4 aircraft was the first aircraft to have a patch of its own .
 The ""Pete's Dragon"" aircraft also had its own patch, a black shield with a green dragon and a red dragon, in red .
 Other than the ""Pete's Dragon” design, artwork on the FSD aircraft was limited .
 Weinberger went to Groom Lake in 1984, when he was at the height of his career . The most spectacular exception occurred in 1984 when Weinberger was there .
 Senior Trend made a flyby as part of the display of Black airplane activities . The Senior Trend is a member of the Senior Trend Air Force .
 The plane approached the reviewing stand from the south and banked banked to show its top surface . The plane banked from the air to show the top surface.
 As it reaches the center of the crowd, the plane banked again and showed a flag design painted on its underside . As it reached the center, it banked and showed the flag design .
 It was also called ""the Black Jet,"" to differentiate it from the camouflaged A-7 . The plane was also known as the "Black Jet"
 Even the C-5 flight crews that picked up the completed aircraft at Burbank had their patch . The patch is a black circle with a white crescent moon and a large question mark .
 When the Senior Trend began to fly, Lockheed started referring to it as ""117"" until the actual designation could be given . Lockheed started using the name '117' when the aircraft began flying . The Senior Trend was originally known as "117"
 The incoming Reagan administration increased the secrecy surrounding the stealth program .
 Several projects would remain unknown for a decade and more . The stealth fighter was not entirely successful with the stealth fighter .
 In June 1981, an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology said the Lockheed demonstrator aircraft was undergoing tests against Soviet equipment . The article was published in June 1981 . It was reported that the demonstrator was undergoing testing against Soviet technology .
 The general pattern was a long SR-71-like fuselage, elliptical wings at the rear, a bubble canopy, canards, and twin inward-canted fins . It was the first time a plane was flown by a single aircraft .
 As it was now known the SR71 had a reduced RCS, it was assumed the ""F-19"" was similar . The F-19 was later known to have a smaller RCS . It was assumed that the F-71 was the same .
 Some experts scoff at the suggestion that the Air Force could deploy 40 stealth fighter planes in the western deserts without public knowledge .
 These accounts were in the technical press and so had little impact on the public . The accounts were published in technical press, so little impact was felt .
 The F-19 arrived at the local hobby shop in May 1986 . It was the first time the plane had arrived in the UK .
 Among those following the stealth story was the Testers Corporation . The F-19 stealth fighter jet is a stealthy fighter jet .
 The design was based on technical data, such as the Radar Cross Section Handbook, on a description from an airliner pilot of a black airplane seen over Mono Lake in 1983 .
 It had inwardly canted rudders, curved surfaces, and blended air inlets . The aircraft was designed to be the first of its kind .
 Testers were able to test it in a San Diego defense contractor's RCS test range .
 Only two features were correct -- the pilot tube and platypus exhaust . The pilot tube was described as being about ""80 percent accurate"
 Two Lockheed engineers made accusations that hundreds of documents, photos, films, and tapes were missing in June 1986 . In late June 1986, two Lockheed engineers accused Lockheed of missing hundreds of photos, photos and films .
 Dingell was chairman of the oversight and investigation subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee . Dingell held hearings on the alleged security leaks on the F-19 .
 The night operations of the 4450th Tactical Group continued to have an adverse effect on its pilots . The 4450 Tactical Group's night operations continued to affect its pilots.
 He noted that extended hours were taking their toll on overall pilot performance . He said he believes that these extended hours are taking an 'taken toll'
 He added that extended summer hours are accelerating the countdown to zero . He said: "If we liken our usual late-go to a time-bomb waiting to go off, then our extended summer . Hours are "already accelerating the Countdown to zero," he said .
 Mulhare had been declared mission ready in the F-117A on March 18, 1986 . Mulhare was the first F117A to be sent to the air force .
 Although an experienced pilot, he had a total of only fifty-three and a half hours in the plane . He had only flown more than 50 hours in total .
 He flew northwest to the town of Tonopah, then headed southwest and climbed to 20,000 feet . He then flew southwest to the area's largest town, then climbed to more than 20 feet high .
 Mulhare turns south along the eastern edge of the San Joaquin Valley . After crossing the Sierra Nevadas, Mulhare crossed the San Francisco Bay .
 During the flight, Mulhare was in contact with the Los Angeles and Oakland Centers . Mulhare says he was in touch with the L.A. and Oakland centers during the flight .
 Andy Hoyt, his sister Lisa, and her 16-year-old son, Joey, had pulled over at a rest stop . The Hoyt family pulled over for a break-up at a stop stop .
 Hoyt got out his camera and took two or three photos before the object disappeared behind a hill . Hoyt: "It's a miracle that this object has been spotted in the sky"
 The crash site was declared a national security area . No unauthorized people could enter the site . No planes could fly within five miles of the crash site at altitudes below 8,500 feet .
 Hoyt called Edwards Air Force Base to report what he had seen . The air force brought the three of them to a command post near the crash site . Hoyt and the air force were brought to the command post .
 The air force said only that a plane had crashed and the pilot had been killed . The pilot was killed in the crash, air force says .
 They would not say what type of aircraft, where it had taken off, its mission, or where it was going .
 The reports that followed the crash were a mixture of guesswork and speculation . The crash was the first of its kind in the area .
 Newsweek ran an article that claimed over seventy-two stealth fighters were operational . It speculated that the crash site would have to be cordoned off ""forever"" to prevent the Soviets from recovering debris . The crash site was reported to have been closed off by the Soviets .
 An August 22, 1986, Washington Post story said that about fifty aircraft were operational, that the F-19 designation was incorrect, and that the plane was described as ""ugly"" due to its bulging, nontraditional shape . The plane is described as "ugly"
 The air force tried to find the cause of the crash . The press chased rumors and shadows .
 The F-117A had hit the ground in a steep dive, between 20 and 60 degrees . The crash occurred at a height of 20 to 60 degrees, the pilot says .
 There had been no in-flight fire, the engines were at a high-power setting at the time of impact, and Mulhare had not attempted to eject . Mulhare was not attempting to eject from the plane .
 At night, without the normal visual clues, a pilot cannot tell if he is flying straight or is in a turn . At night it can be difficult to tell if a pilot is in turn or straight .
 Normally, the artificial horizon and other instruments are in the center of the panel, so the pilot can read them without moving his head . The pilot can also read them in the other panel without looking at them with his eyes .
 On the F-117A, the center of the panel is occupied by the FLIR-DLIR screen . The F117A is a prototype of the F1117A fighter jet .
 This took some getting used to, and more important, it could cause vertigo . It could cause some people to feel dizzy and dizzy .
 Pilots were more closely monitored for signs of fatigue and were better trained to resist disorientation . Pilots are now more closely trained to avoid disorientating flights .
 Pilots would watch each other; if someone showed signs of fatigue, a buddy would pull him aside for a private chat . Pilots watched each other, and if someone looked tired, they would be pulled aside for private chats .
 Several times, he has spoken about the need to avoid unnecessary risks . Several times he had spoken of the need for caution .
 The flight was a single-plane mission that would remain within the Nellis Air Force Base range . It was the first time a single plane has flown over the airfield in the past .
 At 8:33 P.M., radar controllers noticed the plane had strayed to the left of its planned ground track . Radar controllers said the plane strayed from the ground track to the right of the path .
 A large fire was reported to the Bureau of Land Management, which relayed word to the air force . Shortly thereafter, a large fire on the Nellis range was reported . The fire is believed to have been caused by a small fire .
 The F-117A hit the ground in an area of gently sloping desert, digging a crater six to seven feet deep . The crash caused a crater 6 to 7 feet deep in the desert, the pilot says .
 The plane was 28-degrees nose down and in a 55-degree right bank at impact at impact . Plane was 28 degrees nose down at impact, nose down, at 55 degrees right bank . Plane crashed into the water at impact of impact .
 There were a number of similarities to the loss of Mulhare the year before . Mulhare's loss was similar to that of the previous year's loss .
 Mulhare and Stewart were experienced pilots but had limited time in the F-117A . Mulhare had 53. hours for Mulhare, Stewart had 76 hours for Stewart . Both pilots had limited experience in the jet .
 As with the earlier crash, the air force released minimal information, but the press had no doubt that another ""stealth fighter"" had crashed .
 Because the crash had occurred within the Nellis range, there was not the publicity of the first loss . The crash was not as bad as the first crash .
 The attempt was unsuccessful due to weather, and Teagarden was forced to eject . The attempt to win the title was unsuccessful .
 The A-7D crashed into the lobby of a Ramada Inn, killing nine people . He landed safely, but the crash killed nine . The crash was the first of its kind in the world .
 Major Teagarden was a member of the 4450th Tactical Group . Mulhare and Stewart had flown with the same unit Mulhare, Stewart and Mulhare were with . Teagardan was a major commander in the Air Force .
 The wall of secrecy around the F-117A was breaking down, it was clear . The F-116A was the first F117A to fly in combat .
 The F-117A actually used large panels, but the basic principle was the same . The F.117A was the first version of the F.111 aircraft .
 A second major disclosure came in September 1987 with the release of a second Testors kit .
 The stealth fighter was such an open secret by the fall of 1988, that even the air force could joke about it . The stealth plane was such a secret that even air force air force joked about it.
 At that year's Edwards Air Force Base Air Show a large area was roped off . A large area of the air show is roped away from the public .
 Bringing the F-117A out of the Black would have a number of advantages . The plane would be the first to fly in the U.S. Air Force to carry out the mission .
 The plane could be used in Red Flag exercises and could become part of standard war planning .
 With daylight flights possible, the fatigue from the late hours would be lessened . Daylight flights would also help ease the fatigue of late hours .
 The air force had planned to announce the F-117A's existence in early October 1988 . The plane's existence was planned to be announced in early 1988 .
 It was argued that if Congress had funded a Black program, then Congress should be consulted in any decision to declassify the program .
 A congressional staffer complained, ""They can't just unilaterally release information at their insistence,” and referred to the air force's ""irresponsible handling"" of the matter . The air force is accused of being irresponsible in releasing information .
 The first flight had been made in June 1981, that three had crashed, and that fifty-two had been delivered out of a total of fifty-nine ordered from Lockheed . The press release contained the facts that the first flight of the first of the Lockheed-built aircraft was made in
 The angular shape came as a surprise, as did the out-ofsequence ""century-series” designation . The angular angular shape was a surprise .
 The photo showed the plane in a slight turn and gave no clue as to its size . The photo was taken at the time of the plane's departure .
 No information was given out as to the F-117A’s dimensions, cost, range, speed, or speed . No information has been given out on the size and speed of the plane .
 Between 10:30 and 11:30 P.M. that night, another group of at least six planes was spotted flying the same route . The planes were seen flying around the clock on the same night .
 Cameraequipped observers photographed the planes as they made takeoffs and landings . Other sightings were made at TTR, where cameraequips were used to record the takeoffs .
 Despite the F-117As coming out of the Black, speculation about the aircraft continued . The aircraft is believed to be the first of its kind in the U.S.
 People began watching the skies, looking and listening for ""other"" Black airplanes . Black airplanes were still being kept secret .
 Manuel Noriega had been indicted by two Florida grand juries on charges of laundering drug money . He was indicted on two counts of laundering drugs money . The former Panamanian general was indicted in 2007 on drug charges .
 He laughed off the charges and dismissed Panama's president in February . The former president has been accused of corruption in Panama .
 Noriega's ""Dignity Battalion"" goon squad beat up opposition candidate Guillermo Endara in May 1989 election campaign .
 Endara won the election, but on October 1, Noriega prevented him from taking office . Endara had won the elections, but was prevented from taking power by Noriegas .
 A coup attempt was made but collapsed when loyalist Panamanian Defense Forces rescued Noriega . Two days later, a coup attempt to oust Panama's leader collapsed .
 On December 15, Noriega declared a state of war between the U.S. and Panama . The United States and Panama have been at odds for years over the years .
 PDF soldiers killed a marine lieutenant and arrested a navy lieutenant and his wife who had witnessed the shooting . PDF soldiers also killed a navy officer and arrested the wife of the officer who witnessed it .
 The attack was to strike PDF forces, capture Noriega, and rescue political prisoners . It was also intended to rescue prisoners from PDF forces .
 U.S. Army Rangers were to be dropped at the adjoining airfield . The Rangers were dropped at an adjacent airfield.
 Carl W Stiner, the XVHI Airborne Corps commander, requested F-117As be used . Carl W. Stiner was the commander of the XV HI Airborne corps .
 2,000-pound LBGs with time-delay fuzes would be directed to aim points near buildings . They would not bomb the two barracks, but rather the 2,500-pound bombs would be aimed at targets .
 They would act as ""a giant stun grenade,"" to confuse PDF troops without killing them . The PDF troops would be confused by the idea . They would be able to confuse them without killing .
 The use of F117As was based on their night-bombing accuracy, rather than stealth, as the PDF lacked heavy air defenses . The F117A were based on night bombing accuracy, not stealthy night-bombs .
 Two of the planes were targeted on Rio Hato, two more were to provide support for an attempt to capture Noriega . The final two were in-flight spares should any of the others suffer malfunctions . Two more were targeted in Rio Hata, one was to provide
 The attempt to capture Noriega was called off because he was not at any of the potential targets . The planes neared Panama, the planes were called off as the planes nevevelled .
 As the two F-117As approached the release point, a moment of confusion occurred that would mar their debut . The F117As would be the first of its kind in the world .
 The original plan was for the lead plane to drop its bomb in a field near the barracks on the left, while the wingman would drop his bomb in the right . The lead plane dropped his bomb near a field on the right, while his wingman dropped a bomb near the left
 Gregory A Feest, responded by telling his wingman to switch targets with him . Feest's wingman responded by switching targets and telling him to do the same .
 At the drop point, however, the lead pilot bombed his original aim point . The lead pilot then bombed his own aim point, but the pilot was able to recover .
 This was only 18 yards from the 6th Company barracks, which was too close to the barracks . This was just 18 yards away from the barracks, and it was too much for the soldiers .
 Initial reports spoke of PDF soldiers running around in their underwear, while others threw down their weapons . Initial reports said PDF soldiers ran around in underwear, with others throwing down weapons .
 Defense Secretary Richard B Cheney was advised both bombs hit their targets . Defense Secretary was advised the bombs hit his targets . Cheney was told both bombs were hit .
 The following days saw the running down of scattered snipers and a prolonged hunt for Noriega . The hunt for the former dictator was a major operation .
 The press had its ""cover-up"" story, and the usefulness of the F-117A was further questioned . The F117A has been used in more than 50 years of operations .
 Eastern European countries cast off their Communist governments in 1989 . During 1989, one by one, like dominoes, Eastern European nations cast off Communist governments . The fall of Communism in Eastern Europe was seen as a major blow to the West .
 Whatever followed would be far different than the past forty years. The world had changed. Whatever followed, it would be a very different thing .
 Questions arose about what role, if any, the United States military would play in this brave new world . Questions arose over what role the U.S. military will play in it .
 Its descendant, the F-117A, was being dismissed as a useless relic of an era never to return . Now its descendants are being dismissed by the Air Force as being dismissed .
 At Groom Lake, as the afternoon passed, the shadows from the mountains lengthened toward darkness .
 Three Iraqi armored divisions, backed up with MiGs and helicopters, attacked Kuwait . The Iraqi invasion was the first of its kind in the country .
 Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein's ambition would not end there . Saddam Hussein was captured on camera in 1991 . Hussein was Saddam's first dictator to be captured in Iraq .
 Seven more Iraqi divisions took up positions along the Saudi-Arabian border soon after the invasion . The Iraqi invasion began in 2003 .
 The Iraqis could take the Eastern Province in six to twelve hours, and the whole country in three days . The whole country could be taken within three days, according to the Iraqi government .
 King Fahdibn Abd al-Aziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia invited U.S. troops into the country on August 6 .
 On August 17, Alton Whitley, now a colonel, was named commander of the 37th Fighter Wing . Whitley is a colonel and a former Air Force pilot .
 Four hours later, he was ordered to deploy the 415th TFS to Saudi Arabia . The deployment was ordered by President Obama .
 The brand-new base was located at the southern tip of Saudi Arabia, outside the range of Iraqi Scud missiles . The base is now located in southern Saudi Arabia's southern tip .
 It had state-of-the-art hardened aircraft shelters and even hardened crew quarters . Aircraft shelters and crew quarters were built in the hardened aircraft shelter .
 Only four of the sixty-five stealth pilots had flown combat, one of them in Panama . One of the stealth pilots was in Panama, Panama .
 The flights simulated the operational missions, right up to the point that the F-117A would head into Iraqi airspace .
 Twenty F-117As from the 416th TFS flew to Tonopah East, arriving on December 4 . Another twenty F-116As arrived on December 3 .
 As the Allied buildup continued in the Gulf, doubts were expressed that the effort would be successful .
 Dug-in troops could not be dislodged by bombing, nor could airpower cut off supplies to Iraqi troops . Airpower could not cut supplies to Iraq troops, and could not dislodge them .
 The Air Force has never been the decisive ‘racior in tne mstory 01 wars," says me'voice . Another voice added, ""The United States relies on the Air Force and the Air . Force has . never been . the decisive 'racior’ in t
 Iraqi use of poison gas in the war with Iran brought back echoes of the mass slaughter of World War I . Estimates of U.S. casualties from such a ground war ran as high as forty-thousand-plus .
 In a real sense, the U.S. had to fight not only the Iraqis, but also the ghosts of its Vietnam experience . The United States fought not only Iraq but also Vietnam's ghosts of that experience, CNN's John Sutter says .
 On January 12, 1991, the Congress approved the use of force to back up a United Nations resolution calling on the Iraqis to withdraw from Kuwait . The U.N. resolution was backed by the U.S. Congress .
 The UN deadline expired on January 15, and President Bush ordered combat operations to begin . The deadline expired January 15 . The President Bush has ordered the start of combat operations .
 This war would begin over Baghdad and would strike at the heart of Iraqi air defenses and communications facilities, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: War would start over Baghdad, strike at heart of Iraq's air defenses .
 This air-defense network controlled some five hundred radars, some eight thousand antiaircraft guns, and eight thousand anti-aircraft guns . The SA-2, SA3, SA-6, SA8, and Roland SAMs were among the radars .
 Senior commanders and F-117 pilots had very different images of the plane . Ironically, the senior commanders and the pilots had different images .
 Due to the flawed Panama attack, there were questions about the plane's bombing accuracy . The commanders had great faith in stealth, but the attack was flawed .
 The F-117 pilots had absolute faith in their ability to hit the targets . The F117 pilots, on the other hand, had faith in the accuracy of their targets .
 At the briefing, Colonel Whitley tried to prepare them for what was ahead . At the briefings, he tried to warn them of the dangers .
 He explained what it would be like when the whole world seemed to be firing at them . He said it was like a normal day for the U.S. to be in danger .
 He recalled, ""I told them there would be hormones that would flow that they'd never tapped before. They'd never tap before," he said .
 The pilots arrived at their planes about 10:30 P.M. and began the preflight inspection . They arrived at the airport about 10.30 p.m. ET and began to inspect their planes .
 The ground crews then handed them the paperwork for the mission . They handed them target photos, maps, checklists, and locations of emergency airfields .
 Each pilot also carried a protective suit against chemical attack, a rescue radio beacon, a radio beacon and a 9mm Berreta automatic .
 The 415th TFS pilots had been at Tonopah East since August, so Colonel Whitley felt they should have the honor of being first . The first wave was made up of the 415th .
 Just before midnight the F-117AS were towed out of the hangars and began moving down the taxiway . The F117AS are being towed from their hangars into a taxiway in New York .
 The day shift had just come off duty, and the taxiway was lined with maintenance personnel . The taxiway had just been lined up with maintenance workers .
 Just after midnight, the first F-117A took off; by 12:22 A.M., January 17, the last was gone . The last was taken off at 12:30 a.m. January 17 .
 The second was completed thirty-five nautical miles from the Iraqi border . The first completed the mission in Iraq in 2007 .
 CNN's David French is interviewing Casper Weinberger . Weinberger is a former defense secretary . He is also a former secretary of state .
 The sky above Baghdad erupted with antiaircraft fire, but, yet, there were no United States aircraft over Baghdad . No U.S. aircraft has been seen over the Iraqi capital .
 Apache helicopters blasted two early warning radar sites at 2:39 A.M. Only minutes after CNN began broadcasting from Baghdad, helicopters blasted the radar sites .
 F-15Es flew through a gap in radar coverage to strike Scud missile sites in western Iraq . This opened a gap between radar coverage and radar coverage, which opened up a gap . The gap was then used to strike a missile range in Iraq .
 Unlike the F-15Es, they did not have support from EF-l1].
 Located in a hardened bunker, it could coordinate attacks on the incoming F-15Es and the followon strikes . Located in the bunker, the bunker is located in hardened bunker . The bunker could be used to coordinate the attacks on incoming F15Es .
 Feest saw the night sky was filled with antiaircraft fire, triggered by the bomb's explosion . Feest looked back and saw the sky was full of antia aircraft fire . The bomb exploded in the middle of the night .
 When he looked toward the second target, he saw the whole sky was alive with ground fire . "When he looked . toward the two targets, he said, "I'm going to be in the air," he said .
 As the other F-117As closed on Baghdad, antiaircraft fire seemed suspended above the city . The F117As were seen closing in on the Iraqi capital .
 Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Getchell, 415th TFS commander and leader of the first wave, likened it to Washington, D.C., on the Fourth of July . Getchell: "It was like Washington, DC. on the 4th July"
 The firing at the empty sky had been going on for a full twenty minutes, but at 2:56 A.M., a cease-fire order was issued . The firing was stopped at 2.56 a.
 From their cockpits, pilots could see the eerie glow suddenly disappear . The pilots were able to see the glowing glow disappear from the sky .
 Capt. Marcel Kerdavid had destroyed the AlKark communications tower, Capt. Kerdav had destroyed it in the last hour of the mission .
 Mark Lindstrom dropped an LGB through a roof vent on the new Iraqi air force headquarters . Ralph Getchell struck the National Air Defense Operations Center, and Lee Gustin bombed Saddam Hussein's lakeside palace-command center .
 As the first bombs exploded, F-117 pilots saw antiaircraft fire rise above the city . The first bombs were dropped by the U.S. Air Force in 1945 .
 Major Jerry Leatherman dropped his two GBU-10 LGBs through the hole blasted by the first bomb . Major Leatherman followed one minute behind Dolson, dropping his two . Leatherman was one minute after Dolson .
 The GBU-10 had a thin casing and a greater blast effect . Unlike the GBU 27, which was designed for attacking hard targets, the 10 had a thinner casing .
 As his plane cleared the area, he looked back and beheld the wall of fire he and the other pilots had flown through . He looked back to see what had happened .
 He said later, ""There were greens, reds, some yellows, and you could see little white flashes all over" The airbursts would just move in a straight line, he said .
 Kerdavid bombed the National Command alternate bunker at the North Taji military complex . Others headed for their second target; Kerdav bombed the deep National Command bunker . The bombing was the first of two attacks on the site .
 Thirty-feet-thick roof proved too much even for a GBU-27, and it remained intact . The plane's thirty-feet thick roof was too much to withstand .
 The Tomahawks directed against the electrical plants shorted out power lines, and all over Baghdad, power went out . Power went out, not to be restored for the rest of the war .
 At 3:30 A.M., the disrupted air-defense network began picking up a huge attack force heading directly toward Baghdad . The attack force was headed toward Baghdad, Iraq .
 Michael J Dugan in September 1990 had indicated there would be a raid on Baghdad by nonstealthy aircraft between F-117A strikes . Michael Dugan had indicated that non-stealth aircraft would attack Baghdad .
 General Dugan was fired for the comments, but the Iraqis still expected such an attack . The Iraqi general was later fired for his comments .
 As the planes neared, the radars came on and the SAMs were prepared to fire . The planes were preparing for the attack .
 Navy A-7s, F/A-18s and F-4Gs with HARM (high-speed antiradiation) missiles . And behind them were navy A-8s and . F/4Gs .
 Even as the Iraqis were attempting to deal with this, the second F-117A wave was closing on Baghdad . The second wave of F-119A was closing in Baghdad .
 The glow was the continuous firing of nearly four thousand ant-aircraft guns . The glow of the glow was a continuous fire of nearly 4,000 ant-plane guns .
 At 4:00 A.M., the second F-117A wave restruck the air force headquarters and the National Air Defense Operations Center . The second wave also restruck air force HQs and the national air defense operations center . The first wave of the second wave of F-
 In all, the two waves had dropped thirty-three bombs and scored twenty-three hits . The two waves dropped over 30 bombs and hit at least 23 times .
 The late hour was selected because sunlight would reduce the danger from Anthrax spores . The late hours were selected to reduce the risk of Anthrax spreading .
 As they approached their targets, a weather front moved into central Iraq, with thin clouds at 5,000 feet . The weather front is moving into Iraq's central Iraq .
 The F-117A's bombing system required a clear view of the target or the LGB would lose its lock . The LGB was designed to lock down the target in order to avoid losing sight of the bomb .
 They knew they had won a victory, but they were sure the cost had been high . The cost of the victory was high, they said .
 The first wave landed at night, while the second and third came back after sunrise . The first and third waves landed in the early hours of the morning .
 As the tapes of the strikes were reviewed, it became clear that something remarkable had occurred . The tapes were reviewed by the team at the end of the day .
 In World War II, RAF had sent huge armadas of bombers on night raids against Germany . RAF had been sending huge armada of bombers to night raids on Germany .
 A handful of planes had faced an air-defense network that dwarfed that of Berlin in 1943-44 . They struck at the heart of the enemy capital, and emerged without a scratch . Now, a handful of . planes faced an . air-defence network .
 The operators were unable to operate their tracking and fire control radar, for fear a HARM missile would destroy them . The operators of the radar were also unable to use their tracking system .
 Units in the field had limited communications with each other and with higher command . Units were able to communicate with other units in the battle .
 In the Civil War, Gettysburg was the Battle of Gettysburg; in the Pacific in World War II, it was Battle of Midway . In the Gulf War, that was the moment when the battle came to an end in Gulf War .
 Ground fire described as perhaps the most intense of the Gulf War . Ground fire that greeted the F-117As on the second night was described by the war's most intense . The F117As were the first F1s to land in Gulf War.
 Lieutenant Colonel Miles Pound said, ""They knew we were at war that second night and they had every gun manned. Every gun was manned"
 The last ten minutes before the target commanded the pilots’ full attention . The last 10 minutes before they arrived at the target command the pilots' full attention.
 Pound explained that his technique was to run the seat down, so he wasn't distracted by what was going on outside . Pound explained later, ""My own technique was . to run down" Pound explained .
 The chemical and biological weapons bunkers not hit on the first night were also targeted . Chemical and biological weapon bunkers also targeted in the attack .
 On January 19, weather front stalled over Iraq, and visibility was poor . Visibility was poor in Iraq, but visibility was good .
 Beginning on the third day, it was planned to send large ""packages"" of F-16s to Baghdad during daylight during daylight . The operation was planned for three days .
 They would attack large targets such as oil refineries and headquarters . They would also target oil refinery and headquarters, officials say .
 F-117As by night and F-16s by day would serve notice that Iraq could not defend itself . The round-the-clock missions would be round the clock missions . F-17s would be deployed in Iraq by day and night .
 The first of these daylight attacks was ""Package Q"—seventy F-16s, as well as support aircraft . The first daylight attacks were 'Package Q' -- the first of many daylight attacks .
 Strike directed against Daura petroleum refinery and Baghdad nuclear research center . Strike was directed against the Daura refinery and the Baghdad nuclear center . The strike was directed toward the refinery and a nuclear research facility .
 Bad weather, heavy ground fire, and smoke screens resulted in a failure . Bad weather and ground fire caused a failure in the operation .
 It was clear the skies of Baghdad were too dangerous for conventional attacks . The skies of the Iraqi capital was too dangerous to carry out any conventional attacks.
 The Baghdad nuclear research center was huge, with four reactors and large numbers of support buildings . About one hundred structures in all were built in Baghdad .
 The Black Jets would have to destroy Saddam's war machine one aim point at a time . They would need to destroy the war machine at a single aim point .
 Two reactors destroyed, another severely damaged, and research buildings also hit . Two reactors were destroyed, one severely damaged .
 The Iraqis did not know the attack was under way until the bombs exploded . The Iraqis were not aware of the attack until the bombings exploded .
 The F-117A strike was quite a contrast with Package Q . The eight planes had been supported by just two KC-135 tankers . Package Q had eight planes supported by two tankers.
 Package Q attack consisted of thirty-two F-16 bombers, sixteen F-15Cs as air escorts, four EF-lllAs and eight F-4Gs to suppress the defenses . Package Q had consisted of 32 F/16 bombers and 16 F/15Cs .
 On the tactical level, the goal was to prevent air defenses from functioning, and chemical or biological weapons from being used against Coalition troops . The U.S. military says the goal is to prevent the use of biological or chemical weapons .
 The Iraqi air force showed no more success in countering Coalition air strikes than ground fire . The Iraqi Air Force showed no success in counter-attacking air strikes .
 It was feared that the Iraqis might launch an ""Air Tet" -- a sudden, massive, and suicidal air raid, possibly using chemical weapons, meant for maximum propaganda and destructive effect . The Iraqis were feared to launch an 'Air Tet' -- an air raid that could use chemical weapons
 U.S. reservist recalls having his "head on a swivel" watching for Iraqi planes . One reservist recalled having his head on a 'swivel'
 His special concern was understandable; he drove a large, green fuel truck . His concern is understandable, but it was understandable that he was worried .
 Iraq's destruction would reduce Saddam's future role as a regional troublemaker . The destruction of Saddam's weapons would reduce his role in regional troublemaking .
 F-117As attacked Balad Southeast Air Base the following night . They were joined by F-16s and F-17s . Black Jets attacked the base the next night .
 One plane forced to divert to an alternate target, but the others scored twenty-one hits on the HASs . One plane was forced to . divert to alternate target .
 The GBU-1lOs penetrated the outer layer of concrete but were deflected by the second layer of dirt and rock . The mission was the first ever to hit a concrete structure in the U.S.
 The Iraqis concluded that the HASs worked, and more planes were hidden away . The Iraqi government concluded that more planes could be found .
 On the eighth night of the war, intelligence was received that Air Tet was at hand . Air Tet is believed to have been at hand during the war .
 Eight Tu-16 bombers at Al-Tagaddum Air Base being loaded with chemical weapons for dawn strike, it is reported . Tu-Brucker: Eight bombers are loaded with weapons for a dawn strike on Syria .
 The Tu-16 bombers were fully fueled and had support vehicles grouped around them . The bombers were also equipped with support vehicles .
 When the GBU-10Os struck three of the Tu-l6s, they exploded in huge fireballs . When the U.S. fired at them, the fireballs were huge .
 The night's first wave struck the Qayyarah West, Al Assad, and Kirkuk Air Bases . The first wave also struck the Al Assad and Al Assad air bases .
 F-117As had to be refueled by tankers flying inside Iraqi airspace . The U.S. Air Force says it was the best example possible of Coalition air supremacy .
 In many cases, armored doors were blown off, and smoke and flame billowed out . The armored doors are blown off and smoke billows out .
 Iraqi planes ran a gauntlet of U.S. F-15s as they sought to escape from Iraq . The Iraqi planes were escorted by F-16s in the days ahead of their escape from the Iraqi base .
 To cope with the various demands, additional F-117As were flown to Tonopah East .
 A total of forty-two planes and nearly all the qualified pilots would see action . Nearly all of the pilots were qualified to see action.
 Norman Schwarzkopf ordered the air force to shift all air activities except F-117As and F-llIFs to Kuwait . The air force is based in Kuwait, Kuwait .
 F-111F crews began spotting tanks at night, and on February 5, F-lllFs dropped eight GBU-12 LGBs which destroyed four Iraqi tanks and one artillery piece . F-11F crews also began spotting Iraqi tanks in the night .
 The following night, a larger F-111F strike was made against Iraqi Republican Guard units . The strike was carried out on Iraqi Republican Guards .
 The results were spectacular, and the F-l1]Fs were immediately shifted out of the strategic campaign . The results of the campaign were spectacular . The F-L1Fs are now being used in the United States .
 The forty-two Black Jets would cover the wide variety of targets previously assigned to the sixty-six-plane F-111F force . The Black Jets will cover the target of the F111F forces .
 The number of F-117A attacks against command and control targets increased to nearly equal those directed at chemical targets . The F-116A attacks on command, control targets are now nearly equal as those directed by chemical attacks .
 On one occasion, sixteen Black Jets took out every SA-2 and SA-3 site from south of Baghdad to Tikrit . On another occasion, 16 Black Jets were able to take out all SA-1 and 2 sites .
 Later that night, twenty-four B-52s hit targets in the area without any losses . The planes hit targets without losses .
 Minimum altitude of the F-117A strikes was raised to avoid the ground fire . Minimum altitude was raised at the end of the first week .
 Although the plane could not be detected, a random hit, (called a ""Golden B.B."") was still possible . A random hit (called "Golden B."B.") was also possible .
 They began using ""barrage fire,"" directing all the antiaircraft fire into specific parts of the sky, in hopes the Black Jets would fly into it . The Black Jets flew into the sky in the hope of intercepting them .
 On one night, they held their fire, watching for the glow of the F-117A's afterburners as the planes sped away from the target area . On another night, the pilots held fire, looking for the planes as they sped from the area .
 The Iraqis were very confident it would work and even alerted Jordanian reporters in advance . The Iraqis are very confident they would work .
 Colonel Whitley and Major Leatherman were over Baghdad when it was tried out . The two men were in Baghdad at the time of the incident .
 RAM had delaminated, thought to be battle damage from battle damage . RAM was delaminating after being damaged by the battle . RAM had been damaged by battle damage, but it was thought to have been a mistake .
 Leadership targets became a high priority, as they had been during the first week of the week . Leadership targets were also high priorities, as were leadership targets, officials said .
 Two F-117As dropped a single bomb each on the Al Firdos bunker on February 13 . The F117As were the first to drop bombs on the bunker in the early morning hours of February 13.
 At the start of the Gulf War, it was not in use at the time . It was one of twenty-five bunkers that had been built as command posts .
 On February 5, trucks were observed unloading communications equipment at the bunker .
 They claimed it was an air-raid shelter, not a command post, and that it had been a deliberate attack intended to kill civilians . They claimed the attack had been deliberate and was intended to target civilians .
 The Iraqis also showed Western reporters a sign identifying it as an air-raid shelter . The Iraqi government has been fighting a government offensive in Iraq since 2003 .
 The United States countered the claims, noting that it had been hardened against nuclear attack . The U.S. said it was surrounded by a chain-link fence and barbed wire .
 General Schwarzkopf told the air force that they could not hit any targets within Baghdad without his specific permission . General Schwarzopf said he would not allow them to hit targets in Baghdad without permission .
 For a week after Al Firdos, he was unwilling to give permission to strike any Baghdad target, for fear of civilian casualties . The Iraqi government was unable to attack any Baghdad targets in the past week .
 Three symbols were recommended for attack on Saddam Hussein's regime . The symbols were not the substance of Saddam's regime, but the substance was the target .
 These were Ba'th party headquarters, a sixty-feet-tall statue of Saddam, and the huge victory arches commemorating the Iran-Iraq War War .
 Schwarzkopf approved the choices, but the targets ran into a particularly American difficulty—lawyers . The targets were chosen by the U.S. Attorney General for the first time .
 The statue and the victory arches, military lawyers said, were ""cultural monuments" which could not be bombed under international law . Military lawyers said they could not have bombed the statue and arches under the law .
 With the halt on bombing leadership targets, the F-117As were turning to other targets . The F-116As were targeting leadership targets in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Schwarzkopf directed that a seventy-two-hour bombing campaign be planned to destroy nuclear, chemical, and biological targets . If a cease-fire was imminent, a planned bombing campaign was planned .
 At the time of the Al Firdos strike, more than a dozen suspected chemical and biological bunkers were still to be hit .
 Priority was given to research and development sites, however, rather than storage bunkers, to prevent Iraq from having such weapons in the future . Priority was also given to the research sites, but not the bunkers .
 The seventy-two-hour list was headed by the Baghdad nuclear research center . The list includes more than 70 hours of monitoring by Baghdad .
 Only four of ten aircraft bombed on the eighteenth, while four out of six scored hits the next night . Weather continued to be a problem; only four of 10 aircraft bombed that night .
 On the twenty-third, F117As bombed the site in good weather, with 18 out of twenty-six bombs hitting structures in the compound . The site was bombed by F117A on the third day of the war .
 F-117As bombed suspected nuclear facilities across Iraq, including the Al Qaim uranium extraction facility in western Iraq . Other F-11s bombed suspected sites across Iraq . The F117As were used to attack suspected nuclear sites .
 United States intelligence did not fully comprehend the scope of the Iraqi nuclear effort . U.S. intelligence didn't fully comprehended the scope .
 Three nuclear facilities located at rocket development sites were only realized late in the war . The identity of three nuclear facilities was not known until late .
 The Tarmiya rocket facility was hit by F-117As and B-52s on February 15 . The Russian rocket facility has been hit by the Russian military in the past .
 By February 23, its nuclear role had been discovered and four F-117As were sent to bomb it . Four F-119As were dispatched to bomb the site .
 It became the highest priority target but was not hit again due to weather . It was not the most recent target to be hit due to the weather .
 The Ash Sharqat facility had been hit by six F-111E raids before four F-117As visited the site on February 16 . The site had previously been targeted by F-11E raids .
 Musayyib was selected to be the final assembly site for the first Iraqi nuclear bomb . The site was not discovered until shortly before the war's end . It had been selected to build the first bomb .
 If a target needed to be attacked on short notice, it was far easier to send a handful of Black Jets, rather than a force of forty to sixty F-16s and support planes .
 Distribution points, pipe junctions, and pumping stations were hit with 500pound GBU-12 bombs . 500pound bombs were dropped at distribution points and pipes .
 The attack was so hurried that the second wave pilots had to use sketch maps, because photos were not available . Second wave pilots used sketch maps because of the lack of photos available .
 The F-117A combat missions were quite popular, and, as the weeks passed, ground personnel, as well as their friends and relatives, wanted a little piece of history . The mission was the first of its kind .
 Major Leatherman gave his crew chief one of the bomb arming lanyards from the first mission . The crew chief gave Leatherman the lanyard he received from the mission .
 American flags were most requested, but everything from footballs to Bart Simpson dolls were flown . American flags, footballs, dolls were also requested .
 F-117As were not authorized to fly into downtown Baghdad until the final nights of the war . F117As flew into Baghdad on the final night of war . They were authorized to do so again in the final days of war in Iraq .
 The target selected was Ba'th party headquarters—a complex covering several city blocks . The target of the attack was Ba's party headquarters . Ba'sh Party headquarters is a complex covering several blocks .
 It had been hit by Tomahawk missiles on the first night and again by F-117As in mid-February . It had also been hit twice in the past month .
 The following night was no better; only a few targets were hit outside Baghdad . The next night was the same night as Baghdad .
 The original plan was altered due to the progress of the ground war and the impending cease-fire . The original plans were changed after the war's progress was altered . The plan was changed to accommodate the impending ceasefire in Syria .
 The size of the force directed against the Ba'th party headquarters was reduced to release planes for other targets . The force was reduced by releasing planes to other targets in the area .
 16 of the twenty-plane first wave were directed against it . Still, the first wave was directed against the plane .
 The complex was left devastated, and a statue in front of the building was also destroyed . The complex has been left devastated .
 The biological weapons facility at Salman Pak was hit by the night's first wave . Two transport planes at Muthena airfield were also hit .
 Kuwaitis welcome victorious U.S. and Coalition troops . Yet another was the crowds of Kuwaitis welcoming victorious United States and Coalition forces .
 The final image was that final image, which put to rest a ghost from the past . And there were that final images of the couple .
 A photo of a Blackhawk helicopter hovering on the roof of the U.S. embassy in Kuwait City is posted online . The photo shows a helicopter hovering over the embassy's roof .
 The first group of F-117As arrived back at Nellis Air Force Base on April 1 . The first of the first group to arrive back at the base arrived back in April .
 Al Whitley returns from two tours in Vietnam . Whitley: "It was quite a contrast to his return from two wars in Vietnam"
 In May, the town of Tonopah held a parade for the F-117 pilots and ground crews . The town held the parade for pilots, ground crews and pilots .
 Even before the Gulf War, the plan was to move the F-117As to Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico . The plan was intended to move them to the base before the war .
 This would allow the pilots' families to join them and eliminate the need for the Key Airlines shuttle flights . Key Airlines has been criticized for the lack of a need for a shuttle flight .
 With postCold War reductions, the air force sought to preserve the names of distinguished units . The air force has been in existence since the Cold War .
 Under the name ""Black Magic," it had flown nineteen combat missions in the Gulf . It had flown 19 combat missions .
 Captain Mills attempted to return to the field, but the plane began to roll uncontrollably . The plane rolled uncontrollably as Mills tried to return . Mills was the pilot of the plane .
 The loss was traced to the improper installation of a bleed air duct just before the flight . The loss of the flight was later traced to a leak air duct .
 A detachment of six to eight F-117As had remained at Tonopah East as part of the U.S. forces in Saudi Arabia . The detachment had been part of a military presence in the country .
 The cease-fire agreement directed that Iraq dismantle all nuclear, chemical, and biological facilities, as well as giving up all Scud missiles and long-range weapons . The agreement also directed that all nuclear facilities be dismantled .
 There was also an increasing number of border incidents with Kuwait and interference with allied planes policing ""no-fly" zones in the north and south of the country .
 On January 13, six F-117As, each with one LGB, were sent to hit targets in southern Iraq . The F117As were each armed with LGBs .
 The Al-Amara IOC was hit, as was the SA-3 SAM site's radar at Ashshuaybah . The SA-2 SAM site was also hit, along with an IOC site in the region .
 Bombs dropped against the two radars at Nasiriya lost their locks due to clouds . Bombs dropped on the radars were dropped due to cloud clouds .
 Bad weather apparently caused one pilot to bomb a farmhouse a mile from the Basra radar . Bad weather also apparently caused the attack on a nearby farmhouse .
 As with other Dark Eagles, the F-117A has undergone improvements to its systems . The F-116A has been the subject of several major upgrades in recent years .
 The planes were sent to the Skunk Works plant at Palmdale for modifications . The modifications included color displays, satellite navigation system, and improvements to infrared system .
 One modification was a result of the loss of Mulhare and Stewart in 1986 and 1987 . Another modification was the addition to the team in 1987 .
 It would use the basic F-117A fuselage, with a new wing and horizontal stabilizer . The plane would use a new fuselage and wingspan . It would be the first of its kind .
 The F-117N, like the air force version, would be a ""silver bullet"" force . The F.117N would be like the Air Force version of the F.111 .
 The navy rejected the proposal, saying the plane was too limited and was not a multimission aircraft . The proposal was rejected by the navy, which said it was too small .
 A later proposal called for adding afterburning engines and advanced radar-infrared systems to give the plane both an allweather air-to-ground and air-air capability . The plane would be able to fly in both weather and air to ground .
 Proposals have been made to increase the size of the bomb bay to hold four bombs . Proposalalts have also been proposed to expand the number of bombs in the area .
 With new engines, the F-117A's payload could be increased to eighteen thousand pounds . The F117A could also have a payload of 18,000 pounds with new engines . The plane's payload can be increased by up to 18,500 pounds .
 Some of the added bomb load could be carried externally, as many as four internal weapons and another four under the wings . The added weapons could be used to carry internal weapons .
 If the F-117A's bomb load and radius of action could be doubled, a single squadron could handle a regional conflict such as the Gulf War . Such improvements would have a major impact .
 Black Jet from Groom Lake could still be flying into the second decade of the twenty-first century . The Black Jet is still flying in the air today .
 On April 5, 1995, an F-117A was seriously damaged by a fire after landing . The plane was badly damaged by the fire in 1995 .
 The plane crashed on Red Mesa at the Zuni Indian Reservation, its impact dug a 20-foot deep crater . The impact of the crash dug a crater 20-feet deep into the ground .
 Zuni Tribal Police were the first on the scene and secured the area . The Zuni tribal Police were first to the scene . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Due to the remote location, it took the Air Force five hours to reach the crash site . The Air Force was called to the site after the plane crashed .
 The plane was both the first U.S. jet aircraft and created the concept of the Black airplane . It was the first United States jet aircraft .
 Bell test pilot Robert Stanley, left, made the XP59A's first flight on Oct. 31, 1942 . Bell test pilots Robert Stanley and Robert Stanley were test pilots at the time of the first flight .
 Colonel Lawrence ""Bill"" Craigic became the first United States military jet pilot when he made the plane's third test flight that same day . Craigic was the first pilot to fly a military jet in the United States .
 The fake propeller on its nose was used in March and April, 1943, to thwart the curious .
 Bell's portable mission control center during the XP-59A tests . Bell's XP59A test center is located in Bell's Bell's Mission Control Center . Bell is testing a new version of the XP 59A system . Bell says the XP--59A system is capable of sending
 The U-2 combined the aerodynamic simplicity of a glider with careful weight control that enabled it to reach altitudes far above those of contemporary Soviet fighters . It was the first U.S. Air Force to fly the U.2 .
 The SS-6 test pad at Tyuratam, as photographed in 1959 by a U-2, was a test pad for the U.S. Navy .
 The pad was used to launch early ICBM tests as well as Sputnik I and Vostokl . It was also used for the launch of the Soviet Union's first ICBM test program .
 Differentareas were walled off to prevent people working on one project from knowing about the others . Different areas of work were closed off from each other .
 On missions, national insignias were removed; the only markings carried a false, five-digit serial number in red paint . The only markings were a false serial number .
 By the time Kelly Johnson and the Skunk Works engineers had worked up to the ninth version of the A-6 proposal, a trend toward a delta with a long forward fuselage had developed . By the end of the decade, a delta-shaped fuselage would be a long-
 The A-11 design with radar absorbing chines became the basis for the final A-12 . The wedge-shaped chines were designed for radar-absorbing radar .
 Personnel at Groom Lake do not live in the hot, dusty, and isolated area, but are flown to and from the site each week . Personnel at the site are flown in and out of the area each week.
 This was a modification of the A-12, designed to produce a long-range interceptor . The A-11 was designed to be a long range interceptor. This was the first of its kind to be produced in the 1960s .
 U.S. Air Force Model 147B drone under the wing of its DC-130 launch aircraft . The drone is a model 147B that has been flown by the Air Force since 2010 .
 The 147B would fly its programmed instructions over the target areas and then on to the recovery zone . It would then fly its own programmed instructions to the target area .
 The TE was an ELINT version of the high-altitude photo reconnaissance 147T drone . The TE drone was a prototype of the 147T, a photo reconnaissance drone .
 Model 147SC ""Tom Cat"" flew a record-setting 68 missions before being lost on Sept. 22, 1974 . Model 147 SC drone flew record-breaking 68 missions .
 Model 154P-4 Firefly landed at Los Alamos in August 1969 . It was the first time the plane had landed in the U.S.
 The Have Blue 1002 was produced under the tightest secrecy since the atomic bomb program of World War II . It was the first such secret program to be produced since the war's first atomic bomb .
 This aircraft was optimized for RCS testing, and had the full range of coatings and radar absorbing materials . The aircraft was designed to be optimized for testing .
 Unlike its angular upper surface, the plane's underside was arrow shaped . The plane was shaped like an arrow-shaped plane .
 These flat surfaces made it possible to calculate the plane's radar cross-section . The plane's flat surfaces were used to calculate radar cross sections .
 Activities at Groom Lake, such as the F-1 17A's first flight, are scheduled around the passes of Soviet reconnaissance satellites . Activities are scheduled to take place during the time of the first flight .
 The Amber UAV was designed to provide a family of low-cost but effective vehicles capable of undertaking both reconnaissance and strike missions . Lockheed's Amber is designed to be a family-of-low-cost, effective vehicle capable of both .
 During the late 1980s and early '90s, there were a number of reports about ""other"" flying wing or triangular Black aircraft . During the '80s and '90's there were reports about 'other' flying wing aircraft .
 Soviet-built Yak 23 undergoing flight tests at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base . The Yak 23 is a Soviet-made Yak 23 made from scratch .
 The plane was ""loaned"" to the United States by an Eastern European intelligence officer, then crated aboard a United States C-124 cargo plane . The plane is believed to have been flown to the U.S.
 The Yak was crated and reinserted into Eastern Europe without detection . The markings were removed; the Yak was then crated . It was re-inserted to Eastern Europe .
 Long rumored to be a flying wing, it was, in fact, one of the strangest looking aircraft ever built . It was, of course, a strange looking aircraft .
 Its odd shape was to accommodate a specialized radar able to track armor units . It was designed to be able to fit a special radar that could be used to detect armor armor .
 The Tacit Blue first flew in February 1982, but was declassified until April 30, 1996 . It was the first aircraft to fly in the world since 1982 .
 From top to bottom, the original ""Black Diamond,"" the ""North Sea"" Aurora, and finally, the XB-70 Aurora, were the first of its kind . The first and last Aurora were the "Black Diamonds"
 The Aurora stories began to spread in the late 1980s and reached their peak in 1994 . The stories about the Aurora began to grow in the mid-'90s .
 "By this means I examine the situation and the outcome will be clearly apparent," he says . "By examining the situation, the outcome is clearly apparent"
 Stealth changed both tactical and strategic aircraft . But it also caused a resurgence of interest in strategic reconnaissance UAVs .
 Two very different systems would emerge during the 1980s and early 1990s . Both systems were created in the same era as the Internet age .
 One advantage of a UAV over a manned aircraft is that of flight duration . The UAV is an unmanned aircraft that can be controlled by a remote control device .
 Its planned flight time would not be measured in hours or even days but in months . The plane's flight time is measured in months rather than hours or days .
 The technology to build the first of these Dark Eagles did not come from an exotic development program but from a contest . The first Dark Eagles were built from scratch . The technology was developed by a contest to build Dark Eagles .
 In the myth of Icarus, a man had flown by flapping wings attached to his arms . GOSSAMER DREAMS .
 British industrialist Henry Kremer offered a 50,000-pound prize for the first successful man-powered flight in 1959 .
 It was to cover a figure-eight course around two markers a half mile apart . It was intended to cover an eight-miles of a half-mile course .
 The aircraft had to start and finish the course at an altitude over ten feet . It had to be completed at ten feet above the ground .
 Principally made of wood, they were too heavy and incapable of turning . Principals of wood were made of heavy metal .
 Paul B MacCready of AeroVironment Incorporated understood that neither a conventional design nor conventional thinking would work . Paul BMacCready: "Neither of these things would work. Neither of these ideas would work"
 The Kremer Prize would take an innovative aircraft designed with no preconceived notions . It would be the first time the prize has been awarded .
 Like the Wright Flier, it had a canard and wing warping to provide control . The plane was built in the 1930s and 1940s . It was the first of its kind .
 Dozens of times the plane crashed, once as it was approaching the second pylon and victory . The plane crashed as it approached the pylon, once .
 Bryan Allen peddled the Gossamer Condor around the course on August 23, 1977 . Allen was the first person to peddle the Condor .
 In 1980, AeroVironment was sponsored by DuPont to develop a solar-powered aircraft able to fly from Paris, France, to England .
 First test aircraft, the Gossamer Penguin, was so fragile and unstable that it could be flown only in the early morning when the air was calm . The first test aircraft could only be flown when it was flying in the morning .
 Based on the results of these tests, the Solar Challenger was designed . The Solar Challenger is designed to be a solar-powered spacecraft .
 Power came from 16,128 solar cells, which covered the entire upper surface of the wing and stabilizer . Power was powered by solar cells covering the entire surface .
 Despite the large surface area, the array provided a maximum of only 2,600 watts . The array provided enough power to power two hair driers . Despite the size of the array, it only provided enough electricity for two hair dryers .
 If provided with some type of energy storage system, it could fly ""eternally"" and remain at altitudes above 65,000 feet . It could fly at 65.000 feet above that altitude .
 The design of a solar-powered Gossamer-type aircraft flying at these altitudes faced a number of problems .
 At takeoff, the Solar Challenger could barely climb . At 11,000 feet, however, it could equal a Cessna light plane . The Solar Challenger can barely climb at takeoff, but it can equal a light aircraft .
 The air temperature becomes constant, so there is not a continued improvement in efficiency . Air temperature is constant, and there will be no continued improvement, says the pilot .
 Because of the thinner air, the plane must fly faster for its wings to generate the same amount of lift . The plane flies faster because of the thin air, so it can generate more lift .
 More than half the current generated by solar cells would have to be stored in some type of battery to keep the plane aloft during darkness .
 The ""eternal"" solar-powered aircraft would need twice the collection area, with no increase in weight, over the Solar Challenger . The Solar Challenger would need to be twice as large as twice as the solar aircraft .
 The design would have to be extraordinarily light—one-half pound per square foot of wing area, the same weight as foam art board . Design would need to be lighter than one-half pounds per square feet .
 An eagle has a wing loading of four to six pounds per square foot of wing . In contrast, an eagle has an average of six pounds of wing loading .
 The Gossamer Penguin's structure was light enough, but was too fragile . The Penguin is light enough to survive, but the structure is fragile .
 By 1983, AeroVironment was able to attract government sponsorship from a ""classified customer"" to build a proof-of-concept test aircraft . HALSOL .
 Unlike the other Gossamertype aircraft, this was to be a Black airplane in the classic sense . The plane was intended to be the same type of aircraft as the other .
 From front to back, the wing was eight feet wide . It was made of five, 20-foot-long segments joined together . The wing was 8 feet wide; it was made up of five segments .
 Attached to this were ribs of Styrofoam reinforced with Kevlar and spruce . The ribs were attached to the Styro-foam structure .
 The aircraft was powered by eight electric motors—two mounted on the center of the wing, two on each inboard wing segment, and one on each outer wing segment . The aircraft is powered by electric motors .
 Spreading them out along the full span of the wing distributed the load . Spreading the load was the best way to distribute the load.
 To pitch up or down, an elevator on the center wing section's trailing edge was used . The elevator was used in the World War II aircraft .
 To make a turn, the outermost motor on one side was sped up, while the opposite motors were slowed down . The outermost of the motor is sped up while the other is slowed down in order to make a move .
 The plane flew at twelve knots and had a never-exceed speed at low altitude of twenty-seven or twenty-eight knots . It flew at 12 knots .
 Because it was a test vehicle, the HALSOL was designed to climb, rather than to remain at high altitudes . Because of the design, it was designed for climbing, not to stay at high altitude .
 The efforts to control weight led to creative thinking and some unusual solutions . The weight loss experts say weight loss is a key to weight loss .
 The front wheel assembly on the two gondolas used dual baby-buggy wheels, while the main landing gear assembly had a sixteen-inch bicycle wheel .
 Over the next two months, nine flights were completed at Groom Lake . Over a total of nine flights completed at the lake .
 These lasted for thirty to sixty minutes and reached an altitude of 8,000 feet . These lasted 30 to 60 minutes and lasted for 30 to sixty .
 Studies indicated that 1983-vintage solar cell technology was not efficient enough to permit very long, high-altitude flight . The aircraft was proven to be aerodynamically and structurally sound .
 In particular, the solar technology lacked sufficient ""power-density,"" the energy available per pound of the components .
 The HALSOL program was discontinued, and the aircraft was placed in storage . The aircraft is now in storage in California .
 In 1987, General Motors selected AeroVironment to develop the Sun Raycer car, which won the first transAustralia race for solar-powered vehicles . In 1987 (four years after the HALSOL project ended) General Motors chose Aerovironment for the car .
 The following year, GM selected AeroVironment to develop the Impact, a battery-powered commuter car suitable for mass production . The Impact was the first mass production version of the car . The car was developed by the company .
 An aircraft like the HALSOL could be used to detect missile launches, such as the Scud ballistic missiles Iraq fired against Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War .
 Scud missiles had been exported and were in production throughout the Third World . Scuds missiles were exported and had been produced in the Middle Eastern countries .
 The HALSOL was taken out of storage in early 1992 . With the technology now available and a military need, it was removed from storage in 1992 .
 AeroVironment began a modification program . Under the direction of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, the program began .
 The motors also had new custom-designed inverters to improve efficiency . The motors were designed to be more efficient and efficient .
 Keeping the motor's temperature within limits while flying at high altitude was a problem due to the thin air . The plane's temperature was kept within limits due to thin air due to high altitude .
 The complete motor and propeller assembly weighed only 13 pounds . The entire assembly was made of just thirteen pounds .
 Modified aircraft would carry some two hundred square feet of new lighter-weight solar cells . The modified aircraft would also carry some 200 sq ft of new lightweight cells .
 They would cover about one-third of the wing and provide about 3. kilowatts of power . They would be used to power the entire wing of the facility .
 The modification work was completed in the late summer of 1993— a full decade after the HALSOL's last flight . The modification was complete in the summer of that summer, 1993 .
 Because of the extensive modifications, a new name was given to the aircraft . The aircraft was renamed after extensive modifications to the plane .
 Up to this time, there had been no hint that there was a Black Gossamer-type UAV or that it had been flown a decade before .
 The HALSOL-Pathfinder finally came out of the Black with an October 1, 1993, air force press release, which announced the aircraft's existence .
 Pathfinder would make a series of low-altitude test flights at Edwards Air Force Base in October-November 1993 . Pathfinder would be the first of its kind to fly in the air .
 It lasted forty-one minutes and involved six trips around a 1.2-mile racetrack course on the Edwards lake bed . It was the first time the team had been on the track for more than 40 minutes .
 Pathfinder was a majestic sight as it flew slowly above the tan lake bed like some huge transparent bird . The Pathfinder was seen flying slowly above a tan lakebed in a majestic pose .
 At least 60 percent of the Pathfinder's power was provided by the solar cells . The Pathfinder's solar cells provide at least 60 per cent of power .
 The Pathfinder made its public debut on November 23, 1993, at the Edwards Air Force Base Air Show . The Pathfinder's public debut came at the same air show in 1993 .
 Six weeks before, even its existence had been a secret; now, more than 200,000 people saw it on display . Six weeks ago, even the existence of the exhibit was a secret .
 Never before had a Black airplane's first public showing come so soon after its existence had been revealed . The plane was the first to be shown in public since its existence was revealed .
 The Pathfinder was in a roped-off area of the main hangar, and there were armed guards nearby . Armed guards were also nearby .
 People were kept back because the light in the hangar was enough to start the motors, and a spinning propeller might injure a spectator . This was not due to any secrecy .
 Pathfinder was returned to AeroVironment for modifications that would enable it to undertake high-altitude flights . Pathfinder is the first of its kind to fly in the world .
 Control of the program was also transferred from BMDO to NASA due to budget reasons . Control of NASA's space program has also been transferred to NASA .
 While at AeroVironment, about 70 percent of the wing surface was covered with solar cells .
 The high-altitude flights were seen as critical to demonstrate the feasibility of the Pathfinder concept . The Pathfinder concept is designed to fly at altitudes of up to 10,000 meters .
 It was planned that the tests would run from late August through mid-October 1994 at Edwards .
 Pathfinder lacks an energy-storage system . The flights would be made during daylight hours .
 The Pathfinder's flight characteristics at high altitudes are very different than the heavier and faster-flying U-2s . The Pathfinder flight characteristics are different than those of the heavier, faster-moving U.2s.
 At altitude, the U-2s' minimum and maximum speeds, limited by wing flutter, provide only a small margin for flight . The U.2s can only reach their maximum speeds at altitude at altitude .
 With the lighter and slower Pathfinder, both speeds are considerably slower and therefore much less susceptible to structural failure . The lighter, slower Pathfinder is much lighter and less prone to structural failures .
 This is important, as tight limits would be very demanding for the automatic control system . This would require tight limits for the system to work .
 At sunset, electrical power would be lost from the solar cells, and the Pathfinder would start down . The Pathfinder would use solar cells to power down the Pathfinder .
 Following the high-altitude tests, long-duration flights could be attempted . Following the tests, the team hopes to launch long-range flights .
 Pathfinder could fly over the North Pole for weeks at a time to measure ozone levels . Pathfinder could take off from Alaska from Alaska and fly over North Pole over the winter .
 During the summer, there is nearly continuous sunlight over the pole, so the Pathfinder would not need any energy storage system . The Pathfinder would need to be powered by solar power .
 These would use the light reflected from clouds, the ice cap, and the atmosphere to produce power during the evening hours, when the sun is low .
 The HALSOL-Pathfinder was designed to act as a technology demonstrator for the eternal aircraft, which would be a much larger and heavier aircraft . The aircraft would be much heavier and heavier than the eternal plane .
 The solar array would produce 21. kilowatts, powering the eight motors . It would be the same motors as those used on Pathfinder .
 At night, hydrogen and oxygen would be allowed to recombine into water . Hydrogen and oxygen will recombine in the night to create water .
 The energy released would be converted back into electrical power for the motors . The energy would then be converted into electricity for the vehicles .
 Although the technology is understood, the problem is putting it into a lightweight package . The problem is not being able to put the technology into a lighter package .
 Attention is shifting to dualuse technology -- military systems that can also have civilian applications . Dualuse technology is being developed in the post-Cold War political environment .
 The ability to reach high altitudes, then stay there for months at a time, opens numerous possibilities in the area of atmospheric research .
 One-shot measurements of atmospheric conditions cannot give the needed baseline data to detect changes . Sporadic, one-shot measures of atmospheric . conditions cannot be used to provide baseline data, scientists say .
 To distinguish normal atmospheric variations from changes caused by natural and man-made sources, it is necessary to take measurements throughout the day-night cycle .
 The Pathfinder could be flown continuously over the Yukon Valley in Alaska during the summer . The Pathfinder, for example, could also fly continuously over Alaska during summer .
 It could monitor flow of air pollution from Russia as well as the effect of local volcanoes . It could also monitor the flow of local air pollution to Russia .
 Pathfinder's electric motors give off no exhaust emissions . Another advantage is that its electric motors don't emit any emissions . Pathfinder is the first time a car has been driven by an electric motor .
 The plane could carry sensitive chemical detectors without their measurements being contaminated by the plane itself . It could carry sensors that detect chemicals without being contaminated .
 Other research projects would utilize the Helios and its ability to fly continuously through the night . The Helios is a prototype of the Apollo spacecraft .
 Major storms develop in subtropical areas of the Atlantic and Pacific, then move toward North America over several weeks . The storms are expected to develop in the coming weeks .
 The Helios can fly above most of the atmosphere, which would allow instruments to observe in ultraviolet and infrared wavelengths . It would be the first time the Helios has ever flown above the atmosphere .
 These observations cannot be made from ground-based telescopes because the atmosphere and water vapor absorb these wavelengths . Ground-based telescope telescopes cannot be used to make observations because of the Earth's atmosphere .
 The final, indirect result of the Helios would be improved electronic and solar technology .
 The payload limitations would encourage development of ultralightweight electronics and sensors, much as satellites did in the 1950s and 1960s . The payload will be limited to a maximum of two kilograms .
 Helios development effort could improve solar technology . Just as Pathfinder made Pathfinder practical, Helios could improve technology . Helios will be the first solar-powered vehicle to fly into space .
 It has been estimated that a Helios-SRA would cost between $2 and $3 million . A minimum production run of twenty aircraft is estimated to cost $2 million .
 In particular, the development of flyable fuel cells are the key to day-night flights . The development of fuel cells is key to the success of the world's aviation industry .
 Pathfinder-Helios now faces a political environment that views new and innovative ideas with disinterest or hostility . As a White project, Pathfinder-helios faces a ... hostile environment .
 Leading Systems, in the best tradition of high-tech companies, had started in a garage in 1980 . Leading Systems was founded in the garage in the 1980s .
 The control system for the UAV was built in the living room of one of the founders .
 As with earlier Black airplanes, the goal was the rapid building of the prototypes . The goal was to speed up the production of the prototype aircraft .
 The program office had few government personnel, while the number of support contractors was kept small . The office was kept under control of the program office .
 On the strike version, the wing would be separated from the pylon; the UAV would then fall to the target . The strike version would be the first of its kind .
 The Amber took off and landed on a set of long and sticklike retractable landing gear . The Amber was the first of its kind to take off from the airfield .
 Amber was more akin to the simple battlefield support UAVs, rather than the complex strategic drones used earlier . Although it was as large as a light airplane, the Amber was a more like a battlefield support drone . Amber was the first of its kind to be developed by the U.
 Flight tests began in November 1986 at the Leading Systems test facility at the El Mirage Airport, in the Mojave Desert, near Edwards Air Force Base, near the base .
 These proved out the low-drag aerodynamics, lightweight structure, control system, and engine . The project was designed to reduce drag and improve aerodynamic efficiency .
 When the UAV was placed in a high-angle-of-attack or high-g condition, it would start to oscillate . The UAV would then start to vibrate when placed in such a condition .
 During the fall of 1987, information began to be released on the design, possible payloads, and future activities .
 Leading Systems decided to attempt to break its UAV world endurance record . Leading Systems is hosting the Fifteenth Annual Association of Unmanned Vehicle Systems Technical Symposium and Exhibit .
 As the flight progressed, the elapsed time was posted in Leading Systems’ booth .
 Congress was becoming dissatisfied with the large number of UAV programs under way . During this same time, Congress also became unhappy with the number of such programs .
 In 1987, it ordered a consolidation of the programs and froze UAV funding . The UAV program was ordered by the U.S. government in 1987 .
 In June 1988, the Joint Project Office for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles was established . It was established under the U.S. Navy's Naval Air Systems Command .
 UAV funding is now provided at the Office of the Secretary of Defense level . UAVs are now provided by the Office for the Defense Department .
 Amber I UAVs will be the first of its kind in the UAV program . Amber I will be able to fly in the Amber I-UAVs .
 Ti%e.wJfie/irawtrVriAi'er'fne ""rrase ana we're covered with a plastic bubble. We're covered in plastic bubble."
 The Amber I flew the Amber I using a nose-mounted television camera . The operator at the ground station flew the aircraft using the camera .
 Amber design would test the ability to meet service specifications for reliability, availability, and maintainability . Amber would be tested for reliability and availability of reliability .
 Some expected that all ten would be lost during the tests, but there were no mishaps . Some were worried that the ten would lose during the test .
 A total of thirteen Amber UAVs had been built . Three A45s, three B45s and seven Amber Is were built .
 The move was widely regarded as an act of folly because it created a gap in overhead reconnaissance . The move created the gap between the two aircrafts and reconnaissance .
 At the low end, the air force and navy were dependent on RF4C reconnaissance planes and F-14s carrying camera pods . At the end of the war, the U.S. Air Force and navy was dependent on reconnaissance planes with cameras attached .
 At the high end, photo reconnaissance satellites would provide worldwide coverage . The satellites would be satellites that provide worldwide photo reconnaissance .
 Their resolution was as good as six inches under ideal conditions . They could provide coverage only when they orbited over a target . The resolution was up to six inches .
 The events of January and February 1991 would make this shortcoming clear . The events in 1991 would be remembered for the events of that month .
 Throughout the Gulf War, intelligence was a problem . UAVs over the Gulf were a problem for the U.S. military .
 Charles Horner expressed dissatisfaction with the quality of intelligence reports they were given to the CIA . Horner said he was unhappy with the intelligence reports he received .
 There are major disagreements over the bomb damage assessments of Iraqi forces . Iraqi forces have been unable to assess the damage of the bombs .
 The BDA controversy was the result of the differing data and "platforms" being used, as well as the mindsets of the analysts . The Bda controversy was a result of differing data being used .
 The air force intelligence officers in the field were using the videotapes from the strike missions . The footage was used by the air force to help them find out what happened .
 Ajet of flame would erupt from the hatch, and the tank's interior and crew would be incinerated . The tank would have been incinerated by fire .
 Once the fire burned out, the tank would have little visible external damage—perhaps only a small entry hole . But once the fire was out, there would be little visible damage to the tank .
 When a satellite photographed the area hours or days later, the tank would be listed as intact . The tank would then be photographed as intact by satellite .
 In one case, a tank was declared operational, until it was pointed out that the turret had been blown a foot out of position .
 Schwarzkopf complained that the guidelines for assessing damage were so stringent that a tank had to be on its back ""like a dead cockroach"" before it would be counted as destroyed before it was counted as a destroyed tank was destroyed .
 In other cases, the T72 would undergo such a violent secondary explosion that it would be blown apart . The T72's secondary explosion would be so violent that it was blown apart, the author says .
 Then it would be claimed that the revetment had been empty when it was bombed, it would have been claimed that it was empty . It would have led to the death of many who died in the bombing of the city .
 Air force estimated 40 percent of Iraqi tanks and artillery had been destroyed . Ground war was about to begin in late February 1991 .
 The air force was accused of inflating its damage estimates . Not surprisingly, the air force has been accused of exaggerating its estimates of damage .
 In fact, 60 percent of Iraqi tanks and artillery had been destroyed during the bombing campaign, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In the final assessment, the strike videos, which recorded events as they happened, proved more accurate than ""National Technical Means"" such as satellites .
 The Pointer, Pioneer, and Exdrone UAVs were used by U.S. forces . Three different systems were used in the United States .
 The Pointer, built by AeroVironment and used by the marines, was simplicity itself . It was the first of its kind to be built by the company .
 It was a radio-controlled model airplane, similar to the ones built by hobbyists . The plane was built by a hobbyist group .
 Pointer carried a television camera that transmitted its photos back to the operator . The Pointer used the camera to transmit photos to a camera operator .
 Pointer was used for real-time BDA, artillery adjustment, and reconnaissance-early warning . The Pointer is used for BDA and artillery adjustment and reconnaissance .
 The aircraft was powered by a piston engine and had a twin-boom, high-wing design . It was powered with a twin boom, high wing design .
 In the Gulf, one Pioneer unit was aboard each of the battleships Missouri and Wisconsin . Three units were assigned to the marines, one to the army. One unit was on each battleship .
 Several were sent on one-way missions . The UAV was kept over a target until the fuel ran out, in order to produce the maximum amount of information .
 The army would fly them along the routes to be taken by Apache helicopters . The pilots would watch the live video, then climb into their helicopters and take off .
 The navy used them to spot targets for the 16-inch battleship guns, then correct their fire . They were used by the navy to spot and correct the fire of the 16 inch guns .
 During one mission, forty Iraqi soldiers were seen coming out of a bunker and waving white cloths at a Pioneer in an attempt to surrender to it . During one of the missions, 40 Iraqi soldiers attempted to surrender .
 About fifty-five to sixty Exdrone UAVs were also used by the marines in the Gulf . About 50-five-to-60 ExDrone drones were used in Gulf .
 The marines used them to observe minefields and barriers in southern Kuwait City . The marines were able to observe mines and barriers on the city .
 In each of these cases, the UAVs were able to provide real-time intelligence directly to the units that needed it . In each case, the intelligence was able to be directly delivered to the unit .
 Following the Gulf War, interest within the air force grew in the development of long-range UAV systems . The systems could keep watch on a specific area day and night .
 This could clear up shortcomings in reconnaissance that the war had made apparent . This could do much to clear up the shortcomings that were made apparent.
 Work on the GNAT-750 project had actually begun at Leading Systems in 1988 . GNAT was the work of Leading Systems, which had begun in 1988.
 Like Amber, the GNAT-750 had an inverted V-shaped tail, the same sixty-fivehorsepower engine, and took off and landed on a spindly tricycle landing gear . Amber was the first aircraft to fly in the U.S.
 Mounted under the nose was a ""skyball""; a movable turret that could carry a stabilized infrared system, a daylight television camera, and a low-light-level television camera . The turret could also carry infrared cameras .
 GNAT-750 could fly for forty-eight hours continuously, giving it a maximum radius of 1,512 nautical miles . GNAT was designed to be able to fly for 40 hours continuously .
 When one sees the GNAT-750, the first impression is of a model airplane . Despite this, when one . sees the . first impression was of a . model airplane. The GNAT .750 is the first .
 The prototype GNAT-750 made its first flight in the summer of 1989 . The GNAT 750 made a series of successful test flights in the 1990s . It was the first of its kind .
 Despite this success, technical problems with the UAV program continued . Technical problems continued to plague the program .
 In 1990, its assets were bought out by General Atomics; this included the Amber and GNAT-750 projects . The Amber project was one of the first to be developed by the company .
 In 1992, a prototype made a continuous flight of over forty hours at El Mirage, reaching altitudes of over 25,000 feet . The prototype reached altitudes over 25000 feet in 1992, reaching over 40 hours .
 General Atomics then won a contract from the Turkish government to supply it with GNAT-750s . Deliveries began by the end of 1993 .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff requested immediate development of a UAV for use over Bosnia and Serbia . Joint chiefs of Staff have requested development of the UAVs .
 Yugoslavia had disintegrated into a barbaric civil war between Serbs and Moslems . Following the end of Communist rule in Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia had broken out into a bloody civil war .
 It was marked by ethnic cleansing—wanton killing, torture, and starvation . It was also marked by the deaths of people who were tortured and starved .
 The UAV was to keep track of the warring factions’ troop movements, artillery emplacements, and antiaircraft weapons, in support of UN peacekeeping forces . UAVs were to be used to monitor troop movements and artillery .
 It would be rapidly modified for the mission, then equipped with an off-the-shelf sensor package . It would then be equipped with a sensor package that can be fitted to the mission .
 GNAT750 was available for export; if one was lost, no sensitive technology would be compromised . The GNAT 750 was available to export . No sensitive technology was compromised .
 GNAT-750s needed to be operational by October 1993 at the latest . The GNAT 750s were launched in Bosnia in 1993 .
 A development effort with so short a time frame could only be accomplished, however, if freed of the funding and acquisition constraints of a military program . The development effort could be accomplished only if freed from the funding constraints of the military program, the Pentagon says .
 By the late summer of 1993, the CIA GNAT-750 effort was under way . The project was launched in the summer of that year .
 The CIA acquired two GNAT-750s from General Atomics, which were modified with the relay antennae . The CIA used the modified antennae to launch the CIA's first-generation aircraft .
 A large teardrop-shaped dome was added to the top of the GNAT-750 to house the data link . The data link will be used to send data from the satellite network .
 The CIA GNAT-750s were to be ready for operations by October 1, 1993 . Once operational, they were based in Italy; once operational they would be based in the country .
 The CIA GNAT-750 program had to face the political realities of spying in the 1990s .
 In 1993, CIA Director R James Woolsey Jr. was far less than that enjoyed by Allen Dulles in 1956, when the U-2 program was about to begin . Woolsey's autonomy in 1993, however, was far greater than that of Dulles' in 1956 .
 CIA consulted with the Defense Department and Congress on the GNAT-750 effort . Now it's necessary for the CIA to consult with Defense Department, Congress . CIA: "Now it is necessary to consult" with Congress .
 The overall UAV program itself was caught in a tug-of-war between the various factions who were faulting the CIA's handling of the GNAT750 program .
 The CIA objected to the CIA's unwillingness to tell others what was going on with the project . The CIA refused to reveal what it was doing to the public .
 GNAT-750 was a very different shade of Black than the U-2 . GNAT750 was the first aircraft to fly in the U.2 .
 The White GNAT-750 became Black with the start of the CIA program . Then, suddenly, the White GNat-750 become Black .
 The CIA GNAT-750 effort was a Black project that was almost open . The net result was that the project was almost free to use .
 Political infighting over the CIA GNAT-750 was aggravated by technical problems . The political infighting was exacerbated by technical issues .
 A Pentagon official complained that the CIA lacked experience with systems integration or developing tactical communications links . A ""Pentagon official"" complained that a CIA official complained about the CIA's lack of experience .
 By late October, the GNAT-750 was judged ready for its final systems integration test flight . The GNat-750 is judged ready to undergo a test flight in late October . It will be the first of its kind ever to fly a spacecraft into space .
 On the night before the flight, the CIA contract personnel modified the software program . The CIA contract workers modified the program the day before the plane went down .
 The GNAT-750's motor and data link shut down when its speed fell below 40 mph . The new program shuts down the GNat-750 when speed drops below 40mph .
 It was assumed that if the UAV was at this low a speed, it would be on the ground . The UAV is believed to have been flying at this speed .
 During the flight the next day, the GNAT-750 was hit by a gust of wind . The plane was later hit by the wind .
 This produced a low-speed indication, and the software shut down the motor and data link link . This produced an indication of a low speed, and then the data link shut down .
 The GNAT-750 rolled over on its back, went into a flat spin, and crashed . The crash was the first of its kind in the U.S. history .
 On December 2, 1993, a GNAT-750 flying over the El Mirage test site successfully transmitted imagery of moving targets, such as a tank, to a relay aircraft, which then passed it on to the Pentagon . The Pentagon received the imagery from the GNAT 750 .
 It was believed that this was due to the shape of the fuselage, its heavy use of carbon epoxy materials, and, ironically, its slow speed of 90 knots .
 The radar's own software filters out such weak and slow-moving targets as returns from birds or weather . The radar is designed to detect weak targets such as birds and weather .
 CIA Director Woolsey reportedly demanded that it be operational before his next appearance at congressional budget hearings . Woolsey demanded that the CIA Director would have it operational before he appeared at budget hearings next week .
 The Italian government was having second thoughts about playing host to the CIA operation . The CIA operation was set to take place in Italy .
 The U-2 had taken off on that first overflight . But the world had changed since the first flight . The U.2 was the first to fly over the world .
 There were other possibilities, ones that would have been unthinkable in the mid-1950s . There were also other possibilities .
 When the Italians refused permission, the U.S. government made a direct appeal to senior Albanian officials . The United States made the appeal to Albania's government .
 The single GNAT-750 and a satellite transmission station would be set up at an Albanian military base on the Adriatic coast . It would be based in Albania's capital Tiranija .
 The three prime candidates were Scutari, Durres, and Tirane, the capital, Tirane . Durres is the capital of Albania .
 They would have direct access to Montenegro, Kosovo, and Macedonia without having to overfly a third country . They would be able to access Montenegro and Kosovo, without needing to fly to the other countries .
 It was in these regions that United States ground troops were assigned as part of the UN peacekeeping force . U.S. ground troops are assigned to the region in the United States .
 It was a stunning example of how the world had changed in just a few years, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Between 1949 and 1953, the CIA and the British Secret Intelligence Service had tried to establish networks of agents within Albania in an attempt to overthrow its Communist government . The CIA and British Secret Service had attempted to establish agents in Albania .
 Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Albania remained a closed, Stalinist country . Albania was a closed Stalinist state during the period of the Cold War .
 Its deployment in Albania was marked by a major article in Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine .
 From 6,000 feet they were able to identify decoy artillery and SAM sites . Other flights were targeted against entrenchments . The U.S. was also able to target enemy forces .
 Airfields, troop and artillery movements, supply dumps, and tank locations were monitored . Airfields and troop movements were also monitored .
 GNAT750s were quite stealthy—no time did people on the ground realize the UAVs were overhead . GNAT 750s were stealthy enough to be able to fly over the country .
 Albania could only spend about two hours on station . Because of Albania's location, the station was only able to spend two hours there .
 UAVs could only be flown in specific areas, and at certain times and altitudes . Having to coordinate the GNAT-750s with the manned RG-8 meant the UAV was only flown in certain areas .
 Real-time changes in the GNAT-750 route disrupted by real-time traffic disruptions . GNAT 750 was launched in 2008 and 2009 . The GNAT750 was launched on November 1, 2008, and launched in 2009 .
 By the summer of 1994, the United States European Command requested the renewal of GNAT-750 overflights . The U.S. European Command asked for the renewal .
 The CIA preferred to fly from an Italian base, but this was again refused . The CIA wanted to use the base in Italy, but it was refused .
 The CIA also wanted to expand its GNAT-750 unit with three more UAVs and an additional ground station . The CIA wants to expand the unit with additional ground stations and a new UAV .
 Two of the UAVs would be used for reconnaissance, two others for relay aircraft . Two others will be used as relay aircraft, while two others would be reconnaissance aircraft .
 The reconnaissance GNAT-750s were also expected to be fitted with ELINT receivers that could pick up both radar signals and transmissions from walkie-talkies .
 The Turkish government was in a budget crunch and lacked the money to pay for the three GNAT-750s already delivered, much less the four still at the General Atomics factory . The government did not want to use the GNAT 750s as a military aircraft .
 Each GNAT-750 cost $800,000, while the ground station cost $1.1 million . The ground station was built for $1 million each .
 The HALSOL and GNAT-750 represent the future of airborne reconnaissance . The GNat-750 were developed in the 1990s .
 The smaller post-Cold War air force is unlikely to have the billions of dollars needed to develop and fly a new manned reconnaissance aircraft . It is unlikely the billions will be spent developing and flying a new aircraft .
 GNAT-750's similarity to a big model airplane is an advantage, rather than a shortcoming, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter.com .
 This allows it to combine long-duration flight times with the simplicity of the small tactical IJAYs_iiJift-rifrfiN’Ji/ifr3u-kiruwhftrin4 tJonunu'ea value bt Black
 Despite all the problems, it was still done faster and at a lower cost than conventional methods could have accomplished . Despite the issues, the project was done faster than any other method .
 The involvement of congressional staffers meant that the lines of authority were less clear and direct . Congressional staffers were also involved in the process of removing the White House .
 The GNAT-750 effort also marked the return to Black aviation by the CIA after two decades . The mission was the first time the CIA has tried to fly a plane in the past two decades.
 Between 1969 and 1971, the CIA-sponsored D-21 Tagboard made their few disappointing flights . The Tagboard was the first of its kind to fly .
 The GNAT-750 project brings the story of the United States Black airplanes full circle . With this, the GNAT plane project will bring the U.S. Black airplanes back to the forefront .
 The A-12, D-21, and HALSOL had all been kept secret for a decade or more before their existence was revealed . They were kept secret from the public for more than a decade .
 Such secrecy, along with the large number of stories about the stealth fighter, inevitably gave rise to speculation about other Black airplanes, ones that were still secret . Such secrecy has led to speculation that there may be more Black airplanes .
 Reports and sightings of these secret airplanes were soon being whispered about . Reports of sightings soon were being whispered around the world .
 The longest continuing U.S. Black airplane program is the secret test flying of MiGs and other Soviet aircraft . The program continues to test Soviet-made aircraft .
 This effort's tentative beginnings were in the mid-1950s, before the U-2 . This effort was in the 1950s, when the U.2 was launched .
 It began in earnest a decade later, contemporarily with the A-12 and D-21, and has continued to the present day . It has continued in earnest since the 1980s .
 Unlike the other Black airplane programs, MiG operations still remain Black . Unlike the Have Blue, F-117A, or HALSOL, the MiG program still remains Black .
 It is not known exactly the actual number or types of aircraft involved, where they came from, or the complete history .
 There are only a few, limited accounts, and it is probable that many are incomplete, and at worst, wrong . It is possible that many of these are, at best, incomplete .
 It is known that these Dark Eagles brought about a fundamental change in air-combat tactics . The Dark Eagles are known to have changed the tactics of air combat .
 They revitalized the art of dogfighting at a time when, seemingly, it had nearly been forgotten . Dogfighting is now a popular sport in the United States .
 The knowledge gained from these planes was reflected in the success of the U.S. Navy air operations over North Vietnam in the final year of the war . It was also used in the founding of the Navy's Top Gun school .
 The program started with a C-124 Globemaster landing at WrightPatterson Air Force Base in the mid-1950s . The program is now being used to test the ability to fly a small aircraft .
 Although quickly superseded by the more advanced MiG 15, it was the first jet operated by these Eastern European air forces . The first jet was operated by Eastern European Air Forces .
 For the United States Air Force, it introduced the secret testing of Soviet aircraft . For the U.S. Air Force .
 According to one account, an Eastern European intelligence officer contacted an American intelligence officer and offered the ""loan"" of the plane . The plane was shot down by a jetliner carrying passengers and crew members .
 Yak 23 is packed in shipping crates and left aboard a railroad car . Yak 23 was packed in crates and shipped aboard a train car . The Yak 23 sold for $1.5 million .
 After its arrival, the parts were photographed, to insure they could be repacked correctly .
 In September 1953, he had become the first U.S. pilot to fly a MiG 15 . He was the first pilot in the United States to fly the MiG15 .
 The Yak 23 tests were top secret . Unlike that effort, the tests were conducted with the Yak 23 . Unlike the tests Collins conducted with Yak 23, they are top secret.
 The plane was then disassembled, loaded aboard a C-124, and flown away . It was then loaded aboard the plane, flown away from the airport .
 It would be another forty years before the existence of the Yak 23 would be revealed . The Yak 23 was the first Yak Yak from the United States Air Force .
 In the years following the Yak 23's brief stay at Wright-Patterson, a new generation of fighter aircraft was developed . The Yak 23 was developed by the F-4 Phantom II, which was developed in the 1970s .
 The F-4 was the first fighter designed from the start with only air-to-air missiles . The radar-guided Sparrow and the shorter-range Sidewinder infrared-guided missile were the first .
 With the new missiles came the new attitude that dogfighting was obsolete . The new attitude came with the idea of dogfighting being obsolete .
 The air-to-air training given to new navy F-4 crews was extremely limited . The air to air training was very limited, with only a few days of training .
 Early years of the air war over North Vietnam showed the faith placed in missiles was terribly in error . The early years of air war in Vietnam showed that missile technology was wrong .
 Between 1965 and 1968, the U.S. Air Force had a 2.15 to 1 kill ratio . The United States Air Force was at a high kill ratio between 1965 to 1968 .
 For roughly two North Vietnamese MiG 17 Frescos or MiG 21 Fishbeds shot down, an American F-4, F-105, or F-8 would be lost . For roughly every two North Vietnam MiG17 Frescos shot down an American aircraft, an F
 The percentage of U.S. fighters being lost in air-to-air combat is growing . More serious, the percentage of United States fighters were losing in air to air combat was growing .
 Frank Ault is assigned to learn the reasons for this poor showing against the MiGs . Frank A. Ault was assigned to look at the reasons behind the poor showing .
 A full 25 percent of Sparrows failed because their rocket engines never fired . The rocket engines failed because of the failure of their engines .
 It took a full 5. seconds to fire a Sparrow . Yet, the average time the F-4 crews had to fire was 2. seconds .
 These attacks changed with altitude, and whether it was a tail, head-on, or side attack . These changes were based on altitude, altitude, or altitude .
 The crews lacked the knowledge to judge the ever-changing parameters in the midst of the fight . The crews lack the knowledge of the ever changing parameters .
 The MiG 17's superior turning capability then allowed it to close to gun range . MiG17's superior turn capability then let it get close to range .
 All too often, hits from the MiG 17's ""outmoded"" cannons would then destroy the F-4 . The MiG17's cannons were often used to hit the F.4 .
 The key to survival in the skies of North Vietnam, as it had been in every air war, was to make the enemy pilot fight on your terms . The key was to survive in the air war as it was in every other air war .
 ‘aestrb'y tne enemy ""drrpiarfef crrcuursb~ rrrtrlpY trOiem~was acquiring the knowledge. This meant knowing his weaknesses, while using your plane's strengths to maneuver into position .
 In 1967, the Defense Intelligence Agency secretly acquired a single MiG 21 .
 The country the MiG 21 came from, and the means by which it came to the U.S. remain secret to this day . The country it came from remains a mystery .
 U.S. possession of the MiG 21 was, itself, secret . It was tested at Groom Lake, where it was tested for the first time .
 A joint air forcenavy team assembled for a series of dogfight tests . Joint air force team was assembled for the tests in a joint air force .
 At a speed of Mach 0.0. at 15,000 feet the instantaneous turn rates of the two planes were nearly identical, at 13.degree degrees per second .
 At Mach 0.5, the MiG 21 held the edge at 11.5 degrees versus 7.7 degrees for the F-4 . The MiG21 holds the edge of the F.4 at 11 degrees, while the F.-4 holds the advantage at 7.5
 When the air force pilots flew the MiG 21, the results were a draw . The F-4 would win some fights, but not others . The MiG-21 would win others .
 To avoid accidents, restrictions had been placed by the air force on air combat maneuvers .
 One of the navy pilots was Marland W ""Doc"" Townsend, then commander of VF-121, the F-4 training squadron at NAS Miramar . Townsend was the pilot of the Navy's first F4 squadron .
 He was an engineer and a Korean War veteran and had flown almost every navy aircraft . He was also a Korean war veteran and flew almost every Navy aircraft .
 Townsend would make his pass, then pull up into a vertical climb, do a roll as he came over the top, spot the MiG 21, then line up on its tail . Townsend would pull up, then roll, spot and line-up on the tail of his MiG
 The Have Doughnut project officer was Tom Cassidy, a pilot with VX4, the navy's Air Development Squadron at Point Mugu .
 Cassidy was willing to fight in the vertical, flying the plane to the point where it was buffeting, just above the stall . Cassidy was able to fly the plane in a vertical position . Cassidy flew the plane into a stall, but was unable to get stuck in the air .
 After the flight, they realized the MiG 21 turned better than the F-4 at lower speeds . The MiG-21 is a fighter jet made of MiG21 .
 An F-4 had defeated the MiG 21; the weakness of the Soviet plane had been found . The weakness had been discovered by the F4 . An F4 was able to defeat the Soviet aircraft .
 This would require a special school to teach advanced air combat techniques . The school would require students to take part in the air combat school .
 The MiG pilot reduced his speed, wiggled his wings, and lowered his landing gear . The pilot was killed in the crash of the MiG in 1944 .
 The MiG pilot signaled he wanted to land when Israeli planes pulled alongside . The Israeli plane pulled alongside the MiG plane and the pilot signaled to land . The plane was shot down by the Israeli plane .
 Monir Radfa defected due to his revulsion against attacks on Kurds in northern Iraq . Radfa said he had defected because he was disgusted with the attacks on Kurdish people .
 He was also a Roman Catholic, one of only five or six in the Iraqi air force . He felt discriminated against in the predominately Moslem country . The air force is one of Iraq's most heavily populated areas .
 He had requested a transfer to MiG 21s and spent four months training in the Soviet Union . He spent the time in Soviet Union training with Soviet Union forces .
 Dated August 3, it said in part, "Iam a MiG 21 pilot of the Iraqi air force and I have decided to come to your country" The document was posted on August 3 .
 Please tell your pilots not to shoot me down because I come for peaceful feelings. I come to peaceful feelings . I'm not afraid to fly down. I'm afraid to be shot down. Please tell me not to fly again. I love peace .
 I should come in high altitude between 0700 and 1100 hours G.M.T. flying east to west and over the Jordan River near the Dead Sea . I should be flying east-to-west and over Jordan River .
 Monir Radfa took off from Rashid Air Base outside Baghdad on a navigation flight, then headed for Israel . The plane was headed to Israel after it landed in Israel .
 As he crossed Jordan, two Hawker Hunter jet fighters climbed toward his plane, but the MiG was flying too high and too fast for them to catch it . The plane crossed Jordan but was too fast and too high to reach it .
 For the next several months, it was subjected to a series of flights to learn its strengths and weaknesses . For the first time, the plane was given a tour of the United States .
 At low speeds, the MiG 21 would tend to spin out in tight, low-altitude turns . The MiG-21 would also have to be able to fly in tight turns .
 The newspaper Lamerhavy said two days after the defection that ""supreme political interests"" and defense responsibilities required that Israel not give any information to other countries . Israel's newspaper said that Israel's political interests required that the information was kept secret .
 Israel should not allow foreign experts to examine the new Soviet plane, Ma‘ariv newspaper said . Ma’ariv said . The Ma'ariv paper said, ""Israel should not let foreign experts examine the Soviet plane"
 On June 5, 1967, Israel launched a preemptive strike on Egypt, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq . The strike was the first Israeli strike since the Arab Spring began .
 By the end of the first day, the Arab air forces had been destroyed on the ground and Israel had complete air superiority . The Arab air force was destroyed on ground and Israeli air superiority was complete .
 Six Algerian MiG 21 pilots flew into El Arish Air Base in the Sinai Desert . Six of the pilots were from Algeria .
 Israeli pilots deliver MiGs to Israeli control . This was not the only example of wayward pilots delivering MiGs . Israeli pilots have been involved in accidents in the past .
 On August 12, 1968, two Syrian air force lieutenants took off in a pair of MiG 17s on a training mission . Walid Adham and Radfan Rifai were airmen from the air force .
 They lost their way and, believing they were over Lebanon, landed at the Beset Landing Field in northern Israel . They thought they were flying over Lebanon and landed at a field .
 Yossi Yitzhak, who witnessed the landings while working in a nearby hay field, told them they were in Israel . Yitzak: "We are in Israel. We are not going to be surprised"
 The Israeli MiGs had, by this time, acquired an importance far beyond their intelligence value . Israel's MiGs were among the most important weapons in the world .
 France cut off military supplies to Israel in the wake of the Six Day War . In the aftermath of the war, France cut back military supplies . Israel won the war with Israel in 1967 .
 Israel turned to the United States for A-4 attack aircraft and F-4E fighters . Israel sought the A4 and F4E attack aircrafts .
 Israel could offer captured Soviet tanks, SA-2 SAMs, and MiGs in exchange for captured MiGs . The United States government was reluctant to accept Israel's offer .
 Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine came as a Shock. The article was published in the February 17, 1969, issue of Aviation Week .
 Soviet MiG 21 fighter was secretly brought to the United States last spring and flight tested by USAF pilots to learn first-hand its capabilities and design characteristics . The MiG-21 fighter was flown to the U.S. last spring to learn about its capabilities .
 The aircraft engaged in simulated combat against U.S. fighters . The aircraft was highly regarded by pilots who flew it .
 He had been an F-8 pilot during the early years of the Vietnam War . He had seen the problems with the F-4 .
 Teague was a fighter pilot who had completed two combat tours in Vietnam . Teague served two tours in the Vietnam .
 Initially, he was only told he was being sent ""into the desert"" for two hundred days . He was initially told he would be sent to the desert .
 Teague and his personnel quickly wrote up a test plan for the aircraft . After being told about the MiGs, Teague wrote up the test plan .
 Have Drill tests were conducted by a small group of air force and navy pilots under Teague and VX-4 test pilot Ronald ""Mugs"" McKeown . The Have Drill test was conducted by Teague under the supervision of the VX 4 and Teague .
 The pilots’ introduction to the MiGs was a strange and wonderful experience . As with the earlier Black airplanes, the pilots' introduction was strange .
 Foster recalled being taken to the ""hidden location"" and entering a huge well-lighted hangar where the gleaming silver MiGs were kept . Foster said he was taken to a 'hidden location' and entered a well-lit hangar .
 The MiGs' instruments were in Russian, so the pilots had to be briefed extensively . The MiG's instruments are in Russian .
 This made even such basics as taking off and landing a learning experience . This made such basics such as landing and taking off a landing experience difficult .
 Taxiing was an ""unnatural" experience for American pilots, as the MiGs used air brakes activated by a lever on the stick . Taxiing in MiGs was an 'unnatural' experience .
 The American MiG pilot tended to wander around as he taxied out to the Groom Lake runway .
 Before taking off, one of the officers would climb up on the MiG's wing and give the pilot final words of advice . The MiG was the first MiG to fly in the Soviet Union .
 On the MiG 17, the pilot had to lift a toggle switch, turn on a pump, wait until the pressure built up, and then put the gear handle down . The pilot has to wait for the pressure to build up in the plane .
 Once the gear was locked, the pilot turned off the pump and closed the toggle switch . The pilot turned on the switch to lock the gear down .
 Flying the MiG 17 reminded Foster of the T-33 trainer in the way it handled . The MiG17 is a Russian-made fighter jet . Foster: "It's like a real-life airplane"
 To demonstrate, Teague would let an F-4 get into firing position on the MiG 17's tail . Teague: "To demonstrate" Teague let a MiG-17 fire on the tail of an F4 .
 Within seconds, the F-4 would be out in front and the MiG 17 would be in firing position . The MiG-17 would be able to take off from the airfield .
 There was simply no way an F-4 could win a close-in-turning fight with a MiG 17 . The MiG17 is a Russian-made fighter jet that can take off from a fighter jet .
 It had an extremely simple, even crude, control system which lacked the power-boosted controls of American aircraft . It had to be extremely crude, even . crude, and lacked power .
 Although tight turning at low speeds, the control system would lock up at high speeds . The control system was designed to be able to lock up high speed .
 One technique for an F-4 to evade a MiG 17 on its tail was to fake a roll one way, then make a hard turn the other direction . One technique was to make hard turns the other way around .
 When the MiG tried to follow, the F-4's better roll rate and acceleration would open the distance between them, so the F.4 could turn around and reengage . The MiG would then be able to follow and turn around to engage .
 The F-4's twin engines were so powerful it could accelerate out of range of the MiG 17's guns in thirty seconds . It was so powerful that it could be out of the range of MiG guns in 30 seconds .
 The F-4 was one and a half miles from the MiG 17 . The MiG was within reach of the Soviet fighter's guns, but was within the reach of its missiles . The U.S. MiG's missiles could also be fired at the Soviet fighters .
 To turn with the MiG 17, a technique called ""lag pursuit"" was developed . The MiG17 was the first MiG-17 fighter jet to fly .
 Rather than trying to turn inside the MiG, the F-4 would stay to the outside . The F-F-4 was designed to be able to fly from the inside .
 The MiG 21 was almost as fast as the F-4, so running was not an option . It was not the first time the MiG-21 was ever seen to be as fast and as fast .
 The delta-wing design of the MiG 21 also lost energy in turns faster than the F-4 did . The delta wing design was designed to reduce energy in turn faster than those of the F4 .
 The technique was to force the MiG 21 to make vertical turns until its air speed fell below a critical value . The technique therefore was used to force its vertical turn until it fell below the critical speed .
 The F-4 had to keep its speed up, to insure the turn rate was even . The Have Doughnut tests were first discovered in the Have Doughnuts tests .
 The data from the Have Doughnut and Have Drill tests were provided to the newly formed Top Gun school at NASA Miramar .
 The Top Gun instructors had been studying the Ault Report, accounts of dogfights, and intelligence reports on North Vietnamese tactics for six months .
 They were given clearances to see and fly the MiGs . They were shown a film of the Have Doughnut tests . Now they are shown a video of the tests .
 The selected instructors would fly in pairs to Nellis Air Force Base to be briefed by Teague or his assistants . Teague's assistants would also fly to the base to meet with the instructors .
 One instructor later recalled his heart racing as the MiGs drew closer on radar . One instructor recalled how his heart raced as MiGs approached him .
 The first step was for the MiGs to pull alongside the F-4s so the instructors could get a good look at them . MiGs pulled alongside F4s for the first time . The MiGs are now being used in the United States to test their combat systems .
 The MiGs were not much to look at; there were bumps and rivets that would never have been on an American plane . There were also rivets on the MiGs that would have never been on American planes .
 The F-4 would then follow along behind as the MiG 17's good low-speed and poor high-speed maneuverability was demonstrated . The MiG17's low speed and poor maneuverability would then be demonstrated .
 The radar intercept officers (RIOs) who operated the F-4's radar also got the chance to study the MiG's radar return . The MiG was the first MiG to fly in the F4 .
 By 1970, the Have Drill program was expanded; a few fleet F-4 crews were given the chance to fight the MiGs .
 For the vast majority who could not go to Top Gun or participate in Have Drill, a thirtyminute film called Throw a Nickel on the Grass was produced . The film was produced for those who couldn't participate in Top Gun .
 The other pilots based at Nellis Air Force Base were not to know about the U.S.-operated MiGs . They were not the other pilots .
 The airspace above the Groom Lake range was closed to prevent any sightings . To prevent sightings, the airspace was closed .
 Several MiG 17 flights were made to test fire the plane's twin 23mm and single 37mm cannons . The plane was designed to be able to carry out a full range of weapons .
 A special dogfight test was conducted with navy and air force F-4 crews . The test took place with navy, air force and navy crews from the air force .
 The navy RIOs were specially trained for their task; the air force used pilots for the position . The air force also trained specially trained pilots for their position .
 The tests showed that the navy's pilot-RIO team worked better than using two pilots . The tests were carried out by the Navy's navy .
 The navy crews were able to detect the target at longer ranges and go over to the offense faster . The navy crew was able to go over the target faster .
 The MiGs were also used for familiarization flights by high-ranking naval officers . MiGs are also used to familiarize pilots with the Royal Air Force .
 Foster convinced several admirals to go with him to fly the MiGs . Foster convinced them to fly MiGs at Groom Lake in 1969 . Foster flew MiGs with admiral at the Tailhook Convention .
 Have Drill personnel were worried about the high-ranking pilots flying the irreplaceable MiGs . The Have Drillers were worried that the pilots were flying the . irrereplaceable MiGs .
 At one point, Teague thought that an admiral was flying a MiG 17 too hard . Teague, who was flying chase, thought that he was flying too hard at one point .
 On August 25, 1947, he set a world speed record of 650. mph in the Douglas D-558-I Skystreak . He set the world record in a record-breaking plane .
 On August 21, 1953, he set a world altitude record of 83,235 feet in the Douglas D-552-II Skyrocket . The record was set in 1953 in a record-breaking aircraft .
 He had also served as commander of the first marine jet fighter squadron and flew secret reconnaissance missions over Communist China .
 He was a living link between propeller fighters and missile-armed, supersonic fighters of the 1960s . He was also a link between the days of propeller fighter planes and the missilearmed fighters .
 The first was a simulated dogfight with several F-8s, while the second was with A-4s . The first dogfight was a dogfight between F-2s and several A-8 aircraft .
 It could be stalled flying straight up and allowed to fall off but would be under full control within 1,500 to 2,000 feet . The plane would be able to fly straight up but would then fall off .
 Pilots over six feet tall were cramped in the cockpit, pilot says . The only drawback was the cockpit size, he says .
 General Carl ran into one of the security precautions surrounding the MiGs . General Carl was at Groom Lake at the time of the incident .
 Ground crews begin pulling the MiGs into the hangars . About midday, the ground crews began pulling them out . The MiGs were pulled out of the hangar .
 Carl asked about this and was told a Soviet reconnaissance satellite would soon pass overhead . Carl was told it would soon be a Soviet satellite . Carl asked if this was true and it was true .
 In spite of the lessons learned from the MiG program and from Top Gun, the future of both programs was by no means assured . The future of MiG and Top Gun was not assured .
 Air-combat training was dangerous, and several aircraft had been lost in accidents . Several aircraft had died in accidents during training .
 In one simulated dogfight with a MiG 17, a brand-new F-4 was lost when it went into a flat spin . In one simulation, the F-2 was lost in a crash .
 There had been only one MiG 21 shot down since the bombing halt in 1968 . The Vietnam War was also winding down .
 Top Gun and Have Drill have produced a small group of navy pilots skilled in the art of air combat . But they had yet to prove the value of their training . Top Gun has produced a few pilots skilled but not enough to prove value of the training .
 Just after midnight on March 30, 1972, the North Vietnamese Army launched the Easter Offensive . The Easter Offensive was launched by the North Vietnam Army .
 President Richard Nixon ordered the mining of North Vietnam's ports and the start of the Linebacker I bombing campaign . The bombing campaign began on May 8, 1968 .
 William R ""Willie"" Driscoll was assigned to an air strike on the railyards at Hai Duong, located halfway between Hanoi and Haiphong . The strike was the first strike in the Vietnam War .
 Cunningham and Driscoll had already shot down two MiGs on January 19 and a MiG 17 on May 8 . Cunningham's team shot down the MiG 21 in January and May 8 in the air . Cunningham had shot down both MiGs .
 As the strike force neared the target, twenty-two MiG 17s, MiG 19s, and MiG 21s rose to challenge the navy planes .
 Cunningham looked to his right at the building, two MiG 17s were coming in from the left . Cunningham: "Two MiGs came in from a left. Two MiGs were coming into the left" Cunningham says .
 The MiG 17s were moving fast, so he knew the controls would be hard to move . He knew he was going to have to be able to control the aircraft .
 Grant chased off the second MiG 17, Cunningham fired a Sidewinder . Cunningham reversed and fired the gun on the second aircraft . Cunningham was killed in the attack .
 The MiG 17 was within the missile's minimum range at launch, but due to the MiG's high speed, the distance opened to 2,500 feet when the Sidewinder hit .
 Eight MiG 17s were in a defensive circle with three F-4s mixed in . Below them were eight MiGs 17s in a circle of fighters .
 One of the F-4s broke from the circle and nearly collided with Cunningham's plane . The plane was flying through the air at the time of the crash .
 Following behind his plane were a MiG 17 about 2,000 feet away . A MiG 21, 3,000ft behind; and a Mi G 17 in his blind spot below and to the outside of the plane .
 Timm's arcing turn was allowing them to close the distance . For the moment, they were out of range, but Timm was closing in on .
 Cunningham saw two MiG 19s begin a diving firing pass on the F-4 . Cunningham looked up and saw two bright flashes of bright flashes . Cunningham: "Two bright flashes" of MiG-19s .
 One of the MiG 17s was now within firing range of Cunningham's F-4 . Cunningham was in a lag pursuit with Timm’'s wing, but one of the aircraft was now in range . Cunningham’s F4 was in the pursuit of Timm
 This allowed the MiG 17 chasing Cunningham to close the range with his plane . Cunningham's plane was able to get out of the range . Cunningham was killed by a MiG-17 .
 He then turned back toward Timm’'s F-4 and yelled for him to break right . Timm then yelled for Timm to break the right .
 Timm, thinking he had evaded the two MiGs (and still not aware of the third MiG), turned right . Timm turned right. Timm thought he'd evaded three MiGs .
 The fast-flying MiG 17 was not able to follow, and Cunningham had a clear shot . Cunningham had clear shot of the MiG, but it was too late to follow .
 Cunningham fired a Sidewinder, which homed in on the MiG 17's hot exhaust and destroyed it . Cunningham fired the missile at a MiG17, destroying it .
 Cunningham and Driscoll's fourth kill; they are now tied with air force Col. Col. Air Force Col. John Col. Cunningham . Cunningham: "It was Cunningham's first kill; it was his fourth kill"
 Cunningham had become separated from his wingman, and it was time to leave . Cunningham had been separated from the wingman . Cunningham was forced to leave after the pair were separated by Cunningham .
 Cunningham spotted the next MiG 17, ahead and slightly below them . Driscoll kept watch behind them for any MiGs that might try to catch them, so Cunningham kept watch .
 This prevented the MiG pilot from using the lateral separation to make a quick turn . MiG pilots were forced to use lateral separation in order to make quick turns . This prevented them from using lateral separation .
 As they closed the distance, the nose of the MiG 17 lit up as the pilot fired his guns . The nose lit up when the pilot opened fire .
 When Cunningham looked back over his ejection seat, it was with considerable shock that he saw the MiG 17, also in a vertical climb . Cunningham: "When I was in the cockpit, I was shocked to see that it was a MiG17"
 Cunningham could see the North Vietnamese pilot's leather helmet, goggles, scarf, and even the expression on his face . Cunningham could not see the pilot's face and could see his leather helmet and goggles . Cunningham: "It's a miracle that he survived"
 As he rolled over the top, the MiG 17, on the verge of a stall, nosed over and fired its guns . The MiG17 was shot by the U.S. Air Force in 1991 . It was the first of its kind to carry out a mission in
 In this maneuver, planes would go into a weaving climb whenever one flew lower than the other . Planes would go in weaving climb when they were flying lower than other .
 Whenever the F-4 pulled out in front, the MiG pilot would fire a short burst . The MiG pilots would fire short bursts when they were attacked by the F4 .
 Cunningham was holding his own, but the F-4 was losing speed faster than the MiG 17 . Cunningham was in the air, but he had to be careful to avoid a crash .
 He lowered half flaps, then made a looping turn at a right angle to the MiG's flight path . He lowered flaps and made a full loop around the plane's path . The crash was the first of its kind in the history of aviation .
 When Cunningham saw the MiG's nose turn slightly, he extended his own turn to the outside of its flight path . Cunningham extended his turn after seeing the nose turn . Cunningham says he saw the plane turn slightly and extended its own turn .
 Remembering the previous escape maneuver, the MiG pilot also pulled up into a loop to counter . The MiG pilots were able to pull out of the formation formation in the first place .
 Cunningham continued through the loop, extended out under the thrust of the afterburners, and was quickly out of range . Cunningham continued though the loop and extended out of the . loop, extending out under . thrusts . Cunningham .
 Neither pilot attempted to run; one plane would go home, the other would be shot down . The plane was shot down by a German plane carrying a U.S. Navy SEAL .
 Cunningham pulled up into a climb as the two planes headed toward each other in their final pass . Cunningham was the pilot of one of the most successful U.S. presidents in history .
 Cunningham pulled throttles to idle, lowered the flaps, and popped the speed brakes . Cunningham pulled the car to idle and lowered the throttle flaps to idle .
 MiG pilot saw the F-4 cross into his plane's six o'clock position, then lost sight of the plane . The MiG was shot down by a Soviet-made MiG fighter jet in the early hours of the day .
 He made a maximum turn to the right to keep the F4 in sight, but the MiG 17 stalled . The MiG17 stalled. The F4 had to be pulled out of the race .
 Cunningham, his own plane near a stall, pulled up the flaps and air brakes, dove, and swung to the right to increase separation . Cunningham's own plane was in a stall when he pulled up flaps, air brakes and pulled to the left . Cunningham: "It's
 Cunningham had to use rudder, throttle, and speed brakes to control the plane . Both hydraulic systems failed, and Cunningham used rudder and throttle to control his plane . Cunningham was the first person to fly in the plane to land safely in the air .
 Cunningham and Driscoll ejected and landed in the mouth of the Red River . Cunningham was killed in the sinking of the ship in the early 1900s .
 U.S. planes chased off patrol boats, junks, and freighters, they were picked up by marine helicopters . Marine helicopters picked up the downed vessels .
 On May 10, 1972, eleven North Vietnamese MiGs were shot down . Eight by the navy and three by the air force pilots . Eight of the MiGs shot down by the Vietnamese navy .
 During the remainder of the war, the navy kill ratio climbed to 8.33 to 1.33 . During the rest of the WWII, the Navy's kill ratio was 8.32 to 1 .
 The air force rate improved only slightly to 2.83 to I . The reason for this difference was Top Gun .
 The navy had revitalized its air combat training, while the air force had stayed stagnant . The air force has been in decline for years .
 Most of the navy MiG kills were by Top Gun graduates, Cunningham among them . Cunningham among those killed in the Navy MiG .
 Top Gun was soon made a separate command, ending the need to beg, borrow, or steal aircraft, fuel, or supplies . Top Gun ended the need for begging, borrowing, or stealing aircraft or fuel .
 The air force also saw the need and, starting in 1975, began the Red Flag exercises . Starting in the 1970s, the air force began the exercises .
 These included the use of high speed to counter the MiG 17's maneuverability, the close head-on pass, and the pilot-RIO teamwork . The pilot-riO teamwork was key to countering the maneuverability .
 Cunningham and Driscoll had used all these to survive and triumph, even when outnumbered by seven or eight to one, to survive . Cunningham's team had been outnumbered seven to one by seven to eight times, but they fought back .
 He was described as being the North Vietnamese air force's leading ace with thirteen kills . He was said to have been the country's leading air force ace with 13 kills .
 The North Vietnamese were quite willing to describe the exploits of their pilots, even while the war was going on . North Vietnamese pilots were quite able to describe their exploits .
 In the two decades since the dogfight, there has been considerable speculation about Colonel Toon's identity .
 The day after the fight, the North Vietnamese announced the death of Col. Nguyen . The North Vietnamese army chief was killed in the fight .
 It has also been speculated that he was a Soviet, North Korean, or even Warsaw Pact pilot .
 In the early 1990s, former Soviet pilots stationed in North Vietnam indicated that Toon was actually the nickname given by the Soviets to a North Vietnamese pilot named Pham Tuan .
 In 1980, he was selected by the Soviets to make an eight-day flight to the Salyut 6 space station . He was selected for the mission to the space station in 1980 .
 From these fragments, it is possible to reconstruct the events of May 10, 1972 . The events of that date are reconstructed using these fragments .
 The rank, timing of his death, type of aircraft he flew, and skill level all match . The rank and skill levels all match up .
 Colonel Coc was the North Vietnamese air force's highest scoring ace with nine kills . More important, he was the highest scorer of kills for the air force .
 The story of a North Vietnamese pilot with thirteen kills was apparently based on the photo of a MiG 21 with thirteen stars painted on its nose . The photo was apparently a photo of the MiG21 with 13 stars painted .
 The thirteen kill markings were the total for the plane, however, and were claimed by several pilots . The 13 kill markings are the total number of kills .
 It is possible that Tuan was aloft during May 10, 1972, and, with the confusion of the large numbers of North Vietnamese MiGs in the air, was mistaken for the pilot Cunningham shot down .
 One need only recall the decades of confusion from the intercepts made during the shooting down of Powers's U-2 . Powers's plane was shot down by the U.S. forces in the 1970s .
 In the end, all that matters is that the two best pilots met in the sky that day . "In the end of all that matter is that that day. It's all about the best pilots," pilot says .
 Cunningham won—thanks to a Black program . Cunningham won thanks to the program. Cunningham won .
 Top Gun and Red Flag had their own ""Aggressor units,"" which used Soviet-style tactics . Red Flag and Top Gun used similar tactics .
 Top Gun used A-4s to simulate MiG 17s, while F-5s stood in for MiG 21s . Top Gun also simulated MiG 18s and MiG 20s .
 The flight characteristics of the aircraft were close enough for training . They did not need the special security of the MiGs, and the flight characteristics were close .
 The prototypes of the F-14, F-15, and F-16 fighters made their first flights in the early 1970s . The prototypes were made in the 1970s and 1980s .
 This new generation of U.S. fighters was designed with the lessons of Vietnam lessons in mind .
 They were much more agile than the original F-4; they also packed a 20mm cannon . They were also more agile and more agile . The F-2s were much faster and more maneuverable than their predecessors .
 Have Drill tests were used to develop F-4 tactics . This would allow development of tactics for the new fighters . The Have Drill test is similar to the Have Drill used in the development of the F.4 .
 It appeared that the United States MiG operation grew to squadron size . The U.S. operation appeared to be in the shape of a squadron of MiGs .
 MiG operations were based at the former A-12 test hangars at the north end of the Groom Lake complex . The MiG operation was based in the former hangars .
 With a squadron-sized force, there was also need for a formal unit to operate them . The squadron-size force is also need to be a formal operation unit .
 Tires were also a problem—they were good for only a few landings before replacement . Tires are good for a few landing times before replacing .
 During the spring of 1977, a MiG 21 reportedly suffered a landing gear problem . The MiG-21 reportedly suffered landing gear problems .
 The air force pilot was able to keep the skid under control and fairly straight . The skid was the first of its kind in the air force history .
 As during the Have Drill period, control of the MiGs was a source of conflict .
 The air force was barely able to retain custody of the planes and responsibility for their operation .
 It may have been that the value of the MiGs for training and evaluation outweighed any use the CIA may have had for them .
 The Have Blue project was nearing its first flight . Have Blue was being worked on by the Have Blue team .
 The Have Blue was tested against Soviet radar; it would be probable that the MiGs would also be used . Have Blue would be likely to be used by MiGs also .
 In 1977 there was a second leak about the existence of the U.S.-operated MiGs . In 1977, there were also two leaks of information about the MiG .
 The U.S. has been flying a squadron of stolen or captured Soviet-built fighters for years, it has been claimed .
 Some of the planes are very recent models; others date back to the Korean War . Some of these planes date back from Korea War .
 The article reported that MiGs were being flown from ""at least one base"" in the United States to perfect air-to-air tactics . The article also reported that the MiGs had been flown from a base in the U.S. The article said MiGs are being flown
 Armed Forces Journal learned the existence of the MiGs, as well as test data from joint air force-navy tests, had inadvertently been compromised to a potentially unfriendly nation .
 The article noted that estimates varied on the total number of MiGs the United States had .
 The article estimated that about one hundred United States pilots had flown the MiGs . Three or four hundred pilots were given the opportunity to fly against them .
 The Have Drill flights were limited to Top Gun instructors, a few selected fleet pilots, and senior officers like Gen. Gen. George H. Eisenhower .
 A more probable guess would be around seventy-five pilots involved with the MiG operations in one way or another by 1977 .
 In the late 1960s, the MiG 17 and MiG 21F were still frontline aircraft . The MiG-17 and 21F are still frontline military aircraft .
 A decade later, they had been superseded by later-model MiG 21s and new aircraft, such as the MiG 23s .
 In the mid-1970s, relations between Egypt and the Soviet Union had become strained, and Soviet advisers were ordered out of Egypt . In the 1970s, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak ordered the removal of Soviet advisers .
 The Soviets had provided the Egyptian air force with MiGs since the mid-1950s .
 Egypt's traditional source of power is now out of the picture . The Egyptians are looking west for the Nile River .
 The MiG 21s and 23s were built in the U.S. for parts of their late-model aircraft . They turned to United States companies for parts to support them .
 According to one account, two MiG 23 fighter bombers were given to the United States by Egyptian president Anwar Sadat . The U.S. was given the bombers by Sadat, an Egyptian president .
 The planes are disassembled and shipped from Egypt to Edwards Air Force Base . The planes were disassembled before being shipped to the base .
 The MiG 17 and MiG 21 were small, short-range, tight-turning, point-defense fighters . They were the first MiG-17 and 21 fighters to be launched in the Soviet Union .
 They could be pivoted forward for takeoff and landing, then swept back for highspeed flight . They could also be swept back to high speed flight .
 Unlike earlier Soviet fighters, the MiG 23 had a high-wing loading and thus poor maneuverability . Unlike other Soviet fighters it had to be fitted with a high wing loading . The MiG23 was the first MiG fighter from the Soviet Union .
 The 4477th TES was replaced by the 413th Test Squadron at some point in the late 1970s-early 1980s . The 413th test squadron was replaced with the 4477 TES in the mid-1980s .
 The would-be U.S. MiG 23 pilot underwent a three-phase training program .
 The pilot then underwent ejection seat training, three hours of cockpit training, and briefings on the local area traffic patterns, restricted areas and navigation aids .
 The United States MiG 23 pilot would then undergo written proficiency and emergency exams and an oral emergency exam . The tests include written proficiency, emergency and oral emergency exams .
 In preparation for flying the MiG 23, the pilot would make a supervised engine start and then a high-speed taxi . The pilot would then make a high speed taxi to the ground .
 Pilot would have to demonstrate his knowledge of flight test techniques and effective aircraft handling . Pilot would need to demonstrate knowledge of test techniques .
 Phase III was continuation training, in which the pilot was required to demonstrate mission qualification events, approach, and a normal landing . Phase III is continuation training . The pilot is required to be able to demonstrate the pilot's ability to land safely .
 The MiG program was more akin to the flight rates of the X-planes, rather than the day-in, day-out operations of a regular fighter unit . Clearly, the MiG was more like the flight rate of the aircraft, not the day in-and-out
 A U.S. MiG 23 pilot could also be upgraded to instructor following a single flight to demonstrate mission qualifications, instructional capability .
 All the pilots had to complete openand closedbook exams and make an annual qualification check flight . The pilots must complete open and closed book exams .
 In September 1978, a man named John Lear took a panoramic photograph of Groom Lake facility from public land at the north end of the lake bed . The photograph was taken at the end of September 1978 .
 The following year came the notorious Las Vegas Review-Journal article on Groom Lake activities . The article was published in the same year as the infamous incident .
 According to one account, there were about twenty MiG 21s and four MiG 23s in service by the mid-1980s . The MiG-21s and 23s were among the most powerful MiG fighters in the Soviet Union .
 U.S. Black airplane activities in the early 1980s rivaled those of the 1960s . Over all, United States Black Air Force activities rivaled the 60s .
 Not only the MiGs, but also the F-117A, HALSOL, and possibly another Black airplane were undergoing flight tests . The MiGs were undergoing test tests at the time .
 The MiGs operated by the U.S. during this time were ""new"" aircraft . MiGs were "new" aircraft . They were used by the United States .
 The other U.S.-operated MiG 21s were apparently retired, stored, stripped of useful parts, or scrapped . The MiG-21s are apparently retired or stored in storage .
 Despite the leaks, only minimal attention had been drawn to U.S. MiG operations .
 Three-star generals do not generally fly test missions, so Bond's death attracted press interest . Bond was a three-star general, but he was not a test pilot .
 The fact that the air force also refused to identify the type of plane also raised questions . The air force has refused to name the plane .
 It was said that the MiG 23 was used to test the Stealth fighter in simulated combat . Bond might have been involved in such tests at the time of the crash . It is believed Bond was involved in the tests when he crashed .
 Later, it would be claimed that the crash was caused by a loss of control at high speed . Still later, it was claimed that . that was not caused by the crash . The crash was later claimed to have been caused by an accident .
 The mission was planned to include a high-speed run, followed by a systems-radar familiarization . The mission is scheduled to take place in the early hours of Wednesday morning .
 The two planes climbed to 40,000 feet while ground control reported they had about fifteen minutes of airspace time . Ground control reported the two planes had about 15 minutes of air time .
 Bond climbed back to 40,000 feet after they had descended slightly to 37,000ft . Bond and Bond had descended to about 37,00ft, and Bond climbed to 40ft .
 Bond reported to ground control that he had reached the planned speed without problems . Bond then reported that he'd reached the speed without any problems . He then reported the speed had passed .
 Ground control informed the T-38 pilot that Bond was twenty-two miles away . Ground control told the pilot he was in danger . Bond was 22 miles away from Bond's location .
 Ground control warned the T-38 pilot that Bond's plane was nearly at the edge of the airspace . Ground control told the pilot that the plane had crossed the border of airspace .
 The plane had hit the ground in a high-speed, 60-degree dive and was destroyed . The plane was destroyed after hitting the ground at a high speed, 60 degrees .
 The tail, the engine compressor and turbine blades, and the engine inlet were examined . Three major sections of the engine were examined, including the tail, engine compressor, turbine blades and the inlet .
 Examination of debris showed that all the damage was due to ground impact . Examination of the debris showed the damage from ground impact was caused by ground impact.
 The engine was running normally, at a throttle setting of about 80 to 90 percent . The engine is running normally at the throttle setting at about 80-90 percent .
 There was no evidence of fire, an ""overtemp,""’s"” heat distress, or an engine stall . No evidence of a fire or engine stall was found .
 Checks of fuel, hydraulic fluid, and lube oil showed no contamination or abnormal wear . Checks of the fuel and hydraulic fluid were checked .
 The accident report concluded that the plane had crashed due to loss of control during high-altitude, supersonic flight . The crash was the result of a loss of flight control during the high-speed flight . It was the first time a plane crashed in a supersoniatic
 U.S. MiG operations continued after the death of Bond, but its days were numbered .
 The TTR operations were closed down in the mid1980s, apparently due to the growth of F-117A activities . The F117A was used to fly the F119A fighter jets .
 It was reported that in late 1988 or early 1989, the MiGs were grounded .
 Most of the planes are placed in storage at North Base at Edwards Air Force Base .
 As the United States MiG operations were ended, MiG 15s and MiG 17s began arriving on the civilian market . Ironically, as the U.S. MiG operation was ended, as was the civilian sale of MiGs .
 Communist China and the Eastern European countries began selling the old MiGs to anyone with hard currency . Communist China began selling them in the 1980s . The MiGs were sold to anyone in hard currency in China .
 A MiG 15 could be bought for $175,000 (a fraction of the cost of a flyable P-51 Mustang) and operated for about $10,000 per year . A flyable Mustang can be flown for $100,000, a fraction of that cost of
 Among those who took advantage of the privately owned MiGs was the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School . The test pilot school was among those who used the MiGs .
 They were intended to be used in air-combat training for both U.S. and Allied forces . The planes were designed to be able to fly in air combat for both sides of the war .
 One such exercise was reportedly held at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, in September 1988 .
 The MiGs were put into storage at Kirtland until the legal problems could be sorted out . As rules were judged more important than results, the MiGs went into storage .
 U.S. Navy air combat over North Vietnam and the founding of the Top Gun School included material on the MiGs . The book was primarily concerned with United States Navy air .
 In March 1991, the Strategic Air Museum at Offutt Air Force Base received a call from the Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson . The museum is now housed in the National Museum of American Aviation .
 The next morning, SAC Museum employees arrived at work, they discovered four large crates had been dropped off by their back fence . The crates were dropped by the museum's back fence at the museum .
 When it was put on display a year later, questions arose about its source . Questions arose about the source of the discovery .
 A civilian employee of air force intelligence said the U.S. government had agreed never to divulge the source of such planes . The deal was made years after it was made, even years after .
 Still another MiG 21F was put on display at the USAF Armament Museum at Eglin Air Force Base .
 A close examination showed the plane had Chinese characters inside some of the access panels . Chinese characters were found in the plane's access panels, according to investigators .
 Although some of the U.S.-operated MiGs were now on public display, they were still Black airplanes, in the darkest shades . Some of the planes are still Black .
 It is clear that the air force had created a security ""firebreak"" around the MiGs . The air force has created a 'firebreak' around MiGs, it is clear .
 How the MiGs came into U.S. possession, or any records connected to this, were out of bounds . Any records connected in any way with this were also out .
 In some fifteen years of filing FOIA requests, this was the first time the author had run across information considered this sensitive . This was the author's first time he'd run across such information .
 The air force was so protective of the project that seemingly had ended became apparent in March 1994 . Another reason the air force is so protective is that the project was never finished .
 Su 22 Fitter in flight . Photo of Su Fitter flying in flight from Groom Lake . Su 22 is published in Popular Science .
 It is currently in frontline Russian air force service . It has been exported widely to Eastern European and Third-World countries .
 The article also said that MiG 23s had been seen flying above Groom Lake . It also claimed that MiGs 23s were seen flying in the area .
 With East and West Germany now unified, there was an ample supply of spare parts . Both Soviet-built planes and spare parts needed to support them .
 There are also suggestions that operations were not limited to MiG 23s and Su 22s .
 In October 1994, Aerospace Daily reported that ""reliable observers"" had sighted an Su 27 Flanker on two occasions . The Su 27 was reported to have been sighted in 1994 .
 It is in operation with both the Russian and Communist Chinese air forces . The Russian and Chinese air force are involved in the operation .
 The first sighting took place in late August near Lake Tahoe, while the second occurred near Yosemite National Park in September .
 The F-117Awas flying in the opposite direction at about the same altitude as the Su 27 . The F.117A was flying at the time of the attack .
 Mi 2 Hoplites, Mi 8/17 Hips, Mi 24 Hinds, Mi 14 Haze, and a Ka 32 Helix . Mi 2 and Mi 8 Hips are the latest models to be launched by Mi 2 .
 The helicopters are flown out of Fort Bliss and Fort Polk and are used for training . They are flown from Fort Bliss to Fort Polk .
 The pilots were particularly impressed with the Ka 32, due to its lifting power . The Ka 32 is the latest in a long line of superloud aircraft to be built .
 Although their existence is not a secret, some things remain classified . Some things are still classified, including their existence .
 A photographer was not allowed to go inside the helicopters, as this would indicate the country of origin . The helicopter is believed to be the first of its kind .
 During the early 1990s, this was budgeted at only a few million dollars per year . In the early 90s, the budgeted budget was only a small amount of money per year.
 The budget in 1993 for ""Foreign Material Acquisition"" was $500 million . The budget for foreign material acquisition in 1993 was $5 million .
 In reconstructing the history of Black airplane programs that are still secret, one must take care not to be led astray . MiG operations are where reports are many, but confirmed facts are few .
 Report of a MiG crash near the town of Rachel, Nevada, is one of many cautionary tales . The crash occurred near Rachel .
 In 1994, an article on Groom Lake was published in the Las Vegas Review-Journal . The lake is located in the area of Las Vegas .
 An individual went to Rachel's crash site and was able to track down the crash site . Rachel was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 It had been cleaned up very well; the only visible debris was tiny bits of aluminum . It was cleaned up by the time the plane came to rest .
 The rake was soon pulling up compressor blades, hose clamps, and a data plate . It was soon pulled up .
 The way the debris was spread out was also consistent with a plane crash, experts say . The debris was also found to be consistent with the crash .
 All this proved conclusively that the ""MiG"" had been built at General Dynamics Fort Worth . General Dynamics had built the MiG at the time .
 Later, he found a person in Rachel who had kept a scrapbook of newspaper articles about the town . The scrapbook was kept in Rachel's scrapbook .
 The crash had occurred on July 10, 1986, (the day before the loss of Maj. Maj. Gen. John Sutter). Maj. Sutter was killed in the crash .
 The F-16 impacted about seventy-five yards from two different trailers and three hundred yards from the town's gas station . The crash occurred about three hundred feet from two trailers and about 75 yards from a gas station.
 Norwegian pilot landed safely by parachute and was picked up by one of the townspeople . Pilot landed safely and landed by parachute in the town .
 The local sheriff's office was called and told of the accident and that the pilot was safe . The pilot was uninjured .
 No property on the ground was damaged, and the fire was allowed to burn itself out . No property was damaged in the fire .
 The sheriff, his deputies, the paramedics from Alamo, and the Lincoln County SWAT team all showed up . The sheriff and his deputies were involved in the incident .
 People living in the immediate area should go to the Stage Stop Saloon . Because of the possibility of toxic fumes from the burning metal, it was decided to evacuate the area immediately .
 The next day, locals set up a picnic for the air force recovery crew . Locals set up the next day to celebrate with the rescue team .
 Channel 8 from Las Vegas came out to film the crash site . Las Vegas Review-Journal called several people for interviews . The crash site is located in Las Vegas .
 Letters of appreciation were sent by the Nellis base commander and the pilot .
 Despite secrecy that still surrounds MiG operations, there is no doubt that the U.S. has owned and flown MiGs . Despite the secrecy, there are still questions surrounding MiGs.
 There are no photos of this Dark Eagle, no confirmation of its existence . The Dark Eagle is believed to have been created in the 1980s .
 There are only vague stories of a plane whose shape seems to change with every telling . The plane's shape changes with each telling .
 "I can assess the truth or falsity of the . . . statements and discriminate between what is substantial and what is not," she says .
 By the mid-1980s, with stories of the stealth fighter increasing in frequency, suspicions began to grow that there were other Black airplanes . The stealth fighter is believed to be the first of its kind in existence .
 A small technology demonstrator like the Have Blue could be built at low cost and in a short time . The Have Blue is a small demonstrator that could be easily built at a low cost .
 Speculation grew that there was a kind of Black X-plane program, where different stealth configurations could be tested . The program could include prototypes or aircraft with a limited production run .
 Reports, stories, and sightings of still-secret Dark Eagles began to appear . The Dark Eagles are still a mystery .
 The story of Shamu began with the June 1, 1981, issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology . Shamu is the first of its kind .
 Northrop had lost the competition to build the Have Blue . Interest in stealth aircraft was not limited to attack aircraft . The Have Blue was built by Northrop .
 A stealth strategic bomber could render the huge Soviet air-defense network useless . A stealth bomber could make the Soviet air defense network useless, experts say .
 Northrop soon emerged as the leading contender for a "stealth bomber" Northrop . Northrop emerged as a leading contender in 1980-81 .
 In the 1940s, John K Northrop had designed the XB-35 and YB-49 flying wings . In the 1950s, Northrop's design was used to develop the X-35 flying wings and X-49 .
 They were beset with a number of problems that prevented them from entering service . Perhaps the most graceful bombers ever flown, they were never able to fly .
 The XB-35's propeller system was redesigned several times but never proved reliable . The propeller was designed to be reliable enough to fly the XB35 .
 With the emergence of jets, the propeller-driven bomber was considered obsolete . The propeller bomber was seen as obsolete in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The second prototype crashed during a stall check, killing the crew (including Capt. Capt. John Lister) The crew died in the crash .
 Before the program ended, the YB-49 made several flights against a coastal radar site at Half Moon Bay, California, California . The program ended .
 Even given the primitive state of radar technology in the late 1940s, it was clear that a large flying wing had good stealth properties . The World War II bomber was one of the most stealthy aircraft in the world .
 With RAM and the proper shape, a flying-wing stealth bomber could be as hard to detect as the Have Blue . The Have Blue could be hard to spot as well .
 Both the Lockheed and Northrop Have Blue designs used faceting, in order to make RCS calculations easier . Both designs use faceting to make calculations easier.
 Given the limitations of computers in the late 1970s, this would have been much harder to design . The project would be much more difficult to design than today's model .
 It was assumed the ""Northrop"" aircraft described in the Aviation Week report was a Have Blue-like technology demonstrator .
 The stability system could also insure the stability system would overcome the control and stability problems that had doomed the YB-49 . It could also guarantee the stability of the stability .
 Several sightings were made in the 1980s of triangular aircraft from areas near Groom Lake . The triangular aircraft were made from areas around Groom lake .
 Greenpeace continued efforts to infiltrate the nuclear test site . Despite the Groom Mountain land seizure, Greenpeace continued to try to infiltrate it .
 Greenpeace trespasses near Groom Lake area . Greenpeace was trespassing on the area . The area is a popular tourist attraction .
 They reported seeing a black, triangular-shaped aircraft flying slowly overhead . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 Years later, several of the group said they thought it was a subscale flying prototype of the B-2 . The group said it thought the plane was a prototype of a B2 .
 In a book on the F-117A, it was stated that the project was under way in the early 1980s, the same time as the FSD tests . The FSD test was conducted in the 1980s and the F117A was also under way .
 Lockheed engineers nicknamed the plane Shamu because it resembled the killer whale at Sea World . The plane was nicknamed Shamu by Lockheed engineers because of its resemblance to the whale .
 Lockheed engineers were initially not cleared to see the Northrop aircraft . Lockheed F-117A FSD aircraft were not to be seen by Northrop personnel . Lockheed engineers initially were not allowed to see Northrop planes .
 This disrupted operations for both programs, and each group was eventually cleared to see the other's airplane . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 The Northrop aircraft is understood to have operated from a hangar at the south end of Groom Lake, separate from those used by Lockheed . It is understood the aircraft is believed to be operated from the hangar .
 If Shamu really had a wingspan of 100plus feet, it was rather large for a subscale test aircraft . Aviation Week and Space Technology had described it as a fighter-sized plane .
 Over the years, a number of different reports circulated about triangular or manta-ray-shaped airplanes .
 The sightings began in mid-1989, when daylight operations of the F-117A started . The sightings have been reported since then .
 The normal pattern was for several F-117As to fly the same route, separated by eight to ten minutes . The F117As were separated from each other for eight to 10 minutes .
 Observers would report that three or four F-117As would pass, then the triangular plane, then three or more F.117As . The plane would pass through the air, then pass through a triangular plane . The F117As were followed by F-16s,
 It showed a similar lighting pattern to the F-117As . The plane's lighting pattern was similar to that of the F.117A . It showedamber lights at the wingtips and red lights near the nose .
 It is claimed that Northrop was awarded a contract in 1978 to develop a stealth test aircraft . Northrop is believed to have been awarded the contract .
 In 1982, Northrop is described as receiving a contract to build a production aircraft, based on the test aircraft . Northrop received the contract in 1982 .
 It was speculated its reconnaissance data and target information were relayed directly to the F-117As in near real time . It is speculated that the reconnaissance data was relayed to the aircraft .
 The TR-3A could designate targets for the F-117As, that is, illuminate them with a laser so the LGB could strike . It was also claimed the TR-2A could also designate targets to the F117A's LGB .
 Months before the B-2 made its first flight, sightings were made of a large flying-wingshaped aircraft . The plane was the first to fly .
 Sightings were made of this aircraft on moonlit nights while the B-2 was grounded . Later, sightings of the aircraft were also made of sightings of this plane .
 In one case, it was claimed that the aircraft turned 90 degrees on its wingtip . In another case, the aircraft was claimed to turn 90 degrees .
 Claims of a huge black boomerang-shaped flying wing that moves silently at speeds as low as 20 knots . Even more remarkable are claims of a giant black wing that can move at speeds of 20 knots.
 Several Antelope Valley residents have reported seeing it slowly moving through the night sky . Several residents have said they have seen it slowly move through the sky . It is slowly moving slowly across the sky, moving slowly .
 The big triangle is also described as making such ""unlikely maneuvers"" as coming to a full stop, tipping upright, and hovering in this vertical position . It is also said to have made such 'unlikely' maneuvers .
 It is claimed that a pattern of small white lights on the triangle's black underside provide ""constellation camouflage"" against the starry night sky . It is also claimed that the pattern of white lights provides "constellation camouflaging"
 Some suggest that it could be a lighter-than-air craft propelled by slowly turning propellers . Others suggest it could have been propelled by a lighter than air craft .
 The vertical hovering suggests to some that it acts as a reflector for a bistatic radar system . Some believe it could be used as a radar system for radar .
 In this system, a transmitter emits a ""fence"" of radar signals, which is reflected back to a receiver . The system uses radar signals to send back radar signals .
 Equilateral triangle is equilateral triangle with the tips flattened . It is described as being an equilateral triangular with the tip flattened .
 At the center of the F-121's underside was a depression and a dome-shaped nozzle . The F.121 was designed to be able to carry out a full range of weapons .
 It is claimed that a squadron of the planes are based at the Northrop RCS facility at Tehachapi .
 The plane is described as similar to the F-117A in shape; but at least 20 percent bigger, with a two-man crew and a larger bomb load . The plane was described as . similar to . the F.117A . in shape .
 The rear of the plane has several spikes, giving it the appearance of an artichoke . The aircraft has been nicknamed the 'Artichoke'
 It is claimed that the design was tested with a subscale flying model about the size of the Have Blue . It is further claimed that it is also claimed to have been tested with the prototype .
 There were eyewitness accounts of both the Lockheed engineers and Greenpeace protestors .
 In early 1994, all the assumptions about Shamu were challenged . Shamu is the world's most famous bird of the night .
 Shamu was a Northrop design for a one-of-a-kind electronic warfare aircraft . The Shamu story is believed to have been a flying-wing design .
 The aircraft was large and has been described as ""conventional" One source likened it to the Boeing Stratocruiser airliner of the 1950s . It was described as 'conventional' and described as a large aircraft .
 Like the Stratocruiser, the cockpit windows wrapped around the front of the fuselage . The plane was built in the 1960s .
 The side of the fuselage was described as flat and covered with antennae for the jamming equipment . The side was described by the plane as flat .
 The wings were said to be slightly swept and were set low on the fuselage . The wings are said to have been swept and are set low .
 Shamu "looked funny," according to another source . Shamu looked funny, according to the source . According to another (allegedly) ""reliable source"
 Reports began to circulate that the air force would soon unveil a ""fighter-sized"" Black airplane . The plane is believed to be a fighter-sized fighter jet .
 Tacit Blue began in 1978, when DARPA asked Northrop to develop a stealth reconnaissance aircraft . Tacit blue was developed by Northrop in the 1970s . The stealth aircraft was designed to be stealthy .
 It would have to operate behind front lines and carry radar able to detect armored units . It would also have to carry radar that can detect armored vehicles .
 Designers John Cashen and Steve Smith faced a difficult task to create the plane . The plane was designed by Steve Smith to be a low-costed aircraft .
 The F-1 17A was designed to have a minimum radar return from the front and back of the plane . It was designed for a minimum return of radar return .
 The Tacit Blue would fly in circles, thus be exposed to radar signals from all directions . Tacit blue would fly circles, exposing itself to radar from all sides .
 They also had to fit a large radar inside an airframe that was about the same size as an F-15 . The radar was also needed to fit inside the airframe .
 The pilot's windshield wrapped around the front like that on the Stratocruiser airliner . The plane's windshield was wrapped around around the windshield .
 The plane was 55. feet long, had a wingspan of 48. feet, and weighed 30,000 pounds . It was 55,000 feet long and weighed more than 30,500 pounds .
 Tacit Blue made use of existing components—F-SE landing gear, an F-15 ejector seat, and two Garrett ATF3-6 high-bypass turbofan jet engines from the Falcon 20 business jet .
 The engines were supplied with air from a flush inlet atop the fuselage, while a slot exhaust was between the fins . Air was supplied from an inlet between the inlet and an exhaust from a slot inlet .
 The Tacit Blue was highly unstable . As with the other stealth aircraft, it is highly unstable. As well as the stealthy aircraft, the Tacit blue was highly stable .
 Ifallowed to ""weathervane"" in a wind tunnel, a model would actually fly backwards . If allowed to fly backwards, the model would fly backwards in the air .
 A General Electric digital quadruple-redundant fly-by-wire control system was needed to make Tacit Blue controllable . TacitBlue was built in the 1970s and is now being used in the United States .
 Thomas, Cashen, and the rest of the team were keyed up the night before . Thomas and Cashen led the team to victory in the first game .
 Thomas and Cashen played a one-on-one basketball game until they both dropped . When two beers didn't help to relax them, they played basketball until they dropped . Thomas: "It's not easy to relax"
 It was designed, however, to use low power and techniques which made the signals seem to be only background noise .
 Crosswinds on the ground caused stalls during engine startup . Flight test showed the inlet worked well, but crosswinds caused stalls .
 Tacit Blue would never enter production . Despite the success, it was soon clear it would never be sold .
 Five pilots flew the plane . Dick Thomas, Lieutenant Colonels Ken Dyson, Russ Easter, and Russ Easter . Russ Easter and Don Cornell were the pilots .
 The ""F-121"" was described as taking off vertically with an anti-gravity engine . The F-121 was designed to take off vertically and take off with a vertical thrust .
 On May 4, 1996, I was told that an individual found it suspicious that I had become interested in Black airplanes and UFOs, that my previous book, Watch the Skies! had been published by Smithsonian Institution Press, that Dr. Dr. John Sutter had written a book about UFOs
 Carl Sagan liked the book, and that I had been right about Tacit Blue . Carl Sagan had liked it and that he had also liked it . The book is now available on Amazon .
 At the Tacit Blue press conference, the name of another Black airplane came up . The name of the plane came up as a reference to another Black plane .
 Strange sounds have been heard coming from the skies above the western United States . For the past several years, strange sounds were heard coming out of the sky .
 These sounds are described as a ""rumbling,"" akin to a small earthquake or like the sky is being ripped open . The sounds are said to be similar to the sound of an earthquake or an earthquake .
 The source of these sounds is claimed to be the ""Aurora"—a Mach 6 Black aircraft developed and flown in secrecy .
 The Aurora's speed is such that it could fly from Washington, D.C., to Baghdad in ninety minutes . The Aurora could fly in 90 minutes, according to reports .
 With its claimed top speed of 4,500 mph (six times the speed of sound), the Aurora is seen as the epitome of a century of aerospace development . The Aurora has a claimed top speeds of 4.500 mph .
 These tales of darkness and shadows have been told in the technical press, weekly news magazines, and television news and entertainment programs . The tales of the dark have appeared in a range of media outlets .
 The air force has repeatedly denied the existence of the Aurora, yet the stories have continued to spread and grow . The stories have been growing and growing, but the stories continue to grow .
 Sightings and 'hearings' have been reported from a remote field in Scotland and a small island in the Pacific . Sightings have also spread worldwide, with sightings reported from remote areas of Scotland and the Pacific Islands .
 Aurora has raised questions about the role and necessity of such advanced weapons in a post-Cold War, one-superpower world . Aurora has also been used to raise questions about development of such aircraft .
 A Caltech graduate student told the author that he had heard that Lockheed was developing a high-speed, high-altitude replacement for the SR-71 reconnaissance aircraft . The student says Lockheed is working on a replacement .
 In 1979, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine published an article describing high-speed aircraft studies at the Skunk Works .
 By the 1990s, the article speculated, a Mach 4, 200,000-foot aircraft could be developed . The article speculated that the aircraft could reach Mach 4.5 feet .
 The aircraft would relay its image and radar intelligence data via satellite in real time . The plane would relay the data to a satellite via satellite .
 It would be powered by an advanced turbo-ramjet engine powered by a J58 with a ramjet surrounding it . The J58 would be the first time a jet has been powered by such an advanced engine .
 The main problem was cost . The engine alone would cost $1 billion to develop . It would be the engine alone .
 At the same time, the air force was looking at advanced bomber and cruise missile designs .
 Since the mid-1960s, when the SA-2 SAM had chased them out of the stratosphere, bombers had gone in at low altitude . Since then, they had gone into the stratospheric at low altitudes .
 The A-12/SR-71 showed a high-speed and high-altitude profile could work . The project could be used as a high speed and high altitude profile .
 Some wanted to use a very high, very fast attack profile, harking back to the B-12 studies . Some said they wanted a 'very high' high attack profile .
 At this time, it was assumed that any future Black airplane would rely on ever higher speeds and altitudes to survive . The plane was believed to be capable of surviving at any time .
 It is not commonly understood that stealth and high speeds are incompatible . Stealth and high speed are incompatible, experts say .
 Rumors of such high-speed projects continued to circulate during the 1970s and early 1980s . High-speed trains were planned for the 1960s and '80s .
 This was also the time the Have Blue was flown, the existence of stealth was unveiled, and the stories about the stealth fighter grew . The Have Blue will be the first stealth fighter to be flown by the US Air Force .
 The Department of Defense issued a budget document, a declassified version of the P-l1 weapons procurement document for fiscal year 1986 . The document was released in 1986 .
 Project would receive $80. million in fiscal year 1986, $2.272 billion in 1987 . Project would be funded by $80 million in 1986 and 1987 . The project would be the largest project in the country's history .
 $80. million was a very small amount for an aircraft development program, while $2.272 billion was very large . This was an unusual amount—$80.m. was a small amount .
 It was speculated that the Aurora entry should have been removed before the document was declassified . The Aurora entry was removed from the document before declassification . It is speculated that it was removed before declassified.
 On January 28, 1986, space shuttle Challenger was destroyed during launch, killing the seven crewmembers . Challenger was the first space shuttle to be destroyed in 1986 .
 In the wake of the tragedy, there was discussion of possible future shuttle replacements . In the aftermath of the crash, there were discussions of possible replacements .
 They would take off from a runway, then accelerate to Mach 25 speed and go into orbit . The space shuttle would be able to reach Mach 25 mph .
 The technology necessary would be tested in the X-30 National Aero Space Plane program . The technology would be used to build a space-plane .
 This scientific instrument was similar in design to the Lockheed Big Bird photo reconnaissance satellite . The instrument is similar to the Big Bird satellite .
 Such a Black project, it was suspected, could have already cleared up some of the X-30's technological unknowns .
 It was also noted that the air force wished to retire the SR-71 fleet due to cost . The air force will also be retiring the SR71 fleet .
 In early 1988, there were several articles on the alleged Aurora . AURORA in early 1988 was an alleged Aurora.
 Official: "With the SR-71, they know we're there but they can't touch us" The article quoted one official as saying, "They know they're there . They know we are there, but they cannot touch us."
 The progress of the development effort, when it would become operational, and the specifications could not be determined .
 The C-5B, C-141, or C-130 transport aircraft, TR-1 reconnaissance aircraft, P-3 antisubmarine aircraft, F-117A, or YF-22 stealth aircraft . That same month, Armed Forces Journal published a financial analysis that indicated
 It was suggested that Lockheed was building a ""super-stealth"" replacement for the SR-71 and that flight tests had begun in 1987 .
 The third article was published in the February 1988 Gung-Ho magazine . That was done by the third article, which was published by the magazine .
 Aurora is capable of Mach 7 (5,000 mph) and 250,000-foot altitudes . Aurora is fueled by methane and can reach speeds of up to 5,000mph . Aurora will be able to reach altitudes of 250,500 feet at a time .
 The aircraft was described as having a three-man crew and as being operational since the mid-1980s . It is described as a 'operational' aircraft with a 'three-man' crew .
 It was claimed that inflight refueling was done by special KC-135Qs . It was also claimed that . inflight . refueling . was also said to be carried out by special aircraft .
 Official: "We are flight-testing vehicles that defy description"
 Retired Lockheed engineer was reported as saying, ""Let's put it this way. Let's put this way," he said . Retired engineer said, "I don't think it would be a good thing to say 'Yes'
 In 1989, an eyewitness came forward to claim he had seen Aurora close up while working at Groom Lake . Aurora was first seen in the early 1980s .
 He described it as fueled by liquid methane and requiring the entire three-mile runway at Groom Lake to take off . The plane is fueled by methane and requires the entire runway to be taken off .
 Aurora was able to reach speeds of Mach 10 and altitudes of 250,000 feet . Aurora was described as able to hit speeds of up to Mach 10 . Aurora is a fast-flying spacecraft capable of reaching speeds of 10 mph .
 In 1989 and 1990, reports began to appear that described a very loud, deep rumbling engine noise . The noise was sometimes punctuated by a onehertz ""pulsing"" sound .
 The first reported sighting occurred in July 1989, at about 3:00 A.M., near Edwards Air Force Base .
 On October 18, 1989, another ""hearing"" occurred during the early evening hours . The hearing took place in the early hours of that evening .
 It was described as ‘extremely loud, with a deep, throaty rumble’ which shook houses 16 miles away . The explosion shook houses sixteen miles away from the site .
 The roar continued for about five minutes; it seemed to be heading north and climbing into the sky . No light or glow was seen, but the roar continued . The roar was heard in the middle of the night .
 Local residents said the sound ""was like the sky ripping"" and was unlike anything heard at Edwards for years . Residents said it was like the sound of the earth ripping . Local residents described the sound as like the 'sky ripping' sound .
 Witness compared it to the Saturn 5 rocket engine tests of the 1960s . Witness said it was similar to a test run on a Saturn 5 engine . Witness compared the test to a rocket engine test of the same era .
 Both aircraft were headed to the northeast . It's not clear if the sighting was of one aircraft twice or two different vehicles .
 All occurred between midnight and 5:00 A.M., and all were headed northeast . The objects were headed toward the northeast .
 Similar sightings also reported from central Nevada during 1989-90 . Similar sightings were also reported during that period .
 It was a rumbling noise, with a one to two-hertz pulse rate and heard in the early morning hours . The noise was heard from the early hours of the morning . It was similar to a similar noise heard from a mobile phone tower .
 The aircraft was reported to have left the Groom Lake range and overflown a small town . The aircraft left the area and overflowed the small town of a town .
 The first appeared in the December 18, 1989, issue, against the background of the fall of the Soviet Empire in Eastern Europe . This article was originally published in 1989 .
 Much of the article was a discussion of the role of Black development in the post-Cold War world . Much of this article was an article about the role played by Black in the Cold War .
 These gave more details about the sightings and included artist conceptions of possible designs . Artist conceptions of the sightings were included in the report .
 Many in government are "extremely skeptical" of the reports, according to the report .
 One official said he was confident that there was no such thing as a family of high-speed aircraft . Another official said there were no such things as families of high speed aircraft .
 The vehicle was shaped like a flattened diamond or football—110 feet long and 60 feet wide . The vehicle is 110 feet long, 110 feet wide and 110 feet in diameter .
 The fuselage's edges were rounded, and the aircraft's contours were likened to a skipping stone . Aircraft's contour was likened to that of skipping stones in the World War II .
 The article said that they have a scorched, heat streaked appearance, and seem to be coated with a crystalline patina indicative of sustained exposure to high temperature .
 The jet engines were shut down, and the inlet and exhaust ports were closed . The jet engine was shut down .
 Misted fuel was sprayed from ports at ports at the midsection of the fuselage and ignited . The plane was shot down by a jetliner carrying passengers .
 The weapons were cone-shaped, like an ICBM's warhead, and sat in the ports nose down . They were cone shaped and had a nose down, like a nuclear missile .
 The outer cap was discarded, the weapon was ejected, and then a second tile-covered cap moved into position . The weapon was then ejected from the weapon .
 The aircraft was unmanned—it was preprogrammed, but could also be controlled via a satellite or ground station . It was controlled by an unmanned aircraft .
 All these articles were written against the background of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and the buildup of Allied forces . The invasion of Iraq was in place during the time of the invasion of the country .
 There is reason to wonder whether complete knowledge of the most exotic aircraft may reach ""The Top,"" all for super-security .
 America's staggering black-world expenditures have yielded weaponry that could neutralize Iraq President Saddam Hussein's most valued military and political assets quickly . One would like to think U.S. weapons would neutralize Saddam Hussein quickly . The U.N. has spent billions of dollars on weapons since
 Some say capability is in hand and could be used ... if the right people choose to do so . Some say that capability could be in hand . Others say it is in the right place to use it .
 Following the flurry of reports in late 1990, there was a drop-off in articles during 1991 . There was also a drop in articles in late 1991 .
 What was being published was little more than a rehash of the earlier articles . What was published was . little more . than a . rehash . of the . earlier articles.
 An investigation was launched at a high level, which, despite diligent effort, could not discover such an aircraft . An investigation into the disappearance of the aircraft was launched by a high-level .
 These were sparked by four ""brief rumbles"" in the Los Angeles area over a ten-month period . The rumbles are sparked by 'brief rumbles" over a period of ten months .
 The specific dates were June 27, October 31, and . November 21, 1991, and January 30, 1992 . The dates of the events are listed .
 KFWB called Caltech's Seismo Lab for the location and magnitude of the quakes . Believing they were quakes, radio station called the lab for the locations and magnitude . The quakes are believed to have been earthquakes .
 Caltech seismologists looked at computer records from a network of sensors and determined no earthquakes had occurred . No earthquakes have occurred, Caltech scientists say .
 A research seismologist at Caltech concluded that the rumble was actually a sonic boom . Jim Mori, a researcher at the Caltech Institute, concluded that it was a boom .
 The seismic record of a sonic boom is different than a small earthquake, even though they have the same magnitude . The record is different from a small quake or a small sonic boom .
 Mori thought it might be from a meteor, but the regular occurrence, always between 6:30 and 7:30 A.M. and always on a Thursday, ruled this out . Mori thought he might have seen a meteor from the sky, but it was ruled out .
 Since there are no commercial supersonic aircraft, KFWB called local air force and navy bases . Since there is no commercial jet jetters, it was called to local air forces and navy .
 Mori worked on a team studying seismograms recorded during space shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base in 1989 . Mori had worked on team studying seismicograms recorded by space shuttle landing .
 Based on this, some information about the mystery plane could be determined . The plane is believed to have been a Boeing 777 that crashed in 2010 .
 It was possible to calculate how fast and how high the plane was flying, based on the pattern of the arrival times of the sonic boom across the seismic network . The plane's sonic boom can be heard in the wake of an earthquake .
 By looking at the entire network, it was possible to determine the flight path and direction . The entire network was able to see the entire flight path .
 On three of the four days, the records showed two events, which means that there were two planes . The records show two events on three days, meaning there were planes .
 They flew about one minute apart as they traveled across the seismic net from south to north . The two flew about a minute apart each time .
 The planes traveled at about two to four times the speed of sound, at an altitude of 10,000 to 40,000 feet . Plane travels at about 2 to 4 times the speeds of sound .
 From the frequency of the event on the seismogram, we think that the aircraft is smaller than the Shuttle . The aircraft is thought to be smaller than that of the Shuttle, scientists say .
 It appears that they did not land at Edwards Air Force Base, but kept going north to southern Nevada . It appears they are headed for southern Nevada.
 This included details on the rumbles and on the aircrafts’ flight path . The aircrafts' flight path was included in the report .
 There was a brief film clip taken from a site near Groom Lake of a light hovering in the night sky . The film clip was taken from the site of a site where the light was seen .
 Aurora's public display indicated to some that a disclosure was imminent . The seeming public display of Aurora indicated that some believed it was imminent, police say .
 believers detected a ""subtle language shift"" in the air force denials . Believers detected a 'subtle' language shift' in the denials from the Air Force . Air Force denies any wrongdoing .
 The Federation of American Scientists had long opposed new U.S. weapons programs . Steven Aftergood, an analyst with the FASU, said about the air force statement, "it's a non-denial denial"
 Aftergood: "I would say the triggering of earthquake sensors is a leak from the air force" Aftergood continued to say the trigger of the sensors was a leak .
 Just when the ""unveiling"" of Aurora would come was unclear to observers . Aurora was the first of its kind to be unveiled in a museum .
 Reports of a sighting of an Aurora sighting in Scotland also contributed to the belief .
 It was claimed that in November 1991, a Royal Air Force air traffic controller picked up a radar target leaving a NATORAF base at Machrihanish .
 When he telephoned the base to ask what the plane was, he was told to forget what he had seen . He was then told to call the base and forget what had happened .
 Aurora took off from Groom Lake and headed west to a landing at Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific . It is claimed that Aurora was headed to a base in the middle of the Pacific Ocean .
 It then continued west and overflew Iraq, using ""high-powered cameras and infrared radar"" before continuing on to Machrihanish .
 After taking off, Aurora was refueled with liquid methane by tankers based in England . Aurora's fuel tankers refueled the plane using liquid methane . Aurora was the first plane to carry out a mission to the U.S.
 The story crossed the Atlantic and the Antelope Valley Press carried a story on March 6, 1992 . The Antelope County Press carried the story in 1992 .
 On the first two nights, a KC-135Q took off at about 6:15 P.M. followed by the aircraft . On the second night, the aircraft took off from the base at 6:30 p.m. ET .
 It had a red light near the nose, two ""whitish"" lights at the wingtips, and an amber light at the tail . It had two ""Whitish" lights at wingtips and two amber lights near the wing .
 The plane then joined the tankers in a close formation and extinguished its lights . Plane then joined tankers and extinguished the lights .
 Two T-38 trainers took off with unknown aircraft between them . Unknown aircraft was unknown .
 The third aircraft did not turn on its lights until it was about three miles from the runway . The plane was flying over the runway at the time .
 A formation of a KC-135Q, two F-117As, and the unknown aircraft took off on February 27 . The unknown aircraft are believed to be the first known aircraft to take off from the base .
 What was thought by some to be a ground test of the Aurora's engine was also reported .
 Late on the night of February 26 (the second night of the sightings) a series of ""booms"" was heard coming from the base . A series of 'booms' were heard coming out of the base on February 26 .
 These occurred every two to three seconds and continued for around thirty minutes . These occur every two-to-three seconds and continue for around 30 minutes .
 It had long been reported that Aurora left such contrails, but this was the first time it had been photographed . Aurora's contrails have long been seen in the sky, but it has been photographed in the past .
 The photographer later said he talked with an engineer at Convair Fort Worth, who said the contrails were formed only when the PWDE was operating outside its design parameters . The engineer said he spoke to the photographer to discuss the situation .
 Another theory was that they became visible only when the aircraft descended out of the thin air of high altitudes and into the thicker air of low altitudes . Another theory is that they become visible when aircraft descend out of thin air .
 Two advisories were recorded: ""You're at 67,000, eighty-one miles out," and ""Seventy miles out, 36,000.”
 Fighter aircraft, such as F-15s and F-16s, do not fly above 50,000 feet, as they lack pressure suits . Fighter aircraft do not have pressure suits, and cannot fly at 50,00 feet .
 Edwards Air Force Base has no record of an aircraft with the call sign Gaspipe on those dates . The call sign is used by the Air Force .
 After the Scottish reports, drawings were published of a pure-delta Aurora . The Aurora Aurora is the largest in the world, and is believed to be the world's largest species of ice .
 On September 13 and October 3, 1990, sightings were made at Mojave in the late evening . Mojave sightings occurred on September 13, October 3 and September 13 .
 The final sighting occurred on July 12 at 11:45 P.M. at the Helendale Airfield, near Barstow, California .
 This field is located next to a Lockheed radar cross section test range . It is located near the Lockheed radar range test range.
 Lockheed aircraft land at the field to bring in workers to the test range . Lockheed aircraft are seen arriving at the site to take part in the work .
 Witness says aircraft turned on landing lights while quite high, then descended quickly in S-pattern . Witness says plane turned on its landing lights then descended in an S- pattern .
 Witness saw plane as it landed in bright moonlight . Witness says plane landed in the dark . Plane landed on landing in the middle of the night .
 There were severe thunderstorms in Las Vegas and the Groom Lake area . The weather was clear at Helendale, but there were thunderstorms .
 On January 6, 1992, there had also been a sighting of a shape being loaded on a C-5 cargo plane at the Skunk Works facility .
 It was described as looking like the forward part of an SR-71 fuselage, except the chines were rounded . The fuselage is described as 'looking like the front part of a fuselage' with rounded chines .
 The aircraft was described as having a large delta wing and a long forward fuselage .
 The edges of the wing and fins had a black tile covering, while the rest of the fuselage was white . The edge of the wings and fins were covered in black tile .
 The rear fuselage had a raised area with a black line extending down it . It was a raised fuselage with the black line extended down it. It was the first time the plane had been flown in a plane .
 Because some did not recall seeing the canard, it was thought to be retractable . Some thought it was retractable because they did not remember it .
 There were two rectangular engine exhausts, and it produced a ""very loud, low-pitched roar"" with a rhythmic beat to it . It produced a "very loud" roar, with a 'very loud pitch roar""
 The aircraft would reach a speed of Mach 6 to 8, then fire to put a small satellite into orbit . The second stage, attached to the raised section of the rear fuselage, would fire to send the satellite into space .
 It was noted that the Groom Lake facility had recently undergone an expansion, which believers pointed to as support facilities for the Aurora team .
 Four water tanks were built on the hillside behind the base for fire-fighting purposes . The water tanks are built on a hillside near the base of the base .
 There was also an extensive runway upgrade program, which included the addition of a second runway .
 Another improvment was construction of a new fuel tank farm at the south end of the base . Another new fuel farm was built at the base's south-end .
 The crash occurred at 1:45 P.M. on August 5, 1992, as the airliner was headed east out of Los Angeles International Airport .
 The crew reported the plane was headed directly toward them and passed five hundred to a thousand feet below them . The plane was passing through the air at about 1,000 feet above the ground .
 The crew thought the plane was supersonic as the closure rate was two to three times normal . The plane was closed in at least three times faster than normal .
 The plane was the size of an F-16 and had a lifting-body configuration . It was much like the forward fuselage of an SR-71 with a tail .
 The FAA and Edwards radar records were examined, but no target was recorded when the crew said the near miss occurred . The crew said it was near a target when the plane said it hit .
 In a letter to the Washington Post, he said, “Let me reiterate what I have said publicly for months. Let me reiterate ... what I've said publicly’ve said publicly,” he said .
 The Air Force has no such program either known as ""Aurora"" or by any other name . Air Force no longer uses the name of its own program .
 If such a program existed elsewhere, I'd know about it— and I don't . And if such an existence existed elsewhere . I'd known about it, and I'm not sure if it exists elsewhere .
 When the latest spate of ""Aurora"" stories appeared, I had my staff look into each alleged "sighting" to see what could be fueling the fire . I once again had his staff look at each alleged 'sighting'
 Some reported 'sightings' will probably never be explained simply because there isn't enough information to investigate . Some reported sightings won't be solved simply because of lack of information .
 Other accounts of sonic booms over California, near collision with commercial airliner are easily explained . Strange shapes loaded into Air Force aircraft are also explained .
 "I feel that I must set the record straight. While I know this letter will not stop the speculation, I feel that it will not change the speculation," she said .
 On October 30, 1992, Rice said, ""The system that has been described in those articles does not exist" Rice said in 1992 that the system that was described in that article did not exist . Rice said the system described in the article "does not exist."
 Aurora was operated by the National Reconnaissance Office, which controlled spy satellites . It was suggested that ""We" meant the air force .
 If there ever was a follow-on to the SR-71, that aircraft could be assigned to the NRO . "We at NRO have no such vehicle or under development"
 I'm not aware of any such activity, and the Air Force has said the same . The Air Force says it has said it is aware of no such activity in the past .
 I'm just saying that NRO doesn't have an ""Aurora"" or anything else like it . I'm not just saying NRO has no "urora" or "aurora," but I'm saying that it's a good thing for NRO .
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory was hired to analyze a seismic recording from Catalina Island . Seismic recording was recorded on Catalina island, California .
 Lincoln Lab concludes it was from an F-14 on a test flight off the California coast . Lincoln Lab concluded it was a test run by an F14 on an F1 test flight .
 The October-November 1992 issue of Air and Space magazine published an essay on Black aircraft . The article was published in the October 1992 issue .
 The Pentagon is afraid Congress might suffer sticker shock when they find out how much money the military is vacuuming out of the nation's treasury . The cost of these programs must be enormous, Pentagon says .
 It could also be that buried in the budgets of black programs could be evidence of monetary fraud, kickbacks and wasteful expenditures .
 The December 12, 1992, issue of Jane's Defence Weekly carried an account of a sighting by an oil-drilling engineer in the North Sea .
 The witness said the sighting took place from the drilling rig Galveston Key in 1989 .
 A witness reported seeing a KC-135 tanker, two F-llls, and a triangular aircraft flying north . A triangular aircraft a little larger than the F-lls flying north, the witness said .
 Witness was also a twelve-year veteran of the Royal Observer Corps . Witness was a member of its international aircraft recognition team . Witness also served in the RAF for 12 years and was member of an international aircraft team .
 The aircraft was estimated to be 90 feet long, with a 45to 50-foot wingspan . The aircraft is estimated to have a 90-foot long wingspan and a 45-foot wide .
 As with most of the speculated Aurora designs, it was described as burning liquid methane . The Aurora spacecraft is believed to be a prototype of the Aurora spacecraft .
 Reports also claimed sightings had been made at Kwajalein Atoll and that a loud sonic boom had caused damage in Holland was from Aurora .
 As the reports continued, believers became more strident in their attacks on the air force .
 The Pentagon continues to deny the existence of the Aurora Aurora, the Pentagon says .
 The idea of a Black airplane at your local hobby store attracted press attention . And as with the F-19 kit, the idea of the Black airplane attracted press coverage .
 By late 1993 and early 1994, numerous articles about Aurora had been published . The end of Aurora was the end of the series of articles .
 There was a qualitative difference with the stories about the stealth fighter published during the 1980s, however, however . The stories of the stealth aircraft were published during that time .
 The nightly flight activities at TTR clearly indicated the stealth fighter was operational years before the public announcement . The stealth fighter has been operational for years .
 These were rich in details, many of which, in retrospect, proved correct . These are rich in detail, and many of them proved right .
 The Aurora stories, in contrast, were fragmentary and stood in isolation . Aurora stories are fragmentary stories, but the Aurora stories stood alone and stood alone .
 The Aurora had a distinctive sound and left a distinctive contrail, both of which could be heard and seen for many miles . The Aurora was the first plane to fly over the U.S. to leave a contrail in the sky in the 1960s .
 Among some believers, the suspicion grew that all was not well with the Aurora project . The Aurora project was set to be completed in 2015 .
 Plans to build several dozen production Auroras were abandoned by the NRO in 1989—90 . Plans for the production of several dozen Auroras was abandoned in 1990 .
 Aurora was depicted as yet another Black project that had ended in an expensive failure . Aurora is depicted as a failed project that has ended in expensive failure. Aurora was shown to be a model of failure .
 Even as Aurora faded away, attacks on Black projects became more strident . Attacks on Aurora became more frequent as the project faded away .
 He added, "This is not a part of the official program of the United States government" He added that the program is not an official program .
 This is the story of Aurora, as told by some of the world's foremost magazines, newspapers, public interest groups, and aerospace writers . Aurora is the largest city in the U.S. and largest in the world .
 Reading through the inch-thick stack of material, one might think the case for Aurora was proven beyond a reasonable doubt . The U.S. had, in fact, built a remarkable aircraft, unlike any the world has ever seen, then systematically lied .
 Sightings were also made by ""reliable witnesses” of remarkable vehicles, capable of speeds and maneuvers beyond those of conventional aircraft . But perhaps the reader can think of another case where sightings were made by "reliable" witnesses .
 These include 1,700mph speeds, at a time when manned supersonic flight had not yet been achieved, and right-angle turns . These were at the time of the first manned flight .
 The air force denied the sightings were valid, saying they were of conventional objects that had been misinterpreted . In that earlier case, the air force also denied the reports were valid .
 Much time was spent examining official statements for any inconsistencies . Much of the time spent was spent looking for inconsistencies in statements .
 When a university study supported the air force position, it was also accused of being part of the cover-up . The air force has been accused of covering up the existence of unidentified flying objects .
 AURORA DOES NOT EXIST, ELVIS IS DEAD—ACCEPT IT . Aurora does not exist, but only one person has publicly claimed to have seen Aurora close up on the ground .
 The Aurora I did see once on the way out there, and the only reason I say it's Aurora is, I was told by Dennis in the bus . Dennis told me he saw Aurora in the back seat of the bus, and that's the reason he says Aurora is .
 "It sounds like the sky is tearing. And it makes an unbelievably loud sound," he says .
 From what I understand, it operates on a liquid methane powered engine . The engine is powered by liquid methane . It is not the first time I've heard from such a vehicle .
 A lot of this information has gotten out in Aviation Week and Popular Science . It's not the first time this has been reported .
 It looks like the old X15 looked like a very long slender craft with short wings on it, and a square exhaust that had little vanes in it . "It looks like, if you know what it looks like ... it's quite large," says the author .
 The original 1990 articles, including the ""flattened diamond"" Aurora, were based on the stories of an individual with no connection to the aerospace industry, but who claims he was hired to design several diskshaped, antigravity-powered flying saucers for a shadowy military
 He claims he was once taken out to a test site to see the diamond-shaped Aurora .
 He said it had steel wheels, like a Bonneville salt flats racer, because rubber tires could not withstand the very fast takeoff speeds it required . He said the steel wheels had to be made to withstand the high takeoff speeds required .
 John Lear also believed that in 1972-74, a huge underground base was built at Groom Lake . Lear also believes that in 1974, a massive underground base could be built at the lake . Lear believed to have built the base in 1972/74 .
 Lear believes the aliens’ digestive system has atrophied and does not function . Lear also believes that the alien’s digestive system does not work . Lear believes that aliens have no functioning digestive system .
 To survive, the aliens take organs from humans and cattle, mix them with hydrogen peroxide, then spread the mixture on their bodies . The aliens take the organs from their bodies to survive .
 The landing light was the landing light of one of the 737s used to bring workers to Groom Lake each morning . It was a landing light used to land light of a 737 used to take workers to the lake .
 The landing at the Helendale Airport is impossible for so large an aircraft . The landing was impossible for the aircraft to land at the airport .
 An airport directory lists it as having two runways, one 3,800 feet long, while the other is 5,300 feet long . The airport is listed as having runways that are more than 4,000 years old .
 These runways are too short and, being dirt, would not be able to support so large an aircraft . The runways would be too short to support such a large aircraft .
 The field also has no lights, tower, navigation aids, or instrument landing systems . There are no lights or tower, or navigation aids .
 The drawing of the XB-70 forward fuselage being loaded on a C-5 is questionable . The drawing is also questionable .
 The witness did not get a good look at it, as the object was obscured by bright lights and obstacles . The witness says the object did not appear to be a UFO .
 The drawing made it look much more airplanelike than the evidence would suggest . The drawing was made to look more like an airplane than it would appear .
 The other XB-70 sightings can be put in perspective by an experience of the author .
 On January 12, 1993, the author saw the XB-70 flying at low altitude, heading west . The author says he saw the plane flying at a low altitude .
 The author had evidence by this time that the XB-70 Aurora stories were not to be relied upon . The author was quite surprised, as he had evidence that the stories were untrue .
 At second glance, the plane proved to be an F-14 coming into NAS Miramar . The plane was seen coming into the U.S. Navy base .
 The Helendale sighting could have been a home-built Long E-Z light aircraft . The sighting could be the first of its kind .
 The doughnut-on-a-rope contrail has several internal inconsistencies . The photos of the doughnut on a rope contrail have several inconsistencies .
 As the size of the lens and the frequency of pulses are known, it is a simple matter to calculate the distance between each ""puff"" for a given altitude . The distance of each "puff" is calculated at a given height .
 If the aircraft was moving at supersonic speed, the puffs would be shooting out several hundred feet from the central contrail . The calculations are done, they say .
 Blowups of the """"""~f>iTuaJs-ars\rsn6V me regularity or me"" pulses breaks down . Blowups break down of pulses .
 The contrail itseir snows snows zigzags that are inconsistent with a very-high-speed object . The contrails snows are often seen in Ireland .
 Aurora is an example of how any strange sight or sound would be credited to Aurora . Aurora is the name of a radio station that broadcasts the most unusual sounds in the world .
 The North Sea sighting was of a KC-135, two F-Ills, and a black triangle silhouetted against high clouds . It was the first time a plane has been seen over the North Sea in over two decades .
 The angle of an F-I11 with its wings in the fully swept back position is 70 degrees . The angle is the same as the angle of the wings in an F.I11 aircraft .
 In all probability, the Aurora was simply a third F-I1] with its wings swept back .
 From far below, the nose and wings would blend together, and it would look like a black triangular flying wing . From far from below, it would be a black triangle shaped nose .
 Evidence of Aurora's nonexistence has been amassed from different sources over the past several years . Aurora's existence has been a mystery for several years, including the mayor of Aurora .
 Aurora's story was closely connected to belief in UFOs, says author . Aurora was one of the most famous UFO sightings in the U.S. history .
 The February 1988 Gung-Ho article on Aurora said, ""Rumor has it some of these systems involve force-field technology, gravity-driven systems, and ‘flying saucer’ designs"
 The author used the name Al Frickey; he has subsequently been identified by several sources as the author of books on stealth and Black airplanes . Several sources have identified him as an author of stealth and black airplanes .
 An article on the ""skyquakes"" observed that earthquakes, meteors, or aircraft had all been eliminated as the source of the source . The article concluded that earthquakes and meteors were not the only source .
 WFAA-TV of Dallas, Texas, carried a two-part program titled, The Aurora Project . WFA-TV carried the Aurora Project on Friday night .
 The Tester Corporation released models of the SR-75 and XR-7 in 1994 . Tester Corp. followed up with another kit in late summer 1994 .
 America Online BBS has two sections titled ""Area 51"" dealing with Black airplanes and ""Above Top Secret"" on UFOs . Area 51 is a reference to Area 51 and Area 51 .
 Using screen names such as ""FR8Driver,"" ""Stealth C,"" and ""VelvtElvis," individuals can post messages and exchange information using screen names . Individuals can also post messages such as "FR8 driver" and "BlackSky"
 The myth of Aurora can serve as an example of how a belief system can develop and spread . Aurora is a myth of how belief systems can be developed .
 Aurora the Aurora Aurora were formed in 1985 . Aurora was the name of a group that formed in the 1980s . Aurora is the name Aurora, Aurora, and Aurora is now Aurora's name .
 A close examination shows the difference between the Aurora myth and research into stories of real Black airplanes . The Aurora myth is a myth of a Black airplane .
 In historical research, the separate bits of information are assembled into a complete picture . In historical history, the pieces of information can be assembled together into a more complete picture.
 It is much like the pieces of a puzzle; individually they may seem meaningless, but together the pattern becomes clear . It is like a puzzle: individually, individually, the pieces are meaningless but together, they become clear .
 "These tales of darkness and shadows are without substance or coherence," says the author of the book .
 The ""flattened diamond"" stories, which ushered in the first series of reports, are now passed off by believers . For example, the 'flattening diamond' stories are passed off .
 The intercepted messages are thought to be from security guards playing with their radios . The intercepted radio messages between Gaspipe and Edwards Air Force Base are now thought to have been made by the security guards .
 As with Aurora, the flying saucer myth had been developing for several years before the first widely publicized sightings in June and July 1947 .
 This was followed by a major upturn in 1992, which was an election year and a period of economic uncertainty . This was then followed by an upturn of economic growth in 1992 .
 Jung gave an interview in 1954 in which he expressed a degree of skepticism about UFOs . Jung said he was skeptical of the idea in the interview .
 News affirming the existence of UFOs is welcome, but that skepticism seems to be undesirable . As the behavior of the press is a sort of Gallup test with reference to world opinion, one must draw the conclusion that news affirming UFO's existence is welcome .
 To believe that UFOs are real suits the general opinion, whereas disbelief is to be discouraged . To believe in UFOs, believe is discouraged, says author .
 This creates the impression that there is a tendency all over the world to believe in saucers and to want them to be real, says the author . This creates an impression that the press has no sympathy with the phenomenon, he says .
 This remarkable fact in itself surely merits the psychologist's interest . It is the first time a psychologist has been able to find a psychologist who can be interested in a patient .
 On July 1, 1994, believers in Aurora suffered a stunning blow . Aurora believers suffered a devastating blow to their community .
 The Senate Appropriations Committee added $100 million in funding to bring three SR-71s back into operation . On that date, the Senate also added funding for the SR71s .
 Ben Rich's book Skunk Works was published at the end of the year . Ben Rich is the author of the book, which has been published by Ben Rich .
 Aurora funding item is for the competition between Lockheed and Northrop for the B-2 contract . Aurora funding is part of the competition to win the contract to build the aircraft .
 Both companies came up with flying-wing designs and built one-quarter scale models for ground testing on a radar range .
 Northrop's design was larger and had a heavier payload and a longer range . The Northrop design had a larger and heavier payload . The design was designed by Northrop .
 The first example of this ""revisionist Aurora” was an article in the January 1995 Popular Science on the A-17—a Northrop stealth attack aircraft . The first time this article appeared in Popular Science was in January 1995 .
 The article alleged the aircraft had a two-man crew, swing wings, and the ability to reach supersonic speeds without an afterburner . The aircraft was alleged to have swing wings and can reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 The A-12's future home base was to be Cannon Air Force Base in New Mexico . The plane was scheduled to have a home base in Cannon, New Mexico.
 Aurora was the last of the "orthodox" Aurora to be seen in the U.S. Aurora was released in 2007 .
 A more significant problem was that it was inconsistent with the policy governing post-F-117A stealth aircraft . The U.S. Air Force will continue to fly the F-117 aircraft .
 The F-117A remained secret, but the existence of the B-2, YF-22, and F-23 programs were public knowledge . The F117A program was first developed in the 1960s .
 Artists conceptions were released before the aircraft were rolled out . Artists conceptions of aircraft were released .
 Another negative factor is the sheer number of supposedly still secret Black aircraft . Black aircraft are still believed to be still operational .
 From the published accounts, there are at least eleven such planes—two Shamus, at least three differing Auroras, the TR-3, the large delta wings, the very large deltas, the F-121, the Artichoke, and the A-17 .
 At best, the only one with any credibility is the ""funny-looking" Shamu . Shamu is the only animal with credibility .
 The situation is similar to the early 1950s, when numerous reports and blurry photos were published of ""new"" Soviet aircraft .
 The tales of Aurora and captured flying saucers brought a degree of attention to Groom Lake that no real Black airplane ever had . Aurora and a captured flying saurer were the real Black aircraft . The tale of Aurora brought a level of attention that no one else had .
 People were going to sites near the restricted area to watch the UFOs . Soon, people were going near the sites to watch UFOs .
 One popular site was ""The Black Mailbox,"" a rancher's mailbox that stands by the side of a highway . The mailbox is located by a side of the highway .
 Two hills, dubbed White Sides Mountain and Freedom Ridge, actually overlook Groom Lake . The hills are located in the middle of the lake . The lake is known as Groom Lakes .
 These were the only sites from which a person could have a close look at the facility itself from public land . The facility is located on public land, but it is not accessible to the public from the public .
 Security guards, (originally in tan Broncos or Blazers, then later in white Cherokees and HUMVEes) watched the visitors . Security guards were originally in . tan Broncos, Blazers or Blazers . Then later in tan Cherokees, and HUMvees .
 Sheriff was called after they observed a group climbing White Sides . The local sheriff was called to the scene .
 The group was called down off the mountain, IDs were checked, warnings were issued about entering restricted area or taking pictures . The visitors were sent on their way .
 Video cameras also were installed to watch visitors on White Sides Mountain . Video cameras were installed on the mountain's summit .
 The few foolish enough to enter the restricted area were arrested on the spot . A few foolishly entered the restricted zone were arrested .
 The fine was typically $600, but could run as high as $5,000 or a year in jail . The fine could run up to $6,000, jail time or jail time .
 Throughout 1993, there was a standoff, which grew increasingly tense, between the viewers and the security guards . The standoff was between security guards and the viewers .
 Film was confiscated, and hikers were often buzzed by low-flying helicopters . The film was confiscated and the film was banned .
 Rumors of a land grab by the air force of White Sides Mountain and Freedom Ridge began circulating in the spring of 1993 . The land grab is believed to have occurred in the early spring of that year .
 When Freedom Ridge was discovered, there were already survey stakes in the ground . As support for this, when Freedom Ridge is discovered, the site was already in use of survey stakes .
 It was claimed that congressional personnel had already been warned that the seizure would be made in several months . It is claimed congressional personnel were already warned of the seizure .
 Three congressional groups were shown Groom Lake and came away ""dazzled"" by what they had seen . The lake was the largest lake in the United States .
 In their handouts, they have depicted as absurd the idea of a secret base that anyone can see . The government has depicted the idea as absurd, but it is not absurd .
 The withdrawal of 3,972 acres of public land in Lincoln County, Nevada . The following day, the Federal Register carried a notice of the withdrawal of the land .
 The withdrawal would be until the year 2001, and the land would be closed to public access, mining, or any other government agency . The withdrawal of the land from public access would be made until 2001 .
 The land seizure attracted both protests and media attention . It was the first land seizure to take place in the area .
 During early 1994, magazines such as Wired, Spin, and Nose carried articles on Groom Lake .
 Groom Lake is equipped with defensive systems to protect against air and missile attack, including antiballistic missile launchers . The lake was described as equipped with anti-air and missile systems .
 Controversy over Groom Lake land seizure in 1993 led to accusations of illegal chemical waste burning and cheating on property taxes for civilian contractors .
 The goal was to focus attention on Groom Lake, to make the land seizure more difficult, and to force the Bureau of Land Management to hold public hearings . The group also wanted to make public hearings more difficult for land seizure .
 A radio talk show host from Alaska said, "God knows what they're testing out there"
 Adolf Hitler wrote the book, The New World Order, and he used the Big Lie . Adolf Hitler used the book to create the Big World Order . Hitler's use of Big Lie was a lie .
 He could not allow the people to go in and take a look at the camps at Nordhaus, Auschwitz, and Dachau . The camps were located in Nazi Germany, Germany's largest concentration camp in Germany .
 There are missing children, a hundred thousand plus across this nation . There are 100,000 missing children in the U.S. alone .
 Guards would quickly cross back into the restricted area to prevent being identified . This had proven difficult, as, when approached, guards would quickly re-enter . This has proven difficult to find out who the guards are .
 When one of the white Cherokees passed their three-vehicle convoy, the vehicles turned diagonally across the road, trapping the Cherokee between them . The white Cherokee was trapped between the two vehicles .
 The following day, the group was on Freedom Ridge when they discovered they were being watched by a telescopic camera . The next day, they discovered that they had been being filmed by the camera .
 When they tuned a scanner to the sheriff's radio frequency, they discovered that search warrants were being issued . The search warrants are being issued, police say .
 When the sheriff's deputy found them, he bluntly told them to surrender their film or be held until search warrants were obtained . When the deputies found them they told them they would be held in jail until warrants were granted .
 On April 8, 1994, an ABC news crew was stopped, searched, and detained for two hours . The crew of ABC's ABC News Network was stopped by police in 1994 . They were detained for more than two hours by the police .
 A video camera, sound-mixing equipment, tape recorders, microphones and microphones, batteries, cables, a tripod, radio scanners, walkie-talkies, and audio and videotapes were seized .
 It included shots of the crew being questioned, a Russian satellite photo of the base on the XR-7 instruction sheet, and ""sound bites"" of enraged citizens at the public hearings .
 Other than the satellite photo, there were no shots of the Groom Lake facility itself . Other than a satellite photo of the facility, there was no shot of the lake .
 Warning signs were put up during the weekend of April 8-9, 1995 . The warning signs were posted during that weekend .
 Opinion in Waco, Texas, was solidly behind David Koresh during the standoff with the Branch Davidians in early 1993 . Koresh was the leader of the cult that led to the Waco siege of Waco .
 President Clinton and the federal government are vehemently cursed and despised . President Clinton is the subject of much of the nation's most vitriolic attacks .
 There was talk about ""Frankenstein experiments" being done to humans at the secret alien underground bases . There was also talk about 'Frankenstein' experiments being done by aliens .
 Robert Lazar also appeared and was mobbed by the faithful everywhere he went . The show was held in New York City, New Jersey .
 Lazar spent two and a half hours answering questions from the eager audience . Lazar was asked questions from an eager audience at the end of his talk .
 These covered such topics as how the saucers worked, antimatter generators, gravity waves, and, of course, Aurora .
 He runs a group called Secret Saucer Base Expeditions, which has tours to the area .
 UFOs represent only one strand of this web, which includes the death of David Koresh and the Branch Davidians, the B-2, the Council of Foreign Relations, Dreamland, and the local sheriff . UFOs are only one of the many strands of the web, including Koresh
 In late 1990, at the time the Aurora stories were published, there was a fad on the U.S. east coast for T-shirts with a black Bart Simpson .
 With the turn of the century, and the approach of the 100th anniversary of the first powered flight, this is an appropriate moment to look back on the role played by the Dark Eagles .
 Dark Eagles are inextricably intertwined with the history of stealth's development and application . As a result, the Dark Eagles have a long history of developing stealth technology .
 The Dark Eagles provide a case study in the process of innovation . They are the first of the Dark Eagles in the history of military aviation .
 Stealth's first practical applications were made a quarter century ago . The seeds of stealth are as old as military aviation, and stealth is still being used in military aviation .
 The concept had lain dormant, awaiting the circumstances that would finally transform it into an operational reality . The concept has been dormant for more than a decade .
 When World War I began in August 1914, the few operational military aircraft were slow, mechanically unreliable, and fragile . The few operational planes were slow and mechanically unreliable . The aircraft were the first aircraft to be used in World War One .
 Over London and other English cities, German Zeppelins and bombers attempted to destroy factories and break British will to continue the war . Over London, British factories and factories were destroyed by the Germans in the Blitz .
 One factor that affected both offensive and defensive efforts was the lack of longrange detection and tracking systems . The U.S. military says it has no long-range detection or tracking systems that can be tracked down .
 Although some work was done with sound detection equipment, this had only limited use . Sound detection equipment was also used in the project .
 The competing technologies to meet the need were the then relatively new concept of camouflage, and the more exotic one of the transparent covering . The competing techs were the . .
 The German Imperial Air Service's experiments with the first stealth aircraft ended in failure . The first stealth plane was a German Air Force prototype .
 The transparent covering made the planes harder to see in some threat environments, such as clear weather, in others it was ineffective or actually made the plane more detectable . Translated into modern terms, although the transparent covering .
 The glint in bright sunlight, for instance, would have been detectable for tens of miles . It would have shown a glint that could have been visible in bright daylight .
 Today, it would be said that it reduced the planes’ operational readiness due to excessive maintenance downtime . The planes were said to be reduced to operational readiness because of the downtime .
 The technology that was finally selected to counter the threat of visual detection was to paint the aircraft in camouflage colors . Blue underneath to blend into the sky, and multi-color patterns on upper surfaces to make it harder for pilots of other planes to see .
 Zeppelins and night-flying bombers had their undersurfaces painted black to merge with the dark skies . Night-flying planes were painted black in order to blend with the night sky .
 An airplane silhouetted against a blue sky would be easily seen, while searchlights and even a moon-lit night sky could illuminate a blackpainted aircraft . Such camouflage had limitations, such as an airplane silhouetting against blue sky .
 It did not have the technical and operational shortcomings of the transparent covering, however, however . It did have a number of technical shortcomings .
 Ironically, today the German Imperial Air Service is best remembered for ""unstealth"" airplanes, such as those of Baron von Richthofen's Flying Circus . Ironically, the German Empire Air Service was best known for its "unstalth" airplanes .
 Manfred was known as the ""Red Baron" because his DRI triplane was painted red . He was also known as Manfred the Red Baron because of his triplane color .
 His brother Lothar's was red and yellow, while the squadron's other planes wore similar bright colors . His brother's plane was painted with bright colors, while his brother's was yellow and yellow .
 This built unit morale, allowed the pilots to keep track of each other in the swirl of combat, and to intimidate . The pilots were able to intimidate each other and to build morale .
 If British pilots went into battle, they did so on the psychological defensive . The British pilots did not go into battle with the enemy .
 Among the lessons of the first World War was the importance of air power . Air power was key to the success of air warfare in the first world war .
 Zeppelin and bomber raids were, in retrospect, minor, but had a great psychological impact . Although the amount of damage done by the German Zeppelin raids was minor, it was not the most serious damage .
 The bombers would always get through, decimating their targets with chemical weapon attacks . They would always decimate targets with . chemical weapons attacks .
 Some experts predicted that each air raid would kill tens of thousands of civilians . Within a few days there would be millions of casualties, experts said .
 The horrors of the Western Front would be inflicted on civilians, who would be left psychologically devastated . The horrors would also be inflicted upon civilians, according to the historian .
 The appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s was based, in part, on visions of this as the fate of London and Paris . It was based in part on visions that this was the future of the British capital .
 What this apocalyptic vision assumed was the continued lack of a long-range detection capability. What this vision assumed is the continued .
 Interceptors would have to hunt for the bombers, and the probability of successfully engaging them was low prior to striking the target . Interceptors must hunt for bombers, but the chances of hitting the target are low . The probability of striking a target is low .
 The development of radar in the late 1930s changed the nature of the threat aircraft faced . Radar developed in the 1930s was the biggest threat to aircraft aircraft .
 Radar plotted their course, and fighter units ahead of them were alerted to take off . Radar plotted the course of the formations as they flew towards their targets, radar plotted their path .
 The controllers could then guide the fighters to intercept the bombers . They would then guide them to intercept them .
 Because of radar, the air war over Europe was not the kind of devastating thunderbolt envisioned before the war, but, rather, a grim war of attrition . The air war was not a devastating thunderstorm envisioned before, but a grim battle of attrition, the author says .
 Even as the Allied bomber force grew in size and experience, new aircraft and technology were introduced . German air defenses expanded to keep up with the Allied bombers .
 New fighter squadrons were added, radar network enlarged, and more flak guns deployed . New fighters were added and radar network was enlarged .
 Allied bomber crews were a Second Front in the air, drawing off fighters, guns, fuel, and soldiers from the battle fields . Bomber Command suffered losses higher than those of junior officers in World War I .
 The need facing the offensive air forces was to develop a means to hide the bomber formation from radar . The need for a means of hiding bomber formation was to be developed .
 The technology selected was brute-force jamming of radar echos, and dropping chaff to fill the screen with masses of false echoes . The technology was used to jam jamming the radar and filling the screen .
 Air defenses attempted to counter these efforts with more sophisticated technology and experience . Air defenses are more sophisticated and more sophisticated than ever .
 The countermeasures equipment aboard the aircraft was also improved, to meet the changes in air defenses . Countermeasures equipment onboard the aircraft were also improved .
 Aircraft and air defenses became the pattern for the future . This on-going struggle between aircraft and air defense became a pattern for future .
 The ability of radar to detect aircraft at long range, and the attempts by the aircraft to drown out the echos, meant that visual camouflage lost its importance .
 From the latter part of 1944 onward, U.S. Army Air Forces bombers and fighters were no longer painted in camouflage colors, but, rather, flew in bare metal finishes .
 The U.S. Air Force continued this practice through the Korean War, and into the early years of Vietnam War .
 It was also during World War II that the modern concept of ""Black Projects"" originated . The concept of "Black Projects" was also developed during the war .
 This was a fundamentally different kind of security than that normally conducted by the military, says CNN's John Defterios . This was the first time the U.S. military had been involved in a major security operation .
 It involved keeping secret, for example, the speed, altitude, range, and bomb load of a new aircraft . The secret was kept secret, including the speed and altitude of the aircraft .
 Allied efforts to break German and Japanese codes had to be kept hidden from all but a select few . The existence of these projects was kept secret from most of the world .
 The strategic advantages these technological breakthroughs gave the Allies would be lost if the Axis powers were to gain even a hint that they had been made . The strategic advantage these technological . breakthroughs . gave the . Allies the strategic advantages they . gave .
 To gain intelligence on the USSR, it was necessary to undertake covert overflights of its territory and that of its allies . The U.S. needed to gain intelligence from the USSR .
 To be both effective and politically useful, overflights would have to remain unknown to the Soviets . To be effective, these overflights must remain unknown .
 It was a violation of international treaties to fly a plane in another nation's airspace in peacetime . The plane was flying over the border in violation of treaties .
 If the overflights were detected, the Soviets would make every effort to shoot the planes down . The Soviets would try to shoot down the planes if they were detected .
 Even if this failed, the inevitable Soviet protest would cause political problems . Even if it failed, it would cause problems for the country's political leaders .
 The need for the overflights to remain undetected by the Soviets was thought to be satisfied by designing an aircraft able to fly at altitudes of 70,000 feet or greater .
 This placed the aircraft above the reach of Soviet jet fighters, and, it was believed, would also make the plane difficult to detect by Soviet radar . The plane was believed to have been able to fly without being detected by radar .
 During World War II, American radar had been supplied to the Soviets, and, it was assumed, that their radar would have similar problems tracking a high-flying target .
 President Eisenhower gave approval for development of the U-2 . It was on this basis that President Eisenhower approved the development . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be developed .
 The theory seemed to be confirmed when U-2 training flights began over the U.S. The U.2 has been flying over the United States .
 Even with advanced notice, it was difficult to spot the U-2, much less track it . Yet, the Soviets were able to track the plane and send MiG fighters after it . The Soviets were not only able to spot it, but to track it down .
 The assumption had been that the Soviets would only detect a few unknown radar targets, and would not understand what was occurring . The assumption was that the Russians would only detected a few radar targets .
 The Soviet's ability to track the U-2 changed both the threat to the aircraft, and what was needed to counter it . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be tracked down by the Soviet Union .
 For the first time, an aircraft's Radar Cross Section had to be reduced . The first time an aircraft had to reduce the size of its Radar Cross section .
 Since the early days of radar, it had been known that not all aircraft echos were equal . Since then, it has been known not to be able to hear the sound of a plane's voice .
 The radar would vary according to the frequency of the radar, as well as the size, shape, and orientation of the plane .
 Project Rainbow, with its radar absorbing coatings, and special wires extending from the nose and tail to the wingtips, was disappointing . The first attempt, Project Rainbow was disappointing. Project Rainbow's radar-absorbing coatings were .
 The best that could then be done was to paint the U-2 with the sinister-looking black iron ferrite-based paint .
 This reduced its RCS to a limited extent, and made the plane harder to spot . The plane's RCS was reduced to a 'limited extent' and made it harder to see .
 The A-12 Oxcart depended on altitude, speed, and a low RCS and countermeasures . The Oxcart was designed to be a low altitude, altitude and speed .
 The A-12's altitude put it on the fringe of the Surface-to-Air Missile's envelope . Its speed cut the time the SAM had to engage the aircraft . The A.12's speed cuts the time SAM had had to intercept it .
 Low RCS made the A-12 difficult to track and to gain a radar lock-on for firing . This, along with the low RCS, made it difficult to gain radar lock on for firing. This, and the low .
 During the development program, the air force was worried that if an A-12 carrying existing countermeasures equipment was lost over hostile territory, this would compromise the systems used by U.S. fighters and bombers . The air force worried that an A.12 carrying . existing . countermeasures
 Even if the countermeasures equipment was only similar, the Soviets would have an insight into U.S. designs . The Soviets would be able to learn from the United States .
 The CIA started Project Kempster, which tried to develop ion guns that would be mounted on the A-12 . The project was part of the CIA's effort to develop the weapons .
 Kempster proved unsuccessful, and more conventional systems were developed for the A-12 . Kempster was developed to replace Kempster, but it was later found to be a failure .
 The later model Lightning Bugs carried additional equipment tojam missile radar, and a device that caused the drone to take evasive maneuvers when illuminated by a MiG's radar .
 The inability of the available technology to meet the political need for an undetectable aircraft eliminated any possibility they would be used over the Soviet Union . Despite the accomplishments of these aircraft, the aircraft were never used over Soviet Union.
 While for the Dark Eagles a reduced RCS was a critical design feature, this did not figure in the design of operational fighters and bombers . The Dark Eagles were the first to have a fighter jet with a fighter .
 B-17s and Lancaster bombers of World War II relied on conventional countermeasures packages to overcome air defenses . They relied on such techniques as flying through gaps in radar coverage and attacks on air defense sites .
 U.S. aircraft now faced SAM missiles in addition to interceptor aircraft and anti-aircraft guns . SAM missiles could be used to attack aircraft in the United States .
 What was needed was the means to defeat a weapon that was faster than a conventional jet fighter, and which was guided to the target aircraft by radar . It was needed to defeat the weapon faster than conventional jet fighters, and that was guided by radar.
 This involved improved countermeasures, Wild Weasel aircraft to suppress the SAMs, and, finally, maneuvering to avoid any incoming SAMs .
 Even with the proliferation of Soviet SAMs, the opinion in the tactical units was that countermeasures, Wild Weasels, and maneuvering could still overcome the threat posed by any new enemy air defense .
 "Manly Men,"" who could out fly SAM's, given the proper warning . They were "manly men," who could fly SAMs, given proper warning, given .
 The need, as they saw it, was more of the same— improvements in the existing technology . The need is to improve existing technology, they said, but it's not enough .
 The threat assessment was not based on U.S. success against SAMs in Vietnam, but, rather, on the Israeli failure in the 1973 Yom Kippur War . The Israeli government's assessment was based on the 1973 Israeli failure to win the war .
 The threat they saw was that countermeasures were susceptible to technological surprise when faced with the multi-layered, interlocking network of SAMs, radars, and guns that the Soviets and Third-World countries were deploying, they said .
 What was needed against this threat was not the kind of incremental approach that the tactical units wanted, but, rather, a whole new approach . What is needed is not incremental approach, but a new approach, says U.S. President Obama .
 U-2 and A-12 needed to be effective, but a magnitude greater than that was achieved with the U.2 and a-12 . The U-12 and U.12 were both developed in the 1970s .
 Because of the A-12 and SR-71, the assumption had been that the key to survival was ever-greater speeds and altitudes . The assumption was that that would be the key was ever greater speed and altitude .
 The CIA had considered such possible high-speed replacements for the A-12 . The CIA considered such a possible replacement for the plane . The plane was designed by the Air Force in the 1960s .
 Project Isinglass proposed an aircraft able to reach Mach 4 to 5 at 100,000 feet . General Dynamics completed a feasibility study in mid-1964 . It proposed a Mach 4-5 aircraft capable of reaching Mach 5 to 5 .
 Project Rheinberry was followed in 1965 by a McDonnell Aircraft design called Project . This was followed by the design of a McDonnell aircraft based on a design from 1965 .
 This was to be a rocket-powered aircraft launched from a B-52 that could reach Mach 20 at 200,000 feet . Rocket-powered plane could be launched from the ground at a height of up to 700 metres .
 In the face of the threat of improved SAM systems, this faster and higher assumption had to be turned on its head . The U.S. government has been forced to take action against the threat .
 Such speeds were incompatible with stealth, due to the sonic boom and infrared energy the vehicle would produce . Such speeds would produce an infrared energy and sonic boom . The vehicle would be able to reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 Stealth required a subsonic vehicle . Rather than hypersonic speeds, stealth required subsonics . The stealth vehicle will be a subsensational vehicle .
 Stealth aircraft would have to use a similar philosophy to conceal itself in the sky . Just as a submarine relies on silence while cruising slowly in the depths of the sea, a stealth aircraft relies on a similar strategy .
 The question was one of whether the technology existed to create a truly invisible aircraft . The question is whether technology exists to create an invisibility aircraft .
 Project Rainbow has proven to be as elusive as a rainbow's end . Kelly Johnson had begun Project Rainbow two decades ago . Project Rainbow aims to raise awareness of the end of the rainbow .
 How it was finally accomplished illustrated the changes made in those intervening years, including who made the innovative discoveries, how they did it .
 Bill Schroeder, a Lockheed math286 DARK EAGLES ematician, and Denys Overholser, a Skunk Works programmer .
 Schroeder turned the aircraft design process inside out to create a stealth aircraft . Schroeder created the stealth aircraft to create an aircraft that can be stealthy .
 Schroeder made the conceptual breakthrough that a complex shape such as an airplane could be simplified to a finite set of flat surfaces . Schroeder did make the breakthrough in the 1970s .
 In effect, he designed a shape with the smallest possible RCS, then tried to make it fly . The shape was designed to be the smallest RCS possible .
 This was far more efficient in the initial design stage than pole testing a model, and allowed the shape to be modified in the computer . The shape of the car was also more efficient than pole-testing .
 The result, the ""Hopeless Diamond,""with its wings made of flat plates, would never have occurred to an aerodynamicist . The result of the "hopeless Diamond" would never be the same thing .
 But this was not about aerodynamics; it was about electrical engineering . "This is not an aerodynamic problem. It's about an electrical engineering problem," he said .
 Schroeder's and Overholser's work would have meant nothing without a technological advance . Yet all Schroeder and Overhollser's efforts would have been nothing without another technological advance, say Schroeder .
 Despite its strange shape, the Hopeless Diamond was structurally similar to a conventional aircraft . Despite its odd shape, it was structually similar to an aircraft structurally .
 Had the shape been discovered in the 1960s, the basic airframe could have been built, but it would never have flown . The shape of the airframe would have been the same shape as the original airframe .
 The aircraft stability control systems which existed in the 1960s, even the one developed for the A-12, could not have coped with the Hopeless Diamond .
 It was not until the early and mid-1970s that multi-axis computer control systems necessary for such an unstable vehicle were developed . Multi-axis control systems were developed in the 1970s .
 It was the computer revolution that made stealth a reality . Without computers it would not have been possible to calculate the radar cross section of a given shape, or to make it controllable .
 Despite the loss of both of the Have Blue aircraft during the test program, the RCS test results were phenomenal .
 In the mid-1950s, it was confidently predicted that ballistic missiles would make manned aircraft obsolete . In the 1950s, experts predicted that manned aircraft would be replaced by ballistic missiles .
 Political, technical, and social factors which influence the future are so unpredictable as to border on the irrational . The problem is that the future is so unpredictable that it borders on irrational, says David Cameron .
 In the world you know, Eisenhower is President, Elvis is king, both televisions and countermeasures use vacuum tubes, the transistor is still experimental, the B-52 is just entering service . The launch of the first satellite is still in the future, a manned flight to the Moon
 I predict that in forty years, computers will be as commonplace as televisions are in the 1950s . Computer sales in stores will be commonplace as well as television sales in the 1960s .
 These computers will fit on a desktop, while others are small enough to sit in your lap . Some of the smaller computers are smaller than desktop computers . They can fit on desktop computers or small computers that fit into lap chairs .
 All these computers are vastly more powerful than any existing 1950s mainframe computer . The computers were vastly more power than any other mainframe computers .
 Publishers require books to be prepared on these computers; the typewriter is obsolete . Publishers need to use these computers to prepare books .
 These computers are linked together by a communications system called the Tnternet’ which allows you to send messages and do research at universities, libraries, and other institutions anywhere in the world . The system is called the ‘Tnternnet’ and allows users to send
 If this had really been said to a mid-1950s audience of people working in the electronics field, they would have thought the speaker was out of his mind . If this were really said to an audience, it would have been out of the mind .
 Technical, political, and social trends that would create the PC were already developing . Yet, the PC was already being developed in the 1950s .
 The future of stealth is a reflection of its past, says the author . Having given this cautionary tale, it has to be said that it has been said .
 Have Blue was built with the sole purpose of finding out if stealth would work on a real airplane . Have Blue will be the first time a stealth airplane has been built on a commercial aircraft .
 Have Blue has been updated to correct defects found in the Have Blue . A few changes have been made to accommodate operational equipment . Have Blue will be available to the public for the next few months .
 Stealth superseded other design considerations such as range or payload . Despite this, the F-1 17A was designed to be stealthy and stealthy . The stealthy aircraft were designed to avoid the need for range and payload .
 Its stealth capabilities had to accommodate the long range and large payload of a strategic bomber . However, its stealth capabilities must also accommodate the large payload and long range .
 They had also been built under the tight secrecy which enveloped stealth from the late 1970s to the end of the 1980s . They were also built under tight secrecy .
 The effect of this secrecy was to make stealth a highly specialized concept, one that seemed to apply only to a narrow set of missions, rather than to aerospace technology as a whole .
 In the decade which followed, and the first combat use of stealth, this changed . The first combat uses of stealth was in the first decade of the Cold War .
 It must be balanced with the more traditional requirements of speed, range, payload, weight, maneuverability, and cost . Rather, it must be balancing with the other traditional requirements, including speed and range .
 The concept was now integrated into the mainstream of aircraft design, rather than being a separate ""Black"" aspect . The concept of the 'Black' aircraft has been integrated into aircraft design .
 The F-] 17A, B-2 and the F-22 are all openly on display at the annual Edwards AFB air show . The stealth UAVs, the GNAT 750, Darkstar, and Global Hawk are also on display .
 In today's air combat, the preferred method is a first-shot kill with long-range air-to-air missiles . The preferred method for air combat is to kill with air strikes, not air strikes .
 Historically most pilots lost in air combat were shot down by planes they never saw . Historically, most pilots were killed by planes that never saw them . Most pilots lost their lives in combat are shot down .
 The F-22's stealth features are an extension of this, giving it the ability to destroy an enemy plane, without warning, with a missile fired from miles away . It can also be used to launch a missile that can be fired without warning from a distance .
 If the ability to make along-range kill was the only consideration, then a pure stealth design would serve . The stealth design is designed to make it easier to make a deadly kill .
 In a close-in dogfight, a stealth-centered design would be at a disadvantage, as it could be slower, underpowered, and much less maneuverable than its conventional opponents .
 In the case of the F-22, the designers were unwilling to totally compromise its performance in the name of stealth . The F22 was designed to be the most stealthy aircraft ever made .
 Several features of the F-22 increase its radar cross section, but that was the price for better maneuverability . The F22 was designed to increase the radar cross-section of the aircraft .
 The shape of the aircraft may be the primary driver of stealth . The design considerations now include existing airframes .
 An aircraft's RCS can come from relatively small features, such as a gap in an access door . The RCS comes from small features such as the gap in the access door of an aircraft .
 The ""Have Glass" program was undertaken in the late 1990s to add stealth features to F-16 fighters . Subsequently the ""Have glass" program added stealth features . The program has been called 'Have Glass'
 Have Glass has made F-16s much more difficult to spot in air-to-air engagements . F-1 17A or B-2 cannot give an F.16 the tiny RCS of a true stealth aircraft such as an F-2 .
 The effect of both the more balanced design philosophy and the addition of stealth to existing airframes is to blur the boundaries of the aircraft's design .
 In the 1970s and 1980s, there were stealth airplanes, and there were conventional airplanes . In the '70s and '80s, 'there were stealth planes, and conventional airplanes. There were also stealth planes .
 The boundaries between them are fixed and rigid ones of secrecy and technology . The boundaries are between technology and secrecy, and secrecy .
 No, but they are stealthier now than when the prototypes made their first flights . The stealthy aircraft are now stealthier than when they were prototypes . They are still stealthy now, but not stealthy .
 A different factor influencing the future of stealth and military aviation is the increasing importance of cruise missiles and UAVs. Cruise missiles are also important in the military's future .
 It entered production in the final months of the war, but did not see action before the Armistice . The production of this type of weapon did not last long enough to be used in the war .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, the air force operated Mace and Matador cruise missiles, while the navy Regulus cruise missiles were based aboard ships and submarines . In the 1960s and 1970s, air force and navy operated Mace missiles .
 They could only strike area targets, such as cities or airfields with nuclear weapons . They would only be able to strike targets such as airfields or cities with nuclear arms .
 The stealth breakthrough was made in the late 1970s at the same time as the development of scene-matching guidance systems changed this. In the late 70s, at the . time of the . 1970s, the . development of . scene matching guidance systems . changed this .
 The missile could now find its way to a target by matching specific landmarks, in order to correct its flight-path .
 A navy Tomahawk or air force Air Launched Cruise Missile could navigate hundreds of miles, taking an evasive course to avoid air defenses, and then hit a specific building in the heart of a city . The missile could be launched from a range of range and range of targets .
 The systems were seen as strategic systems, designed to attack targets inside the USSR with nuclear weapons . They were seen to be strategic systems .
 Even their size and low-altitude flight could not guarantee their survival in the face of hundreds of SAMs . Even their small size and . low altitude flight did not guarantee them survival .
 The need was to make cruise missiles harder to detect, enabling them to strike even the most heavily defended Soviet targets . The need is to make the cruise missiles less to detect and strike even heavily defended targets .
 The technology to do this had already been developed for the Have Blue .
 It is reported that the Senior Prom missile was a smaller version of the Have Blue missile .
 It is understood that the ""Hangar 18"" building on the Groom Lake flight line was actually built to support this program . It is further understood that it was built in support of the program .
 With the B-52 inside the hangar, the test missiles could be loaded aboard without being seen . The test missiles were loaded inside without being spotted .
 TSSAM had the same shape as the Tacit Blue, only turned upside down . Just as Senior Prom used the Have Blue shape .
 According to one story, persons joining the program were given an initial briefing using a ""model"" of the TSSAM to illustrate its odd shape . According to another story, the program was given a "model"
 Senior Prom and TSSAM failed to enter production, with the number of ACMs built were limited . The role of the cruise missile has grown in the U.S. since the 1980s .
 The scene matching guidance system was originally designed to allow a much more accurate strike with a nuclear weapon . It was designed to increase the probability of destruction, increasing the likelihood of destruction .
 This guidance system also allowed tactical strikes using conventionally-armed cruise missiles . The guidance system allows tactical strikes with conventional-armed missiles .
 This increase in accuracy was essential for the missile to have any utility, due to the small warhead size . This increase was essential to the missile's survival .
 Tomahawks and ALCMs were used in Desert Storm . They have been the weapon of choice for reprisal raids, including Desert Fox .
 They have the advantage of accuracy to minimize civilian casualties . While being unmanned, their use does not pose the risk of U.S. pilots being captured or killed .
 At the same time, stealthy UAVs were under development for reconnaissance missions . At the time, the stealthy drones were being developed for reconnaissance .
 The UAVs would conduct overflights, then return to a base for a landing . Unlike the one-way missions of the cruise missiles, they would conduct their overflights and return to the base for landing .
 As the name implies, this is a UAV with a role beyond that of passive reconnaissance, but, rather, active air-to-ground missions . The UAV can also be used in active air to ground missions, rather than passive reconnaissance .
 The concept of a UCAV has specific advantages and possible shortcomings . The concept has been described as a 'UCAV' and a 'vehicle' concept .
 It could, for example, be able to make 20-G maneuvers, allowing it to fly rings around a manned aircraft . It could also fly ring-like rings around manned aircraft, allowing them to fly in circles .
 It would also not have to accommodate the volume of a cockpit, giving it the freedom of design to use unique stealth shapes, as well as reducing size, weight and cost .
 At the same time, there is the question of whether the cost savings of eliminating the pilot would not be exceeded by the expense of replacing the systems needed to replace the pilot . The pilot program is a pilot program in the United States .
 The missions envisioned for the UCAV are much more complex than flying from A to B and back again . The missions would be much more complicated than flying between A and B and again .
 Some designs can fly at high altitudes and remain on station for a day or more over enemy territory . They can fly without being detected by enemy's air defenses .
 Any military role for a UCAV should capitalize on such capabilities, rather than trying to simply duplicate what manned aircraft can already do . UCAVs are already capable of carrying out tasks such as carrying out missions .
 A high-altitude, long-endurance stealthy UCAV could be fitted with long-range air-to-air missiles . A stealthy stealthy aircraft could also have long range-range missiles . The stealthy craft could be used to carry long range air-
 It would then patrol an area that would allow its missiles to cover a number of enemy airfields . The missiles would then be able to cover any of the enemy's targets .
 Other possible air occupation missions include suppression of air defenses, destruction of ballistic missiles as they are launched, attacks on ground forces .
 An enemy would have no way of knowing if it is in the area until the missiles struck . The missiles would strike without knowing if they were in the target area .
 This would put an enemy on the psychological defensive, making him unwilling to expose his forces to destruction . This would have put the enemy on a psychological defensive .
 At the same time, manned aircraft would be undertaking those missions for which they were best suited . The U.S. Air Force says manned aircraft will carry out missions for the purposes of their mission .
 The question becomes, however, if the perceived need for air occupation-type missions justifies the money, time, and effort required to develop a UCAV able to meet it . The question is whether it will be necessary to meet the need for such missions .
 Beyond this, there is the question of whether the existing technology is capable of meeting the mission requirements . Beyond that, there are also questions about whether existing technology can meet the requirements .
 It might also use off-board sensors from a robot AWACS, as well as have the ability to receive data from ground-, air-, air- and spacebased systems .
 During the Cold War, the threat was from Soviet-designed missiles and radar . The U.S. government says the threat is still a threat to Russia .
 U.S. and Allied forces must potentially face equipment from the old Soviet Union, from Russian and Western and Eastern Europe, from indigenous designs .
 Desert Storm brought a realization of the threat from the spread of ballistic missiles, and nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons . Desert Storm was the first Gulf War to see the threat of nuclear weapons .
 What were once strategic weapons restricted to the United States and Soviet Union are now found in Third World countries .
 The strong men who rule these countries seem to lack any restraints on using them, writes CNN.com's John Defterios.com.com .
 During the Gulf War, Saddam fired Scud missiles at Israel with the goal of provoking retaliation from a country which has long been reported to have nuclear weapons . During the 1990s, Israel was reported to be holding nuclear arms .
 Various systems, such as bistatic radar or use of ultra-wide band frequencies, have been proposed as counterstealth measures .
 Computer technology has advanced at a fantastic rate . As noted earlier, however, computer technology is still being used in the world .
 In such a case, we would have to revert back to classic countermeasures techniques . In such an instance, the use of such techniques would be limited to countermeasures .
 It would be ironic if, after all the changes of the past 50 years, simple chaff would be the one constant . "Simple chaff" is the only constant constant for 50 years .
 An early warning radar with a huge antenna and massive computing capability might detect and track a stealth aircraft . The same might not be true for a missile with an antenna a few inches across . Also, while an early-warning radar with huge antennas might detect a stealth plane, it might not
 Super computers could also make possible ""smart" stealth and countermeasures . One can speculate that super computers could make possible 'smart' stealth . Super computers may also be able to make possible "smart" countermeasures and stealth .
 With the impending arrival of the 21st Century, all of us are setting sail on an unknown sea . All of us will set sail on the unknown sea, says author .
 We do not know where that voyage will take us, but the stealth experience does offer a guidepost . The stealth experience is a guide to the future .
 Stealth was created by a few men with vision, who saw both the need and the possibilities . Stealth is the first of its kind in the U.S. and the second of the world's most successful startups .
 Their ideas were translated into reality by the support of others with the courage to try . Their ideas will be translated into the reality of life in the United States .
 An idea is a fragile thing; it can be crushed by ridicule or extinguished by something as simple as neglect . "An idea is fragile thing," says the author of the book "An Idea is a Fragile thing"
 It is ideas, in every field of human endeavor, which lead us toward the invisible horizons . But it is ideas that lead us to the invisible horizon, says author .
 The Turbojet Conies To America,"" Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1992 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 247, 248 .
 General Electric's earlier work with superchargers that caused the British to recommend they produced the Whittle engine . The Whittle supercharged engine was produced by General Electric .
 North Base, the Skonk Works, and Rachel will be used throughout . To avoid confusion, the later names of North Base will also be used .
 The open cockpit did reduce the maximum speed and altitude the first XP-59A could reach . The aircraft's open cockpit reduced the maximum altitude and speed speed .
 XP-59A did much to usher in the modern era of flight test instrumentation . The XP59A was the first of its kind to be used in flight tests .
 Hundreds of separate readings are transmitted to the ground in real-time . Today, hundreds of different readings are sent to the air and ground .
 The XP-59A was restored to its October 1-2, 1942, appearance . The observer's cockpit was removed and the aircraft was restored .
 It is often thought the fake prop was used as cover throughout the XP-59A program . The fake prop is thought to have been used as a cover for the XP 59A .
 It appears, from photographic evidence, that it was used only during the move and while at Harpers Lake . It appears to be used only when the move was made and when it was at the move .
 The photos of the plane with the fake prop have become a symbol of the secrecy that enveloped the project . The plane with a fake prop has been a symbol .
 Tex Johnston tells of jumping a P-38 lining up for a gunnery pass . When the pilot saw him, Johnston tipped his hat and climbed away . Tex Johnston says he tipped the pilot and climbed off .
 An aspect of jet flight that prop pilots had to get used to was the slow throttle response of jet engines . Prop pilots would have to learn how to use jet engines to control their prop engines .
 It took much longer for the turbine to spin up compared to a piston engine . The turbine spins up much faster than a piston-powered piston engine.
 On the positive side, the jet pilot did not have to deal with prop pitch, mixture, manifold pressure, and the roar and vibration of a propeller airplane . On the negative side, it is not the first time a jet pilot has dealt with the prop pitch and mixture .
 Early overflights took advantage of the commitment of the Soviet air force to the Korean War . These early overflights were taken advantage of Soviet commitment to the war .
 Between then and the spring of 1953, when the Soviet ""Honchos"" were withdrawn, a full twelve air divisions had seen action . Between the spring and spring 1953, the Soviet Honorchos were withdrawn .
 Richard H Kohn and Joseph P Harahan, ed., Strategic Air Warfare , 95, 96. Richard H . Kohn, ed. Harahan and Joseph . Harahan . Richard H. Kohn . ed., ed. ed. The Air Force Handbook of Strategic Air . Warfare
 Curtis E LeMay later said that the loss rate of SAC bombers, had there been a war with the Soviet Union during the 1950s, would have been higher than that of the peacetime accident rate .
 ll. Special Aircraft for Penetration Photo Reconnaissance, (Washington, D.C.: May 12, 1954). ll. The aircraft were used in World War II . ll.
 The History of the U-2 Spyplane (Shrewsbury, England: Airlife, 1989), 8.5.2.3 .
 This article is composed of the transcripts of the radio communications, notes, and LeVier's postflight reports . This article has been compiled by the author of this article .
 Peter Pocock, "Dragon Lady," and Kenneth W Weir, "The U-2 Story," published by Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1978 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 186. Pocock .
 Comparing the X-16 and the U-2 indicates just how farsighted Johnson was . The U-16 was the prototype of the U.2 . The X-2 was the first of its kind, and the X.16 was designed to be a prototype of
 The X-16 represented aeronautical conventional thinking, a conventional aircraft that attempted to perform an extraordinary mission . It was designed to carry out a mission that would be carried out by an extraordinary aircraft .
 Johnson used as his model the aerodynamic efficiency of a glider . Johnson used the large X-16 as a model for the large aircraft . The glider was designed to be aerodynamic efficient .
 None of the U-2s lost over ""denied areas"—the USSR, China, or Cuba—was due to flameouts . None of those lost over those areas was due to a flameout .
 These requirements were a mixture of security and the demands of flying the U-2 . The U.2 was designed to meet the requirements of flying a U.1.
 Because of the U-2's demanding nature, good ""stick and rudder"" men were needed . The U.2 was a U.S. Air Force One .
 This was for ""still air"" conditions only, as one member of the first group learned in early 1956 . This was only for 'still air' conditions only .
 After several relight attempts, it looked as if he would have to land on a dirt strip in the canyon . After several attempts, he was forced to settle on the dirt strip instead of landing .
 Initially, Powers thought the eighteen-month contract was an unduly optimistic estimate of the U-2's lifetime . Powers initially thought the contract was a unduly optimistic estimate of the aircraft's life .
 The U-2s were flown only the mimimum necessary for training and test flights, to avoid wearing them out . The U.2s would be used only for training or test flights .
 Of the fifty-five early-model U-2s built, only ten still survived when the type was retired in 1980 . Only ten of the 50-year-old aircraft were built .
 Article 347 was Article 347, the first U-2 to overfly the Soviet Union . Article 347 is Article 347 of the U.2 series of U.S. aircraft . The U.1-2 was the first to fly over Soviet Union in the series of flights . Article
 It is now on display, along with a B camera, at the National Air and Space Museum . The B camera is on display at the museum .
 Bissell's autobiography is published by Jane's Information Group . Shaw, Shaw, and Bissell were interviewed by Bissell .
 It was initially thought Sicker had loosened his faceplate to eat when the engine flamed out .
 The Kyshtym 40 facility outside town included reactors that produced the nuclear material, the weapon assembly facilities, and waste storage tanks . The facility was outside town .
 Also in the area was a flight test center for trials of aircraft weapons systems . The area was also known as a test ground for weapons trials .
 The Su-9 and MiG 19s that tried to intercept the plane came from the test site . The plane was shot down by a Russian jetliner carrying a Russian intelligence officer .
 This restored the altitude lost due to the weight of equipment added to the U-2 . This included the midnight blue paint, ejector seat, and reconnaissance equipment . This restored altitude .
 Only four knots separated the maximum and minimum speeds of the aircraft . The aircraft was also more demanding to fly .
 The Soviets did not admit the loss of the MiG and its pilot, or the mass SA-2 firings, until 1990 . The Soviets never admitted the loss or the losses of the Soviet MiG or the pilot .
 Claims the overflight was a plot by the CIA to sabotage the Paris Summit and prolong the Cold War . This was combined with claims that the CIA was behind the flight .
 It was not until 1992 that the Russian government admitted the Soviets had systematically lied about the shooting down of the airliner . It was only 1992 that Russia admitted the Soviet state of responsibility for the crash .
 In the nuclear engine, a reactor heated water, turning it into pressurized steam . In the reactor, water was heated to pressurify steam, making it pressurized .
 This went through a steam turbine, which powered the compressor fan via a reduction gear . This was powered by a turbine, and the fan fan powered by the turbine fan . The fan fan was powered through a turbine and turbine fan to power the fan .
 The steam then flowed through a heat exchanger, which heated the compressed air to produce thrust . The air was then heated by the heat of the steam to create thrust thrust .
 The water then flowed back to the reactor to begin the cycle all over again . The water was then sent back into the reactor .
 To provide added thrust, boron would be sprayed through an afterburner . Boron would provide thrust, such as for takeoff and the Mach 3 dash to the target .
 More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1985), 137, 138. More than My Share Of It All . More than my share of it All (D.C. author)
 A number of aircraft projects during the 1950s had configurations similar to the CL-400 . Ironically, given Sun Tan's secrecy, a number of other aircraft projects were similar .
 This document was declassified when the surviving A-12s were given to museums . This document is based on a declassified version of the document .
 A copy was sent to each museum as an ""owner's manual"" for the airplane . A copy of the manual was sent as a copy of it for each museum's use .
 The SA-2's booster rocket burns for four to five seconds, while the second stage fires for twenty-two seconds . The rocket's second stage burns for two seconds .
 It would have to be launched well before the A-12 was within range . Thus, it would have been launched before it could be launched .
 The computer and guidance radar would have to direct the SA-2 to a point in space ahead of the A-12 . The A-2 would need to be directed by the computer and radar to the point in .
 Johnson, "Some Development Aspects of the YF-12A Inteceptor Aircraft,"" 5.5. Johnson . Johnson: "Some development Aspects" of the aircraft . 5.6.5 .
 Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell resigned following the Bay of Pigs disaster a year before . The two men who had done so much to bring both the U-2 and A-12 into existence had both resigned from their post .
 Two of Skliar's classmates were Mercury astronauts L Gordon Cooper and Virgil I ""Gus"" Grissom . Two of the astronauts were also classmates .
 The author has extensive contacts within the Black airplane community, both personal and through publications . The author is proud to represent the Black Air Force .
 This provides an insight into both the latest information and the beliefs behind it . It also provides a view of the world's most recent developments in science .
 In the event of an engine failure during the climb, the X-15 would have to land on dry lake beds scattered across the desert . In the case of engine failure, the plane would need to land in dry lakebed .
 The high mountains to the west and east would have made the unpowered approach difficult . High mountains would have led to a difficult climb to the summit .
 Article 126's right engine sucked off its manufacturer's nameplate during a ground run on March 30, 1965 . Article 126 was the first car to have a manufacturer nameplate removed from the car's manufacturer's logo .
 There was no intention of using the A-12 over the Soviet Union, except in a national emergency . The Soviet Union was not expected to use the aircraft .
 Satellites could provide routine coverage of the USSR with zero political risk . Satellite could provide coverage of Soviet-era news with no political risk.
 In the 1960s, the number of satellites was too small to cover targets in Cuba, North Vietnam, or North Korea .
 SR-71/A-12/YF-12 Flights/Checkout, Edwards AFB History Office, June 14, 1991 . Edwards AFB history office: "Checkout" was June 14 .
 Among Scott's classmates were NASA astronauts David Scott, James Irwin, and Theodore Freeman, as well as X-15 astronaut Mike Adams .
 Sullivan's A-12 was the only U.S. aircraft over Hanoi at the time . Sullivan's plane was the last aircraft to fly over the country .
 Years later, the SR-71 operations building at Kadena was still known as the ""Oxcart" building .
 After nearly a quarter century in storage, JP-7 fuel was still found in the A-12 tanks when they were disassembled for transfer to museums . The tanks had been stored in storage for 25 years .
 Brugioni, Eyebal to Eyeball, is an Italian TV game show . The game is set to be shown in a new series of episodes .
 Statsenko retired soon after the shooting down of Anderson's U-2 . Statsenko was only forty-five at the time of the missile crisis . He was retired soon afterward .
 Ten air force U-2 pilots, Majors Richard Heyser, Buddy Brown, Ed Emerling, Gerald Mcllllmoyle, Robert Primrose, and Jim Quails, received Distinguished Flying Crosses .
 Major Rudolph Anderson was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Service Medal, the highest peacetime decoration . Anderson was awarded the Medal for his service in the World War II .
 The text of the original memo was changed after it was typed . Interestingly, the text of this article has been changed .
 The word ""could"" was crossed out and ""might"" was written in with an underline . The word 'could' was written out and 'might' was marked with a crossed out .
 Drones have been flying drones for more than a decade . They have been used in the U.S. since 2010 . The drones have been deployed in the past five years .
 The ""F-104"" should be ""RF-101"—no reconnaissance version of the F-104 was ever used over Cuba . The F-103 was never used in Cuba . No reconnaissance version was ever ever used .
 The article implied that lowlevel flights were still being made in 1964 . Also, the article said that low-level flights still were being made .
 Robert Zimmerman, ""Ryan Receives Contract for More Drones,"" San Diego Union, April 21, 1965, sec. Robert Zimmerman: Ryan received contract for more Drones .
 During the testing of the Rivet Bouncer system, an unusual incident occurred . The incident occurred during a test of the system .
 Technical representative working on Rivet Bouncer was allowed home leave . Due to a family emergency, the technical representative was allowed to go home .
 sO was very surprised to discover its first stop was Hanoi, Vietnam . He did not check the route, sO did not know the route .
 The thoughts of Chairman Mao were described as better than compasses and radar . Chairman Mao's thoughts were said to be better than those of the world's most famous .
 The 147SC/TV did have a major problem: It had a tendency to just fall out of the sky . It's not the first time a TV station has been in the air .
 The problem was traced to the fin-shaped antenna that transmitted the television signals to the DC-130 . The problem is traced to an antenna that was used to transmit television signals .
 It was found that the fin caused the drone to become directionally unstable . The fin was found to cause a drone to lose control of the drone .
 In the 1970s, photos were published of a Chinese copy of reconnaissance drones very similar to the 147G/H high-altitude drones . The Chinese version of the Chinese model was published in 1970s .
 The launch aircraft was a Tu-4 (a Soviet-built copy of the B-29) modified with turboprop engines . The launch was a Russian-built version of a Soviet-made copy of a B-30 .
 Wagner, Lightning Bugs and Other Reconnaissance Drones, 24, 25, 191, 192, 197, 199, 200, 209, 213, 213. Wagner, aka "Lightning Bugs," is known for his drone strikes in the U.S.
 This was a ground-launched drone able to fly both high and low-altitude missions . This was the first time the U.S. government has launched a drone capable of flying in a controlled environment .
 Following a U-2 crash in the late 1950s, a small-town newspaper agreed not to publish a photo of the wreckage . A small town newspaper in the 1950s refused to publish photos of the crash site .
 This included scenes inside the control officer's cockpit showing the control panel . The launch control officer was given a tour of the launch control room .
 There are also shots of wind-tunnel tests, refueling, and two successful D-21 launches from the onboard camera .
 To put the 24,000-pound weight of each D-21B/ booster rocket in perspective, the Hound Dog missile weighed 10,140 pounds . The MK 15 nuclear weapon weighed 7,600 pounds, the MK 39 and MK 41 nuclear weapons each weighed 10,.000 pounds .
 A student on his lunch break glanced up and noticed a large jet accompanied by four other, smaller aircraft . The D-21B drop of September 28, 1967, may have been a sighting of the aircraft .
 He could barely see the shape of the large plane, while the smaller planes could be seen only because of their contrails . He could only see the shapes of the larger planes .
 The group seemed to be directly over Torrance, California, south of Los Angeles . The group was flying west and seemed to have been flying west .
 He then noticed one of the large plane's contrails (the inner one, on the left side as he recalled later) began growing . He said he then noticed the inner one began growing, and then noticed it was growing .
 Suddenly, the contrail ""got huge"" and another contrail shot out ahead of the large plane . The contrail "got huge" and shot out of the sky ahead of a plane .
 The formation, new object included, began a gradual turn to the northeast . The whole formation, including a new object, began to turn north .
 The student thought he had seen an X-15 launch . The student was interested in space . He thought he'd seen a space shuttle .
 He had seen films of X-15 launches and knew several chase planes followed the B-52 drop plane . The X-52 dropped plane was the first to carry out a drop plane from a B-Q plane .
 According to one source, a D-21 launch had been made over the Los Angeles area . The launch is believed to have taken place over Los Angeles .
 The description is consistent with the large solid rocket used to boost the D-21B, but one problem is that he believes the sighting occurred during the 1966-67 school year . The description of the rocket is consistent .
 The Skunk Works is unwilling to say where the September 28, 1967, drop occurred . It's not known where the drop took place .
 The witness's inability to remember the date makes an exact identification impossible . The lack of official confirmation, along with the witness's . inability to recall the date, makes it impossible to confirm the identity .
 Lockheed Blackbirds, 56, 57, and 56, respectively, are the latest in a long-running series of Blackbirds . The team is based in Los Angeles, California .
 The Pentagon's Secret Hypersonic Spyplane (Pentry's Secret Spyplane) was 9.7 years old . The Pentagon had been working on the program for decades .
 Michelle Briggs, "Classified D-21 Mini-Blackbird On Display at Arizona Museum,"" Pacific Flyer, November 1993, A39.
 It was 95.12 feet long, with a top speed of Mach 2.55, a range of 1,620 nautical miles, and an operating altitude of 69,000 to 72,000 feet . The plane was 95 feet long and had a range from 1,600 n
 It was launched from a large trailer by its own KR-15 jet engine and two rocket boosters that separated after liftoff . The rocket was launched by a trailer with its own jet engine .
 It carried three AFA-54 vertical cameras and one oblique camera in a detachable nose . It was carried by three cameras in three different locations .
 It was built by the Tupolev Design Bureau and operated by the Soviet army . The Soviet army used it as a training ground for the first time .
 There is very little documentation about the German World War I ""stealth"" aircraft . The aircraft were used in World War One .
 Bill Gunston, ""Back to Balloons and Gliders?,"" Air International , 228. Bill Gunson, "Air International," 228. Gunston .
 The German Go 229, another flying wing design, was nearly invisible to radar . The Go 229 was also known as the German Go 219 .
 It was made of wood and had charcoal mixed with the glue to absorb radar signals . The glue was mixed with charcoal and was used to make the glue .
 Radar echo would be dispersed by 10 degrees away from radar . The move is described as being done for aerodynamic reasons . It would also cause the echo to be dispersed .
 The third prototype, the YB-70, was to have had the canard sweep changed from 31 degrees to 51 degrees . It would have brought the echo of the canards and wings into line . The YB70 was also to have changed the sweep of the wings and can
 Aviation Week and Space Technology: Small Fighter Intended to Demonstrate Stealth, or Low Signature Technologies . The Pentagon is developing a small fighter intended to demonstrate stealth technology .
 Ralph Vartabedian, Now It Can Be Told—He Has the Right Stuff, Los Angeles Times, Sept. 29, 1989 . Ralph has the right stuff, he says, and it's time to tell the truth .
 The idea was not to ""hide" the ships but, rather, make it difficult for a U-boat commander to determine the ship's speed and heading . It was designed to make the U-boats difficult to determine their speed .
 The Have Blue and F-117 planes have an odd shape, like the Have Blue . A similar effect could be expected on planes with odd shapes like the F.117 .
 Ralph Vartabedian, Now It Can Be Told, Los Angeles Times, Sept. 29, 1989 . Ralph was the author of the book "Now It Can be Told"
 The only date on the clipping is 1979, but the mention of a second crash suggests a date in the late summer of 1979 .
 William Moore wrote a book in 1980 called The Roswell Incident in which he claimed that the army air forces had captured a flying saucer in July 1947, which has been covered up since .
 Several ""UFOlogists"" have claimed that stealth technology was actually developed from captured flying saucers . Several 'UFO'logists' claim that the technology was developed by captured flying saucers scientists .
 Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117, 25, 26; and Cunningham, ""Cracks in the Black Dike,"" 18, 19. Cunningham, "Cracks" in the black Dike, 18,19. Cunningham .
 Melinda Beck, William J Cook, and John J Lindsay, "Unveiling a Ghost Airplane,"" Newsweek , 23.23.01 .
 "Military reportedly moving in to stake claim on Groom Mountains,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 10, 1984, sec. Ed Vogel, "Groom Mountains"
 Las Vegas ReviewJournal: "Nevadans question Air Force seizure of land" Air Force seized the land in 1984 . Air Force was involved in the land seizure .
 Mary O'Driscoll, "Reid backs USAF on land issue,""Las Vegas Sun, July 7, 1984, sec. Mary O’Driscolls, "The Las Vegas Sun" was published in 1984 . O O Discoll:
 Ed Vogel, ""Nevadans question Air Force seizure of land,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, May 20, 1984, sec. "Nevada Air Force seized land"
 Mary Manning, "Irate Nevadans "march" on D.C. to protest federal land-grabbing," Las Vegas Sun, August 6, 1984, sec.
 Timothy Good, Alien Contact , 148, 149; and Chris Chrystal, ""AF admits to illegality of NTS land grab,"" Las Vegas Sun, August 7, 1984, sec. 2: "Families of the FBI, CIA, CIA and others"
 Kathleen Buckley, ""Wilderness tradeoff proposed,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, Sept. 14, 1984, sec. 2: "Wilderness Tradeoff proposed" Kathleen Buckley wrote in 1984 .
 Las Vegas Sun, September 14, 1984, sec. B; and Chris Chrystal, ""2-year limit in Groom Mtn. land grab bill,""Las Vegas Sun" Sept. 13, 1984: "Land grab bill is a land grab"
 Kathleen Buckley, "Top secret maneuvers in jeopardy,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, September 19, 1984, sec. Kathleen Buckley .
 Christopher Bell, "Air Force will seek continued access restriction to secret base,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, Oct. 11, 1987, sec. Christopher Bell .
 Las Vegas ReviewJournal, November 19, 1987, sec. B; and David Koenig, "House panel drops plan for wilderness" Koenig and Koenig wrote in 1987 .
 David Koenig, "Air Force seeks extension of closed area on Groom Mountain,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 18, 1988, sec. "Groom Mountain" is a closed area . Koenig: The Air Force wants to extend the area .
 David Koenig, "Congress extends fed takeover of Groom area," Las Vegas Review-Journal, April 2, 1988, sec. 2: 1988 . Koenig: "Groom area" is the area where the U.S. military took over .
 David Koenig, "House separates Groom Mountain pact from wilderness issue," Las Vegas Review-Journal, June 15, 1988 . Koenig: "Groom Mountain is not a wilderness issue. It's a matter of life"
 William Scott, "F-117A Design Presented Avionics Challenges,"Mv/ation Week and Space Technology , 43. William Scott . William Scott was the lead designer of the F117A design .
 Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1990 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 144, 145. Harold C Farley Jr. and Richard Abrams, "F-117A Flight Test Program" Richard Abrams and Harold C. Abrams wrote about the F117A test program in 1990 .
 Pace, Lockheed Skunk Works, 233; Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117A, 29,30. Pace and Sweetman are Lockheed's most recent additions to the program . Goodall and Pace are the first of the F117A program to fly the F-
 All the operational air force pilots received numbers counting from 150 . Air force pilots receive numbers of 150 .
 The effect of the phase of the moon on F-117A operations is not unique . The F117A has been deployed in the U.S. since 1983 .
 RAF bomber squadrons stood down during the ""moon period” because it made the night sky too bright . During World War II, RAF bomber squads stood down because of the 'moon period' during the period .
 Michael A Dornheim, "F-117A Provides New Freedom in Attacking Ground Tragets,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 106.5 . Michael A. Dornheimer, "The F117A provides New Freedom" in attacking ground targets .
 This book contains two interviews with Steve Paulson, one of the original 4450th Tactical Group members . The book also contains two interview interviews with Paulson . Paulson was a member of the 4450 Tactical Group .
 This information was obtained from a framed set of F-117A development patches shown at the Edwards AFB Air Show . The patches were part of a display at the Air Show as part of the display .
 Washington Roundup, Aviation Week and Space Technology (October 12, 1981), 17.17. 1981: Washington Roundup. Washington Roundup . Washington Roundup: Aviation Week . Aviation Week is Washington's biggest aviation week of the year .
 Northrop wanted ""F20" to symbolize a new generation of fighter fighters . Northrop is believed to have developed the F20 fighter jet in the past .
 Benjamin F Schemmer, ""Stealth Goes Public,"" Armed Forces Journal International , 23, 24. Benjamin F. Schemmmer, "Stealth goes Public" Benjamin F
 Richard Barnard, ""AF Abandons Stealth Reconnaissance Plane; Deploys Fighter Units,"" Defense Week , 1, 6.6.
 Ron Labrecque, "Alone and without Stealth, John Andrews Makes Child's Play of the Pentagon's Most Secret Weapon,"" People (no date on clipping), 127, 128; and Cunningham, ""Cracks in the Black Dike,"" 20, 24, 25.
 Washington Roundup, Aviation Week and Space Technology (September 14, 1987), 21.21. Washington Roundup . Washington Roundup: Aviation Week . Aviation Week is Washington's annual Washington, D.C. capital .
 The document control problem occurred because of standard Skunk Works practice . The problem was due to standard document control practice .
 When the air force showed up to conduct a classified document audit, they discovered there were no records of their destruction . The air force says they destroyed the classified documents .
 William B Scott, "F-117A Crash Reports Cite Pilot Fatigue, Disorientation,” Aviation Week and Space Technology , 22; and Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117, 81, 82 .
 "Stealth' jet said to crash in California,"" Boston Globe, July 12, 1986 . Boston Globe .
 It has been claimed that the air force dug up a large area around the impact point to recover every scrap of debris . Then scattered parts from an F-101 to deceive anyone entering the site, it is claimed .
 Scott, "F-117A Crash Reports Cite Pilot Fatigue, Disorientation,"" 22, 23. Scott, ""F-116A crash reports Cite pilot Fatigue,"" Scott, 22, "disorientation" Scott .
 Giangreco, Stealth Fighter Pilot, 50, 51; and Scott. Scott, 22, died in F-117A crash . The crash was caused by pilot Fatigue .
 The B-2 was scheduled to arrive at Edwards Airport in Los Angeles at about noon . The plane was headed to the airport from Palmdale, California . It was the first time the plane had ever arrived in the U.S.
 A few minutes later, it was announced that the B-2 would be making a flyby . The plane was scheduled to fly over the U.S. Air Force .
 Three B-2s, an F-117A formation flyby, and an HALSOL-Pathfinder flyby at the 1993 Edwards Air Show . The punchline came at the Edwards Air show .
 John D Morrocco, ""USAF Unveils Stealth Fighter; Black Weapons Probe Likely,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology, (November 14, 1988), 28. 28. Air Force will launch the first stealth fighter jet in 1988 .
 Mary Enges-Maas, ""Stalking the Stealth Fighter,"" Times-Advocate, Decembers, 1989, sec. "Stalking a Stealth Fighter"
 David F Bond, ""Six F-117As Flown in Panama Invasion; Air Force Broadens Daytime Operations,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology .
 A In all the adverse comments following the Panama mission, one aspect has been overlooked, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "In all the negative comments following this mission, the one aspect is overlooked"
 Even had the bombs fallen where planned, the U.S. had already lost the element of surprise . The United States was already losing the elements of surprise, CNN says .
 John D Morrocco, ""F-117A Fighter Used in Combat for First Time in Panama, ""Aviation Week and Space Technology , 32.2 .
 Kenneth Freed, ""Panama Tries to Bury Rumors of Mass Graves,"" Los Angeles Times, October 27, 1990, sec. Kenneth Freed: Panama tried to bury rumors of mass graves .
 The fact that the press continued to use the term into 1992 says more about their ""accuracy"" than that of the plane . The plane crashed in 1992 .
 "General didn't report Stealth flaws in Panama,"" San Diego Tribune, July 2, 1990, sec. A; and ""General didn’t report Stealth flaw in Panama"
 The F-117A's first combat mission came from a Newsweek press pool member . A The final word on the F-116A's mission was that it was a combat mission for the first time .
 The F117A attack was that significant, as no one could hear it coming, a reporter said . The reporter told a Department of Defense public relations officer that he did not think the attack was significant . No one heard the attack coming, he said .
 Macy, Destination Baghdad, 19, 20; and Giangreco, Stealth Fighter Pilot, 86. Macy, 18, Macy, 20, Macy . Macy, 17, Macy and Giangreco. 86 . Macy .
 Joe Hughes, ""500 protest war threat at Balboa Park,"" San Diego Tribune, December 24, 1990, sec. Joe Hughes: "500 protest . protest protest war . threat .
 CNN's War in the Gulf, 119, is published by Norman Polmar and Thomas B Allen, F Clifton Berry .
 Saddam Hussein responded in the usual manner of dictators to the night of thunder . Saddam Hussein responds in usual manner to the storm .
 Iraqi Air Force General Muzahim Saab Hassan was arrested and executed . He claimed over a hundred Coalition aircraft had been shot down, and had Iraqi air force arrested .
 Even if the Package Q strike had used LGB, the F-16 force would only have been cut to 16 aircraft, and the tankers to eleven . Even if LGB had been used, the force would have been reduced to just 16 aircraft .
 "If military use known, why wasn't civilian role detected?,"" San Diego Union, February 14, 1991, sec. 1.2.3.5.6.5 .
 As the bunker was being used as a military installation at the time, it would be considered a legitimate target . The bunker would have been considered a military target .
 At least four emblems other than the red cross/red crescent can be placed on civilian shelters to indicate protected status . And, as one letter writer noted, "At least four internationally recognized emblems ... can ... be placed ... to indicate protection status"
 He was driving his fuel truck across the desert when he saw two Iraqis beside an overturned jeep . He said he saw them next to an overturned vehicle . The two Iraqis were found in the desert .
 He never saw an Iraqi officer or NCO; they had fled, abandoning their troops in the desert . The Iraqi officer and NCO had fled .
 David A Fulghum, ""Planners Seek to Exploit United States Technology Lead,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 52. David Fulghumi, "Planners seek to exploit U.S. Technology Lead"
 The navy has yet to build even a first-generation stealth aircraft . The air force is deploying a second generation of stealth aircraft, the B-2 Spirit and F-22 Lightning II .
 When the last A-6 Intruder is retired in 1999, the navy will be without a long-range, all-weather attack aircraft for a decade . The last of the last Intruders to be retired will be in the UK in 1999 .
 Stuart F Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,"" Popular Science (April 1994), 73. Stuart F . Brown, "The Eternal . Airplane" is the name of the plane .
 Michael A Dornheim, ""Raptor/Pathfinder to Test High-Efficiency Propulsion,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology, 60; and Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,” 75. Michael A. Brown, 75.
 Author's examination of the HALSOL-Pathfinder aircraft at the 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show . Author: "HALSOL" was the first aircraft to fly at Edwards AFB air show .
 Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to Curtis Peebles, reference FOIA Request 93-F-2470, February 16, 1994 . Ballistic missile Defense Organization . Ballistic Missile Defence Organization . to Curtis .
 Brown, "The Eternal Airplane,"" 75; and David A Fulghum, "SolarPowered UAV to Fly at Edwards,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 27 .
 Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""Solar-Powered Pathfinder Soars on First Test Flight" NASA videotape of first Pathfinder flight, 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show .
 Author's examination of the HALSOL/Pathfinder at the 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show . Author: "Pathfinder" was the first to fly the aircraft to fly at Edwards AFB .
 Fulghum, "Solar-Powered UAV to Fly at Edwards,"" 27; and Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,"" 100. Brown, "The Eternal airplane,"," 100.
 David A Fulghum, "Scud-Killing UAVs Now Science Tool,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 27.27 .
 Dale Tietz, "Raptor/Talon Briefing,"" Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, 1993; and Dornheim, "Pathfinder to Test HighEfficiency Propulsion,"" 60. Dale Tiez, ""Raptors/Talons Briefings,"
 AeroVironment Inc., ""Backgrounder—Pathfinder Solar-Electric Aircraft,"" 29.5: "Pathfinder solar-electric Aircraft," 29.6: "Solar-electric aircraft" 29: "Airstrikes" is a solar-powered aircraft .
 Conversations with NASA personnel at the Pathfinder display, 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show; and ""Solar-Powered Spy,"" Air and Space (February/March 1994), Il, Il, 12. 12 .
 Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""'Pathfinder' Solar-Electric Unmanned Air Vehicle Data Sheet,"" 1993 . Ballistic missile defense Organization, "Pathfinder" Solar-electric Unmanning Air Vehicle data Sheet," was released .
 Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""Pathfinder Questions and Answers,"" 1993. Ballistic missile Defense Organization. "Pathfinder questions and answers,""
 Murphy, ""AMBER for long endurance,"" 33; and Leading Systems, ""Amber Fact Sheet"" 34 . Murphy, "Amber for long'endurarice,*' 34. Murphy .
 Most extreme example of this was by army intelligence officers in the field . The most extreme example was by the British Army in Afghanistan .
 As late as January 31, 1991, the Republican Guard units were still at 99 percent effectiveness . The result was that as late as 1991, they estimated the Republican Guards were still effective .
 The goal of the Coalition air campaign did not lend itself to easy numerical measurements . The Coalition's goal was to raise awareness of the issue .
 The number of tanks, vehicles, trucks, and artillery pieces destroyed did not determine whether the Iraqi Army would fight or even how well it would fight . The Iraqi Army did not know if it would be able to fight in Iraq, however .
 Iraqi soldiers and their officers should be mindful of the state of mind of Iraqi soldiers, their officers, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Iraqi troops have been fighting in Iraq since 2003 . Iraqi soldiers have been killed in the country's worst-ever conflict with President Obama .
 GNAT-750 was actually part of a family of UAVs with similar designs . GNAT was actually a UAV that was actually one of a series of similar designs.
 The GNAT-BT ‘e""\""J}~""ird3hr'rrdi'fier_) wks besigriea to'train the controllers without risking me bigger UAV‘ 'IVwas 8 feet long and had a 13.
 This is half the size of the GNAT-750 and is rail-launched for short-range reconnaissance . It is rail launched for short range reconnaissance . This is the first of its kind to be launched in the UK .
 The Predator would carry a synthetic aperture radar with a resolution of one foot . The radar would cover an 8,000-foot-wide swath from 25,000 feet . The Predator could be armed with a range of sensors .
 A turret under the nose would also house three electro-optical infrared sensors with a resolution of six feet . The turret would also be equipped with a turret with three infrared sensors .
 The data would be relayed to ground stations via a 30-inch-diameter satellite dish . The satellite dish would be used to relay data from ground stations .
 David A Fulghum, "USAF Stresses UAVs for Recon,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 44.5 . David Fulghumi, "Air Force Stress UAVS. for Recon"
 John D Morrocco, "Pentagon-CIA UAV Gains New Significance,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 28.28.
 David A Fulghum and John D Morrocco, John D. Morroco, and David A. Fulghrum, write, "CIA to Deploy UAVs in Albania,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology .
 The CIA GNAT-750 effort was Tier 1 of a three-part UAV development program . The UAV program is part of a larger UAV effort .
 Ten Predators would be built in a $31. million program, to be fully operational in 30 months . Ten Predators are expected to be built .
 Reports likened the Tier 3, in a broad sense, to an unmanned B2 in terms of size, complexity, and cost . The Tier 3 is a Tier 3 similar to a B2 unmanned aircraft .
 The technology was considered so sensitive that should one have crashed, the wreckage would have been bombed to ensure it was destroyed . The technology would have to be destroyed if one crashed to ensure the wreckage was destroyed.
 The first involved a UAV for broad area coverage for a major regional crisis like the Gulf War . The UAV was used in the first Gulf War, and the second Gulf War involved a similar UAV .
 It would fly at an altitude of 60,000 to 65,000 feet and carry a payload of 1,500 pounds . The plane would be able to fly at a high altitude of up to 70,000 miles .
 The sensor payload would include such equipment as ELINT and multispectral sensors . The payload would be carried out by the Air Force . The mission would be the first to send a payload into space .
 The other is a flying wing UAV with the stealth properties of the original Tier 3, but at a much lower cost . The two new UAVs will be developed in the U.S.
 Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (September 13, 1993), 19.19. 1993. Washington Outlook . Aviation Week: Aviation Week .
 Fulghum and Morrocco: CIA to Deploy UAVs in Albania . Morroco: "Pentagon-CIA UAV Gains New Significance"
 News Breaks, Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 1320, 1993), 21.21. Aviation Week, 21.20, is a weekly feature of Aviation Week .
 Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (February 14, 1994), 19.95, was published by Washington Outlook magazine .
 David A Fulghum, "CIA to Fly Missions from Inside Croatia,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 20, 21. David Fulghrum, ""CIA to fly missions from inside Croatia"
 Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (June 6, 1994), 23.23.94, was published by Washington-based Aviation Week .
 Several sources have claimed that the MiG 21F has a center of gravity problem . Several sources claim that the aircraft has a problem with its center of center gravity . The MiG21F has been classified as a low-tech aircraft .
 With over 25 percent of the fuel still remaining, the safety limit would be exceeded . The safety limit is not currently being met by the government .
 The plane would then pitch up, which the horizontal stabilizers could not counter . The horizontal stabilizer could not stop the plane pitching up . The plane pitch up .
 The use of captured enemy aircraft did not start with Have Doughnut and Have Drill .
 During World War II, the flight line at Wright Field was home to Zeros, ME 109s, FW 190s, and Ju 88s . The flight line was also home to Me 109s and Me 190s during the war .
 The British had a special unit to test-fly captured German planes, while the Germans had examples of nearly every Allied fighter and bomber .
 The German's ""Rosarious Flying Circus" took the captured planes to operational units for dogfight training . The captured planes were used for dogfighting training .
 Selected German pilots were allowed to fly the P-47s and P-Sls . Have Drill was held in the same way as Have Drill .
 The Japanese had examples of United States aircraft, including the B-17, P-40, a P-51, and an F4U Corsair . The Japanese also had an early model B-1917, a B-40 and a P51 .
 During the Korean War, the U.S. tried to get a Soviet MiG 15 pilot to defect, offering $100,000 to defect . The United States tried to recruit the pilot, but he turned down the offer .
 The MiG 15 was flown in simulated attacks on B-36, B-47, F-86D, and F-84F aircraft . The simulated attacks were simulated by the MiG15 .
 The difference between Yak 23, Have Doughnut, Have Drill, and subsequent MiG operations is that the planes were ""acquired"" by secret means, in violation of the export agreement between the Soviet Union and client states .
 If it was done without the knowledge of the client state's government, then the U.S. would not want this publicized . If the government's knowledge is not known, then it would not be publicized . The client state would want this to be publicized, but if it is done
 Intelligence arrangements between governments have always been considered particularly sensitive . Intelligence deals between governments are highly sensitive .
 Armed Forces Journal International (September 1977), 26. The Secret MiG Squadron,"" Armed Forces . Journal International, 26. September 1977 .
 Sources differ on the total number of Israeli air-to-air losses in 1967 . Sources differ as to the number of air losses in Israel .
 Even with this, both the ""reduced"" kill rate and the speed of the war are a stunning contrast to Vietnam . The 'reduced' kill rate is still a huge contrast to the 'Reduced' killing rate in Vietnam .
 Industry Observer, Aviation Week and Space Technology (February 17, 1969), 13.13. 1969. Industry Observer . Aviation Week, 13.17. 1969 .
 This item highlights the problems in reconstructing the history of the U.S. MiG effort .
 It says the MiG 21 was brought to the United States in the spring of 1968 . It says it was brought in the U.S. in spring 1968 .
 It is possible this is a reference to delivery of 007, and the dates may have been confused .
 Marion E Carl, USMC, with Barrett Tillman, Pushing the Envelope , 112.2, is a member of the U.S. Marine Corps. The Marine Corps is currently on a mission to push the envelope .
 Wilcox, Scream of Eagles, 275, 276; and Hollway, ""Showdown between Two Top Guns,"" 43 . Hollway: "Showdown was a show between two Top Guns"
 North Vietnamese have complicated the search for Toon by being unwilling to give a true account of wartime events . The North Vietnamese are unwilling to tell a true story of their wartime exploits .
 They claimed that 16 U.S. planes were shot down on May 10, 1972 . They claimed 16 United States planes shot down in 1972 .
 North Vietnamese claims have major discrepancies as to location and timing . Even when there is a rough match between accounts, there are major discrepancies .
 Robert S Hopkins HI, ""In Search of Colonel Toon,"" Journal of Military Aviation , 22, 23. Robert S. Hopkins HI . Robert S . Hopkins HI. HI, "In Search Of Colonel Toons,""
 The Soviets traditionally looked down on Third-World pilots, but Tuan was described as an equal . He was described by the Soviets as an 'equal' pilot .
 Between 1973 and 1975, he was at the Mary Air Base in the Kara Kum Desert, which was the Soviet counterpart to Red Flag/Top Gun . He was stationed in the desert in the Soviet equivalent of Red Flag .
 Cunningham-Toon dogfight should have an element of controversy should come to no surprise . Cunningham vs. Toon dogfight is a classic dogfight between Cunningham and Toon . Cunningham: "It's not a dogfight. It's a battle between Cunningham, Toon. It
 One need only recall the debate over who shot down the Red Baron or Admiral Yamamoto . One of the key questions is who shot him down in Japan .
 Letters, Aviation Week and Space Technology , 146; and Talkback, Air International , 157. Letters, aviation Week and Technology Technology, 146. Letters and Technology .
 In the three years before the crash, it had logged only 98 hours of flight time . The plane had logged just 98 hours in three years .
 Between March 1984'and the crash, the plane had flown only 7.5 hours—a little more than one hour per week . Between its filial inspection and the crash it had flown 7.6 hours .
 If it was a later-model MiG 21, it would indicate that the Egyptian MiGs were being delivered as early as the summer of 1978 . If it is a later model, it could indicate that Egypt delivered the MiGs in the summer 1978 .
 Peter W Merlin, ""Dreamland—the Air Force's remote test site,"" Aerotech News and Review , 1 . Peter W. Merlin, "Dreamland" is a remote test facility .
 Phil Pattee, "General killed in plane crash," Las Vegas Review-Journal, April 27, 1984, sec. 1984 . General killed in a plane crash .
 The type and serial number of both the aircraft and its engine were deleted from the released text of the report . The type of the aircraft was deleted from being released from the release text .
 Any specific details that might identify what type of plane was involved in the accident were also deleted .
 This allowed the report to be released, even with the extreme secrecy surrounding the MiGs . The report was released even though it was extremely secretive .
 Conversation with student test pilot, Edwards AFB Air Show, October 18, 1992 . Edwards AFB test pilot: "I'm not afraid to fly. I'm scared to fly"
 Letter, Department of the Air Force to Curtis Peebles, February 10, 1993 . Peeblees was a member of the U.S. Air Force .
 Stuart Brown, "Searching for the Secrets of Groom Lake,"" Popular Science , 56, 58 81 . Stuart Brown: "Groom Lake is the only lake in the world to be found in the wild"
 Keith Rogers, ""Budget for hypersonic spy plane rivals Nevada Test Site,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, December 5, 1993, sec. Keith Rogers .
 Keith Rogers, ""Groom Lake toxic burning alleged,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 20, 1994, sec. Keith Rogers . Keith Rogers: Groom Lake "toxic burning" alleged .
 Clarence A Robertson Jr., "Bomber Choices Near,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 18, 22 .
 The July 1986 crash near Bakersfield did not involve a stealth fighter, but rather a plane ""that was more conventional, but just as black,"" or that the stealth fighter would be deployed in flight from a C-5 .
 The rear doors would open, the stealth fighter would be extended out into the airflow on a hook, the wings would unfold, and it would be released . The stealth fighter fighter would then be released into the air, and the wings unfolded .
 Once the mission is completed, another C-5 would make a midair pickup . The mission would take off from a C-4C-5 in midair .
 It also referred to Aurora and the possibility of captured flying saucers at Groom Lake . Aurora was also mentioned in the report .
 Craig Covault, ""Advanced Bomber, Missile in Definition,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 113, 121. Craig Covaults, "Aviation Week" and "Space Technology" is published by Aviation Week .
 This article was the first to use the term ""F-117"" for the stealth fighter . The F-117 was the name of a stealth fighter developed by Lockheed Martin .
 The article claimed aircraft had been developed that could change color to match their background and self-correct battle damage in flight .
 It also claimed that the F-117 did not have an inflight refueling receptacle, as such a fixture could not be made stealthy . It also said that such a refueling device could not have a stealthy refuelling device .
 Elaine de Man, "Shooting the Stealth,"" Air and Space (August/September 1990), 93," 93, is credited with helping to shoot the Stealth . Elaine deMan: "The Stealth" is the first time the Stealth has been shot .
 William B Scott, "Black Programs Must Balance Cost, Time Savings with Public Oversight,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 18, 1989), 42, 43. William B. Scott, ""Black Programs must balance Cost, . Time savings with public oversight," he wrote .
 William B Scott, "Scientists' and Engineers' Dreams Taking to Skies as 'Black' Aircraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 24, 1990), 41, 42. William Scott, ""Scientists' . and Engineers . Dreams taking to skies as 'black' aircraft,""
 "Phantom of the air tracked by Caltech's seismographic network,"" Caltech News . Betsy Woodford, 9.9.01, says it was a "phantom of air tracked" by the network .
 The author understands it is a common practice at some air force and navy bases to deny any knowledge when a sonic boom complaint comes in .
 Bill Sweetman, ""Mystery contact may be Aurora,"" Jane's Defence Weekly , 333. Jane's defence Weekly, 333.
 Christy Campbell, "Secret United States spy plane is Kintyre's dark visitor,"" Sunday Telegraph, July 26, 1992 .
 Bill Sweetman, ""Clues hint of phantom spy plane,"" Antelope Valley Press, March 6, 1992, sec. "Clues hints of phantom plane"
 William B Scott, "New Evidence Bolsters Reports of Secret, HighSpeed Aircraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 63. William B . Scott, ""New evidence bolsters reports of secret, high-speed aircraft,""
 Industry Observer, ""Combined Cycle Powerplant,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 13.13.01 . Aviation Week, 13.01, is the Aviation Week & Space Technology .
 Scott, "New Evidence Bolsters Reports of Secret, High-Speed Aircraft,"" 62, 63. Scott, ""New evidence bolsters" reports of secret, high-speed aircraft . Scott: "New evidence corroborates reports of Secret High-speed Aircraft"
 William B Scott, "Recent Sightings of XB-70-Like Aircraft Reinforce 1990 Reports from Edwards Area,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 23, 24. William B. Scott,  William B . Scott, William B Scott . William Scott, ""Recent Sight
 William B Scott, "Secret Aircraft Encompasses Qualities Of HighSpeed Launcher for Spacecraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (August 24, 1992), 25. Scott, William B Scott . Scott, ""Secret aircraft Encompass Qualities of HighSpeed launcher for Space
 Rice's Media Availability, National Contract Management Association Conference, July 23, 1992, Los Angeles. Rice's Press Conference: "Rice" was held in 1992 . Rice's press conference was held at the same time in Los Angeles .
 William B Scott, ""High Demand Stretches NRO Intelligence Assets"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 52.2 . William Scott, "High Demand" stretches NRO intelligence assets .
 The NRO itself was founded in August 1960, but its existence was not officially acknowledged until the fall of 1992 . NRO was officially acknowledged by the NRO in 1992 .
 The claim that a sonic boom cannot be heard at long range is incorrect . The claim is incorrect, according to the BBC's John Defterios .
 On several occasions in 1985 the author heard the double sonic boom of the space shuttle over Edwards AFB from Long Beach, California . The author heard it several times over the years .
 Steven Aftergood and John E Pike, ""The High Cost of Secrecy,"" Air and Space , 46, 47. Steven aftergood, John Pike, and John Aftergood, write about the high cost of secrecy in secrecy .
 Russ Britt, ""New Dawn for Aurora?,"" Daily News, May 17, 1992, Business sec. News . Russ Britt: Aurora, Colorado, is "a new dawn for Aurora"
 A January 13, 1993, article in Aerospace Daily indicated that the Skunk Works had studied a Mach 45 replacement for the SR-71 during the 1980s . The article said that Skunk works had considered the replacement as impractical as impractical .
 The aircraft would have been about the size of the B-1B, with a long, tapered fuselage . It would have had an intercontinental range, and would have a tapered, long fuselage, and a long range .
 Model depicts spy plane, but Air Force denies it exists,"" The Bakersfleld Californian, November 29, 1993, sec. 1.2.3.4.5.5 .
 A; and Michael Sweeney, ""If you want to see the SR-75, you must settle for the model,"" General Aviation News and Flyer, 1 November 1993, A-30. A.30.
 Model maker's latest guessing game involves Air Force, secret spy planes,"" San Diego Union-Tribune, December 25, 1993, sec. Gary A Warner, "Model maker"
 Shawn Pogatchnik, "Magazine says United States is flying new spy plane,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, Decembers, 1993 .
 Stuart F Brown, "Searching for the Secrets of Groom Lake,"" Popular Science , 54. Stuart F . Brown, ""Searching . for the secrets of the lake's secrets"
 Supposedly the USAF recovered the debris and the bodies of aliens near Corona, New Mexico, in July 1947 . The debris and bodies were recovered from the debris .
 It is possible that the USAF are trying to 'reverse engineer’ the Roswell spacecraft . What people are seeing are examples of man-made copies of alien craft .
 It is possible what they are seeing is conventional secret stealth prototype aircrafts of earthly origin . However it is also possible what is happening is conventional stealth aircrafts .
 The author had received copies of this person's saucer designs long before they were published .
 Betsy Woodford, "Phantom of the air tracked by Caltech's seismograph network,"" Caltech News , 9.9.01 . She says it's a "phantom of air" tracked by the Caltech network .
 Author's printout of computer messages, America Online, June 26 to October 15, 1993 . America Online was America Online's most popular site .
 There was quite a controversy over whether it was a good idea to discuss Black projects, like Aurora, in so public a forum . Aurora is one of the first Black projects to be held in a public forum .
 Rereading the printout indicates the material came from published accounts and rumors . Black buff rumors were based on published accounts .
 A September 19 message claimed people at the site wear ""foggles"" to prevent them from seeing anything other than the project they are working on . One example of this was a September 19 post that claimed people would wear "foggles"
 Foggles are standard safety goggles with the plastic scratched so you can see only your feet . Foggles come with a scratch-scrilled plastic so you don't have to wear them to protect yourself .
 The author should note that the vast majority of Aurora sightings were made in good faith . Aurora sightings have been made in a good faith by the author .
 I have talked personally with four people who heard the ""Aurora roar,"" and I have no doubt they are honestly describing what they experienced . I have spoken to four people personally .
 The problem, as with UFOs, is that the sky has an infinite number of tricks of light and shadow . The problem is that it has an endless number of trick tricks of shadow .
 The real Black airplane was the HALSOL, a plane made of clear plastic and styrofoam, that could be outrun by an electric golf cart . It is ironic that in 1983, as the stories of super-high-speed airplane stories were spreading, the real Black
 Warren Bennett, Commander 554th Range Squadron, Caliente Land Withdrawal Hearing, January 31, 1994 . Warren Bennett was commander of the 554rd Range Squadron .
 Industrial Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (April 18, 1994), 13.13. 1994: Industrial Outlook. Industrial Outlook . Industrial Outlook: Industrial Week and Aviation Week . Aviation Week: 13. 13.
 ABC News Groom Lake transcript, quoted in The Groom . Desert Rat, no.A, April 20, 1994. ABC News transcript .
 The broadcast did not include the statement about the ""New World Order"" or the reading from the Koran . The broadcast was broadcast without the statement .
 The resulting impression of the hearings was less colorful than the actual event . The hearings were held in Washington, DC .
 This chapter is a revised version of a speech given at the 7th Annual Technical Symposium of the Eglin Chapter of the Association of Old Crows, October 16, 1996 . wish to thank them for their interest, hospitality, and the chance to meet the people who made the history
 This is actually Chapter 6 of the CIA's official history of the U-2 program . The CIA says the program was a success story for the U.2 .
 It was declassified separately, and is not included in the published version of the U-2 history .
 Whoever came up with the code name ""Senior Prom"" must be found and stopped .
 Barry Barry, 69, Goodaster, Gen Andrew, 38, Goudey, Ray, 30, Grace, Frank, 35, Grant, Lt. Andrew, 35 . Barry Barry Barry Goodaster was 69 . Goodaster died at the age of 38 .