 Photograph of George De Mohrenschildt and photograph of James Jesus Angleton courtesy Wide World .
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data Epstein, Edward Jay, 1935 . Epstein was named Edward Jay in 1935 .
 I have corrected the spelling and grammatical errors in all direct quotations from material written by Oswald, except as noted . I have, for the convenience of the reader, corrected the . reader's .
 The bullet that killed President John F Kennedy in Dallas exploded in the inner sanctums of five intelligence agencies . Five agencies had dealings with or surveillance of Oswald only weeks before the 1963 assassination .
 Oswald defected to the Soviet Union in 1959, offering to supply military secrets of ‘special interest’ He had served as a radar operator in the U.S. Marines . The KGB’s involvement with Oswald traced back to 1959, when he defected .
 Oswald met with a Soviet intelligence officer in Mexico City just eight weeks before his assassination . Oswald had met with the officer eight weeks prior to his assassination in Mexico .
 Oswald applied at the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City for a visa to go to Cuba in September 1963 . Cuba’s DGI had dealings with Oswald in 1963 .
 On October 15 Havana ordered its embassy in Mexico to grant a Cuban visa to Oswald as soon as he obtained a Soviet entrance visa . Havana ordered the Cuban embassy to grant the Cuban passport to Oswald in Mexico .
 Following the assassination, DGI instructed its officers around the world to remain within their respective embassies and to segregate and seal all DGI files .
 The CIA had surveillance equipment that electronically monitored Oswald’s contacts with both the Soviet and Cuban embassies in Mexico City . Oswald had contacts with the embassies of both the Soviets and Cuba .
 Oswald contacted a known Soviet intelligence officer who was then handling Soviet espionage operations against the U.S. The CIA field office notified headquarters in Washington and informed FBI agents stationed in Mexico of Oswald’s activities . Oswald contacted the officer, who was involved in Soviet espionage against the United States
 The Office of Naval Intelligence had been interested in Oswald’s activities ever since 1959 . It had received a telegram from the naval attache in Moscow warning that Oswald might be supplying military secrets to the Soviet Union .
 Marines who had served with him were interrogated, the damage caused by his defection was assessed . codes and signals that he had had access to were changed . Marines who served with the defector were interrogated .
 The CIA had urgently requested a photograph of Oswald to compare with those of individuals entering and leaving the Cuban and Soviet embassies in Mexico City . In October 1963 the CIA had asked for the photograph to be compared to those of those leaving the embassies .
 The FBI had, at the time of the assassination, had an open security case on Oswald . Oswald was the subject of an FBI investigation into the assassination of the president .
 Oswald had written to the Soviet Embassy in Washington stating that he had traveled to Mexico under an alias and had '‘business” with the Embassy in Cuba . On November 18 it had intercepted a letter Oswald had sent to the embassy in Washington .
 Oswald delivered a threatening note to the FBI office in Dallas in November . Oswald had also delivered a threat note to FBI in Dallas . Oswald also delivered threatening notes to FBI office .
 The agent handling the case in Dallas knew that he was working in a building on the President’s route . And the agent handled the case knew he was in the building .
 Files had been kept on his subterranean activities since he had redefected to the United States in 1962 .
 The possibility had to be considered that the intelligence services had shredded their more embarrassing files on Oswald . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 .
 Intelligence officers were not likely to be forthcoming in divulging informa . In any case, intelligence officers would not be forthcoming .
 Oswald's activities had to be answered about the hidden influences in his life . Yet, to explicate the activities of Oswald prior to the assassination, questions must be answered . Oswald had a history of political and personal influences .
 CNN's John Sutter interviewed more than a dozen U.S. intelligence officers and executives involved in this particular case .
 More than 10,000 pages of previously classified documents have been released under the Freedom of Information Act .
 Oswald defected to the Soviet Union two months after his release from active duty in the Marines . The most vexing question was why Oswald would defect to Soviet Union .
 Oswald served with Marines in Japan and the Far East . Finding the answer required locating and interviewing about seventy Marines Oswald had served with in Japan . Oswald served in Japan, Far East and Japan .
 Oswald's two and a half years in the Soviet Union also presented a void . Oswald’s two-and-a-half years in Russia were also a void. Oswald spent time in Soviet Union .
 The Warren Commission had not obtained any statements from Soviet citizens Oswald had met in Minsk and Moscow . Oswald met with Soviet citizens he had met . Oswald had never met with any Soviet citizens . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 The request was turned down, as it was explained by Andrei Gromyko, the Foreign Minister, because none of the witnesses wanted to be interviewed . The request is turned down because of the lack of interviews with witnesses .
 Through Freedom of Information requests, it was possible to obtain the CIA “traces’—investigations of—Soviet citizens with whom Oswald had been in contact .
 When Oswald returned to the United States in 1962, files were maintained on his movements and correspondence by a number of agencies, including the FBI, Immigration and Naturalization Service, State Department and New Orleans Police Department .
 Oswald XIV PREFACE associated with a fairly extensive number of people involved in political activities of one kind or another . In the fifteen months in Fort Worth, Dallas and New Orleans before the assassination, Oswald XIV was associated with numerous political activities .
 After he was identified as the President’s assassin, many of these people understandably did not want further to associate themselves publicly with him . Many of the people who have been associated with him have not been identified publicly .
 It was necessary to find and interview as many of Oswald’s associates as possible . Yet to delineate this netherworld of contacts, it was necessary .
 By far the most important associate of Oswald during this period turned out to be George De Mohrenschildt . He was one of Oswald's most important associates in the early years .
 De Mohrenschildt himself was subject of a seven-year FBI investigation . He was suspected of having associated with at least four different intelligence services .
 In April 1963 the CIA initiated another security check on his activities . The CIA also initiated a security check in April 1963 .
 In March 1977 I arranged to have a four-day interview with him in Palm Beach, Florida, Florida . The interview took place in March 1977 .
 On the second day of the interviews he went for lunch to the home where he was staying arid two hours later was found shot to death in what appeared to be a suicide . He had been staying in a home in arid and appeared to have committed suicide .
 Oswald's death has left a gap in Oswald’s secret world that will probably never be completely filled in . Oswald's secret world will never be fully filled in, says the author .
 This book has benefited enormously from the research and fact checking done by Pamela Butler . Pamela Butler is the author of the book, which is published by Simon Cowan .
 As chief researcher for this project, she has worked for two years, arranging interviews, organizing the chronology, doing historical and newspaper research . She has carefully scrutinized the final manuscript .
 I am also indebted to Rhoda Leichter, who meticulously resolved problem areas in Oswald’s chronology . Rhoda did much of the original research on his early history and defection to the Soviet Union .
 Lys Chuck, Nina Georges-Picot, Marilyn Reeves and Marilyn Reeves have all assisted in the interviewing of witnesses . Lys Chuck has been interviewed by Marilyn Reeves, Lys Chuck and Marilyn Chuck .
 Oswald served with Marines in Japan and California and worked with Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall in Dallas . One of the most difficult tasks in this project was locating the Marines who had served with Oswald in Japan .
 Without the help of Henry Hurt, this book could not have approached some of the more vexing issues of Oswald’s defection . Henry Hurt found and interviewed dozens of witnesses .
 Oswald served in the Marines under John Donovan, one of the officers PREFACE xv under whom Oswald served . Oswald also served under Donovan under whom he was a Marine .
 Invaluable assistance was given by Colonel James Granger of the United States Marine Corps in tracking down witnesses, interpreting Marine records .
 The records of the CIA and FBI investigations of Oswald could not have been reconstructed without extensive use of the Freedom of Information statute . I am grateful to David O Fuller, Jr. for filing these actions for me .
 Marion Johnson and the staff of the National Archives worked tirelessly to provide copies of documents in the Archives’ Oswald file . They allowed me to develop and print many of the photographs that Oswald had taken. Marion Johnson worked tirelessly .
 I would also like to thank William Gunn of the FBI for locating documents on Oswald in the FBI's archives .
 The index of the Warren Commission’s hearings and exhibits was done by Sylvia Meagher . Meagher was an invaluable guide to the labyrinthine twenty-six volumes . The index was a guide to all the hearings, exhibits and exhibits .
 I am thankful for the professional assistance of Thea Stein Lewinson, who did a psychological assessment of Oswald’s handwriting . Joseph McNally identified typewriters that Oswald had used, and W David Slawson, who advised on procedures which the Warren Commission used in its investigation
 I am deeply appreciative of Dorothy Pratt for her intelligent typing of the manuscript, and of Rosalie Joy, who administered the finances for this project . I also benefited enormously from the insights and experience of Jones Harris, especially as they pertain to Oswald's service in Japan .
 Nancy Lanoue undertook the formidable task of coordinating the research and the manuscript . The manuscript is published in the book, which will be published in 2015 .
 She resolved many of the most difficult research problems and made substantial contributions to the text, footnotes and appendices . She also resolved many difficult problems .
 The research for this book could not have been done without the support of the Reader’s Digest .
 Edward T Thompson has supported this project since its inception both XVI PREFACE as a perceptive editor, and by making available whatever resources I needed . Edward T. Thompson has been a strong supporter of XVI PREPLAY since it began .
 John Pinitzitza and Ursula Naccache conducted background investigations in Europe and Japan . Ko Shioya in Japan conducted background interviews in Europe, Japan .
 In turning a rough manuscript into a finished book, I am indebted to the sage editorial advice of Steven Frimmer . In turning this book into a novel, I'm indebted to him for his editorial advice .
 Fulton Oursler, Jr. Jr. is the one person whose support for this project has been constant, Fulton says . Fulton's support for the project is constant, he says .
 He has contributed to almost every phase of the project, including research, interviewing, and organization of the book .
 "I am most indebted to him for his deeply perceptive editing of the manuscript. By far, however, he is most . I am most . indebted to . him for the editing of this manuscript .
 Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko stepped off an Aeroflot jet in Geneva on January 20, 1964 . He would never again see his home in Moscow or the wife and two children he had left behind . He left behind a wife, two children and a wife .
 He passed easily through Swiss passport control with his diplomatic documents .
 He followed closely behind Semyon K Tsarapkin, the head of the delegation . The delegation is currently in Russia .
 In minutes they were speeding through fog along the highway connecting the airport and downtown Geneva . In minutes, the team was speeding along a highway linking the airport to downtown Geneva.
 To their left was the glass and concrete structure of the Palais des Nations . The seventeen-nation disarmament conference was due to convene the next day . It was the first of a series of disarmament talks scheduled to take place .
 Nosenko spent almost four months in and around the building during another disarmament conference in June 1962 . He spent four months there during the meeting rooms .
 The limousine stopped in front of the Rex Hotel, where the Soviet delegation was staying . The hotel is where the delegation is staying .
 After seeing Tsarapkin to his room, Nosenko decided to take a short walk . After seeing him to his hotel, he decided to go for a walk .
 On a side street he stopped at a pay phone and dialed the telegraph service . He dialed it up to a telegram service .
 The coded message he dictated sounded innocuous enough when the operator read it back . The operator's coded message was read back by the operator . It was not the first coded message to be read back .
 With that message Nosenko had set in motion a series of events that would profoundly affect the Western intelligence community for more than a decade . With that information, the CIA was able to gain access to the world's intelligence community .
 A division within the CIA had been waiting for his telegram for nineteen months . The CIA was waiting for him to arrive in New York City .
 During disarmament conference in Geneva, Nosenko had contacted the CIA and offered to act as a spy for the U.S. when he returned to Russia . Since that time he had not been heard from, some suspicions had developed about his motivations .
 No one in the CIA could have predicted the furor that his reappearance would cause . But no one in CIA could've predicted the furoor .
 No one could have known that Nosenko was about to present information that would accelerate the deterioration of relationships between the CIA and the FBI .
 Nosenko was born on October 30, 1927, in Nikolayev, Russia . According to this dossier, he was born in 1927 .
 When he died in 1956, the most important leaders of the Soviet Union, including Nikita Khrushm, formed the guard of honor at his funeral bier . He was then buried in the Kremlin wall .
 Since the age of twenty-two Nosenko had served in Soviet intelligence . The dossier, based primarily on Nosenkos’s 1962 statements, noted that he had served as a Soviet intelligence officer .
 In 1949 he joined Soviet naval intelligence . In the early fifties he served in the Far East, training Japanese prisoners of war . He was to be sent back to Japan as Soviet agents .
 His job entailed monitoring the activities of first American correspondents and then military attaches in Moscow . His job was to monitor first American journalists and then Russian military attaches .
 In 1955 he was transferred to the Tourist Department, which specialized in compromising and recruiting foreign visitors to Moscow . In 1955, he became a member of the Russian tourist department .
 Nosenko, at the age of thirty, was appointed deputy chief of the AmericanBritish Section . He was appointed Deputy Chief of the British Section at the time .
 A year later he was given a special commendation by the chairman of the KGB for operations which resulted in the compromising of American visitors to Moscow . The KGB chairman also gave him a special commendation .
 In January 1960 Nosenko was transferred back to the American Department to work against personnel at the American Embassy . He was transferred in January 1960 to work with American Embassy personnel .
 From February to June 1962, he was attached to the Soviet disarmament delegation in Geneva as chief security officer . From February until June 1962 he was chief security official in Geneva . He served in Geneva between February and June 1962 .
 It was then that he first contacted an American diplomat and asked to be taken to see a CIA officer . It was the first time he had been taken to the CIA .
 Only hours after Nosenko’s message was received, a case officer from the CIA was on a jet plane headed for 6/LEGEND .
 On January 23, in the Palais des Nations, William C Foster proposed a freeze on the production, development and testing of nuclear weapons .
 His Soviet counterpart, Tsarapkin, extended his lantern jaw and listened passively to the Russian translation of the proposal . The proposal was approved by the Soviet Union, which has been in the process of building a Soviet Union in Russia .
 Sometime during this tedious session Nosenko slipped out of the room and hailed a taxi . "I don't want to be in the middle of this," she says .
 The case officer waited with one other Russian-speaking agent from the CIA in a quiet apartment in a suburb of Geneva . The CIA case officer and the other agent waited in the apartment .
 These quarters had been rented and maintained over the years for just such a special visitor . These quarters were rented out to just such an important visitor .
 Case officer recognized Nosenko sauntering into the room . Case officer recognizes the case officer from the room.
 He was a powerfully built man, about six feet tall, with a massive jaw and brooding eyes set deep in their sockets . He was also a powerful six-foot-tall man .
 CIA's counterintelligence staff briefed him on the full context of the Nosenko case . He did not tell the Russian that he had been briefed for three days and nights on the case .
 He now realized that it was far more complicated than he had ever imagined, and there was a possibility that this KGB officer was not all he claimed to be . He now realizes that there is a possibility he may not be all he said he was .
 He was willing to turn over important information to the CIA . He also wanted to defect from the Soviet delegation in Geneva and go to the United States .
 He had decided, he explained, that he could no longer live in Soviet society . He said he had decided to move out of the country .
 Nosenko had stated that he had a wife and children in Moscow and could never consider defecting from Russia . At MESSAGE from MOSCAVE FROM MOSCOW / 7 their 1962 meeting .
 Nosenko discussed one or two Soviet intelligence operations that had come to his attention . He then dropped a completely unexpected bombshell, revealing what had been a secret .
 Less than two months had passed since the Kennedy assassination and the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby . Jack Ruby was killed by Oswald in Dallas, Texas, in August .
 Rumors about the killings commanded ever-increasing columns of newsprint and commentary on radio and TV broadcasts . Rumors of the killings continued to rise in the 1980s .
 President Lyndon B Johnson to convene a commission of inquiry under Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren . The inquiry was led by the Supreme Court chief Justice of Justice Warren .
 The death of Oswald had left a wide-open void in the assassination case . Oswald's death left the case wide open, but the case has never been solved .
 A Marine, born in New Orleans, defected to the Soviet Union in September 1959 . He was a twenty-year-old Marine who had received an early discharge .
 It noted that he had resided in Minsk for about two and one-half years . It said he had lived in the city for two and a half years .
 After marrying a Soviet citizen named Marina Prusakova, he brought her back with him to the U.S. in June 1962 . He brought her with him back to the United States in June .
 U.S. intelligence agencies have been unable to answer key questions about why Oswald defected in the first place . Key questions include whether relations existed between Oswald and Soviet intelligence and whether any legend was prepared by the KGB for Oswald’s return to America .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter John Sutter in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com for next week’s Travel .
 Nosenko explained that the KGB had not heard of Oswald until he appeared in Moscow . Oswald told his Intourist guide that he intended to renounce his American citizenship and seek Soviet citizenship .
 His interrogator listened keenly, not knowing what would come next in the story . He listened to his interrogator listen keenly to know what was next .
 There was a pause, and he asked what the KGB had finally decided about Oswald . Oswald had been the subject of a series of investigations .
 Nosenko shrugged and answered, “She already had antiSoviet characteristics.” She said: “I'm not surprised that she had anti-Soviet characteristics."
 Nosenko stated with a great deal of assurance that neither Oswald nor Marina had ever been recruited or even approached by the KGB as possible agents . Oswald and Marina had never been approached by KGB agents, he said . Oswald was never approached as a possible agent, he added .
 Nosenko advised that Oswald should not be let back in the Soviet Union . Oswald should never be allowed back in Soviet Union, he said .
 The interrogating team in Geneva immediately relayed Nosenko’s story to Langley . Langley is now working with the U.S. State Department .
 The President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren, was just about to begin its hearings . The Warren Commission, popularly known as the Warren Commission was about to start hearings .
 The other six members of the commission were Congressmen Hale Boggs and Gerald Ford; Senators Richard Russell and John Sherman Cooper . Allen Dulles, the Director of the CIA until 1962; and John McCloy, the former High Commissioner of Germany .
 Originally it was thought that the commission would have to do little more than hear the testimony of a few key witnesses and validate the results of the FBI investigation . The commission was expected to hear testimony of key witnesses .
 By January 1964, it was decided in executive session by the members of the commission that if its report were to be credible, it would have to conduct its own investigation . The commission decided in January 1964 that the investigation would be conducted by the commission .
 If Nosenko's account were true, the CIA realized, it could deliver a witness who could answer questions about Oswald’s missing years in Russia . The CIA realized that the witness could answer the vexing questions .
 The Soviet Russia Division immediately began sorting through Nosenko’s story .
 Oswald's diary had already been leaked to the press, and even if it had not, there was always the possibility that it had been prepared in Moscow for Oswald as part of a legend . But the diary was already leaked, and there is always a possibility it was prepared for Oswald .
 The Soviet Russia Division concluded that it could not be used to confirm Nosenko’s account . It thus could not confirm the account, it said .
 Closer scrutiny of Nosenko’s story revealed some troublesome omissions . The story has been scrutinized closely by CNN iReport .
 Nosenko had not provided any description of the investigation that the KGB would have routinely undertaken to check out various details in Oswald’s story in 1959, when he first applied for Soviet residence .
 In other cases, the CIA knew, the KGB conducted extensive investigations to establish the subject’s bona fides, including even the clandestine examination of records and files in the U.S. In other such cases, CIA knew .
 Oswald contacted the Soviet Embassy in Washington before his trip to Mexico . The CIA knew from FBI surveillance that on two separate occasions Oswald had contacted the embassy in Washington . Oswald's visit to Mexico was the first time Oswald had been in Mexico .
 In Geneva, Nosenko slipped away from the Soviet delegation and went to the CIA safe house . In Geneva a few days later he slipped away again to go to a safe house by the CIA . The CIA had been working with the Soviet government in Geneva .
 Nosenko says he won't rule out such a possibility . He says he's not sure if he will be able to prove otherwise .
 He could therefore testify from his firsthand inspection of the complete files that the KGB had no connection to Oswald . He could also testify that he could not have any connection to the Oswald family . The KGB was not involved in Oswald's assassination .
 Nosenko’s offer to defect troubled Richard M Helms, who, as Deputy Director of Plans of the CIA, actually managed the entire covert side of that intelligence agency . Helms was the CIA's deputy director of Plans, and oversaw covert operations .
 A tall, elegant man with a quiet voice and piercing eyes, Helms had worked in intelligence for more than a quarter of a century .
 Under Allen Dulles, Helms had administered and coordinated most of the secret work of the agency . Helms was elevated to his present position when Dulles retired in 1962 .
 As he reviewed the startling development in Geneva, Helms realized that it presented a potentially explosive situation . Helms: "It presented a potential explosive situation"
 If Nosenko’s account of Oswald in Russia proved credible, it could solve a very serious problem for the Warren Commission . The U.S. government has a serious problem to solve .
 If Nosenko turned out to be a Soviet-controlled agent sent over to misinform the CIA and the Warren Commission, some members of the CIA’s counterintelligence staff feared, the sky could fall in on Soviet-American relations . On the other hand, if N
 At the very least, it would suggest that the Soviets were going to great lengths to contrive a legend about Oswald’s residence in the Soviet Union . Oswald lived in Moscow, Russia, during the time of his death .
 At the most . . . But that was a possibility Helms did not want to think about . At the least .
 Helms knew that he had little choice but to authorize the defection of Nosenko . Despite these considerations, Helms made a decision to approve the move .
 A Soviet intelligence officer who claimed knowledge of a missing area in the Oswald case simply could not be ignored or turned back to the Russians . The case was never solved or solved by the Soviets or anyone else .
 For the short term, Helms decided that Nosenko should be persuaded to remain a defector in place . He would remain in his present position in the KGB but work MESSAGE FROM MOSCOW under CIA control .
 At a later date, if his information proved out, he would be allowed to defect to the U.S. At a future date, he could be allowed back to the United States .
 FBI and Warren Commission would be fully apprised of the statements Nosenko had made about Oswald . Meanwhile, the FBI and the Warren Commission had been briefed on the statements . Oswald was killed in the September 4, 1918, assassination .
 Marina Oswald, the wife of the accused assassin, was the first witness for the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission was meeting in Washington, D.C. on February 3 to hear her testimony .
 As the session began, she smiled timidly at the Chief Justice and told him that he reminded her of her own grandfather .
 Nosenko was the only witness it had who could cast some light on the murky relations Oswald seemed to have had with Soviet authorities during his stay in Russia . She was one of only witnesses who could shed light on murky relations with the Soviet authorities .
 Nosenko claimed to have just received a recall telegram from his superiors at the KGB center requiring him to be on a plane to Moscow on February 4 .
 In his opinion, such a telegram might mean that he was suspected of dealing with the Americans, he said . The telegram may have been sent to the Americans .
 If he returned, therefore, he risked being arrested, tortured and even executed . If he went back, he would have been arrested and tortured, he could be executed .
 He had no choice, he told his CIA interrogators; his escape had to be arranged on or before February 4 . He told interrogators he was forced to leave the U.S. on February 4; he said he would escape on that date .
 At Langley, Helms realized that the recall telegram gave him no alternative . Helms was forced to withdraw from his post .
 The CIA could not afford to lose a potential14 / LEGEND ly valuable witness to Oswald’s activities in the Soviet Union . The CIA would not have been able to lose the witness .
 McCone authorized Helms to bring Nosenko out of Switzerland . McCone immediately authorized the move . Helms was the president of the CIA .
 Tsarapkin: Soviet Union growing increasingly pessimistic about the hopes of reaching an accord on nuclear delivery vehicles . At the Palais des Nations, he complained that the Soviet Union was growing increasingly pessimist .
 He demanded that the United States agree to the Soviet proposal for the elimination of all foreign bases in Europe before the USSR would even consider further the U.S. proposal . The Soviet proposal was rejected .
 At lunch the Soviet delegate noticed an empty chair in the dining room . At lunch he noticed the empty chair at the table .
 Nosenko sat back, smoked an American cigarette and checked his watch . Meanwhile, in a car miles away, headed for Germany, he sat back and smoked a cigarette . Meanwhile in the car, he was heading for Germany .
 He knew that soon Soviet security personnel would begin the search for him . Soviet security forces would begin to search for the missing man .
 The KGB center in Moscow would send cables to the KGB advising he was missing . First, the delegates’ lounges at the Palais des Nations, then the Rex Hotel, where they would search his room .
 The CIA had very efficiently provided him with the necessary documents for the border crossing . The CIA provided him the documents to the border .
 These agencies constituted what was loosely called the intelligence community, and they had to be apprised of defectors . These agencies had to inform each other of defections .
 The Director of Central Intelligence was empowered by Congress to bring a limited number of defectors to the United States on his own authority, but consultation with MESSAGE FROM MOSCOW was the accepted practice .
 When another KGB officer defected in 1961, the FBI was not immediately informed . The FBI did not immediately know when another defected from the KGB .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover exploded, demanding to know why he hadn’t been informed . Later, when he found out about this defector, J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI Director, exploded . The FBI Director demanded to be informed about the defector .
 Relations between the two agencies are becoming increasingly strained . Relations between Russia and the U.S. have been strained for years .
 The FBI, not the CIA, should control all parts of the debriefing pertinent to Oswald or the Kennedy assassination . The FBI should take control of all debriefings pertinent to the Oswald or Kennedy assassination, he says .
 No questions about Oswald were to be put to Nosenko without prior FBI approval . No questions were allowed to be asked about Oswald by the FBI . Oswald was killed in November 1963 . Oswald's death was the first known assassination of President Kennedy .
 Hoover wanted to know why Oswald was not on any of the FBFs security indices, which included more than 20,000 names of potentially disloyal individuals in the U.S. Hoover had asked why Oswald had not been on the FBF security indices . Hoover had wanted to find out
 Oswald had defected to the Soviet Union, offered military secrets, attempted to renounce his citizenship . After his return, he consistently told demonstrable lies to the FBI agents who had interviewed him . Oswald was known to have defected, offered secrets, tried to deny citizenship and lied to
 He refused to submit to a lie-detector examination on his relations with Soviet intelligence . He had maintained contact with the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 The FBI knew through a double agent that Kostikov wasn’t merely a consular officer of the embassy; he was a high-level KGB officer . He was heavily involved in controlling saboteurs in Mexico and the United States .
 Oswald evaded surveillance cameras when he entered the embassy to meet Kostikov . Oswald had evaded cameras in order to evade surveillance cameras at the time .
 Afterward he wrote the Soviet Embassy in Washington that during his trip he had been traveling under a false name . He was unable to complete his business “with Comrade Kostin” because of a mixup .
 The CIA was unable to determine whether this ‘Kostin’ was another name for Kostikov, as it suspected, or an entirely different Russian, operating out of Mexico City . The CIA couldn't determine whether Kostin was another Russian, or a different Russian
 Oswald had dealings with Soviet officials in Mexico, Cuba and Washington . The letter suggested that Oswald had been involved in some undercover dealings with the Soviets .
 Hoover believed these findings had to be suppressed, and kept secret, if the FBI were to survive . Hoover believed that these findings must be suppressed . Hoover thought that the FBI had to survive if it was to survive in order to keep the FBI alive .
 Oswald's connections with Soviet intelligence, even if unrelated to the assassination, could not be raised . This meant that questions concerning Oswald’s connections with . Soviet intelligence could not have been raised .
 President Johnson did not even know the FBI had an ongoing and open security case involving Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 As long as the public could be convinced that Oswald was a lone crackpot, uninvolved in any espionage or subversive activity, the FBI wouldn't be held accountable for not keeping him under surveillance . The FBI wouldn’t be held responsible for keeping Oswald under surveillance, the author says
 If the newly appointed Warren Commission suggested that Oswald had any involvement with Soviet or Cuban intelligence, no matter how irrelevant it was to his killing of the President, then there would be no way to keep the FBI’s mishandling of the investigation of Oswald prior to the assassination secret .
 FBI's interest lay in concealing, rather than revealing, any hint of Soviet involvement . By an odd twist of fate, the FBI’s interest in the case was to conceal, not reveal, Soviet involvement.
 Hoover ordered the FBI to “leak’s conclusions that the Warren Commission had a chance to meet . Hoover ordered that the U.S. Department of Public Service would not meet with the commission .
 Hoover again had to make sure that no revelations exploded in the FBI’s face . Now, with Nosenko in a position to elaborate on relations the KGB had had with Oswald, Hoover had to keep quiet .
 He ordered William Sullivan, the assistant director of the bureau, to check the bureau’s sources to see what could be learned about this defector . The defector is a former CIA operative who worked for the CIA .
 In Germany, Nosenko waited for the plane that was to fly him to America . In America, he waited for a plane to take him to the United States .
 He was driven directly from Switzerland to a safe house on the outskirts of Frankfurt . He had been driven directly to the safe house .
 He signed the various papers his CIA case officer thrust in front of him . He signed them up for the mission .
 He was told that these constituted his official request for political asylum . He was also told that they constituted his request to be granted asylum .
 Yuri I Nosenko defected from the Soviet disarmament delegation and was now in the United States . He was granted political asylum in Washington, D.C., where he had been granted asylum . The U.S. State Department said he defected in February .
 Both Soviet and Swiss representatives in Washington would be permitted to speak with the former KGB officer . They would be able to assure their respective governments that he had come to America of his own free will .
 Tsarapkin denounced the Americans in scathing terms for having ‘kidnapped” Nosenko . He had only two days earlier reported his disappearance to the Swiss authorities . The U.S. is accused of kidnapping the Russian journalist .
 In Moscow, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko accused Western intelligence agents of having lured Nosenko to the U.S. In Moscow he called United States Ambassador Foy Kohler into the Kremlin and accused him .
 A woman, identifying herself as Nosenko’s wife, appeared at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow . She appealed to Nosenkos to return to his loved ones . The woman, apparently with the knowledge of Soviet authorities, appeared in the embassy .
 The apparent importance of Nosenko’s defection was unlined by the flurry of telegrams recalling Soviet diplomats to Moscow from the capitals of Europe, presumably to discuss the revelations .
 Khrushchev personally reprimanded his top security officers for allowing the defection . Reports from Eastern Europe that Premier Khrrushchev “blew his top” over the case . The defection was a major embarrassment for the Soviet Union .
 In Washington, Nosenko’s case officer accompanied him to Raleighs haberdashery and waited while he picked out a wardrobe of American clothes .
 When he first made contact with him in Geneva in 1962, he thought he had recruited an extremely valuable agent who would work for the CIA in Moscow in Moscow .
 For only $300 in cash and the promise that additional money would be held for him in an account in the West, Nosenko had given elaborate information on several major Soviet operations . He was offered $300 cash and $300 more in cash .
 In 1964, circumstances had involved Nosenko in the Oswald case and brought him to America . Now, in 1964, he had been brought to the U.S. by the CIA .
 The defector showed very little interest in the country he had fled to, as far as his case officer could see . Oddly enough, the defector's case officer said he showed no interest in his country .
 Nosenko also showed some reluctance to discuss in detail KGB operations .
 A trip to Hawaii was arranged for him, with the idea that a vacation might make him more amenable to questions . The trip was arranged to Hawaii since he showed interest in escaping the cold .
 Nosenko returned to Virginia, the case officer noted, but his manner had not changed . The case officer said that when he returned, his manner remained unchanged .
 In Washington Hoover read the reports of the CIA debriefing of Nosenko in Geneva with mounting interest . Hoover: "In Washington, Washington, the CIA has been watching the reports from Geneva" Hoover: The CIA is watching the debriefings of the Russian spy .
 Nosenko's account supported the FBI’s conclusion that Oswald was not involved in any sort of espionage activity . The FBI concluded Oswald did not engage in any espionage activity in any form of espionage .
 Nosenko indicated that the KGB had determined Oswald was “not normal,” which fitted in well with Hoover’s hypothesis . Nosenkos indicated that Oswald was determined to be ‘not normal” by the KGB . Oswald was not normal .
 20 / LEGEND Nosenko’s story exonerated not only the KGB, but also the FBI by proving that Oswald was not a Soviet agent . In a very real sense, the story exonerates the KGB and the FBI in the case of Oswald .
 The FBI had one source, code named Fedora, who was so secret and sensitive that his identity was not immediately disclosed to the CIA . The identity of Fedora, code Fedora, was not disclosed to CIA, nor was enough contextual information about him turned over to CIA .
 Hoover sent reports based on Fedora’s information directly to the White House . Hoover sent the reports to show the effectiveness of his bureau's intelligence gathering, Hoover said .
 Fedora was an officer of the First Chief Directorate of the KGB . He had the mission of collecting information on science and technology from Soviet espionage networks in the U.S. In his initial meetings with the FBI, Fedora explained that he was a KGB officer .
 Fedora claimed to be disaffected with the Soviets, and offered to supply the FBI with secret information on Soviet missile capacity and nuclear development plans . Fedora claimed he was disaffected, however, to have been disaffected by the Soviets .
 Fedora was also able to confirm two important parts of Nosenko’s story . Fedora was able to also confirm two other parts of the story .
 Nosenko was a lieutenant colonel in the KGB, with access to extraordinarily valuable information . He told FBI contact that he had received a recall telegram from Moscow ordering him back on February 4 .
 FBI agents Maurice A Taylor, Donald E Walter and Alekso Poptanich arrived to question Nosenko about the Kennedy assassination and Oswald . On February 26, the FBI agents interviewed Nosenkos about the assassination . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Poptanich, of Ukrainian origin, spoke fluent Russian and translated for Nosenko . He spoke of his experiences in Russia and translated the book .
 Oswald had been allowed to stay in the Soviet Union against the wishes of the KGB . The KGB had had no contacts with Oswald or interest in him whatsoever .
 FBI agents returned to the same line of questioning the next day, but Nosenko would not deviate from his original story . The FBI agents would not change their questioning .
 He had no further information to provide about Oswald or the Kennedy assassination, investigators concluded .
 Hoover forwarded to the Warren Commission the FBI report of Nosenko’s statement . Hoover forwarded the report to the commission on March 1. before the commission had a chance to hear the testimony .
 The report raised no questions about the reliability of the information or Nosenko’s bona fides . The report was published by the Washington Post .
 The FBI report on Nosenko did not satisfy the CIA’s Soviet Russia Division . The CIA did not agree with the FBI report . The report was published by the CIA in the 1980s .
 CIA seemed to accept without question KGB procedures for handling an American defector . CIA experts said the CIA’s experts thought it was implausible to the CIA .
 By March 3 the division had formulated forty-four of its own questions (and subquestions) for Nosenko on the Oswald case . The division has also asked for questions about the case .
 Each of the questions was designed to force Nosenko to broaden his basic statement about the KGB’s relation with Oswald .
 The interrogatives attempted to establish how Nosenko and the KGB initially became involved with Oswald . The interrogators were trying to establish the origins of the KGB's involvement in the assassination .
 Oswald had followed what seemed to be a well-prepared defection plan in getting to the Soviet Embassy in Helsinki . Oswald's defection was not the first time Oswald had tried to defect to Helsinki .
 The 22 / LEGEND KGB had advance knowledge and laid the groundwork . In similar defection cases the 22 /Legend KGB had advanced knowledge of the defection case .
 Nosenko asserted that the KGB had not heard of Oswald until after he appeared in Moscow in 1959 . In this case, however, he said the KGB did not hear of Oswald for more than a decade .
 CIA experts wondered why the Helsinki Embassy processing the visa request had not informed the KGB officer in Helsinki, as was then the normal process . CIA experts preparing the questions wondered why . The Helsinki Embassy processed the request and the KGB was not informed .
 Oswald admitted at the American Embassy in Moscow that he had made this offer to the Soviets . It also seemed possible that Oswald had told the Soviets in Helsinki that he planned to defect and turn over military secrets .
 Oswald was indeed the ex-Marine he claimed to be, and not a CIA agent . Oswald was a Marine, not an ex-CIA agent, according to the book .
 If the KGB followed the procedures used in other cases, an effort would be made to check what record there was of him in the U.S. The KGB would then make an effort to find out if he had lived in the United States .
 "Some evaluation would be made of his use as either an agent, a propagandist-agitator, or a Soviet citizen," he says . "And then some evaluation would then be made"
 These, at least, were the procedures followed in other defection cases . These are the procedures used in other defections cases .
 The question attempted to explore the relation of the Second Chief Directorate, which handled the security aspects of the Oswald case, and the First Chief Directorate . Would expectedly be involved in any decision to use Oswald abroad as a spy .
 Oswald’s debriefing, which Nosenko had so far denied ever took place, never took place . Another question pressed for information on the subject of Oswald's debriefed, which he had denied .
 Almost a quarter of the questions dealt with Oswald’s wife, Marina, about whom Nosenko had said very little . Marina was one of the most important women in the history of the assassination .
 The questions were hand carried over to the FBI for the approval of Hoover required . Hoover required the approval from the FBI .
 The most he would suggest was that eventually the FBI might cover these areas . He would suggest that eventually he might cover them up .
 The CIA officer supervising the investigation immediately dictated a memorandum staling . “I indicated that I had no confidence in the FBI’s ability to cover the Soviet phase.” The memo was staling, a CIA officer said .
 The Warren Commission was unaware of the gaps in Nosenko’s story . The CIA tried to fill them in with its forty-four questions, but the questions were not answered .
 W David Slawson, a soft-spoken lawyer from Denver on the commission staff, carefully reviewed the March 1 FBI report on Nosenko and made a number of notes on a yellow pad .
 Marina Oswald's testimony was becoming increasingly concerned with problems and contradictions in the testimony of Marina Oswald . At this very time the commission’s staff was becoming concerned with the testimony . Marina Oswald was a member of the Commission of Investigation .
 She had insisted that she did not know the name of her own father and provided only minimal information about her relatives . She had said she didn't know her father's name .
 Marina's uncle was a lieutenant colonel in the Ministry of Internal Affairs . Marina lived with Oswald's uncle in Minsk prior to her marriage to Oswald .
 Marina declared that he had not intervened on her or Oswald’s behalf with Soviet authorities to facilitate either her marriage or her exit visa from Russia . Yet Marina said he did not help her get a visa or exit visa .
 It is now clear that she lied to the FBI during its interrogation of her during a ten-week period following the assassination . More seriously, it was now clear she had lied to FBI .
 She admitted destroying a photograph of Oswald with his weapon the day after the assassination . The photo was taken in the days following the assassination of President Kennedy .
 She withheld evidence indicating Oswald had attempted to assassinate Major General Edwin Walker seven months before he killed Kennedy . Oswald had also attempted to kill Major General Walker, a Major General, seven months earlier .
 She had falsely denied that she knew about Oswald’s trip to Mexico in 1963 . Oswald had traveled to Mexico to meet Oswald in 1963, Oswald's wife had said .
 Staff members believed that possibly she had committed a felony when she had lied to the FBI after the assassination or when she destroyed evidence . Some staff members thought that possibly . she had . possibly committed . a felony . She had told the FBI that she had destroyed evidence or lied to them .
 It would make little sense for the commission to impugn the credibility of its chief witness on the character of Oswald, Warren said . But Warren explained to the staff that it would make no sense for him to improach the credibility .
 The commission rejected a set of highly specific interrogatives that had been drafted by the CIA for the Soviet government . The commission also rejected the CIA's draft interrogatives .
 Oswald had been processed and controlled during his two and one-half years in the Soviet Union . These questions were designed to elicit from the Soviets, if they chose to reply, key details about the procedures under which Oswald was processed .
 One question asked for the memoranda and minutes of the meetings concerning Oswald’s request for Soviet citizenship . Oswald's request for citizenship was rejected by the Soviet Union .
 The State Department strongly resisted this detailed set of questions . State Department says it will not answer the questions .
 The State Department pointed to the danger that the trap questions might succeed in forcing the Soviets to falsify records, rather than make embarrassing admissions . This would create a crisis for the American government which it was not prepared to deal with .
 The State Department proposed that the commission send “a very short and simple request for whatever information the Russian authorities” had available on Oswald . Instead, the State Department said the commission should ask for information from Russia .
 By March it was becoming clear to the commission that Nosenko was the only available witness who could shed any information of value on the KGB’s involvement, or noninvolvement, with the assassin .
 CIA had serious doubts about Nosenko’s authenticity, commission members didn’t know . Commission members did not know that the CIA had doubts about the authenticity .
 Nosenko had supplied information about other cases since his original contact with the CIA in 1962 . He says the cases arose from information he had supplied to the CIA .
 James Jesus Angleton was perhaps most concerned with the implications of Nosenko's defection . Angleton’s assessment of the defection was based on his CIA assessment . The man in the CIA who was most concerned was Angleton .
 In intelligence terms, disinformation is not merely false information, but a message or set of messages designed to mislead or manipulate a government . The U.S. government has been accused of misleading or manipulating the public in the past .
 A double agent pretends to change sides in order to add credibility to his message . One of the most effective means for supplying such information is through a double agent . Double agent is most effective way to supply information .
 It is crucially important for the CIA to ferret out the fake double agents supplying disinformation . Therefore, it is crucial for the agency to find out who is a double agent .
 Angleton was a man uniquely suited to this convoluted pursuit . Ghostly thin thin, with prematurely silver hair and a finely sculptured face, Angleton .
 His avocation was propagating his own hybrid orchids from seed . The process required seven years of patient waiting to see the results of his planning .
 In evaluating defectors from adversary intelligence services, Angleton believed cases could not be viewed in isolation . Angleton said cases were not seen in isolation, but cases were seen as isolated .
 Russian intelligence had to be analyzed in relation to the bits and pieces of information coming from the enemy over an extended period .
 He knew that Soviet intelligence had the capacity for mounting highly sophisticated disinformation programs with a whole array of dispatched defectors and double agents feeding information to other intelligence services .
 For Angleton. unravelling such a deception was an intellectual challenge of the first order . Angleton . unravelled such a . deception was the intellectual challenge for Angleton, the author of the book .
 Nosenko first approached the CIA in Geneva in 1962 and volunteered information about Soviet espionage operations . Angleton and his staff* had pondered the significance of the offer .
 Only six months before Nosenko’s contact, another Soviet intelligence officer, Anatoli M Golitsin, defected to the CIA from Helsinki, Finland . Golitsins defected from the Soviet Union six months earlier .
 Golitsin identified himself as a major in the First Chief Directorate of the KGB working primarily against targets in the NATO alliance . He was brought to Washington and given the code name Stone .
 The information Stone provided in his debriefing had caused a sensation . Stone provided the information in a press conference in New York .
 According to Stone, the KGB had already planted an agent within the highest echelons of U.S. intelligence . Stone: The KGB planted a spy in the highest-echelons in the United States . Stone says the KGB planted the agent .
 This penetration agent would be assisted by “outside’s” men, who would supply pieces of disinformation designed to bolster an ‘inside’ man’�s credibility . The penetration agent was assisted by other Soviet-controlled agents masking themselves as defectors or
 The “inside” agent, in turn, would be in a position to help confirm the authenticity of the “outside” agents . The ‘inside’ agent would then be able to confirm that of the agents .
 Kovshuk traveled to the United States under diplomatic cover using the alias Komarov . Kovsuk was sent to the U.S. in 1957 using diplomatic cover, using the name Komarov, using an alias . He was the first person to travel to the country from Russia to
 Stone identified Kovshuk as the then-reigning head of the all-important American Embassy Section of the 28 / LEGEND KGB . Stone stressed that only an extremely important mission would account for his coming to the U.S.
 Kovshuk’s mission might have involved contacting or activating a high-level Soviet penetration agent working within the CIA . The agent had been recruited years before in Moscow and had been working for years in Moscow .
 The KGB, realizing that he knew about Kovshuk’s mission, would almost certainly attempt to discredit or deflect the CIA from the information he was providing . Stone had also cautioned that the KGB would try to deflect or discredit the CIA's information .
 He warned Angleton that Soviet disinformation agents could be expected to make contact with the CIA for this purpose . Angleton warned that Soviet agents could not be trusted by the CIA .
 Angleton found that the information Nosenko was providing coincided very curiously with what Stone had revealed . Angleton also found that Stone's information coincided with what he had revealed to Angleton . Stone's death was a mystery, Angleton said .
 Nosenko claimed to have been Kovshuk’s deputy in the KGB, and therefore, in a unique position to know about his trip to America . The former KGB deputy claimed to be in unique position in Russia .
 Stone suggested that Kovshuk had gone to see a Soviet agent working in the CIA . But Nosenko said that the agent was recruited from American military personnel attached to the Embassy in Moscow .
 In 1964, Nosenko provided a further clue that this American had worked in the motor pool at the Embassy in the early 1950s . The man's identification was inevitable .
 Angleton's concerns of Angleton were heightened by the unravelling of the Sasha case . Sasha case unravelled by the case .
 In 1962, Stone had told of the Soviet recruitment of an American agent who was assigned the code name Sasha . The clues he provided pointed to a CIA contract employee working in West Germany .
 In 1964, Nosenko also told CIA officers debriefing him about the agent Sasha . Then, considerably later, in 1964, he also told them about Sasha .
 In two cases, Nosenko’s information led to the identification and capture of enemy agents . The information helped lead to the capture of two of the world's most dangerous agents .
 Nosenko provided the information which enabled the British to apprehend the spy, John Vassall . The spy was captured by the British in 1941 .
 The second case involved a major KGB operation in France by means of which military secrets were being taken from a courier station at Orly Airport outside Paris .
 U.S. Army sergeant Robert Lee Johnson was alleged to be involved in Soviet intelligence . Johnson was an Army sergeant who served in the Army in Vietnam .
 The sergeant, however, had lost his access to military secrets at the courier station . Soviet intelligence had every reason to believe that he was known to U.S. intelligence .
 In 1964, Nosenko said he had heard in Moscow that important NATO secrets were coming from a source near Paris . Now, in 1964, he said that he had . heard in . Moscow that enormously important NATO . secrets were . coming from an important NATO source, he says .
 Angleton: Nosenko was providing information that was ‘dated,’ meaning information which the Soviets would assume already had already been compromised . Angleton saw it as “dated” and “timeless” as information was “likely to have already been
 He tried to assess whether Nosenko was providing dated information by design, or whether he was disclosing original information which happened to coincide with what Stone and other sources had revealed .
 Angleton considered it odd that two men from entirely different branches of the KGB would know of so many of the same operations . Angleton: "I don't think it's odd" that two KGB agents knew of so much of the operations .
 Nosenko's revelations in 1962 might have been designed by the Soviets to deflect from the leads Stone had provided . Such an overlay raised the possibility that the Soviets might have designed the revelations . Stone had been providing the information to the Soviet Union .
 Angleton meticulously planned environments so perfectly that he could manipulate the design of his own 30 / LEGEND prize-winning orchids . Angleton was not inclined to believe in chance coincidences .
 Nosenko claimed to be in a position to know of each and every contact the KGB had with Oswald over a four-year period . From this vantage point, he could definitively exonerate the KGB from having any relation with Oswald .
 Angleton studied the transcript of Nosenko’s account of Oswald in the Soviet Union . Angleton watched the transcript in his thick horn-rimmed glasses as he read it .
 He was particularly troubled by the claim that Oswald had never been debriefed by any part of the Soviet intelligence apparatus . He was especially troubled by claims that Oswald never had a debrief .
 Oswald had identified himself as a radar operator . Oswald was a target, and Oswald was identified as a target .
 Stone had previously explained in detail that in the case of a military defector or one even with military experience, the Thirteenth Department of the First Chief Directorate would have the primary responsibility for the debriefing . Stone: In the case, the thirteenth department has the primary
 When the KGB was created in 1954, the Thirteenth Department was assigned the function of sabotage and assassinations abroad . It therefore had a special interest in debriefing defectors who might be capable of participating .
 Oswald had served for nearly three years in the U.S. Marines with an Air Control Squadron in Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan and California . Oswald had repeatedly stated in Moscow that he was willing to provide the Soviets with American secrets .
 Oswald had verbally renounced his citizenship before the American consul, severed his relations with his family in America and left himself penniless . In addition, the Soviets had Oswald in the palms of their hands in Moscow; it was known that he had verbally .
 Under the procedures Stone described, the Thirteenth Department would have had a hand in the debriefings . Nosenko, if he were who he claimed to be, would have known of them, Stone said .
 Angleton had little doubt that if Oswald had had any contact with the Thirteenth Department, even if it were only a brief interview, the KGB would go to great lengths to conceal it . Of course, in the light of the Kennedy assassination, Angleton believed Oswald had contact with
 Stone confirmed that Nosenko was an officer of the KGB, but he could not have held the position as deputy chief of the Tourist Department . Stone would have known him, or Stone would've known him .
 Stone asserted that Nosenko could not have been in the American Embassy Department in 1960 and 1961 . Stone paid frequent visits to the embassy and would have seen him, Stone said . Stone said he would have visited the embassy in the 1960s and 1961 and 1961, but would not have
 Nosenko’s career could not have been what he said it was, Stone says . Stone: ‘Nosenko's career was not what he claimed it was.’
 Angleton carefully considered the situation in Washington, D.C. Angleton says . Angleton: "Now, with Nosenko in Washington now, it's important to consider the situation"
 Aside from breeding orchids, he was a superbly patient trout fisherman . He was a very patient and patient fisherman .
 All defectors, whether fake or real, should be carefully played out for what ever information they possessed, says legend legend .
 In the contest between intelligence agencies, discovering the disinformation which the enemy was attempting to plant was as important as any real information which might be divulged .
 Angleton was carefully scrutinizing the Nosenko case in the context of other information he had . The CIA’s Soviet Russia Division threw its resources into a direct investigation of the basic points of the story . Angleton: The case was the result of an investigation into Nosen
 He claimed to have risen from the rank of captain to lieutenant colonel in less than four years . He said he had risen from captain to colonel in just four years to become a lieutenant colonel .
 Investigators asked him to name concrete achievements that had led to his rapid promotion . He was unable to cite any successes which would account for this rise in rank .
 At first, Nosenko attributed his successes solely to his friendship with General Gribanov, the head of the Second Chief Directorate . At first he attributed his success to friendship with Gen. Gibanov .
 Under intensive questioning about his relation with Gribanov, he recanted and said he had had no special relation with the general . Then, under intensive questioning, he said he did not have any special relations with the Russian general .
 He also admitted that he had never been given any special commendation by the chairman of the KGB, as he had also claimed . He further admitted he never received any special praise from the chairman .
 The Soviet Russia Division’s investigators knew that it was not uncommon for defectors to exaggerate their importance . It meant more money and attention and increased the chance that they would be given asylum in the United States .
 The fact that Nosenko had claimed in 1964 that he was a lieutenant colonel was understandable in these terms . He had claimed he was lieutenant colonel in 1964 .
 In 1962, when he had first contacted the CIA, he had claimed he was a major . But, in 1962, he claimed he had been a major. He had claimed to be a major in the CIA .
 When Nosenko appeared in Geneva in 1964, he had among his papers a Soviet travel document which had authorized him to be in Gorki in November 1963 . When he was in Geneva he had the document which he had obtained .
 Nosenko had already explained that he had participated in a nationwide ‘All-Union manhunt’ for a traitor named Cherepanov . He said he had been in Gorki because of a nationwide manhunt .
 In October 1963, a man named Cherepanov unexpectedly sent a package of documents, with a tourist, to the American Embassy in Moscow . The documents were sent to the U.S. Embassy in October 1963 .
 Nosenko claimed to have worked in the same U.S. Embassy section he said he worked in . Documents show he worked for the same KGB as the KGB in which he worked .
 Until Nosenko made contact in 1962, CIA had never had an agent from the staff of the Second Chief Directorate . Now suddenly there were two people volunteering information from the same section of the CIA .
 The Cherepanov papers, which dealt mainly with surveillance techniques, dovetailed perfectly with the story Nosenko had told in his first meeting with the CIA in 1962 . The papers were published by the CIA .
 This story concerned Peter Semyonovich Popov, a lieutenant colonel in Soviet military intelligence . Popov was a Soviet lieutenant colonel .
 Nosenko claimed that the KGB had developed a method of painting a chemical substance on a subject’s shoe which left an invisible trail that could be followed without arousing his suspicion . The KGB claimed to have developed the method .
 The Soviets followed 34 / LEGEND the American diplomat to a letterbox, which was then watched until Popov picked the letter up . This new technique enabled the Soviets to follow the U.S. diplomat to the letterbox .
 To prove that he had known of the surveillance, Nosenko named the diplomat who had mailed the fatal letter .
 Cherepanov papers show that Popov was arrested through surveillance . Nosenko's explanation of Popov's arrest coincides with that of Nosenkos' explanation .
 The CIA knew that the Cherepanov papers had been photographed by the embassy staff . The papers were immediately photographed by embassy staff, the CIA says .
 The American Embassy returned the documents to the Soviet ministry, allowing them to identify Cherepanov from the distribution list on the papers . Then, because of some bureaucratic failing (or suspicion that a trap was being baited), the embassy returned the papers to the Soviets .
 Within the CIA there was considerable speculation about whether the Cherepanov papers were authentic or an attempt to manipulate the CIA by planting disinformation . The papers were published by the CIA .
 Nosenko established his rank as lieutenant colonel and his position in the KGB, which were typed out on the travel document . Finally, by implication, he confirmed his own story about Popov, which he confirmed .
 To experts at the Soviet Russia Division such a mistake seemed almost impossible to accept . To the experts, such a decision was almost impossible, they said .
 Expert on KGB procedures determined that Nosenko’s possession of the travel document was in itself extremely suspicious . Expert: ‘Nosenko's possession of a travel document in itself is extremely suspicious’
 The procedure in the KGB was for officers to turn in their travel documents in order to be reimbursed for the expenses involved in their Russian travels .
 The document falsely identified Nosenko as a lieutenant colonel, and its provenance was suspect . The possibility that it was fabricated in order to provide evidence had to be considered . The document's provenance had been suspect .
 If the document was spurious, then the reason he gave for possessing it was the national manhunt for the traitor Cherepanov . The document also had to be questioned, as well as the reason for his possession .
 Nosenko claimed he was part of the manhunt for Cherepanov because he had known and worked with him in the U.S. Embassy Section of the KGB in 1960 .
 The only mention of his existence before he handed a package of documents to an American in Moscow in 1963 was a report that he approached British intelligence in Yugoslavia in the late 1950s .
 The British, however, had decided that this was a KGB “provocation,” and they had cut off contact . The British decided that it was a ‘provocation’ and cut contact with the KGB .
 From this brief file, it was clear that Cherepanov had then been working for the First Chief Directorate, which handles agents outside the Soviet Union .
 He was suspected of contacting the British in Yugoslavia for treasonous purposes . He was believed to have been involved in a plot to kill the British .
 Officials in the Second Chief Directorate felt sorry for Cherepanov and gave him a job, he said . He said that officials in the . Second Chief . Directorate felt . sorry for him and he was given a job .
 That KGB agent suspected of being a traitor would be dismissed from one department and then given a job in the supersecret section of another KGB department defied belief . That a KGB agent believed to have been a traitor defied belief. He was found to be in a super secret section of the KGB
 The second major crack in Nosenko’s story appeared when a team of code breakers from the National Security Agency scrutinized cable traffic between Geneva and Moscow during the period in which he claimed to have received a recall telegram from Moscow .
 No telegram had been sent to Soviet delegation in Geneva on the day Nosenko claimed it arrived, team says . Team was able to establish that no telegram was sent to the Soviet delegation .
 The recall telegram had provided Nosenko with a plausible motive for demanding that the CIA arrange his escape to America . Up to that point the recall . had provided . a plausible . motive for . demanding that . the CIA arranged his escape .
 If the telegram was a fabrication, as the National Security Agency team suggested, then a new motive would have to be found for the timing of his defection . The telegram is believed to have been a fabrication .
 The interrogators hammered away at the circumstances of the recall telegram . The interrogation was part of a series of questions about the circumstances surrounding the recall .
 They asked Nosenko to repeat the message word for word and pinned him down on the exact day, hour and length of the telegram . They asked him to repeat his exact day and hour of the message .
 At first, Nosenko stuck to his story, repeating confidently how the telegram forced his decision to defect . Now, he says he was forced to defect by a telegram to defect from the Soviet Union .
 As the questioning continued to focus on the telegram, he grew more hesitant in reiterating its contents and meaning . Then, as the questioning . continued to . continue, he became more hesitant to reiterate its contents .
 CIA determined no such telegram had been sent . Nosenko admitted he had fabricated the whole story about the telegram .
 He said he feared the CIA would insist that he continue as a defector in place . He explained that he feared that he would continue to be in the CIA . The defector said he was worried that the CIA might not allow him to leave the country .
 The Soviet Russia Division had now established that Nosenko had deliberately lied about his rank and motive for defecting . The Russian Division had established that he had deliberately defrauded the Soviets .
 A KGB operation known to Nosenko was continuing in February and March in Switzerland . Curiously enough, the operation was known to be continuing .
 To the CIA investigators, it appeared that Fedora was trying to bolster Nosenko's credentials . The CIA investigators say Fedora was an attempt to bolster his credentials . Fedora is a free software program that allows hackers to test their skills .
 This heightened suspicions among the counterintelligence staff about Fedora’s own mission . Fedora's mission was to protect the software from the public, rather than itself .
 The only hypothesis the Soviet Russia Division could come up with to explain this strange case was that the KGB was behind Nosenko’s story . The KGB was responsible for the strange case .
 Angleton and the Soviet Russia Division explored the possibility that the man called Nosenko was actually a Soviet agent dispatched by the KGB to pose as a defector . Angleton began to explore the possibility of the man being sent to Russia as a KGB agent .
 A sensor in the sleeve measured his 38 / LEGEND blood pressure . The corrugated tube measured his rate of breathing . The metal plate measured his . rate of perspiration .
 Wires ran from each of these instruments to three penlike devices, which charted three continuous lines on a rolling sheet of graph paper . The devices were used to chart three lines on rolling sheet paper .
 Changes in these three body functions could be seen in relation to each question he answered .
 This was the first time that Nosenko had been subjected to a lie detector . This was first time the CIA called fluttering, or what they called "fluttering"
 The battery of questions took about an hour; then the CIA operator disconnected the sensors from Nosenko’s body and told him he could go back to his room . The battery was asked by the Office of Security, which was guarded around the clock by other CIA agents .
 At CIA headquarters the results of Nosenko’s fluttering were carefully analyzed by experts . Experts at CIA headquarters analyzed the results .
 On key questions, including those concerned with Oswald, Nosenko had shown the sort of emotional stress usually associated with deception . The former FBI agent said he had shown emotional stress on key questions .
 Nosenko had failed his first lie-detector test . The evaluation by the Office of Security said he failed the first test .
 The Office of Security always pointed out that stress reactions could be measuring other emotions than those caused by lying . However, such stress reactions may be measured by other emotions .
 The Soviet Russia Division of the CIA put little value on the results of lie-detector examinations . Its investigators believed that only a time-consuming investigation would prove, or disprove, Nosenko’s story .
 This would require virtually every assertion of Nosenko’s being tested against whatever evidence could be drawn from previous defectors, spies in place, diplomats and other sources .
 Every name Nosenko mentioned would have to be traced through the CIA’s computer system .
 Every revelation would have to be compared to previously known information to determine if it was dated and thus valueless from the Soviets’ point of view .
 Nosenko's story would have to be checked against the information the Warren Commission’s investigation was producing . And finally, the story would also have to check out the information from the Warren Report .
 He was told to include every name, no matter how small, of every individual he had met in his career . He had to include names that were seemingly insignificant, of all individuals .
 The Soviet Russia Division began probing deeper into the putative career Nosenko outlined in his autobiographical sketch . The Russian Division of Soviet Russia began probing into his career in Russia .
 He claimed that for four years, 1953-1955 and 19601961, he had worked primarily against employees of the American Embassy in Moscow . He claimed he worked against American Embassy employees .
 During the earlier period he gave as his ‘primary target’ a colonel who was a military attache at the embassy . During the . earlier period, he gave . as his . “Primary target” was a colonel at the . embassy . He gave as . his
 He was not able to provide any details about the case; nor was able to recognize his “target’s” photograph . Yet he was unable to provide details of the case .
 The colonel finished his tour at the American Embassy and routinely returned to the U.S. The colonel was stationed in the United States during his tour of duty . He was stationed at the embassy in Washington, DC .
 Nosenko claimed to be in the U.S. Embassy Section of the KGB, which he claimed was his primary target . Since the surveillance of this American could be done only by the American Embassy Section, it seemed difficult, if not impossible, to believe that he would not know
 Nosenko’s memory proved faulty on other details of the operation of this KGB unit during this period . Gradually, the interrogators began to suspect that the KGB officer could not have been an officer in the American Embassy Section of the KGB's Second Chief Directorate .
 The interrogators next turned to the later period he claimed to have served from January 1960 to the end of 1961 . He claimed he served in this period from January 1961 to January 1960 .
 Nosenko described in detail how his “boys’s” staked out a hole, or hole, used as a dead drop (or hiding place) for secret messages in Moscow .
 Deputy Chief of the 40 / LEGEND section received daily reports of the surveillance of this location in the first few months of 1961 . He explained that as deputy chief he received daily . reports of this . location .
 His interrogators checked back into the records of the Soviet Russia Division . The interrogators found his interrogators had gone to Soviet Russia . He was interrogated by the Soviet-era KGB officers .
 CIA established a dead drop in Moscow for a GRU officer who had spied for the British and Americans . Colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, 12, was captured and executed by the Soviets .
 After Popov’s death, Penkovskiy had become the CIA's prime source of secret information about the Soviet Union . He had been a key source of information for the CIA .
 Of course, the Soviet Russia Division was eager to hear anything that would explain how he had been compromised .
 The only problem with Nosenko’s account was that it was one year out of date . The account is one year old .
 The dead drop had been set up at the end of 1961, when Nosenko, by his own career description, was transferred back to the Tourist Department . It was set up in 1961, and the dead drop began in 1961 .
 Later in the interrogation Nosenko was asked about the physical layout of the American Embassy . Later that day he was asked if he knew the location of the embassy in Washington .
 He was asked which of the floors in the embassy were used by the Americans for classified work . He said they were used to work on classified documents .
 The interrogators, knowing full well that Nosenko had missed an entire floor in his answer, repeated the question . The question was repeated by the interrogators .
 The top three floors of the American Embassy Section were used for secret work, he says . Certainly, if he was the deputy head of the U.S. Embassy Section, he should know .
 He identified seventeen areas in the old section of the embassy, but the existence of these microphones had already been pointed to by Stone and others .
 Nosenko said he was certain there were no microphones installed in that part of the embassy . He said he is certain there are no microphones in that area .
 Construction delays prevented the KGB from ever putting in microphones at the site . He explained that construction delays had prevented them from putting microphones there .
 Nosenko had never worked in the American Embassy Section of the Second Chief Directorate . The interrogators from the Soviet Russia Division were driven toward the baffling conclusion that he never worked there .
 KGB briefing officers considered the possibility that he might never have been involved in the cases he claimed to have handled, but was merely an empty receptacle . They even began considering the possibility of him never being involved in some cases .
 Papich, a large man with a genial smile, puffed incessantly on his pipe as he listened to James Angleton articulate the elements of doubt the CIA had in the Nosenko case . Papich: "The CIA had a lot of doubt" about the case .
 Papich had been in counterintelligence in the FBI since World War II . Now, as FBI liaison to the CIA, it was his job to listen and report back to Hoover .
 He had come to view Angleton as an extraordinarily gifted analyst of intelligence problems . But he also knew that he was a man who naturally tended toward the arcane rather than the simple solution .
 Papich understood Angleton's analysis of Nosenko, but that didn't mean it would persuade his chief, J Edgar Hoover, that he was a disinformation agent . Papich believed Angleton was a dissembling agent, but didn't convince Hoover .
 The fact that Nosenko lied about a number of matters, including his rank and recall telegram, might simply mean that he was not someone 42 / LEGEND of high personal integrity .
 The fact that the information he provided for the most part coincided with the information that Stone had given might simply mean that both men had had access to the same information .
 The fact that Nosenko interpreted it differently from Stone might simply stem from a different bureaucratic perspective . Stone was the subject of an investigation into the death penalty .
 The fact that he had imperfect knowledge of the Oswald case might have meant he had exaggerated his own importance within the KGB—or had a bad memory . It might have been a mistake for him to exaggerate his importance in the KGB .
 Papich knew Hoover was already committed to believing Nosenko . Papich also knew that Hoover already knew that Papich was committed to the case .
 Hoover would point to a long list of names of college professors, businessmen, journalists and tourists . Nosenko had told the FBI that he had been targets of KGB efforts to compromise or recruit .
 This would provide the FBI with numerous cases to investigate and possibly arrests . It would also provide an opportunity for the FBI to investigate the cases .
 Nosenko had also provided leads to a major Soviet espionage ring stealing NATO documents from Orly Airport in France . He was also involved in a major NATO espionage ring that stole NATO documents .
 Nosenko confirmed the FBI investigation of Oswald, both before and after the assassination . Most important, however, is that he confirmed that Oswald was subject to an FBI investigation .
 If Nosenko’s story were accepted, the FBI would be less likely to be charged with any sort of dereliction of duty in not keeping Oswald on their security indices before the assassination . Neither Oswald nor his wife had connections with Soviet intelligence, since neither had connections to Soviet
 If Nosenko's story proved false, it would leave open the question of Oswald’s relation to the KGB, and by doing so, it also leaves open the questions of why Oswald had not been kept under tighter surveillance by the FBI .
 Despite the risk of incurring Hoover’s wrath, Papich decidicated . Papich decided to present forcefully the CIA's doubts about Nosenko . Despite the risks, he decided to make the decision .
 After hearing Papich out, he thanked him for conveying the information . The president thanked Papich for his service .
 The Warren Commission report to the Warren Commission was simply summarized Nosenko’s version of Oswald in Russia, and mentioned none of the reservations . He then ordered that the FBI report to Warren Commission remain unchanged .
 The Warren Commission was racing to meet a June deadline for winding up its investigation . It was due to end its investigation into the death penalty .
 The commission had been appointed by President Lyndon Johnson to dispel rumors of conspiracy . The commission was appointed by Johnson in order to dispel conspiracy theories .
 The President persuaded the Chief Justice to head the commission . He argued that unless an end were quickly put to such speculation, there could be dangerous consequences, including war .
 Each team of lawyers was given three months to conduct its basic investigation . By the spring of 1964 all were being told emphatically that the time had come to close the doors .
 Questions concerning Oswald’s residence in the Soviet Union and possible connections with Soviet intelligence fell into the bailiwick of William Coleman, Jr. William Coleman Jr., a highly respected Philadelphia lawyer (who later served under President Ford as Secretary of Transportation), and W David Slawson .
 The Soviet government failed to send any statements of individuals who had known 44 / LEGEND Oswald in Russia . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 CIA translators found an extremely high percentage of the signatures of Soviet officials on the documents were either illegible or missing . And in the few documents the Soviets did turn over to the commission, the Soviets turned over the documents .
 This prevented the CIA from using its normal methods of tracing officials on their computers to verify if they were indeed in the positions and cities indicated by the documents . This, in turn, the CIA was not able to use its usual methods to trace officials .
 This represented a far deeper issue in the intelligence community than the lawyers on the Warren Commission were cleared to know about . This represented an issue that was not clear to the lawyers, they say .
 If Nosenko was not sincere, it suggested that the Soviet government was building a legend meant to deceive the Warren Commission about Oswald . The CIA now seems to indicate that the CIA now appears to be building a myth about the assassination .
 Neither Angleton’s shop nor the Soviet Russia Division believed that Oswald was acting under the control of Soviet intelligence when he assassinated the President . Oswald was not believed to be under Soviet intelligence .
 Nosenko would have been sent to reinforce the legend about Oswald’s ‘instability’, a legend first constructed for Oswald when he had been in the Soviet Union for other purposes . Oswald would have categorically denied that Oswald had been recruited before, during or after
 Nosenko would have been chosen to deliver the message because the KGB had already established his credentials with the CIA as a dissident officer of the CIA . The KGB would have chosen him because he was a member of the Tourist Department .
 CIA decided there was a strong possibility that Nosenko might break and unravel Oswald’s tangled web before the Warren Commission put out its final report . The CIA decided to wait for the final report to come out before it was released .
 Richard Helms called Nicholas Katzenbach, the deputy attorney general, to discuss the incarceration of Nosenko . Helms: "Richard Helms was very concerned about the incarceration" Helms says he's glad to hear about the case .
 For both the CIA and the Department of Justice, it was a totally unprecedented situation . The CIA and Justice Department say the situation was unprecedented for them .
 Given more time or other circumstances, Nosenko could be questioned in a different atmosphere . The former secretary of state should be questioned again .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy backed this extraordinary procedure . It was intended either to break or confirm Nosenko’s story . Attorney General Kennedy himself backed this procedure .
 Nosenko was confined to a single room at a CIA detention center, with only a bed, chair and washbasin . He was held in a single cell at the CIA .
 He was treated as if he were a captured spy rather than a voluntary defector . He was given only military fatigues to wear and treated as though he was a spy . He had only been given military clothes to wear .
 He was forced to submit to unrelenting interrogation, and when his answers seemed false or misleading, he was openly challenged—or denounced as a liar . He said he was forced into questioning, and often challenged .
 No longer allowed to ramble on a tangent or suggest going to a bar for drinks . No longer was allowed to suggest going for a drink .
 His interrogators suggested finally that perhaps he had not handled that case . He was eventually found to have handled the case . His interrogator suggested that perhaps perhaps he hadn't handled it .
 Nosenko sat back silently as the interrogator pointed out the contradiction . He sat back silent as the question was answered . The interrogator then pointed out a contradiction .
 Nosenko answered, after long thought, that if he admitted this, he would have to admit that he was not even the person he claimed to be . He said, 'If he admitted that he had been a legend, he'd have to say he was a fraud'
 The interrogators paused to see if Nosenko would make such an admission . The interrogator pauses to see whether Nosenkos would make it . The interrogation was interrupted by the sound of a gunshot .
 He insisted that despite contradictions his interrogators had pointed out, he had handled the case in question . He insisted despite the contradictions, he was handling the case properly .
 He admitted that he “looked bad, even to himself, but had no explanation . He said he had no idea why he looked bad to himself .
 FBI had no problem in locating the agent Nosenko identified as Andrey . FBI agents were able to locate the agent Andrey. FBI agents found Andrey in the house .
 Andrey turned out to be only a retired Army sergeant who had worked in the motor pool at the American Embassy in Moscow in 1953-1954 .
 The man readily admitted to the FBI that he had met the Soviets while in Moscow, though he had no information of value to give them . The man said he was in Moscow at the time .
 In 1957 Kovshukhad indeed spoken briefly with him, but it was clear he was not in a position to be of any use . In 1957 he had spoken to him briefly, but he was clearly unable to help .
 Kovshuk had made a special trip to Washington to see an agent of unique importance, Stone says . The agent had a special visit to Washington .
 CIA reconstruction of dates shows Kovshuk had not been contacted until many months after he arrived . The CIA determined that the Army sergeant had not contacted until months later . The Army sergeant was not contacted by the CIA for months .
 Nosenko explained that Kovshuk had had trouble locating the sergeant . Kovsuk had trouble finding the sergeant, he said . The sergeant had been missing for more than a week .
 To Soviet experts in the CIA, it seemed impossible to believe that a man as important as Kovshuk, while still heading the American Embassy Section of the KGB, would travel to Washington to see an ex-soldier .
 CIA officers were increasingly suspicious that Nosenko was painting ‘‘false tracks” away from some high-level U.S. agents . CIA officers bemused that the CIA officers came increasingly suspicious . In analyzing the disclosures, CIA officers thought Nosenkos was painting
 Kovshuk's trip to Washington in 1957 to contact an important agent, Popov’s capture in 1959, Penkovskiy's capture in 1962 . The leak to the Soviets of classified U.S. secrets in 1961 and 1962 seemed to fit into the same puzzle .
 On June 24, 1964, Helms requested a private audience with Chief Justice Warren . Helms' request for an audience with Warren was denied by the Supreme Court .
 Chief Justice sits alone at a table surrounded by a few empty chairs . Chief Justice was in a conference room in Veterans’ Building, where they had agreed to meet .
 No notes were taken, no witnesses were to be present . It was agreed that no notes should be taken and no witnesses should be seen .
 Helms explained that there were two schools of thought within the intelligence community about Nosenko . Helms said there are two schools, one of which is to blame for the loss of the Soviet Union .
 The first held that he was a legitimate defector and could be believed so far as Oswald was concerned . Oswald was believed to have defected to the Soviet Union . The second held that the defector was a genuine defector .
 The second held that Nosenko was still a Soviet agent, under instructions from the KGB to misinform the commission about Oswald’s activities in the Soviet Union . The other held that the KGB was behind the commission .
 CIA could not say with certainty which view was correct, CIA official says . CIA might not resolve this question before the Warren Report is published .
 Helms disqualified the only live witness that the commission had concerning the involvement of Soviet authorities with Oswald . Helms had just disqualified the other live witness . Oswald was the only one of the witnesses .
 He was advancing the serious possibility that the Soviets had attempted to insert false information in the official history of the Kennedy assassination through the use of a fake defector, he said .
 If true, it would imply that other information the Soviets had supplied to the commission had also been falsified to support the Nosenko version . And if the latter turned out to be true it would also imply that the other information was falsified .
 Warren asked about the report the commission had received from Hoover which raised none of these questions . Warren asked if the report had raised any questions about Hoover's actions .
 Helms said he could not say with certainty whether Nosenko was sincere or a KGB plant . Helms quietly answered that he could speak only for the 48 / LEGEND CIA and reiterated that he couldn't say with certain certainty .
 President Richard Nixon said he would take Helms' advice under advisement . Then Warren, apparently tired and frayed by the additional duties imposed on him by the Kennedy assassination, said that he would .
 Warren Commission met in executive session to discuss the vexing problem raised by Nosenko . Later that same day, at the Chief Justice's request, the Warren Commission held executive session . The Warren Commission later met in an executive session on the issue .
 Nosenko won't testify or be interviewed by any members of the staff . Nosenkos won't be allowed to be interviewed or testify by staff members .
 The FBI report on him would remain, but as part of the unpublished record of the commission that would be filed away in the National Archives . The FBI would also file away from the commission's report .
 For this critical period in Oswald's life, the commission would rely almost entirely on a diary that had been found among Oswald’s effects and on official records tendered by the Soviet government . Oswald's diary was found among his effects and found in his effects .
 There would be no further investigation by the commission into the Nosenko affair, no testing of his story . In any event, the commission would not have further investigation .
 President Johnson was demanding that the report be issued in September, well before the presidential election in November, and it was already almost July . The report was released in July, but it was almost almost July.
 Faced with an unyielding deadline, the commission’s staff was in a quandary over what to do about the Soviet section . The commission's staff were in a dilemma over what they would do with a Soviet section of the country .
 The problem was that the commission had not amassed sufficient information to test Nosenko's story against reference points in Oswald’s life . The problem here is that the problem here was not sufficient information in its decidedly limited investigation .
 Coleman and Slawson concluded that Oswald probably began to lay his plans while serving with the Marines in the Far East . Oswald's defection to Russia was likely to have occurred while he was in the Marines .
 If such a contact had been made and Oswald had indeed been induced by an intelligence service to defect, then such information would cast an extremely different light on his movements prior to the assassination .
 Oswald's Marine unit in Japan would reconstruct the experiences of Oswald’s Marine unit . It would be necessary to ascertain what information of intelligence value Oswald had had access to .
 Oswald’s sudden defection might have held a piece in the jigsaw mystery of Oswald‘s sudden defections . Any one of them might have been a piece of the puzzle in the Oswald's sudden departure .
 The commission's staff knew that there would not be time to track down and interview these missing witnesses . With only days left to finish writing the report, staff knew there would be no time to interview them . The commission’s staff said they would not have been able to interview the
 Commission questioned only one Marine who had been in Oswald's radar unit in Japan . His tour overlapped with Oswald’s by only a few months . Commission: Only one Marine was in the radar unit .
 Oswald was not questioned closely about Oswald’s access to classified information or contacts he might have had with foreigners . Oswald was never questioned about his knowledge of foreign contacts .
 If it proved to be authentic, the commission could conclude that Oswald had made no prior contacts or arrangements with Soviet intelligence services before his defection . Oswald had received no training during his years in the Soviet Union, and was not subsequently given any mission by the Soviets to perform upon his return
 If the story proved to be a fabrication and Nosenko was discovered to be no more than a messenger from Moscow, then the commission would have to assume that all other information from the Soviet Union had been provided as part of the same legend for Oswald .
 The commission would be left with the question of why Soviet intelligence had gone to such lengths to create a cover story for the assassin .
 Nosenko was still being questioned and confined on September 28, 1964, when the Warren Commission published its report . The Warren Commission released its report on September 27, 1964 .
 The men inside the darkened control room listened with bewilderment . Some laughed nervously, as if the radio calls were some kind of practical joke, designed to break boredom .
 All knew from their radar training that no plane could fly at 90,000 feet . No plane can fly at such an altitude .
 The world record for altitude was still 65,889 feet . The radar height-finding antenna—the MPS-11—read only up to 45,000 feet .
 Squadron One received another surprise at the dawn of the morning . The men in Squadron One were greeted by the arrival of a new aircraft .
 A long, thin silver plane, with a needle nose, was wheeled out by a tractor to the edge of a 5,000-foot runway . The plane is wheeled in by tractor to edge of the runway . It's the first time a plane has been wheeled to
 It looked like no plane that any of the Marines in ‘Coffee Mill’ had ever seen before . It was the first time the Marines had seen a plane that they had never seen before in the Marines' training pool .
 Its wings, which stretched out for 80 feet, were more than twice the length of its cigar-shaped fuselage . The plane's wings were twice the size of its fuselage and wingspanpaned 80 feet .
 The wing tips drooped to the ground and had to be supported by aluminum pods with small wheels under them . The wings tips were attached to aluminum pods and small wheels were placed under the wings .
 A pilot, clad in a heavy rubber suit and mask, arrived in an ambulance and climbed into the cockpit . The pilot was wearing a mask and rubber suit when the incident occurred .
 The ground crew removed five identifying numbers from the tail of the strange plane . Ground crew then removed the identifying numbers of the plane .
 As the engine warmed up, it emitted a high, shrill whine, which rapidly increased as the plane began racing down the runway . The plane's whine increased as it sped down the airport runway .
 The wheels under the pods fell off and bounced back down the runway . Then the wheels under its pods fell back to the ground . The plane bounced off the runway as it left the runway and landed .
 UPA-25 radarscopes saw that the unidentified plane had vanished from the radar . Within a couple of minutes the Marines watching their radars were able to see the plane disappear .
 The landings of this silver plane were just as spectacular as its takeoffs . The silver plane landed in a spectacular fashion .
 It would appear from nowhere, circle slowly over the village, bringing excited Japanese out of their houses for a look . It would sail like a glider above the runway before floating down to the ground, its wing tips often giving off a shower of sparks .
 When the plane had stopped, jeeps covered with canvas would position themselves under the wings to keep them from dragging along the runway . The plane would then be covered in canvas .
 A tractor would tow the plane off the runway to a hangar guarded by men with submachine guns . Then the plane would be towed to a special hangar, guarded by submachine gunmen . The Marines quickly observed that the hangar was guarded by armed men .
 Marine surveillance team peered for hours on end through their UPA-25 radarscopes . Inside the semicircular radar room called the bubble, the bubble .
 Heavy cables snaked their way through the bubble to connect the electrical equipment outside of the bubble . Heavy cables were snaked through the air to connect electrical equipment to the outside .
 The temperature was so hot that the grease pencils the men used to mark intercept paths would sometimes melt on the translucent plotting board . Because of the constantly working machinery, the pencils were sometimes melted .
 Perspiration would run down the men’s faces and into their eyes as they sat there, stripped down to their T-shirts .
 The humming noise from incessantly grinding machinery was so loud that it was impossible to talk without shouting . It was the huming noise from the grinding machinery that made it impossible to speak .
 Only the dim light from the radar screen illuminated the bubble, leaving it so dark that one could not identify even a friend from across the room . The bubble was so dark it could not be seen from across a friend .
 The monotony during these long shifts was broken by the occasional appearance of the strange aircraft . It was the first time the aircraft had ever been seen in captivity .
 Radar operators in ‘Coffee Mill’ learned more about the so-called utility plane . Gradually the Marine Corps radar operators learned more than a dozen radar operators .
 In briefings on classified material they were told that the utility plane was a highly secret reconnaissance project . The plane was not to be discussed with anyone outside the radar unit .
 The radar crew would pass the time by figuring out the U-2’s rate of climb from watching its blips on the radar scopes . One Marine, Richard Cyr, remembers that the radar crew . Cyr: "The U.2 was the first U.S.
 The U-2 was used primarily for penetrating the airspace of the Soviet Union 56 / LEGEND and China in order to photograph military and industrial targets .
 U-2s were providing 90 percent of all hard information on Soviet military, ballistic and nuclear bomb activities . U.2s used Atsugi as one of their two main bases in Japan . The U.S. was providing intelligence on Soviet nuclear weapons .
 The ultrasecret cameras on the plane were then assessing missile emplacements and submarine keel laying in the Soviet Union . The cameras were then assessed by the plane .
 The men of Squadron One were not briefed on the mission of the U-2, although many guessed that it flew over enemy territory . Many guessed that the aircraft was flying over enemy land .
 They had no way of knowing that it was the highestpriority target of Soviet intelligence and that its intelligence service was attempting to gain information which might make it possible for Soviet rockets to shoot down one of the odd-looking planes .
 One Marine inside the bubble seemed to go about his work with a good deal of silent efficiency . One Marine in the bubble went about his job with a little quiet efficiency .
 He was gaunt, with sparkling eyes and a smile that was often taken for a contemptuous smirk . He was taken for contemptuous smiles, but was often said to be contemptuous .
 He heard radio calls from “Race Car” and showed an extraordinary interest in the path of the ghostly plane, police say . Like the others, he heard the radio calls and, according to one officer, showed an interest in "Race Car"
 Lee Harvey Oswald was born on October 18, 1939, at the Old French Hospital in New Orleans, New Orleans . Oswald was the son of Oswald, who was born in October 1939 .
 Oswald's father, Robert E Lee Oswald, died of a heart attack two months before . His father, a insurance premium collector named after the Civil War general, died two months earlier .
 His mother, Marguerite Claverie Oswald, is a brunette of French and German extraction . She managed the best she could under difficult circumstances .
 She placed her other two sons, Robert Oswald and John Pic, Jr. in the Infant Jesus College Home, a Catholic boarding school in Algiers, Louisiana . She immediately placed them in the home . Robert Oswald Oswald, who was five, and Robert Oswald, five, were
 With the help of her sister, Lillian Murret, she tried to care for Lee while working in New Orleans . Lee's sister was able to raise her daughter and raise her sister's daughter . Lee was hospitalized with a broken leg, but survived .
 Marguerite retrieved her two older sons from the orphanage within a year and purchased a frame house for the family . The family was moved into a new home in the 1930s .
 The house was small, but they had a backyard and space for a "shepherd collie dog" named Sunshine . The house had a small backyard and a backyard for a dog named Sunshine.
 Marguerite opened Oswald’s Notion Shop in the front of the house, “RACE CAR ” / 57, but the business did not thrive . Marguerie opened Oswald's Notion shop in the home of Oswald, "RACE Car " / 57
 In December 1961 she placed Robert and John in the Evangelical Lutheran Bethlehem Orphan’s Asylum . She contributed $20 a month to the asylum's maintenance .
 She tried to place Lee in the home then, but they would not accept children under three . Lee was placed in a home where she was placed under three-year-old .
 While she worked as a telephone operator, her sister cared for the child . Her sister worked as an operator and raised the child as a child .
 Lee joined his brothers at the Bethlehem children’s home on December 26, 1942 . Lee died at the home in Bethlehem, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, on December 25, 1942.
 Lee's older brothers would take Lee with them from orphanage to New Orleans, where they would spend the afternoon with their mother . Lee would spend that afternoon with his mother in New Orleans .
 Ekdahl, trained as an electrical engineer, earned a comfortable living for his family . He earned a living for himself and his wife .
 Marguerite withdrew Lee from the orphanage and moved to Dallas to be with Ekdahl, whom she married in 1945 . Lee was taken to an orphanage in Dallas, Texas, in 1945, where she was raised .
 Marguerite, Lee and Ekdahl settled in Benbrook, Texas, where they rented a spacious stone house . The two older boys were then enrolled at the Chamberlain-Hunt Military Academy in Mississippi .
 Lee and his brothers fished and swam in a creek just a few hundred yards from their back door . Lee's family lived near a creek where he and his siblings fished, swam and played in the creek .
 He attended the Benbrook Common School and during vacations traveled extensively with his mother and stepfather . He attended school in Benbrook, Connecticut .
 Ekdahl and Marguerite began fighting soon after their marriage . The three boys got along well, but Marguerie and her husband got along less well .
 After a series of separations and reconciliations Marguerite decided to confirm her suspicions of Ekdahl's infidelity .
 In the summer of 1947 she had 15-year-old John Pic and one of his friends drive her to the house where she thought Ekdahl was with his mistress . She thought she was being held captive by the mistress .
 John’s friend posed as a Western Union messenger, and when the door was opened, Marguerite pushed her way in to confront Ekdahl and Ekdah . John's friend pretended to be a messenger .
 She promptly left her third husband and instituted divorce proceedings . She is now engaged in a divorce from him . She has since left him .
 John and Robert were forced to leave military school to join their mother and brother in Fort Worth . They lived in a small house next to the railroad tracks in Fort Waco .
 With the $1,500 settlement, Marguerite paid her legal bills and bought a small house in Benbrook . She did not obtain support from Ekdahl . With the settlement, she paid for legal bills .
 Marguerite urged the older boys to join the military to ease her financial burden . Marguette urged the boys to do so to ease the financial burden of her family .
 Lee, meanwhile, was transferred from one public school to another in the Dallas-Fort Worth area . Lee's mother moved him to a new school as she adjusted her life to being single again .
 Lee was ten, and in the fifth grade, he had attended six different public schools . By the time he was 10, Lee was at six different schools . Lee is now in his fifth grade .
 John and his wife began to realize that Marguerite was making no effort to get a job or find an apartment of her own, tensions in the household began to rise .
 The troubles culminated in an argument between the Pics and Marguerite about Lee's behavior .
 Lee transferred to P.S. 117, where he failed to show up on more than half the school days . Marguerite and Lee moved into a one-room apartment in the Bronx and Lee later moved to a Bronx apartment .
 Marguerite spent what must have been a week's salary on a "little replica of a Magnus organ" for Lee’s present . Lee's gift was a replica of the organ .
 Oswald also took a battery of intelligence tests, which showed that he had an IQ of 118, and he scored above average on all the other tests . Oswald's IQ was 118, according to the tests .
 During this observation period Evelyn Stricknfan, an experienced social worker, tried to penetrate the barriers of silence .
 He seemed to have little interest in anything other than watching television . His favorite program was I Lived Three Lives for the FBI . He also read magazines and watched television .
 The only ambition he discussed was joining the Marine Corps, as his brother Robert had done . Robert's brother Robert was also in the Marines .
 He later claimed that his involvement with Marxism had begun with a pamphlet protesting the execution of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg for wartime espionage . Later claimed that he had been involved with Marxism since the death of Rosenberg .
 Oswald returned to Public School 44 that September and made considerable progress . Oswald returned in September . Oswald was a student in public school 44 in New York .
 In October 1953 he was again reported to his probation officer for being ‘unruly”; apparently, he had refused to salute the American flag . However, in October 1953, he was arrested for being unruly .
 Oswald enrolled at Beuregard Junior High School and attempted to expand his previously private universe . Oswald enrolls at Beauregard Jr. High School .
 He befriended a classmate, Edward Voebel, with whom he played darts and shot pool in a French Quarter poolroom . Lee and Marguerite’s Exchange Street apartment was near the scene of the shooting .
 Lee attended several meetings of the local unit of the Civil Air Patrol with Voebel . Lee even got a paper route to raise the cost of a uniform . Lee attended meetings of local unit with his friend .
 Lee was thrown off the football team for insisting that the coach’s rules violated his constitutional rights . Lee played school sports briefly, but he quit the baseball team and was thrown out of football .
 He signed his mother’s “RACE CAR ” / 61 name to a note informing his school that the family was moving to San Diego and dropped out of school . He signed the note to his school saying he was moving . He also signed the name of his mother
 He forged a document which stated that he was seventeen and convinced Marguerite to sign it so that he might enlist in the Marines . He then forged it so he could enlist . He forged the document to get his wife to sign him .
 The Marines rejected his application and told him to return in a year . The Marines, however, rejected him and said he would return in the next year .
 Marguerite, concerned that Lee was spending all his time at home reading ‘deep books,” pressed him to get a job . Lee's wife was concerned that he was spending most of his time reading "deep books" Lee's mother was worried that he would be spending
 Oswald met Palmer E McBride, a fellow messenger at Pfisterer Dental Laboratory, who shared his interest in classical music . For a few weeks in 1956 he worked as a messenger at the laboratory .
 Lee quickly turned the discussion to politics on his visits to McBride’s home, however, Lee said .
 Lee Oswald was very serious about the virtues of Communism and discussed these virtues at every opportunity . Oswald was serious about Communism . Lee Oswald discussed Communism at every chance to discuss these virtues .
 His central theme seemed to be that the workers would one day rise up and throw off their chains . He would say that the capitalists were exploiting the working class, and his central theme was that workers would rise up .
 Oswald bandied about a vocabulary of class warfare . Oswald's vocabulary suggested that the periodicals and books he was then reading were not the standard fare taught in New Orleans schools . Oswald was a member of a New Orleans school community .
 Oswald’s father, who had emigrated from Germany in the 1920s, found his son's Communistic rhetoric especially offensive and ordered the boy out of the house . Oswald's father, a German immigrant from Germany, found Oswald's communistic rhetoric particularly offensive .
 Oswald was then apparently seeking a cell of sympathetic Marxists . According to what he told William Wulf, 62 / LEGEND Oswald was looking for a cell . Oswald told Wulf that he wanted to find a 'cell' of Marxists.
 McBride never found out how successful Oswald was in seeking out and joining a Marxist cell . McBride, who was not personally interested in the idea, said Oswald joined a cell .
 Their friendship ended abruptly when the Oswalds moved back to Texas in July 1956 . The Oswalds' friendship ended when they returned to Texas . Their friendship was a friendship that lasted until 1956 .
 Oswald enrolled in the tenth grade at Arlington Heights High School in Fort Worth, Texas . He quit school in anticipation of his seventeenth birthday and enlistment in the Marines . Oswald attended classes only until September 28, when he quit .
 I am 16 years of age and would like more information about your Youth League, I would like to know if there is a branch in my area, how to join, etc. Dear Sirs, I am sixteen years old .
 I am Marxist and have been studying Socialist principles for well over fifteen months . I am a Marxist and I have studied Socialist principles well over 15 months. I am also a Marxist .
 He noted a history of ear, nose and throat trouble . He had had a mastoidectomy at the age of six .
 On aptitude tests he scored better than average in verbal and verbal section and slightly below average on mathematical and spatial relations sections . He scored above average in the verbal and spatial section of aptitude test .
 He was handed a plane ticket and that afternoon he boarded an American Airlines flight for San Diego, California . He was to report for basic training .
 Oswald, like all other enlisted men in the Marines, went through ten grueling weeks of boot camp . Oswald went through the grueling boot camp in the early 1950s .
 Sherman Cooley, who had rarely been out of rural Beuregard Parish, Louisiana, was assigned to the same platoon in boot camp as Oswald . Oswald was the only member of the platoon assigned to Cooley .
 The men would be awakened in the middle of the night, told to dress with full packs and then ordered to run for great distances, holding their M-l rifles at port arms .
 Every morning they had to be up at five, and except for short, regimented meal and letter-writing breaks, they spent most of the day attending classes and doing physical exercise .
 In December the company went to the rifle range for training in the use of the M-l. In December, the company trained in the M.l.
 Oswald was known as a “s—bird,” who couldn’t qualify with his weapon . Cooley recalls that Oswald was a "s--bird, who couldn't qualify" with his gun .
 Oswald held up well under the razzing . Other than one day when Oswald reported sick in December, he seemed to hold up well . Oswald was the subject of much of the jokes .
 Oswald was sent for combat training at Camp Pendleton, California, in January 1957 . Oswald completed basic training and was sent to the Infantry Training Regiment . Oswald was a World War II combat veteran .
 Oswald practiced techniques of amphibious landings, tank-supported assaults, hand-tohand combat and squad tactics, as all Marines were required to do . Oswald practiced these techniques, as well as other Marines .
 One of the Marines in Oswald’s eight-man squad was Allen R Felde, a native of Milwaukee, Wisconsin . Felde shared a tent with Oswald and shared a meal with him . Oswald and Felde were both Marines .
 Felde remembers that even while Oswald was learning combat techniques, he was attacking U.S. foreign policy . Felde: "He was attacking American foreign policy. He was attacking foreign policy"
 Oswald reported to the Naval Air Technical Training Center at Jacksonville, Florida, on March 18, after a brief leave from Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald was the son of an Air Force pilot who died in March 1945 .
 Oswald was to be trained as a radar controller, a job the Marines gave only to men of higher-thanaverage intelligence . Oswald requested the job he had requested upon enlisting, Oswald said .
 The course at Jacksonville was a general introduction to aviation fundamentals . The course was designed to teach aviation basics .
 For hours on end the trainees were shown films of various Navy and Marine aircraft landing and taking off and listened to classroom lectures .
 Oswald next was stationed at Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi, where he took the aircraft control and warning operator course . Oswald was stationed in the Air Force at the base .
 The thirty Marines in the course were taught how to use radar to identify whether incoming planes were friends or foes . The techniques for overcoming radar-jamming equipment on Soviet planes were also taught .
 The class learned how to plot the path of a spotted aircraft on a transparent plastic board . The class also learned to stay in radio contact with pilots .
 During the course, instructors warned students that they “RACE CAR' 7 / 65 would be dealing with highly secret and sensitive information . They should not be surprised to find counterintelligence agents planted in their unit to make certain that security was being maintained .
 Oswald tended to remain apart from the others in the class, Powers, feeling sorry for him, attempted to be friends with him . Powers attempted to become friends with Oswald, but Oswald refused to talk .
 Oswald told Oswald little about himself, only that his father was dead and his mother lived alone . Oswald told him about his father's death and how he lived with his mother . Oswald's father was also dead, Oswald said .
 Oswald surprised his classmates with his proficiency, finishing seventh in the class . Oswald finished seventh in his class in June .
 He was ordered to join Marine Air Control Squadron One, then stationed in Atsugi, Japan . Officially designated an Aviation Electronics Operator, with the Military Occupation Specialty—or MOS—of 6741 .
 Oswald boarded the USS Bexar in San Diego, which steamed out into the Pacific the next day . Powers and most of his classmates from Keesler, Oswald, were on board the ship . Powers: "I was a good guy, and I was very proud of my
 Oswald bought a Hawaiian shirt and took a picture of the statue of Kamehameha the Great . The rebel leader overthrew the established order and united the Hawaiian Islands under his rule . Oswald was aboard the ship when he visited the Hawaiian islands .
 He also sent his mother a postcard, saying, “Well, only one day here but I have been having lots of fun. more days at sea to Japan to Japan.” “Only one day . here is only one of the days I've been at sea
 Oswald demonstrated his skill at chess during the twenty-one-day voyage . During the voyage, the Marines had constant “war games” and “drills,” Oswald demonstrated .
 Powers, who played with Oswald almost every day, recalled Oswald’s becoming exuberant when he won, jumping up and saying, “Look at that, I won.” Powers said . Powers said Oswald became an ex-lover when he was playing in the
 Oswald spent the balance of his time reading Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass . Oswald also spent the rest of his life reading the Leaves of the Grass .
 On September 12 the ship finally docked in Yokosuka, a naval port near Tokyo, Japan .
 The base was dotted with deep caves riddled into the sides of the hills . The caves were built to keep fighter planes off the fields to protect them from strafing missions .
 Atsugi was built by the Japanese during World War II as the hub of their air defense system and the main training base for their kamikaze pilots . It was now a base of operations for the First Marine Air Wing .
 Behind it was a barbedwire fence, which separated the Japanese rice fields from the base . Behind the fence was a Japanese rice field fence .
 The hangars on the west side of the concrete runways housed the Marine equivalent of F-86 fighters . A contingent of the fighters stood on ready-alert on pads outside the hangars .
 On the east side were Navy Super-Constellations used for locating enemy radar and antisubmarine operators . The east side was used to locate enemy radar, and the west was used for anti-marine radar .
 One huge hangar at the northwest end of the runway stored the U-2 reconnaissance planes . Another huge hangar was a huge hangar where the planes were stored . The U.2 reconnaissance plane was the first to be used in World War II .
 Atsugi remained a ‘closed’ base, which meant that personnel on the base had to have cards showing their security clearance . For these reasons, personnel had to show security clearance to the base .
 Oswald had had a peripatetic life almost from the time he was born . The move to Japan presented new opportunities for Oswald, who had lived a long life in Japan .
 Atsugi is a former truant and a high school dropout . His job as a radar operator at Atsiga gave him a standing that he lacked as a truant .
 Oswald was assigned to work in the radar bubble located at the northern end of the mile-long runway . Oswald worked in the bubble located in the northern part of the runway at the end of runway .
 For four hours at a time they would alternate peering into their ‘crystal balls’ - radarscopes . They would be plotting intercepts at the plotting board and monitoring radio communications with pilots .
 They were supposed to direct friendly planes toward their destinations through the use of radar and to spot enemy planes . They would then alert the Tactical Air Control Center at Iwakuni, 67 68 / LEGEND Japan, which would then dispatch interceptor planes .
 They also served as communications liaisons with the Japanese air defense forces . They also monitored the air traffic approaching Tokyo .
 Oswald prided himself on the meticulous paths he drew and bristled at a young “Tab Hunter-type officer” who tried to second-guess his plotting or to correct him . Oswald said he was proud of his meticulous work on the plotting board . Oswald: “
 He showed a keen interest in briefings on classified material held by the unit’s intelligence officer .
 Oswald’s supervisor, Captain Francis J Gajewski, duly noted in his record six months after he came to Atsugi, “As a matter of fact has done good work for me.” His supervisor said in his report that Oswald ‘has done good
 Oswald refused to talk much about himself, according to the men who spent all-night watches with him . Oswald was a member of the enlisted crew who spent nights with Oswald . He refused to discuss himself, the men said .
 They continued to pry to find out if he was a “cherry virgin” or if he had found a girlfriend . But he warded away both queries and insults with an odd type of half-smile that some took to be a sneer .
 Sometimes, during a long stretch in the bubble, he would mimic Bugs Bunny . He would wiggle his ears, squint his eyes and extend his teeth over his lower lip . He earned him the nickname Bugs .
 When a blip appeared on his scope, however, he would quickly return to it . He would often return to the scope, but he would soon return to his job .
 Oswald lived in a wooden two-story barracks near the east gate of the base . Like most of the other privates and corporals in the 117man MACS-1 unit, Oswald lived there . Oswald was one of the 117 members of the MACS1 unit .
 Oswald, threw him in THE QUEEN BEE / 69 the shower fully dressed and hassled him in every other conceivable way . Oswald was thrown out of the shower by the queen of the night .
 Oswald would not fight back; he would just turn away from a provoker and ignore him . Oswald would simply ignore the provoker, and would turn away and ignore his threat .
 Not all the Marines in the barracks approved of this razzing of Oswald . Not all of the Marines approved of the joke .
 Zack Stout, who had interrupted his high school education and joined the Marines with a group of his friends, found Oswald both interesting and likable . Stout: Oswald is a good guy and a good Marine, who has a lot of respect for the Marine .
 He also found Oswald one of the few men in the unit with whom he could hold an intelligent conversation and who read serious books . Oswald was one of those few men to hold intelligent conversations with, he said .
 Stout began going on leaves with Oswald, he also found that he was seemingly well informed about politics . Stout found that Oswald seemed to be well-informed about politics in his travels . Stout: "When I went on leaves, I realized that Oswald was well informed"
 Oswald sympathizes with Oswald in resenting the authority of young officers just out of college . Oswald could sympathize with Oswald's resentment of the authority he had in the Army .
 "Ozzie was just like the rest of us. He says, "Hell, we all thought we were smarter and better than any of the officers" Ozzie says he thought he was smarter than any officer .
 When Oswald showed an interest in photography, Wilkins, himself a photography buff, spent some time teaching him how to use a 35-mm camera . Wilkins taught Oswald how to take photos with a camera .
 Oswald then bought an Imperial Reflex camera and walked around the sprawling base . Oswald then took pictures of the various objects that apparently interested him . Oswald took photos of the radar height-finding antennas .
 Daniels had rarely been out of the swamps of Florida, where he had helped his father fish and trap before enlisting at the age of eighteen . Daniels was a giant of a man, with a 6ft 6in figure .
 Daniels was greatly admired by the other Marines in the unit, including at least one officer . Daniels took Oswald under his wing and tried to help him when he could .
 Oswald had found a camaraderie with a group of men that he had never experienced before . Oswald had now found at Atsugi a camaderie that he'd never experienced in his life .
 They also introduced him to the vast array of cheap bars near the base and the girls who worked in them . The girls who work in the bars were introduced to him .
 From neonrise to neonset, bars served as bargain-basement brothels for enlisted men from the base . The bars were used as bargain basement brothems for enlisted soldiers .
 They cheered him on when he finally had his first sexual experience with a Japanese bar girl . The bar girl was a member of the group who had sex with him .
 Oswald took Oswald to Yokohama with them on their “Cinderella’s liberties” because they had to be back on base at a prescribed hour in the middle of the night, usually midnight . Oswald had to return to base at the prescribed hour of the day
 In Yamato, on the outskirts of the base, they turned the Bluebird Cafe into a THE QUEEN BEE / 71 squadron hangout and jeered at sailors who strayed in .
 Oswald sat up all night watching his newfound friends play poker poker . Oswald did not yet gamble himself . He was considered “moralistic” in that respect .
 Oswald would disappear to Tokyo on a two-day leave and refuse to discuss these trips with even his closest friends . There were times, however, when Oswald would go to Tokyo for two days and refused to discuss his trips with friends .
 Years later he confided to a close associate that he had become involved with a small circle of Japanese Communists in Tokyo while in the Marines .
 If this is true, none of the Marines Oswald served with had any inkling of the double life he was living . Oswald served as a Marine in the Marines in the 1960s .
 He seemed to have fallen in love, perhaps for the first time in his life, with a Japanese girl .
 Oswald told Stout she was a hostess at the Queen Bee in Tokyo . Stout asked Oswald where she worked, Oswald told him that she worked . Oswald said she worked as a Tokyo hostess .
 It catered to an elite clientele—field-grade officers, pilots (including U-2 pilots) and a few junior officers with private incomes—not to impoverished Marine privates .
 To take a hostess out of a nightclub customarily required paying not only the girl, but the nightclub as well for the bar business it lost during her absence . A hostess would have to pay for the lost bar business lost .
 For an evening at the Queen Bee, a date could cost anywhere from $60 to $100 . The Queen Bee is located in New York City, New York .
 Oswald, who was earning less than $85 a month take-home pay, went out with this woman from the Queen Bee with surprising regularity, even bringing her back to the base area several times . Oswald was earning just $85 per month, but went out regularly with the woman
 Other Marines, less friendly to Oswald, were astonished that someone of her “class” would go out with Oswald at all . Other Marines saw Oswald with the woman .
 Stout and other men remember that these clubs were frequented by officers, and one could pick up useful bits of information about where the unit was headed . Stout and others remember that . these clubs . remember that they were frequents by officers . Stout remembers that . one could . pick up
 Plans were made for the entire unit to ship out to the South China Sea and the Philippines . Oswald celebrated his eighteenth birthday on October 18, and the unit shipped out .
 The civil war in Indonesia was heating up, and the United States was considering an overt intervention . The U.S. had until now only secretly supported the Moslem generals against President Achmed Sukarno .
 Oswald grazed his upper left arm with a .22-caliber bullet, which he had fired from a derringer he had somehow obtained in Japan . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet that hit his upper arm . Oswald survived the shooting .
 Wilkins rushed into the barracks at the sound of the explosion and saw Oswald quietly sitting on the lower bunk of his double-decker . Oswald was still holding the pistol in his right hand, still holding it .
 Wilkins could see a trace of blood on Oswald’s left arm, but the wound did not look serious . Wilkins: “I don’t believe Oswald was hit by a bullet in the head,” he said. “The wound didn’
 Oswald had shown him the silver-plated two-shot derringer and told him that he had ordered it from a mail-order firm in the U.S. Only a few weeks before, Oswald had told him he had bought it from the mail order firm .
 Wilkins turned and left the barracks as others rushed in . Knowing that it was illegal for enlisted men to have private firearms, Wilkins left . Wilkins says he turned around and left .
 Robert Royce Augg, whose bed Oswald was sitting on, came in just as a Navy corpsman was tying a tourniquet on Oswald’s arm . Oswald was shot in the head by a Navy officer in Dallas, Texas, in August, Texas .
 Oswald had deliberately shot himself “to get himself transferred’’ before the unit departed from Japan . Oswald had been trying to 'get himself transferred'’
 Oswald was rushed to the United States Navy Hospital in nearby Yokosuka, where a Navy surgeon treated the wound . Oswald was taken to the U.S. Navy Hospital .
 Oswald had shot himself by accident when he dropped a .45-caliber automatic pistol and it discharged . Guthrie said initially that Oswald had accidentally shot himself . Oswald had been shot by accident, Guthrie later said .
 Oswald had reported that he had his own .22-caliber pistol, which was a court-martial offense . This apparently was what Oswald reported, rather than reveal he had a .22 caliber pistol . Oswald had said he had the pistol, but not the pistol .
 Oswald was discharged from medical treatment just in time to rejoin his unit in Japan . Despite his apparent desire to remain behind in Japan, Oswald was able to return to his unit within hours .
 On November 20, with the rest of the men from “Coffee Mill” he boarded a rickety World War II LST, the USS Terrell County . He steamed out of the port of Yokosuka, bound for the northern end of the Philippine
 While waiting for their heavier equipment to arrive, the Marines set about exploring the countryside .
 Encountering a group of local people feasting on pork and dog meat, they offered to trade them government blankets for knives . They offered to swap blankets for government knives .
 The natives gave them a locally fermented “green beer,” and as the Marines made approaches to their women, a brawl nearly broke out . The Marines were given a local fermented "green beer"
 James R “Bud"" Persons, a young Mississippian who used to enjoy these foraging expeditions, became acquainted with Oswald during this period .
 An unfortunate monkey had to be dumped overboard because the officers suspected it as a disease carrier . The monkey was taken aboard by one of the Marines .
 On the second day at sea, however, the ship veered around sharply and headed back to Subic Bay in the Philippines . The ship was headed for the Philippines when it veered off the coast .
 For a week the ship simply sat in the bay, no hint was given to the Marines as to their future destination . The ship was not given a hint as to its future .
 Terrell County rendezvoused with some thirty other ships of the Seventh Fleet . In early December the Terrell county headed out into the South China Sea .
 The rumor floated around that the Marines were to be sent into Thailand to rescue some American oil executives . There was no official briefing for the enlisted men .
 Some Marines found relief from boredom by trying to sink floating oil drums with rifle fire . Some Marines were bored by the boredom of the battle .
 For hours on end they had nothing to do but speculate on the forthcoming intervention and play chess and poker . For hours, the pair played chess, poker and played poker in preparation for the intervention .
 Gator Daniels even taught Oswald how to play “nickel and dime” poker . Oswald had resisted gambling up to this point, but had resisted .
 After a hot and dreary Christmas at sea near the equator, the LST returned to Subic Bay . Finally, after a hot winter, the ship was able to make it home safely in the Philippines .
 This time they set up a temporary camp on the edges of Cubi Point Air Base . This is the first time they have set up such a camp in the area .
 ‘Coffee Mill’ celebrated a New Year’s Eve that was raucous even by Marine standards . Persons were knocked unconscious, and a radar technician in the unit was hospitalized with a concussion .
 Boredom was rampant in the Philippines, and some of the men established a booze-making operation . The Queen of the Philippines was the first queen of the Philippine Revolution .
 The men stole alcohol from the sick bay and put it in a five-gallon water can, along with a hearty mixture of orange and potato peelings . Peter Cassisi recalls that the men put the alcohol in the water can and peeled peelings in the can .
 After the can was dug up, they strained the mixture through their T-shirts . After digging up the can, the boys strained it through their shirts .
 A few weeks after the unit landed, on January 15, 1958, there was a violent incident at Cubi Point . A violent incident occurred on the same day .
 Martin Schrand traveled by car with Oswald from the aviation school at Jacksonville, Florida, to the radar school at Biloxi, Mississippi, and then to Atsugi and the Philippines . Schrand was shot to death while on guard duty at the Philippines airbase .
 Persons was also on guard duty that night, patrolling an empty hangar, which on other occasions housed the blueblack U-2 . Persons also was patrolling the empty hangar .
 He distinctly remembers hearing the whistle of the high winds off the South China Sea, which he had come to associate with Cubi Point . He remembers hearing it off the coast of the island .
 The officer of the day, Lieutenant Hugh Cherrie, had just made his routine check of the guard . Lieutenant Cherrie had just been making his routine checks of the guards .
 Schrand heard an explosion and bloodcurdling screams from the area that Schrand was patrolling . Persons heard the explosion, which he instantly knew was a shotgun blast . Persons was patrolling the area when the explosion occurred .
 "I knew I wasn’t supposed to leave my post, no matter what happened, but I just said, ‘Hell, the guy’s in trouble,’ and took off' over there, he later recounted .
 Schrand was found in a pool of blood, mortally wounded . About 50 yards away from the scene, Schrand found Schrand dead in pool .
 It was determined that Schrand had been shot under the right arm by his own shotgun . Schrand was found to have been shot in the arm by himself .
 The barrel of the gun was longer than Schrand's arm and no object with which he could have pulled the trigger was found at the scene . Suicide was ruled out because the barrel of a gun was not longer than his arm .
 At first, it was assumed that he had been attacked by a Filipino guerrilla and, in the scuffle, shot with his own weapon .
 When no other evidence of infiltrators could be found, the death was ruled “accidental,” on the assumption that the weapon had accidentally gone off when Schrand dropped it . Schrand died when the weapon went off, but no evidence of infiltration was found .
 The enlisted men, continuing to suspect that something more was involved in Schrand’s death, grew increasingly nervous about guard duty . Schrand was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 "It was real dark, and I remember walking along and coming to the spot where he’d been shot," he says . "It's real dark. He’s real dark," he recalls walking along the spot of the shooting .
 A few days after Schrand's death ‘Coffee Mill’s camp was again ordered to disband its camp .
 The Marines boarded a Philippine LST and headed for the island of Corregidor, 40 miles away . This time the Marines boarded the LST, which is 40 miles from the island . The Marines are now on their way to the island, where they are based .
 Strewn all around the site was the debris of the fierce battles and bombardments of that war . Strewn with the debris was the wreckage of the battles and bombages of the Great Depression .
 John Wayne, then in the midst of filming The Barbarian and the Geisha, flew overhead in a helicopter and asked permission to land . A week or so after they set up camp, John Wayne flew overhead . John Wayne asked permission for his helicopter to land in the area .
 A moment later the six-foot-four film star was engulfed by Marines . Marines rushed out of the radar hut to greet him .
 Oswald was on mess duty at the time for the third straight month . Wayne was dining with the men when he was in the background of the photo .
 Oswald became a proficient cook during his ten weeks on Corregidor . Oswald scrambled gallon after gallon of eggs each morning .
 He could have three gallons of eggs on the griddle and take a mess tray and slide it under the puddle of eggs and flip them all at once . He could take three gallons and flip all the eggs in one place .
 Oswald seemed to enjoy himself on the island in his spare time, as did his fellow Marines . Despite his continuing mess duty, Oswald was able to enjoy his time in the mess .
 The men were responsible for little but their own entertainment . Sunday visits to the island by American tourists were virtually the only breaks in their routine of swimming, sunbathing and exploring .
 In his letters from Corregidor, Persons had little to report except that his suntan was the best he’d ever had .
 Radar duty was so uneventful that the men practiced scanning for imaginary aircraft to avoid being driven crazy by the monotony . The men were so bored they had to practice scanning imaginary aircraft .
 Zack Stout took long walks with Oswald, exploring the battle-scarred fortifications, and found him especially good company . Stout took Oswald to explore the fortifications in his new home .
 A native found and killed a 15-foot python in the jungle near the beach . Their explorations of the island were temporarily discouraged when the python was found .
 Oswald spent most of the rest of his free time reading serious books and waiting for letters . Oswald spent his rest of the time in his spare time in waiting for his letters .
 When he did receive mail, he would abruptly leave friends he was with to read it in private . He would then leave friends with him to read the mail in private.
 By March 7 the Indonesia crisis had finally subsided, the Marines boarded another LST, the USS Wexford County, with all their radar gear . The LST had all radar gear aboard .
 It took another eleven days at sea before they reached their home base in Japan .
 Oswald was brought up on charges for having had an unregistered weapon . Oswald shot himself with the derringer with which he had shot himself in October . Oswald was charged with having had the weapon he shot himself .
 His confinement was suspended for six months, with the provision that it would be canceled if he kept out of further trouble . He was sentenced to six months in prison, suspended with six months' probation .
 His officers supported his request to be returned to radar duty, but he was inexplicably kept on mess duty . Even though his officers supported he wanted to be back on radar duty .
 Apparently he hoped to be discharged in Japan, where he had made friends, but this request also was turned down . Apparently this request was also turned down by the U.S. military .
 Stout remembers that Oswald became increasingly bitter at this turn of events and began to argue that he was being singled out for mistreatment by the Marine Corps . Stout remembers how Oswald became bitter at the end of the war . Stout says Oswald became angry at the treatment of him by the Marines .
 Oswald finally took his resentment out on the man who had reassigned him to mess duty, Technical Sergeant Miguel Rodriguez . Rodriguez was a Technical Sergeant who was reassigned to mess duties .
 Rodriguez ignored his challenge, suspecting at the time that Oswald was prejudiced against persons of Mexican descent . Rodriguez ignored the challenge .
 Oswald spilled a drink on Rodriguez and attempted to provoke a fight . This time Oswald spilled drink and tried to provoke fight with Rodriguez . The fight broke out between Rodriguez and Rodriguez .
 The military police intervened, and the next day Rodriguez signed a complaint against Oswald . Rodriguez signed the complaint, and Oswald was arrested . The next day, Oswald was charged with murder .
 Oswald elected to act as his own defense counsel at the hearing . He cross-examined Rodriguez and attempted to persuade the court that he had spilled the drink accidentally . Oswald has been charged with attempted murder of Rodriguez .
 Rodriguez insisted—and still insists—that Oswald had not been drunk and that he had deliberately spilled his drink on him . Rodriguez insists he was not drunk, and that Oswald deliberately spilled it on him.
 Oswald was sentenced to twenty-eight days in the brig and forefeiture of another $55 . The judge ruled that Oswald had used “provoking words” and sentenced him to twenty . Oswald was found guilty of using ‘provocative words’
 The QUEEN BEE / 79 were made to stand at rigid attention during every moment they were not performing menial duties .
 From his nine-man cell, he remembers seeing Oswald looking out from a single cell . He remembers seeing him in a cell . Oswald was a single man in the cell .
 Oswald met Oswald soon after he was released from the brig . Another young radar operator in “Coffee Mill’s Coffee Mill” remembers meeting Oswald .
 He found him “a completely changed person from the naive and innocent boy” who had joined the unit in Japan less than a year earlier . He said he found him a “completely changed person” from “naive and innocent” boy .
 Oswald seemed to associate more than ever with his Japanese friends and less with Marines . Oswald's Japanese friends seemed to be more popular than Marines .
 Oswald’s Marine friends recall meeting him at a house in Yamato with a woman who was working there as a housekeeper for a naval officer . One of Oswald's Marine friends recalls meeting him with the woman working there . Oswald was a Marine friend .
 Oswald had found a girlfriend who was not a bar girl or prostitute . He was impressed at the time that Oswald had had a girlfriend not a prostitute .
 Oswald had apparently bought a T-shirt from the PX on base in Japan . In the house was also a handsome young Japanese man . Oswald apparently bought the shirt for Oswald from the base's PX .
 The Marine was unable to understand exactly what Oswald’s relation was to the group . While the girls cooked sukiyaki on a hibachi grill, the men talked, but the Marine couldn’t understand .
 ‘Coffee Mill’ was ordered to set up a forward radar base at Pingtung on Formosa . In anticipation of a possible naval intervention in the straits between Formosa and the Communist-held mainland, the base was set up .
 Oswald boarded the USS Skagit, an attack cargo ship . Oswald was one of the Marines who boarded the ship with fellow Marines .
 In Formosa the officers commanding ‘Coffee Mill’ found that its crucial “squawk” or identification friend or foe system, had been totally compromised .
 Someone with access to the squawk codes in the parrot had apparently passed them along to the enemy . The squawk code was apparently passed along to an enemy .
 When not on radar duty, the Marines helped Nationalist Chinese troops build artillery emplacements . The Marines also helped the Nationalist China build artillery .
 Oswald looked like the kind of kid who got the hand-medowns, just like I had . Oswald looked . like a kid who had his own kind of hand-measure . Oswald looks like the boy who had a good time with the hand .
 Rhodes was in charge of radar operations when he left the bubble for a few minutes, leaving Oswald at the plotting board . Rhodes left Oswald at plotting board while he was in the bubble . Rhodes was responsible for radar operations at the time of the attack .
 Oswald was found asleep at Rhodes’ desk . Rhodes was found sleeping in the bubble by a superior officer . Rhodes died at the age of 92 in 1945 .
 Oswald was on guard duty at about midnight when Rhodes heard “four or five” shots from the position Oswald was guarding . Rhodes, the officer of the guard, suddenly heard ‘four or . five’ shots from Oswald’s position .
 Gunshots ring out a clump of trees from which the gunfire seemingly emanates . Gunman says he ran toward the trees, then ran for help . He says he was shot in the head .
 Oswald was found slumped against a tree, holding his rifle across his lap . Oswald had been sitting in a tree with his rifle in his lap when he was killed . Oswald was the only person to find Oswald slumped against the tree .
 Rhodes put his arm around Oswald's shoulder and slowly walked him back to his tent . Rhodes put an arm around his shoulder and walked Oswald back to the tent .
 Oswald was returned to Japan on October 6 on a military plane . Rhodes reported the incident to his commanding officer, and almost immediately after that, Oswald was flown back to Japan .
 Oswald reported to the base hospital in Atsugi, he complained of having injured himself doing “heavy lifting” in Formosa, but the only unambiguous symptoms the doctors were able to find were urethral discharges which had persisted from the gonorrhea .
 In the case of a Communist Chinese, North Korean or Soviet attack, it was the job of the center to coordinate the air defenses . The center was tasked with coordinating air defenses in the event of a Soviet or Chinese attack .
 This required constant information about the availability of allied aircraft throughout the Pacific be constantly fed to the center . This required that continual information about allied aircraft .
 At any given moment, the center had to be ready and able to scramble interceptors . The center was at the top of the list of interceptors in the air .
 Oswald again was assigned to the translucent plotting board . Oswald was given a temporary assignment as a plotting officer .
 Owen Dejanovich, a tall, lanky native of Chicago, went on to play professional football . He recognized Oswald in the center as someone he had gone to radar school with at Keesler Air Base . Oswald tried to renew the acquaintanceship with a man he went to radar
 He quickly found that Oswald had grown enormously bitter since he had last known him . Oswald was bitter and had grown bitter since the last time he had seen him . He had been in contact with Oswald again .
 Oswald spoke in slogans about “American imperialism” and “exploitation” which made Dejanovich think at the time that Oswald was merely being perverse for the sake of shocking the other Marines at the center . Oswald, who he called Bugs, was just being perverse
 In the evenings Dejanovich would occasionally see Oswald speaking to an attractive Eurasian woman . Oswald would speak to a woman in the evenings, Dejanovic says .
 Another Marine in the unit, Dan Powers, had got the impression from Oswald that this Eurasian was half-Russian and was teaching Oswald the Russian language .
 Other Marines speculated that Oswald had simply set up a “ranch,” or living arrangement, with the Eurasian at Iwakuni . The Eurasian is believed to have been at the base of the base .
 Dejanovich would see Oswald with this girl at the Orion bar in Iwakuni, he would just shake his head at what he considered Oswald's perverse nature . Oswald would shake head at the perverse nature of his perverse nature, he said .
 Oswald told reporters when he arrived in Moscow one year later that he planned to defect to the Soviet Union . Unknown to his fellow Marines, Oswald was during this period in Japan making careful preparations to defect .
 Oswald boarded the USS Barrett in Yokosuka on November 2, 1958, at the end of his 13-month tour of duty in Japan . Oswald was killed in November 1958 .
 Two weeks later, after a quiet and uneventful voyage, the troopship arrived in San Francisco Harbor .
 Most of the Marines aboard cheered at the sight of the Golden Gate Bridge . The Marines were on board at the time of the attack .
 Oswald's journey was merely the first step of a much longer journey eastward . Oswald's first step was to travel to China, but it was only the beginning of a long journey .
 Oswald traveled by bus to Fort Worth, Texas, to see his family on a thirty-day leave . Oswald is in Fort Worth on a three-month leave from the Air Force .
 He stayed at his mother’s apartment but spent a good deal of time with his brother Robert, hunting squirrels and rabbits with .22-caliber rifles . He spent most of the time hunting with Robert's brother .
 Robert Pic remembers telling his brother that he had just missed seeing their half brother, John Pic, who was on his way to Japan with the Air Force . Robert remembers telling John Pic that he just missed him . John Pic is now serving in the U.S. Air Force in Japan
 Oswald boarded another bus and returned to the Marines on December 21 . Oswald boarded still another bus to return to the Marine Corps . Oswald was still in the Marines at the time of his return .
 It operated out of an old Navy blimp base, which had on its grounds two of the largest wooden hangars ever constructed . The base was used mainly to service helicopters .
 Marine jets and other fixed-wing aircraft flew mainly out of El Toro Air Base, located across the road from the blimp base . The Marine jets were used to fly from the base .
 MACS-9 was assigned to operate a radar bubble which was located on a grassy field near the road separating the two bases . Behind it, the radar antennas were enclosed by a square of barbed wire . The radar bubble was located in a grass field .
 Oswald was assigned to Bravo team in the bubble . He served with Owen Dejanovich and a number of other Marines with whom he served in Japan .
 In theory, his job was not very different from the one he had performed in Atsugi . "In theory, he had to do the same thing," he said .
 He would scan the radarscope for unidentified planes (or ones in distress) in the area south of Los Angeles . He would be rotated back to the plotting board, where he would wait for someone else to spot a "bogey" aircraft .
 Radar operators in the California Air Defense Identification Zone had little trouble to break the tedium . Unlike Atsugi, where occasional enemy planes strayed into the zone, little happened in California .
 Oswald arranged to take a Marine Corps proficiency exam in the Russian language . Oswald took the test on February 25, 1959 . Oswald was one of the men in the unit .
 In reading Russian, he achieved a score of plus four, which meant he had got four more answers right than wrong . In Russian, that means he got four answers right and wrong than wrong.
 In writing Russian, he scored plus three, in comprehending spoken Russian, plus five . In understanding spoken Russian he scored minus five, in writing Russian .
 His overall score was considered ‘poor’ when compared to those studying Russian at language schools . It showed that he had learned the rudiments of a very difficult foreign language .
 Oswald would have had to have begun his training in Russian while he was still in Japan . It would take more than three months to achieve such a stage in written and spoken Russian, except under extraordinary circumstances .
 Oswald’s barracks-mates in Japan don’t remember him using a linguaphone or records to learn Russian, which suggests that he had some more private means . None of his barracks mates in Japan, however, remember his use of the language he spoke to . Oswald
 Less than a month after taking his Russian exam, Oswald took and passed tests which gave him the equivalency of a high school diploma and made it possible for him to apply to college . Oswald was able to take and pass the tests which allowed him to obtain a high diploma .
 For hours on end he would sit with a textbook and RussianEnglish dictionary, testing himself on words, then scribbling them down in a notebook . He would sit for hours with a dictionary and a textbook, then write them down .
 Oswald was receiving "leftist literature" to their operations officer, Captain Robert E Block, who questioned Oswald about this reading matter . When astonished clerks in the mailroom reported the fact that Oswald . was receiving this “Leftist literature” to their . operations officer .
 Oswald explained he was only trying to indoctrinate himself in Russian theory in conformance with Marine Corps policy . Oswald explained that he was just trying to learn Russian theory from the Marine Corps .
 Block was not entirely convinced by Oswald’s answer, but did not press the matter . Block said he did not believe Oswald's answer .
 The Marines shared a cubicle with Oswald in one of the quonset huts used for sleeping quarters by MACS-9 . Oswald incessantly practiced his Russian, the Marines say .
 Oswald would knock at his door if he played his classical record Russian Fireworks . Richard Dennis Call, another radar operator in the unit, recalls that whenever he played it, Oswald would say, “You called”
 Oswald had become so well known as a Russophile within the unit that one Marine asked him to have dinner with his aunt, Rosaleen Quinn, an attractive airline stewardess from New Orleans . She was studying Russian in preparation for the State Department’s foreign-language examination
 She met Oswald in a cafeteria in Santa Ana, California, and they spoke in Russian for about two hours . Oswald is a former Russian spy in the U.S. Navy .
 She had been studying Russian with a Berlitz tutor for more than a year . She found Oswald had a far more confident command of the language than she did and could string entire sentences together without much hesitation .
 She asked how he had learned Russian, and he shrugged that he had ‘taught himself” by listening to Radio Moscow . She asked him how he learned Russian .
 He then told her that he had also learned some Japanese while stationed in Japan .
 She was impressed not only by his seriousness about the Russian language, but also by his intellectual curiosity, she said . She said she was impressed with his seriousness and intellectual curiosity .
 After dinner he walked her back to the rooming house where she was staying and politely said good-night . After dinner, he said goodbye to her .
 Oswald took her to see the film South Pacific, and afterward they had a drink at a neighborhood bar . Oswald and his wife were married for more than 20 years .
 Oswald told her he had plans to go to Europe, but he did not specify what they were . Oswald said he was going to Europe but did not say what he wanted to do .
 Oswald also confided in Corporal Nelson Delgado, who shared a cubicle with him in the quonset hut . Delgado worked with Oswald for four-hour shifts, every other day, in the radar bubble . Oswald confided to Delgado that summer .
 Delgado found Oswald ‘treated him like an equal,” unlike the other Marines in the unit . Delgado, a Puerto Rican, found that Oswald treated him "like an equal," unlike other Marines, he says .
 Delgado tried to teach Oswald Spanish and found him a willing and able student . Oswald and Delgado spent most of their time together in the radar bubble .
 Oswald even purchased a Spanish-English dictionary so that he could practice on his own . Oswald purchased the dictionary to help him learn Spanish . Oswald even bought a Spanish dictionary for himself to use .
 Delgado took Oswald to Tijuana, Mexico, with him for the weekend . On one 88 / LEGEND occasion Delgado went to Mexico with Oswald .
 Oswald left Delgado, presumably to meet ‘friends,” whom he did not further identify . After spending a few hours with him in a bar, Oswald left the bar to meet "friends"
 What really seemed to weld the bond between them was their common interest in Fidel Castro, who had in the beginning of that year won his guerrilla war and assumed power .
 Oswald told him he wanted desperately to go to Cuba and help train Castro’s army . Oswald said he wanted to help train the Cuban army . Castro's army was trained by Oswald in Cuba .
 His hero that August was Major William A Morgan, a former sergeant in the American Army who had joined Castro in Cuba, had renounced his citizenship, and had been promoted to a field-grade rank personally by Castro .
 Major Morgan acted as a double agent to lure anti-Castro rebels into a trap in Cuba . He lured the rebels into the trap in order to lure them into Cuba .
 Oswald suggested that Delgado accompany him to Cuba, where they both could emulate Major Morgan . At one point, Oswald suggested Delgado join him in Cuba where they could emulate Morgan .
 Oswald pressed Delgado for someone to contact with Cubans . Oswald said Delgado had some local means of getting in touch with Cuban citizens . Oswald pressed him for someone else to contact, but Delgado said he had no idea .
 Oswald had up to that point received very few letters, Delgado noticed that he now began getting mail several times a week . Delgado says he began receiving mail from Oswald's friends and family members .
 Oswald's locker contained letters from the Cuban consulate . Oswald learned from Oswald’s locker that at least some of the letters came from the consulate . He also learned while looking for a tie to borrow, he also learned .
 Delgado was on duty with Oswald when he got a call from the MP guard shack THE DEFECTOR / 89 that Oswald had a visitor at the front gate . Delgado: "I got a . call from a . guard shack The Defector / 89"
 Delgado saw Oswald in a heated discussion with a man in a topcoat . Delgado happened to pass the main gate and saw Oswald . Oswald was arrested and charged with attempted murder in March .
 It seemed odd to Delgado that anyone would wear a coat on a hot California night . Delgado: "It seems odd to me to see anyone wearing a coat in such a hot night"
 He realized that they had probably been used as a visual aid in training classes, and wondered why Oswald had them in his possession . Oswald had probably used them as visual aids in his training classes .
 Oswald stuffed the photographs into a duffel bag with some other possessions . He asked Delgado if he would bring the bag to the bus station in Los Angeles, put it in a locker, and bring him back the key . Oswald stuffed it in the bag with other possessions and asked
 Oswald asked Oswald if he was still planning to go to Cuba after his discharge . Oswald said he was going to Cuba when he was discharged from the Army . Oswald asked him if he still planned to go there after being discharged .
 Marines normally had a two-year commitment to the inactive reserve even after completing their active duty . Marines had to have a valid reason for traveling overseas during this time . Marines were required to travel overseas during the time .
 Oswald applied in March 1959 for admission to the Spring 1960 term at the Albert Schweitzer College, a new liberal arts college in Churwalden, Switzerland, with fewer than fifty students . Oswald applied to the new college in 1959 .
 Oswald professed fluency in Russian, some knowledge of German, a high school diploma and interest in “ideology,” philosophy and psychology . Oswald also professed interest in philosophy, psychology and philosophy . Oswald's application for the job was approved by the University of Cambridge .
 Oswald filed papers with the Red Cross in July intended to help him get an early discharge from the Marine Corps . Oswald filed the papers in July to get his early discharge . Oswald also filed papers to help get him out of the Marines .
 He explained to his mother in a specialdelivery letter that Red Cross representatives would call on her to ascertain that he was needed at home to support her . He explained in the special delivery letter that he would be needed to support his mother .
 Oswald filed for a dependency discharge on August 17, 1959 . Oswald was discharged from the Army in August 1959 .
 His request was approved two weeks later, and on September 3, he was detached from duty and transferred to the headquarters company at El Toro across the road to be processed out of the Marines .
 Selection of colleges in Switzerland and Finland provided a plausible cover for his travels east . Selection was a cover for him to travel to the east of Europe .
 Oswald signed a statement pledging not to divulge classified information . Oswald was required of all Marines with access to classified material . Oswald said he would not reveal or divulge any information affecting national defense .
 He was released from active duty and transferred to the Marine Air Reserve Training Command . He was then officially released from the active duty .
 Oswald left Santa Ana that day and traveled by bus to Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald arrived at his mother's house at 2m. on September 14 . Oswald's mother was in Fort Worth when he died .
 Marguerite had counted on her son's remaining home to help support her . She was surprised when he told her he planned to “board a ship and work in the export-import business”
 After withdrawing $203 from the West Side State Bank, he went to his brother Robert’s house on Davenport Street in Fort Worth . He spent an entire day at his brother's house, where he spent the day .
 On this day Robert took a picture of Lee holding Cathy, Robert’s daughter . Robert took the picture of Cathy, Cathy, and Lee .
 Oswald showed his mother his passport and left for New Orleans after giving her $100 . Oswald's mother remembers noticing a page stamped IMPORT-EXPORT on his passport . Oswald gave his mother a $100 note to her .
 He had stored most of his belongings, including his Imperial Reflex camera, in his brother’s garage .
 The next day Oswald went directly to the offices of Travel Consultants, Inc., where he booked passage on the freighter Marion Lykes . Oswald was scheduled to sail the following day from New Orleans bound for Le Havre, France . Oswald died of his injuries .
 Oswald described himself as a ‘shipping export agent’ going abroad for a two-month holiday . On the steamship company’s application form, Oswald said he was going abroad .
 "Remember that my values are different from Robert's or yours. Just remember 92 / LEGEND above all else that I'm not just a legend."
 The SS Marion Lykes left New Orleans on September 20, one day behind schedule . The ship was one of the first to leave New Orleans, New Orleans .
 George B Church, Jr., a retired lieutenant colonel in the United States Army; his wife; Billy Joe Lord, a seventeen-year-old student who planned to study at the Institute of French Studies in Tours, France; and Oswald, Lord’s roommate for the sixte
 On their first day out Lord talked to Oswald while he unpacked his belongings . Lord talked with Oswald while they unpacked their belongings .
 Oswald spoke in a decidedly bitter tone about the injustice of his mother’s being reduced to having to work in a drugstore to support herself . Oswald spoke of the injustice that his mother was reduced to working in the drugstore .
 When he noticed that Lord had brought a Bible with him, he turned the discussion to religion . He noticed that he had brought with him a Bible .
 He asked Lord how he could believe in God in light of the findings of modern science . He asked him to explain why he still believes in God .
 The roommates didn't, as Lord put it, “hit it off very well,” and he avoided any further philosophical discussions with Oswald . Oswald and Lord were roommates at the time of their deaths .
 Oswald spent the first few days mainly on deck, pacing to and fro, as if contemplating some plan . Oswald spent most of the time on board, pacing and fidgeting around the deck .
 Church watched him with some interest and tried, on several occasions, to strike up a conversation with him .
 When she asked him for his home address, he looked at her suspiciously and asked her why she cared . He looked suspiciously at her when she asked for his address . He then asked her to tell him why she wanted to know his name .
 Oswald went to great lengths to avoid being photographed . Unlike the other passengers, Oswald avoided being photographed in the plane . Oswald was the last person to be photographed aboard the plane to leave the country .
 Church observed, “Whenever I got my camera out to take some pictures, he would head in the other direction.” Church observed .
 Oswald sat diagonally across from Colonel Church . In the evening the four passengers ate at a common table, and Oswald sat across from him .
 Oswald gave a historic description of the Depression of the 1930s, which he seemed to see as another failure of capitalism . The one time Church tried to draw him into conversation, Oswald gave him a historical description .
 Oswald began to spend most of his time in his cabin after a few days at sea . Oswald spent most of the time in the cabin and even missed meals .
 Oswald and the other three passengers finally disembarked at Le Havre, France, on October 8 . Oswald was aboard the freighter when it arrived in the French port of Paris . Oswald and three other passengers were also aboard the ship .
 Oswald arrived in Southampton, England, on October 9 . He declared to customs officials that he had $700 with him . He intended to spend one week in England before attending college in Switzerland .
 Oswald was the last witnesses to identify Oswald before he appeared in Moscow one week later . Oswald was arrested in Moscow, Russia, a week after he was shot in the head .
 The stamps on his passport show that he left Heathrow Airport in London that same day on an international flight . He landed later that evening in Helsinki, Finland .
 Oswald must have changed planes at some city in Europe . Since there was no direct flight from London to Helsinki during the time Oswald was in London .
 He checked in at 94 / LEGEND the Torni Hotel in downtown Helsinki, then moved on Saturday to the less expensive Klaus Kurki Hotel, where he remained registered for five days . According to Finnish hotel records, he checked in midnight on Friday at 94 - LEGEND .
 Swedish intelligence has found evidence that Oswald traveled to Stockholm during this period, apparently to consult the Soviet Embassy there . Oswald is believed to have visited the embassy in Stockholm during that time .
 Oswald obtained visa number 403339, valid for a six-day trip to the Soviet Union . Sometime that same week Oswald visited the Soviet Consulate in Helsinki, Finland .
 He also bought $300 worth of tourist vouchers for the Soviet Union, although it is not clear where he got these funds . The Soviet Union is also worth $300 .
 Oswald left Helsinki by train and crossed the Finnish-Soviet border at Vainikkala, bound for Moscow . Oswald left Finland by train on October 15, 1961 .
 Oswald arrived at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on October 31, two weeks after his arrival in Moscow . He strode past the Marine guards into the consular section of the embassy . Oswald is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Richard E Snyder, who had joined the CIA in June 1949 as an intelligence operative, then had served in Tokyo under State Department cover . Snyder was now acting as senior consular officer in Moscow, recalled that Oswald banged his passport down on Snyder's desk . Oswald had joined CIA in
 I, Lee Harvey Oswald, do hereby request that my present citizenship in the United States of America, be revoked . I do not want to be allowed to remain in the U.S. Oswald's citizenship in America .
 I have entered the Soviet Union for the express purpose of applying for citizenship in the . Soviet Union, through the means of . naturalization . I've entered the . express purpose to apply for citizenship . through the . means of naturalization, she says .
 "My request for the revoking of my American citizenship is made only after the longest and most serious consideration," she said . Her request for revoking her citizenship was made after the "longest, most serious" consideration .
 Snyder could see that Oswald’s defection had been carefully prepared . Snyder saw that Oswald had been prepared for his defection .
 State Department tried to stall Oswald by asking him his reasons for applying for Soviet citizenship . Even though it was the State Department’s policy to discourage Americans from defecting, Snyder asked him why he had applied .
 Snyder said he had been forewarned that the consul would try to talk him out of his decision . Snyder simply replied that he wanted no lectures from Snyder on Marxism or any other topic .
 Oswald expounded on the “American imperialism” he had witnessed while serving as a Marine in Japan and other bases in the Far East . When asked him when he had first become interested in renouncing his U.S. citizenship, Oswald answered .
 Snyder noticed that Oswald used “simple Marxist stereotypes without . . independent formulation” and that he made a point of condemning his own government and lauding the Soviets . Snyder: Oswald used Marxist stereotypes .
 Snyder asked if he was prepared to serve the Soviet state . Snyder then asked him if he would be prepared to do so . Snyder said he would serve as a Soviet officer .
 Oswald hinted that he knew something that would be of “special interest” to Soviet intelligence . Oswald strongly hinted that something was of ‘special interest,’ to the Soviet intelligence. Oswald also hinted that the Soviets knew something about him personally .
 John McVickar, another consular officer, remembers being stunned by this part of the conversation . Across the room, another senior consular official, was stunned by the revelation .
 At the time, however, there was little Snyder could do to deter Oswald from his planned course . Snyder: "There was little to do to stop Oswald from carrying out his plans"
 He asked him to return the following Monday on the pretext that the consulate could not process his application on a Saturday . He thus asked the consulate to return on the next Monday . The consulate refused to process the application on the Saturday .
 He suggested that a further interview with Oswald might make an “interesting story” for his wire service . Oswald's interview may make an interesting story for the wire service, he said .
 97th anniversary of 9/11 attacks on U.S. President George H.W. Bush in New York City .
 Oswald told Korengold that he was not granting any interviews . Oswald opened the door a few inches and told him he would not give interviews . The door was closed and Oswald was not talking .
 He showed Oswald a telex he had received from Moscow describing his brother’s attempt to renounce his citizenship . Oswald showed the telex to his brother .
 Robert Oswald assumed the application to Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland was “part of the plan,” as was his early discharge from the Marines . Oswald was discharged from the Marine Corps in 1968 . Oswald applied for the college in Switzerland .
 Robert Oswald rushed home and telegraped his brother . After finishing his milk route, he rushed home to tell his brother he was waiting for him .
 Oswald refused to pick the telegram up at the embassy as was suggested . Oswald was called by the U.S. Embassy to relay the contents of the message . Oswald had refused to accept the message as it was suggested by the embassy .
 Oswald sent the American Embassy a letter strongly protesting the refusal of the consul to accept his renunciation of citizenship . On November 3 Oswald sent a letter to the embassy protesting his refusal to accept citizenship .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he will not speak of his decision to remain in the Soviet Union and apply for citizenship here . Putin: "I'm afraid you would not be able to comprehend my reasons. Certainly you do not wish me to speak of my decision"
 Do you know, for instance, that 1 have waited to do this for well over a year, do you know that I speak a fair amount of Russian which I have been studying for many months . Do you also know that 1.1 have waited a year for this interview? Do
 I have been told that I will not have to leave the Soviet Union if I don’t care to. I’m not afraid to, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . He says he will not be forced to leave Russia if he wants to .
 I will not speak to anyone from the U.S. over the telephone since it may be taped by the Americans . I won't speak to someone from the United States over the . telephone since . It may not be broadcast over the phone .
 John McVickar personally brought a letter to Oswald from his half brother John Pic, then serving with the U.S. Air Force in Japan . John Pic was a member of the United States Air Force . Oswald's half-brother John Pic served in the Air Force with the
 The maid on the floor explained to McVickar that he was rarely seen at the hotel . The maid told him that he had been rarely seen in the hotel room .
 Oswald granted his first interview to Aline Mosby of UPI, who came to his hotel room with a camera . Less than a week later Oswald granted first interview with UPI .
 Mosby thought Oswald “looked like some Okie from the boondocks,” not the hard-line political defector she had expected . Mosby, herself from Montana, thought Oswald was a hard-liners . Oswald is a former state senator from Montana . Oswald
 He had a “sallow complexion” and “seemed a bit awkward” at first . He grew more confident, even smug, as THE DEFECTOR / 99 he spoke .
 He claimed that he had saved $1,600 while in active service in the Marines to finance his defection . He claimed to have defected to the U.S. Marines .
 Mosby felt that Oswald used propaganda phrases, such as “capitalist lackeys” and “imperialist’s running dogs,” with which he was not entirely comfortable . Like McVickar, Mosby was not comfortable with the phrases . Mosby
 Before coming to Moscow, Johnson had worked as an assistant to Senator John F Kennedy . He earned a reputation as a keen analyst of Soviet affairs .
 State Department document shows Oswald was seen during Oswald's time in Moscow . She was also listed in document of ‘government employees’ who had seen Oswald during this period .
 Priscilla Johnson had worked for the Joint Translating Service . During a previous tour at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, she had worked at the embassy .
 I was looking for something that would give me the key to my environment. I had discovered Socialist literature at the age of 15. ... 1 was looking . for something . that would . give me a key to . my environment, he said. "I was looking ... for something to
 Oswald made a point of attributing his decision to defect to the Soviet Union to his experiences in Asia with the Marine Corps . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in the USSR .
 He noted his part in the invasion force sent to intervene in Indonesia in March 1958 .
 Oswald continued to refer to the Soviet government as “my government” throughout the four-hour interview . Oswald seemed remarkably well briefed on the Soviets' handling of his case .
 Despite her efforts to elicit information about any persons who had had previous contact with him in the United States, he just as determinedly refused to name any names .
 Oswald’s defection and offer to give classified information to the Soviets reverberated through his former radar unit in California . Meanwhile, back in the U.S., the shock waves from Oswald's defection reverberated . Oswald's offer to help the Soviets to get classified information reverber
 Delgado vividly remembers a group of civilians in dark suits arriving in November with stenographers . They literally took over their headquarters company to question Marines about Oswald . Delgado: "I'm not a Marine. I'm a Marine" Delgado says .
 When his turn came, Delgado recalls, he was asked his name, rank and serial number . Delgado says he was then asked to give his rank, serial number and his name . He says he's not surprised by the results .
 Oswald had access to classified information to which Oswald had had access . He was asked questions about his job in the radar bubble, his knowledge of Oswald's activities .
 A number of other Marines in the unit recalled being asked the same questions as a stenographer typed away at her machine . The Marines were asked questions by the stenographer .
 Richard Call, who had played “hundreds” of games of chess with Oswald, remembers being asked to write out a statement about Oswald’s defection for the team of civilian investigators . Call: "Hundreds" of chess games were played between Oswald and Call .
 In Japan the United States Air Force Office of Special Investigations questioned John Edward Pic about his half brother’s defection . The U.S. Air Force had responsibility for security at Atsugi Air Base .
 Since World War II only two other enlisted men from the military forces had defected to the Soviet Union or its Eastern European allies . Both suspected of having had contact with Soviet or East German military intelligence .
 He could have had access to security procedures for changing codes and frequencies, modes and angles for intercepting enemy aircraft . He also could have access to the location and effective range of American and allied aircraft stationed in the Pacific .
 With the proper guidance, he might have been able to decipher elements of radar-jamming equipment . With the right guidance, the radar jamming equipment could have been detected .
 Oswald might have amassed on “Race Car” presented a more difficult problem . Oswald’s frequencies and codes, now compromised, could be varied; the data Oswald may have amassed might be varied .
 Oswald shifted to a planned intervention by the Marines which had still not been disclosed to the American public . Oswald then shifted attention to the planned intervention which had not yet been revealed to the public .
 D.C. was among the letters routinely turned over to CIA operations sector working under Angleton in counterintelligence . Angleton's counterintelligence section turned over the letters from Moscow to the CIA in the 1950s .
 He defected, renounced his citizenship, compromised military secrets and denounced his country . He had defected and renounced citizenship, compromising military secrets, and denounced family .
 His fate now rests entirely with the Soviets, on whom he was dependent for legal status, financial support and protection . The Soviets were dependent on his legal status and financial support . He was dependent on the Soviets for legal and economic reasons .
 Oswald's brother received one brief letter from Oswald telling him he was moving from the Metropole Hotel . Oswald wrote a brief letter to his brother saying he was leaving the hotel . Oswald died in August 1944 . Oswald was the only person to die of a gunshot wound .
 Oswald also sent Marguerite a brief note with which he enclosed a personal check for $20 she had sent him . Oswald also enclosed a note that he had enclosed a $20 check for her .
 He asked that she send cash; her check was worthless in the Soviet Union, he pointed out .
 Oswald disappeared from sight for more than a year in 1959 . Oswald wrote a short note to his brother before disappearing from sight . Oswald's brother wrote a note to say he had been missing since 1959 .
 During this time he had no contact with anyone outside the Soviet Union, nor are there any available witnesses to his activities within that country .
 The only account that exists of this period is a packet of biographical notes, including a “Historic Diary” presumably prepared by Oswald . Oswald's notes were found among his possessions in Dallas in 1963 .
 Oswald, brimming with enthusiasm about the potential for finding democracy in the Soviet Union, informed his Intourist guide, Rima Shirokova, that he was a “communist” and wanted to stay in the USSR . Oswald was a "communist" and
 She introduced him to a “balding, stout official in a black suit” who asked him in fairly good English why he wanted to become a Soviet citizen, she says . She introduces him to an official who asks him why he did so .
 Oswald claimed to have been interviewed by Lev Setyayev, a reporter for Radio Moscow . While waiting to hear whether he would be allowed to stay in the Soviet Union, Oswald claimed he had been interviewed .
 Oswald wrote a handwritten set of questions and answers regarding his stay in the Soviet Union . Oswald later wrote a set of answers to questions about his stay there .
 The visa was due to expire in two hours and he was told he must leave the country . That afternoon a “police official” told him he must immediately leave the U.S. He said he had been told by a police official that his visa had expired .
 "My fondest dreams are shattered because of a petty official, because of bad planning," she says . "I'm not going to be able to live my dream," she writes .
 Ambulance comes, am taken to hospital where five stitches were put in my wrist . Ambulances come and take me to hospital with five stitches in wrist . 'Five stitches are put in her wrist. Five stitches are needed,' she said .
 A week after being released from hospital, he was taken to the Passport and Registration Office by Rima .
 Oswald decided, without consulting any Soviet official, to take a taxi to the American Embassy and turn in his passport . Oswald decided to do so without consulting Soviet official . Oswald's passport was turned in at the end of the war .
 Oswald remained in his hotel room for the next two months, studying Russian and speaking to no one except his Intourist guides . Oswald was stunned by the flurry of journalistic and diplomatic activity that followed his attempt to renounce his citizenship .
 Finally, on January 4, he was called to the Passport Office and given a residence document, instead of citizenship papers . Finally, the man was given a passport document instead of a citizenship document .
 The Red Cross has arranged for me to receive some money through the Red Cross to pay my hotel bills and expenses . He also tells me that they have arranged for some money to pay for some of my hotel costs and expenses.
 Oswald arrived in Minsk, the capital of Byelorussia, on January 7 and was met by two more Intourist guides 9 — one of whom immediately caught his eye . According to Oswald’s diary, he arrived in . Minsk . The city of Minsk
 The mayor of Minsk promised him a rent-free apartment . The very next day he was personally greeted by the mayor of the city .
 He began working at the Byelorussian radio and television factory 10 as a checker . He began work at the factory 10 years ago . The factory 10 is now owned by the Russian government .
 In the spring of 1960 the diary abruptly switched from a tone of buoyant elation to one of growing disillusionment . The diary ends abruptly in the spring 1960 .
 It's the first voice of opposition I have heard from Ziger, he has seen the world. respect Ziger . It’s the first of many things Ziger has said to say: 'I respect him. respect him'
 Mass gymnastics is compulsory after work meeting; usually political information meeting . Mass gymnastic meets are usually followed by a meeting of political information meetings . The gymnastics meet is a compulsory after-work meeting .
 The diary effectively shows Oswald's progressive disillusionment over the strict party discipline in the factory . Oswald was disillusioned over the lack of recreational diversions outside work . Oswald's diary was published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 An American defector who arrives in the Soviet Union fervently committed to Marxism might subsequently decide to return to the United States . As such, it provides a convenient explanation for why such a defector might return to America .
 A microscopic examination of Oswald’s handwriting in this diary indicates that the entire manuscript was written in one or two sessions . Oswald's handwriting suggests he was writing in just a few sessions, according to the diary .
 The misdating of a number of events further shows that the writing took place at least one year after the events described in the book . The misdated of a series of events shows that a year after they were described .
 Oswald quotes salary he is to receive at the Minsk factory in new rubles, although the ruble was not revalued until approximately one year later . Another anachronism appears in Oswald’s diary entry supposedly written on January 5, 1960 .
 Oswald's diary was prepared after the decision to repatriate Oswald to the United States . Such anachronisms strongly suggest that the diary was written after Oswald was repatriated to the U.S.
 A peculiar feature of the diary is that it omits nearly all events that would be inconsistent with Khrushchev’s desire to return to the U.S. The diary focuses, instead, on providing an unencumbered record of his personal activities in the Soviet Union .
 That would also explain how he was able to take this material out of the Soviet Union, he says . The material is believed to have been taken from the USSR .
 Aside from the autobiographical material, there is scant documentation available for this year . Aside from autobiographical materials, there are scant documentation .
 The Soviet government provided the Warren Commission in 1964 with Oswald’s passport, job application form at the radio factory, hospital records and a report from his supervisor at the factory . The Warren Commission was given the passport and job application forms .
 Documents show that he arrived in Minsk in January, worked at the factory for more than a year . He received a poor rating for his workmanship, documents show .
 But even these few fragments of evidence do not mesh satisfactorally with the account in the diary . It is not the first time the diary has been found out to be true .
 Oswald was accorded the privilege of having a 16-mm shotgun, according to a hunting license found among his possessions . Oswald seems to have spent his weekends shooting small game .
 Whatever education, if any, Oswald had in the Soviet Union was never openly discussed by him . Oswald's education, or any, was not openly discussed with him . He never discussed his education in Soviet Union .
 Oswald dated a number of women from a school from which he dated . The school is located on Ulyanova Street, practically adjacent to a KGB training facility .
 Oswald's Soviet publication Agitator, the title means “propagandist” in Russian, was found among his effects in 1963 . Another possible clue to Oswald's educational interests during this period .
 This magazine was used in the Soviet Union primarily as a textbook for training foreigners in the techniques of propaganda and agitation . It was used primarily to train people in Soviet Union .
 Oswald himself later claimed in a resume to be fully experienced in “street agitation,” and a scrap of paper taken from Oswald by a police officer in New Orleans in 1963 had written on it the phone number of an office in the Institute of Scientific-Technical Information and Propaganda
 Other glimpses of Oswald's life in Minsk come from an album of snapshots found in Dallas in 1963 . Oswald's photos were found in a Dallas album found in the same city .
 Photographs show Oswald living a far richer life, both materially and socially, than he had ever lived in the United States . Far from depicting the dull, drab life described in the “diary,” these photographs show Oswald's life .
 For the first time in his life he had his own apartment with a separate living room gaily decorated with flowered wallpaper, tiled floors and modern furniture . The first time he had a separate apartment, he was delighted to have his own .
 The Svisloch River in Minsk, Belarus, has two private balconies with views of the bend of the river . Private balconies can also be seen from the banks of the Svislch River and the city of Minsk .
 Directly across the river was a treelined plaza bounded by the opera house, museums and other public buildings . The plaza was built in the 1930s .
 In the distance could be seen the twin spires of a seventeenth-century cathedral, Minsk’s oldest and most beautiful church . Minsk's most beautiful cathedral is in the city of Minsk .
 Golovachev reportedly traveled in the highest social circles in Minsk, Belarus . He was reportedly a socialite who traveled the highest circles in the country .
 One picture shows Oswald snuggling contentedly on the bare shoulder of Eleanora Ziger, the daughter of his friend Alexander Ziger . She is lying in her bikini on Oswald’s suit jacket, apparently sunbathing on his shoulder .
 Oswald walked hand in hand with Anna Ziger, Eleanora’s mother, and another girl, Enna, down a boulevard in Minsk . Another photo shows Oswald walking with Anna and Enna Ziger down a Minsk boulevard .
 Oswald, the Ziger family and other friends had a picnic on the outskirts of Minsk . There are also pictures of Oswald and Ziger friends having a picnic .
 At the time there was a group of Cubans being trained in Minsk who lived in the area of the radio factory . Oswald reportedly befriended a number of the Cubans who were being trained there .
 He also appears to have had a fairly constant group of Russian friends, some of whom he stayed in contact with through letters for the next few years . Some of the letters he received from his Russian friends were letters from his friends .
 At one point he and his friends apparently took turns photographing themselves in front of the Victory Monument in Minsk . He and friends apparently take turns taking photos of themselves in the city .
 An almost constant parade of women, many of whom were attending the Institute of Foreign Languages in Minsk, seemed to be available to him . Many of the women at the Institute were attending a Minsk school .
 Francis Gary Powers, a thirty-year-old pilot from Kentucky, watched with some apprehension from the cockpit of his plane as the sun rose over the Hindu Kush Mountains in Pakistan . n May 1, 1960, Powers was the first person to die in the crash .
 He had been waiting at the edge of the runway at Peshawar Air Base for almost an hour, perspiring profusely in his heavy rubber flight suit . President Dwight D Eisenhower gave the “go” signal, which was required on all U-2 flights .
 The mission, originally scheduled for April 28, had already been postponed twice, and Powers hoped it would be canceled . The mission was originally scheduled to be postponed twice .
 CNN.com: "Since that incident he didn’t have great confidence in that particular aircraft. And since that incident, he didn't have very confidence"
 At 6:20 m.m., the control tower cleared him for takeoff . Presidential authorization came through, and he was cleared to take off at 6:30 m.
 In fewer than six minutes it had climbed almost 14 miles . The altitude is higher than the official world altitude record . He turned on the autopilot and climbed the entire route .
 At this altitude, the temperature outside was 60 degrees below zero, and he no longer found himself sweltering . The temperature outside of the base station was 60 degree below zero .
 After entering the sortie number “4154” and the notation “delayed one-half hour” in the log, he again took over the controls as he approached maximum altitude . After entering ‘4154,’ he entered “Delayed one
 At this cruising altitude the U-2 had a very narrow range of speeds, known to the pilots as the coffin corner . Even the slightest miscalculation could prove disastrous, pilots say .
 If the plane went much slower, it would stall, and if it went much faster, the plane would go into a “Mach buffet” and become uncontrollable . The plane went into a 'Mach buffet' and became uncontrollable, the pilot says .
 Keeping the plane at its exact cruising speed required a great deal of concentration . The plane's speed was so high that it required a lot of concentration to keep it at the exact speed .
 As he crossed the mountains that formed the border with the Soviet Union, he could see that the Russian side was obscured for hundreds of miles by a solid cloud .
 He knew that Soviet radar would already be tracking his flight, as it had done for most of the previous flights . But he doubted that it could pinpoint his exact height and presumed that the Soviets were still targeting their missiles at a far lower altitude than that at which the U-2 actually
 He also felt protected by the highly sophisticated radar-baffling equipment which emitted a beam designed to confuse and confuse Soviet height-finding radar .
 The Tyuratam Cosmodrome was the main launching site for Soviet ICBMs and space satellites . The site is 30 miles east of the Aral Sea, 30 miles west of the Arctic Circle .
 The U-2 carried infrared and other sensors which could monitor the precise state of rocket technology being employed at the cosmodrome . In addition to lenses which had the power to define clearly an object as small as a golf ball on a putting green from 70,000 feet .
 The Soviets were determined to put an end to the U-2 missions, U.S. pilot says . He says he had no doubt that the Soviets wanted to end U.2 missions .
 He was not, however, told of the full extent of these intelligence operations, he said .
 One of their key agents planted in Soviet military intelligence, Colonel Peter Semyonovich Popov, had passed information back indicating that the Soviets had definite knowledge of specifics of the U-2 program .
 Popov was not only a valuable spy, but, for all practical purposes, was the most important American agent in the Soviet Union at that time . Popov worked for the U.S. government in the 1950s and '60s .
 He had already delivered to the CIA advance plans of Soviet weaponry, running the gamut from fighter planes to missiles . He also provided reports of a major reorganization of the Soviet Army .
 The U-2 had already succeeded in orbiting a sputnik satellite at a far higher altitude . The lack of a guidance system limited the effectiveness of Soviet antiaircraft missiles was not rocketry, but a lack of guidance system capable of operating in the stratosphere .
 Both men knew, of course, that there was a trade-off between intelligence and technology in solving the guidance problem .
 If the Soviets succeeded in acquiring data about the cruising altitude, speed, load and other flight characteristics of this aircraft, they could design the necessary control system for their high-altitude rockets .
 Powers was aware that only one other U-2 overflight had been made over the Soviet Union since October 1959 . Powers did not know why the flights were being limited during this period .
 He had not been told about the sabotage attempt made against his plane in Pakistan on the eve of its departure, which was foiled by U.S. counterintelligence . American counterintelligence foiled the attempt by Pakistanis .
 Across the snow-capped Ural Mountains, which had traditionally divided the Asian steppes from the European portions of the Soviet Union, he could see green fields and clear weather ahead in Russia . The Ural mountains were traditionally divided by the Soviet border .
 Over Sverdlovsk, an industrial center which had never before been overflown by a U-2, he again switched on his cameras . The U.2 was never before before being overflowed by an aircraft .
 The cockpit was illuminated by the orange flash of an explosion behind the plane . The pilot was killed in the explosion .
 He realized he had no control over the U-2 . Pulling back on the wheel, he realized that he was no longer in control of the plane .
 He opened the canopy and tried to crawl out of the plane as it plummeted down . He then tried to open the canopy as the plane plummeted .
 U-2 cameras provided photographic evidence of troop movements, shipbuilding, weapon deployment, nuclear tests and other selected targets . Instead of relying on spies in the field, the U.2 cameras captured troop movements and shipbuilding .
 Kelly Johnson, who knew each plane inside out, tried to piece together from the few bits of available information how the Soviets could have succeeded in bringing Powers’ plane down . Kelly Johnson: "It's not easy to guess" how Powers' plane was brought down .
 If Powers had been flying at his assigned altitude, it meant that the Soviets had . achieved the capacity to guide, control and detonate a missile at well over 70,000 feet .
 It also meant that they had the means to overcome the radarjamming beam emitted from the plane to confuse enemy radar controllers . The radar jamming beam was meant to confuse radar controllers with the beam of light .
 Johnson speculated then, as he still does, that the Soviets were somehow able to isolate the radar-jamming signals and use their beams to guide their antiaircraft missile . Johnson speculates then-as he still did that .
 This could explain the accuracy they achieved without any apparent technological leaps in their guidance system . It would also require either a penetration by Soviet intelligence of U.S. radar countermeasures or, by some other means, the ability to take precise measurements of the U-2’s radar
 Powers sat through another day of interrogation at Lubyanka Prison in Moscow . Powers sat in the KGB offices in Lubyankanka Prison, Russia . Powers was held in a KGB prison in the Soviet Union . Powers: "I'm not afraid to be interrogated. I'm scared to
 Two majors shot questions at him, while a translator patiently interpreted them in English and a stenographer took notes . A stenographer also took notes and took notes during the interview .
 At various points higher officials, including Alexander N Shelepin, the chainsmoking head of the KGB, sat in on the sessions . The sessions were held in secret at the time .
 They suggested to him that if he had used the needle on himself, such a convulsive death would support the “legend/’ or CIA cover story, that the pilot’s oxygen mask had malfunctioned, enabling the ‘weather plane’ to stray into
 Powers was repeatedly asked to name the altitude he had been flying at when he was hit by the rocket . Powers said he was flying at an altitude he was at when the rocket hit him . Powers was asked repeatedly to name his altitude at the time of the attack .
 He stuck to the prearranged cover story that the U-2 flew at 68,000 feet—far lower than it actually flew . The U.2 was actually a U.S. Air Force One . The plane was a prototype for the Air Force .
 To shake his story, his interrogators then produced the carefully drawn radar plots of his flight, which showed his own coordinates of his path . The radar plots were then shown to the interrogators .
 Bracket was drawn at various altitudes, some above and some below 68,000 feet . But since brackets were drawn, he decided to maintain his story . He decided to draw brackets at various locations .
 At one point a major stated the correct altitude Powers was flying, but assumed that they had no way to ascertain this, he denied it . At another point, Powers denied it was true .
 Powers insisted that he was never at Atsugi Air Base in Japan . Powers was closely questioned about the base in Japan, but he said he was not there .
 The Soviets were very knowledgeable about the U-2 flights from Atsugi, Japan . From their questions, however, he could tell that he could . He could tell the Soviets .
 Oswald might have been in Moscow at about the time the U-2 was shot down . Oswald's diary entries for that period make no mention of the shooting down of Powers . Oswald was in the Soviet press for months afterward .
 Oswald at the time was probably the only person in the Soviet Union who had observed the U-2 up close and had access to its pilots and other personnel . Yet Oswald was only person who had seen the aircraft up close . Oswald is believed to be only person to have seen the U
 He had threatened at the American Embassy to turn over radar secrets to the Soviets . This offer was presumably overheard by Soviet listening devices later discovered to be concealed in the embassy .
 Putin said in Minsk that while in the Marines, he had served in an “aviation unit” in Japan . He also said he served in a “joint’s aviation unit’ in Japan.
 The U.S. conducted an espionage flight just two weeks before the scheduled summit between Khrushchev and Eisenhower was taken as evidence that the United States wished to step up the cold war rather than end it . The flight was seen as a signal that the U.K. wished to
 The United States' explanation for the "bandit flight" of the “black vulture" was likened to a burglar claiming that he was forced to break into a house because the doors were locked . The U.S. said it believed in the principle of “open
 Powers was described as a product of people like “Eisenhower, Nixon, Herter . . The self-assured rulers of the Pentagon,""" exemplified the faults of capitalism,"" Powers said .
 For the right price, Powers would do anything, even perform an act as fundamentally immoral as espionage . Powers would be willing to do anything for the right time, Powers says .
 Oswald had the opportunity to become a hero by volunteering the pertinent information he had on the “black lady of espionage,"" as the plane was characterized . Oswald was a hero for his role in World War II . Oswald's role in the assassination of the U.S. government was
 Oswald's only comment on the U-2 was in a letter to his brother in February 1962 . Powers had been exchanged for Rudolph Abel . Oswald himself made the comment in a February 1962 letter to brother .
 He said then, “Powers seemed to be a nice bright American type fellow when I saw him in Moscow,"" never explaining the circumstances under which he saw him .
 Oswald wrote an entry for May 1 that placed him at a party in Minsk on the day Powers was shot down . Oswald wrote that he was at the party at the time Powers was shooting down .
 He told a co-worker back in the U.S. that he had been in Moscow for a May Day celebration . But later he said he was in Moscow to celebrate May Day . He later told a colleague that he was back in Russia for the day .
 Other evidence precludes this being any other year than 1960—when Powers was shot down . Other evidence suggests Powers was killed in that year .
 He denied that Oswald's knowledge of the U-2 was used by the Soviets . He denied, however, that Oswald knew of the aircraft, but said it was used in the U.2 .
 The American counterintelligence officers debriefing Nosenko found this assertion difficult to accept . The U.S. counterintelligence team debriefed the Russian leader .
 CIA interrogation officers were not aware of Oswald’s knowledge about the U-2 in Japan . At the time of the debriefing in 1964, Nosenko was not at the time .
 Security lapses at base where he was a radar operator, he could have ascertained the altitude of the U-2 . He could have even deciphered some characteristics of the ultrasecret equipment for jamming enemy radar .
 Oswald defected to the Soviet Union in November 1959 . FBI took precautions against his attempt to reenter the U.S. under false identity .
 The Domestic Intelligence Division, responsible for counterespionage, placed a ‘'flash” notice on his fingerprint card to assure that it would be alerted in the event that his fingerprints were detected by the bureau’s Identification Division . Oswald's fingerprint card was placed on his
 It also opened up a “301 “ dossier jacket jacket on his case and placed his name on the watch list used for monitoring overseas telecommunications . The dossier jacket also opened a ‘301 ” dossier jacket .
 Oswald's mother had sent a $25 money order to him in Moscow . FBI headquarters asked Fort Worth office to interview members of Oswald’s family .
 Fain's mother told Fain that all her letters had been returned undelivered, and she was worried over the safety of her son . Fain was interviewed the next day, interviewed by Fain .
 Oswald was expected to arrive at Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland on April 20, 1960 . She added that she had recently received a letter from Albert Schweitz College indicating that Oswald would arrive there .
 Asked whether she had furnished him with “any items of personal identification,” she replied that he had taken his birth certificate with him .
 Oswald was found at the Albert Schweitzer College in Paris, but no trace of Oswald there . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1918, assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in New York City .
 State Department has no "current information" on Oswald's whereabouts . State Department could not furnish any ‘current information’ on Oswald’s whereabouts . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 A “lookout” card had been placed in Oswald’s file, the embassy told the embassy . The card was placed in the file of Oswald, who had a passport in the Soviet Union .
 Oswald offered to turn over classified information to the Soviets, according to naval intelligence . The Marine Corps moved to have him severed from the U.S. Marine Air Reserve .
 Marguerite Oswald decided to take matters into her own hands . Meanwhile, in Texas, the state of Texas is still reeling from Hurricane Katrina .
 After a number of phone calls to her local FBI office and letters to her Congressman failed to prod the government into finding her son . She used all her savings to buy a train ticket to Washington to get her son back .
 She arrived in Washington at 8m. on January 26, 1961, and called the White House to speak to President John F Kennedy .
 When the White House switchboard told her the President was in conference, she asked to speak to Secretary of State Dean Rusk . When the switchboard was told she could talk to him, she went to the State Department . She asked to talk to the secretary of state .
 Two hours later, she had an appointment with two officials at the State Department . She met with officials from both sides of the aisle at the White House . She was invited to meet with State Department officials .
 Memos began moving up and down through channels at the State Department . Memos thus began moving around the U.S. through channels .
 Consul Snyder did not take any action on the request or try to contact the Soviet ministry . The Consul did not, however, try to call the Soviet government .
 Oswald's letter was postmarked Minsk, postmarked February 5, 1961 . Snyder found the letter on his desk less than two weeks after receiving the request from Washington .
 Oswald also pointed out that he had never even been asked to “take Russian citizenship” 2 and therefore technically retained his full rights as an American citizen . Oswald also said he never even took Russian citizenship and therefore retained full rights .
 He apparently had been well schooled in the legal definition of citizenship . He said he was "a good citizen"
 Nonclassified requests were available to Soviet nationals working for the embassy . It had to be assumed that the KGB had access to the request from Washington .
 The KGB may have been alerted to Washington's renewed interest in Oswald, Snyder says . He says it's "quite probable" that the KGB took advantage of the opportunity to have Oswald recontact .
 Snyder referred the question of whether or not to return Oswald’s passport by mail back to the State Department . State Department's Soviet Desk could consider the matter in its full context, he says .
 He also queried Washington on whether Oswald was “subject to prosecution on any grounds” and, if so, whether Oswald could be so informed . If so, he also asked if Oswald could have been informed by the government .
 Oswald suggested to Oswald that he come in person to the embassy for an interview . While waiting for a reply, he temporized by suggesting to Oswald . Oswald responded by saying that he would be interviewed at the embassy .
 Oswald professed a firm desire to redefect from the Soviet Union to the United States in his letters to the embassy . Oswald had not markedly changed his politics, according to one witness who accidentally encountered him in Minsk during this period .
 Soviet students were anxious to speak with their American counterparts . Students in other cities the band had visited had been anxious to talk with them . The Soviet students in the Soviet Union were eager to talk to their counterparts .
 Miss Mallory welcomed the opportunity to communicate, but she spoke not a word of Russian .
 She was struggling to make herself understood when she heard a voice asking in English whether she needed an interpreter . She heard the voice ask in English if she needs an interpreter, which she was unable to understand .
 As she turned around, she faced a young man dressed in a stylish camel’s hair coat . The young man contrasted with the drab garb she had seen on other Russians .
 Most of the questions dealt with aspects of American lifestyles, such as cars, families and so on .
 Miss Mallory was more interested in talking with the Soviet students, so she didn’t pursue the issue of Oswald’s views on America . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 He, in turn, did not press any further information on the woman .
 Oswald would have been asked to prepare his answers for the embassy staff . Such a procedure would reveal the essential elements that embassy staff would attempt to elicit from Oswald . Oswald would also be able to ask for help preparing his answers .
 Oswald’s “passport may be delivered to him on a personal basis only” at the embassy, so his identity could be confirmed . The State Department instructed its embassy in Moscow on April 13 that because of security reasons, the passport could be delivered on a “
 If the Soviets still wanted to facilitate Oswald’s return, they would now have to send him to Moscow . Oswald would have to be sent to Moscow to help facilitate his return .
 If the U.S. wanted Oswald back, it would have also to take his wife . Oswald's wife was killed in the September 9, 1963, assassination .
 The CIA and State Department attempted to acquire information on the background of the Russian woman whom Lee Harvey Oswald proposed to bring back to the U.S. with him as his wife .
 Available files contained, however, no record or intelligence traces on her . The available files contained no record of intelligence traces .
 It was not until 1964 in Dallas that she furnished federal investigators with any details of her life in the Soviet Union .
 The story she told then, and repeated to the Warren Commission, was of a poor, parentless girl falling in love with an American defector . She said she was a poor girl who fell in love and fell for an American . The story was repeated to Warren Commission .
 Marina Nikolaevna Prusakova was born out of wedlock on July 17, 1941 . She was born in the seaside town of Molotovsk in the arctic province of Arkhangelsk in the Arctic .
 The German panzer divisions were sweeping into Russia, and the Soviet Army was in full retreat . The Soviet Army had been forced to retreat .
 Her mother, Klavdia Vasilyevna Prusakova, was unable to care for her in the tumult, and left her as an infant with her elderly parents in the city of Arkhangelsk .
 Marina's grandfather, Vasily Prusakov, was a naval officer who sailed between Murmansk and Scotland . As a young man, he was presented to the czar as a young boy .
 Marina was brought up by her grandmother, Tatyana Prusakov, until she was seven years old . She was sent to the town of Zguritsa near the Rumanian border to rejoin her mother whom she had really never known .
 In the long interim her mother had married an electrical worker, Alexander Ivanovich Medvedev, and was bringing up his family . Her mother was married to an electrical work worker and brought up her own family .
 In 1952 Medvedev found a job in his hometown of Leningrad, Russia, and the whole family moved to this city of fountains and palaces . In 1952, he moved to Russia, where he was born and became a prime minister .
 Marina enrolled in the 374th women’s school . She then switched to the Pharmacy Teknikum, a school specializing in training pharmacists .
 Marina found life unbearable in the home of her stepfather, where she felt like a stranger . In the midst of her training her mother died, Marina's stepfather left her in the house .
 She ate most of her meals out and took a part-time job in a school cafeteria to pay for her living expenses . She also worked at a drugstore on the Nevsky Prospect to help pay for living expenses.
 Upon graduation in June 1959, she was assigned a job in a pharmaceutical warehouse, but after one day at work she quit this job . She was assigned to a position in a warehouse .
 At 18, at eighteen, thin and delicate with thick dark eyelashes, she found hei'self extremely attractive to men . Now, at 18, thin . thin and . delicate with . thick dark . eyelashes she found himself attractive to . men .
 She frequently went backstage at the Maryinsky Opera House, where she would go backstage . She would often go backstage to try to get connected with the theatrical company .
 Marina was invited to live with her maternal uncle, Colonel Ilya Vasilyevich Prusakov, and his wife, Valentina . She decided to move to Minsk, Belarus, after her stepfather wanted to remarry . She was invited by her uncle to live in M
 This apartment even had a private telephone, a rarity in the Soviet Union . The apartment was a rare Soviet apartment with private telephone .
 Prusakov had such privileges as an engineer for the MVD, or Ministry of Internal Affairs, which had responsibility for civil law enforcement . His rank of colonel made him one of the more powerful citizens of Minsk .
 Marina was assigned a position in the pharmaceutical section of the Third Clinical Hospital, located in the center of the city . By October Marina had been assigned to work at the hospital .
 She was able to keep most of her salary of 45 rubles for personal spending money . She kept most of the money for personal use .
 Through the Prusakovs she met students in the professional schools—medicine, architecture and engineering—who constituted a very elite group in Soviet society .
 She spent her spare time with her new friends at coffeehouses around Victory Square or at their dachas in the country .
 Marina took a month's vacation in a workers’ “rest home’ in a forest outside Leningrad . She alternated between two main suitors—Anatoly and Sasha— preferring not to “pair up/’
 Although the men and women were assigned to separate cabins, there was a good deal of intermingling . Men and women shared cabins at the same time .
 Marina continued dating both Sasha and Anatoly throughout the winter of 1961, unable to decide between them . Sasha was married to Anatoly in 1961, but Marina refused to marry him .
 For two hours she stood in front of a mirror in her room debating whether she should chance going to an event where both her boyfriends might be present . She stood for two hours debating whether to risk going to the event .
 There would also be a lecture by the mother of one of her friends on her month-long trip to the U.S. The mother of a friend would also give a lecture .
 She arrived at the Palace of Culture three hours late, missing the lecture entirely . She arrived in time for the lecture but missed it entirely due to a lack of time .
 Her cheeks were rosy, not pale like those of the other women at the dance . Her cheeks are rosy and rosy - not pale .
 When she took off her overcoat, she fully revealed herself in a red Chinese brocade dress .
 Almost immediately a knot of young men formed around her, and she was introduced to one named Alik, who seemed instantly drawn to her . Almost immediately, she was met by one of the young men, and introduced to another .
 When they danced, she noticed he spoke Russian with a slight accent . They danced, and when they spoke, she said he was Russian .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was an American living in Minsk, Belarus, according to his wife . She first thought he was from one of the Baltic parts of the Soviet Union . She later found out he was actually a U.S. citizen living there .
 Marina found herself intrigued with ‘Alik,’ as the American liked to call himself . Marina was intrigued by “Alik’s” American love of the U.S. Marina .
 He was both polite and attentive and seemed very eager to dance every dance with her .
 Afterward they went with a group of other friends to the home of Yuri Mereshenko, whose mother had given the lecture on the United States, where they listened to American records . Afterward, they went to a friend's home to listen to American music .
 The next week spring had come to Minsk, and Marina met Oswald at another dance . Marina and Oswald met at a dance .
 She invited him in when he took her home, and introduced him to her aunt . Her aunt was favorably impressed with his manners and neat appearance .
 After he left, Marina asked jokingly whether Marina was planning on adding this American to her collection of boyfriends .
 Marina finally agreed to allow Oswald to take her out on a date the following Friday, but he was unable to keep the appointment because of an earache he had developed that week . Oswald was able to keep his appointment because he was suffering from earache .
 Oswald was admitted to the Fourth Clinical Hospital for an adenoids operation the day before his date with Marina . Oswald had an operation on March 30, a day before the date .
 No one at the hospital stopped her, in her white pharmacist’s uniform, and she could come and go as she liked . She could come in as a pharmacist in her uniform and leave as she wanted .
 On Easter Sunday, the day after his operation, she brought him a hand-painted Easter egg, which seemed to please him greatly .
 He had “a very sickly look about him,” which made her feel even more sorry for him, she said . She said he had ‘sickly look’ about him . He had a ‘very sickly’ look, she added .
 When Oswald asked her to marry him from his hospital bed, she couldn’t refuse . Oswald asked for his permission from Oswald's hospital bed . Oswald's wife says she can't refuse to say yes .
 Oswald showed her his apartment in April after being discharged from the hospital . Oswald was hospitalized with severe brain injuries .
 She had long admired this particular apartment house at the bend of the river and the view it commanded . The apartment house is located at a bend in the river .
 After some consideration she agreed on April 20 to marry Oswald on May Day . They planted flowers on the balcony in honor of their forthcoming wedding .
 While waiting for their marriage application to be approved, the couple enjoyed springtime in Minsk . They enjoyed boating on Youth Lake, dining in cafes or dancing with friends .
 Oswald had a large classical record collection, including Tchaikovsky and Grieg . Grieg, Liszt, Rimsky-Korsakov and Schumann were favorite composers .
 It was a warm Sunday, and everything she saw seemed bright and beautiful . It was the first time she'd seen the sun .
 Oswald bought her a bouquet of narcissus, and with their friends, they walked hand in hand to the town hall for the civil ceremony . Oswald and his wife were married at the end of the day .
 Afterward, Colonel Prusakov hosted a reception for twenty friends at his apartment . The couple spent the evening feasting and drinking . Afterward they spent the night feasting .
 The entire courtship was recorded in a dozen or so sentences in three entries in his diary . It was recorded by a dozen of sentences, three entries per day in three diary entries .
 At the last moment 1 am introduced to a girl with a French hairdo and red dress with white slippers . Dance with her . Her name is Marina . Boring but at the end of the show .
 The entire courtship from the time he first saw Marina to the . time he proposed marriage thus took place in less than one month . The entire . courtship . from the . first . saw Marina and proposed marriage to the first .
 Oswald was admitted to hospital in Minsk for treatment of an ear disorder on March 30 . He was operated on to remove his adenoids on April 1 . Oswald underwent surgery on April 30 .
 Oswald was confined to a hospital bed under medication and Marina was visiting him illicitly . Most of their “romance,” culminating in his proposal of marriage, would have to have taken place while Oswald was in a hospital .
 The marriage of an American defector and the niece of an MVD colonel occurred after only an extraordinary threewewek . The marriage would have been unusual under any circumstances .
 Oswald’s correspondence with the American Embassy regarding his repatriation . This material would have been kept in the surveillance file . A colonel in the MVD could have found out about Oswald's correspondence .
 Marina applied to Soviet officials in both Minsk and Moscow for documents that would permit her to leave the Soviet Union for the U.S. Soon after the marriage Marina applied for documents allowing her to enter the United States .
 With this set of documents, she then began filing the necessary applications with the U.S. authorities . She then filed the necessary documents with the authorities .
 The CIA was also concerned about Marina’s identity when it was discovered that she planned to return with Oswald to the U.S. Marina's identity was also raised .
 The Russians have a strict system which requires that the middle name identify the person’s father . Therefore, “Marina Nikolaevna” should have had a father named Nikolai .
 It gave the name of the village in which she was born as Severodvinsk, yet at the time of her birth in 1941 that village was named Molotovsk . The name of her village was given to her in 1941, but the name was changed in 1941 .
 Marina's only explanation for the discrepancy was that she had lost her original birth certificate and had had to apply for a new one . Marina’s only explanation is that she lost her birth certificate .
 Marina Alexandrovna Medvedeva used her name until 1958 . She said that she used it until 1958 was Marina . She used the name Marina until 1958, when she was born .
 Up until then, she assumed she was the daughter of Alexander Medvedev, her mother’s husband . Up until now, she thought she was her mother's daughter . Her mother's husband is the prime minister of Russia, who is now Russia's leader .
 Medvedev then told her that her real father was Nikolai Didenko, a traitor who had been executed by the Soviets . He then said that her father was a traitor, who was executed in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 In 1958 Marina changed her name and all her school records to Prusakova . She told her friends to call her Marina Nikolaevna instead of Marina Alexandrovna .
 Marina is not clear when she applied for her new birth Certificate . In this version of this article, Marina is asked to clarify her birth certificate .
 The date of issuance on the copy of the copy she gave to U.S. authorities is July 19, 1961 . She gave the copy to United States authorities in July 1961 .
 Marina would have needed a birth certificate in order to obtain her marriage license in April 1961 . Marina's birth certificate would have been required to obtain the license .
 This could not have been the certificate, dated July 19, 1961, that she handed into the U.S. Embassy . It could not be the certificate she gave into the United States Embassy .
 Marina Oswald's new identity was furnished after it was decided she would accompany Oswald to the U.S. Marina's new documents were furnished to her by the CIA .
 VIII THE RUSSIAN GAMBITACCEPTED swald boarded a jet plane at Minsk Airport on Saturday morning, July 8, 1961 .
 The flight to Moscow took only two hours and twenty minutes, but delayed by heavy traffic in the heart of the city . He arrived at the consular section of the embassy just as it was closing at 3m. Richard Snyder, the official with whom he had dealt with, had already
 Oswald phoned Snyder at home, knowing he lived in the embassy compound . Snyder lived at home at the time of the attack .
 Snyder wasted no time coming over to the consulate section to see Oswald . Snyder spent most of the time looking at Oswald in the eyes of the consulate .
 The young American had volunteered to turn classified information over to the Soviets . He was curious to see what had become of the young American who about twenty months earlier had volunteered .
 He added that he had come to Moscow without any sort of official permission . He said he was not allowed to travel to Russia without permission .
 Snyder realized that this meant that Oswald was traveling illegally since foreigners with the sort of stateless passport that Oswald had were not allowed to travel freely from city to city in the Soviet Union . If true, Snyder said that this means that this would have been illegal .
 Oswald casually mentioned that he was married to a “dental technician,” who wanted to return with him to America . Oswald also casually mentioned his marriage to a "dental technician who wanted to return to America .
 Whatever he personally thought of Oswald, he knew it was the policy of the U.S. government to facilitate the return of all defectors . If only to deprive the Soviets of propaganda points, it would have been a good thing for the Soviets .
 He reassured him that he would do what he could to help and suggested that he return for a formal interview on Monday morning since the embassy was officially closed for business during the weekend .
 Oswald placed a long-distance call to Marina in Minsk and told her to catch a plane and join him in Moscow . Oswald placed the call after leaving the embassy, and told Marina to join him . Marina was in the Minsk region when Oswald called her in .
 Oswald managed to get a room at the Hotel Berlin, where he was known from a previous stay in Moscow . Oswald was staying at the hotel because of the influx of foreigners who had come to Moscow for a film festival .
 Marina arrived the next day, and for the first time they were together in Moscow, Russia . Marina arrived next day . The couple was reunited in Moscow .
 Oswald reportedly asked about Robert Edward Webster, another American who had attempted to renounce his citizenship in the fall of 1959 . Webster had been interviewed by Snyder in a Moscow police station just days before Oswald stormed into the embassy for the first time .
 Oswald was called into Snyder’s office for his interview . Oswald waited a few minutes before being called into the office for the interview . After waiting a few . minutes, Oswald was finally called into his office .
 Oswald steadfastly denied he had ever renounced his citizenship . Other than by a process of formal renunciation, an American can forfeit his citizenship only by joining or taking an oath of allegiance to a foreign government .
 He even said he had not joined the trade union at the factory in Minsk where he worked . He had never been asked to join any official organization in the Soviet Union .
 He offered his “stateless passport” as prima facie evidence that he had never been granted Soviet citizenship . He denied he had ever applied for Soviet citizenship and denied ever applying for it . He said he never had been granted citizenship .
 Snyder knew Oswald had stated in 1959 that he was applying for Soviet citizenship but did not press him on the point . Snyder knew, of course, that Oswald had said he wanted to be in the Soviet Union .
 He did not question him about his threat to turn over classified secrets to the Soviets . He did, however, ask him if he had threatened to give them classified secrets .
 Snyder was not fully satisfied with Oswald's candor and found it difficult to believe the Soviets would not have debriefed a former Marine Corps radar operator . He realized that there was little he could do to challenge the answers .
 Oswald quickly filled out a formal four-page questionnaire, answering no to all questions about joining foreign organizations . Oswald filled out the questionnaire, saying no to joining foreign groups . Oswald then filled out his own questionnaire, which he filled out quickly .
 Oswald laconically suggested that he must take some satisfaction in the fact that he was now sitting in his office as a supplicant, repudiating everything he had formerly said . Looking up at Snyder, Oswald said he was proud of his actions .
 He gave him back his passport so that he could obtain the necessary exit visa from the Soviets, and wished him well . Instead of returning his passport, he gave it back to him so he could get a visa .
 Snyder realized that the passport expired in fewer than two months . He did not intend to renew it until the entire situation was reviewed in Washington . Snyder said he did not want to renew the passport until the review was complete .
 He stated frankly that he had clearly learned a hard lesson the hard way . He said he had been relieved of his illusions about the Soviet Union at the same time that he acquired a new understanding .
 Oswald filed an application to renew his American passport and a request for an immigration visa for his wife . Oswald filed the application for his passport and his wife's immigration visa . Oswald is expected to be repatriated in the U.S.
 On Friday, July 14, they both returned to Minsk, Belarus, where they immediately petitioned for their exit visas . On July 15, they returned to the Soviet capital, Minsk .
 Within one week they had filed all the necessary papers with the militia office, including application forms and supporting letters affirming their desire to live in the U.S. The militia office says they have been given the all clear .
 Oswald had his passport back from the Soviet Union . Now that their decision was made, they obviously intended to waste no time in processing him out of the country .
 Oswald also constructed a story depicting Marina as the victim of unrelenting Soviet harassment, which, if believed by United States authorities, might serve to expedite favorable action in her case . Oswald also proceeded to construct a story .
 In the next entry, “July 15th-Aug 20th,” he chronicles five more unpleasant meetings, over the summer, including an hour-and-one-half session before the Young Communist League . Marina was dissuaded from going to the U.S.
 Oswald continued to elaborate on the story of Marina’s persecution in his letters . It seems to have had little basis in fact in fact .
 Hospital records do not show Marina was confined or treated for “nervous exhaustion” during this period . She herself denied in subsequent testimony that she had ever been hospitalized because of any sort of harassment .
 It seems implausible that Soviet authorities would need to dissuade her from leaving by means of denunciations and social pressures . If they wished to keep her in the Soviet Union, they could simply delay giving her an exit visa, as had been done in numerous other cases .
 For his birthday, Marina sent him from Kharkov an inscribed gold and silver cup, which he wrote about to his mother and brother . On the eighteenth, for his birthdays, Marina wrote him an inscribed cup . The cup was inscribed in Kharkovsky's memory .
 Alik. He signed the letter, as he did all his letters during this period, Alik . He signed it as well as all his other letters during that period .
 Oswald also somehow found time to write long and impressively documented sections of a manuscript on life in Minsk . During this period Oswald also managed to write a book about life in the city .
 He ferreted out of local newspapers to illustrate the difficult economic situation in Russia . He portrayed the regimented social and political life of the people in an ironic style reminiscent of Animal Farm .
 He also noted such discrepancies in socialist societies as elections, in which the voters have no choice, and the faking of “spontaneous” demonstrations .
 Even trips to many cities of the Soviet Union are forbidden, even to those who would like to travel there to see relatives . Travel to many Soviet cities of Soviet Union is forbidden .
 All cars, trucks, and other private vehicles are stopped at police check points in these areas . Police check points are set up at check points across the country's borders .
 Train and plane and bus terminals are not allowed to sell tickets to these places . Passengers must be shown a valid passport whose owner’s address is in the forbidden city .
 Persons already living in these cities may travel freely to and from them . However, they may not bring others in without passes . Passes are given out by the local KGB office .
 Marina went to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for an interview with a Colonel Nikolai Aksenov . Within a few days of her return Marina was interviewed by a Colonel . Marina's interview with the Colonel was published in a book published by the Russian government .
 Marina says the purpose of this meeting was to expedite her documents for traveling to the U.S. Marina says she was meeting with a group of people in order to get her travel documents . Marina is currently in the United States awaiting a visa to enter the country .
 Marina was told on Christmas Day that her exit visa had been approved by the ministry in Moscow . Marina's passport office in Minsk, Belarus, was called to the passport office to check her visa .
 Both would receive all the necessary permissions from the Soviet side in a matter of days . They both would receive . all the . necessary permissions . from the . Soviet side . The Soviet side would be able to withdraw from the country .
 The Oswalds celebrated their first New Year's Eve together at a midnight dinner party at the home of the Zigers . One week later the Oswalds were married at the Ziger home .
 With their Soviet visas in hand, he also expected it would be born in the United States . With their visas, he said he hoped it would live in the U.S. with the baby .
 The Oswalds planned their departure from Russia that winter, but the State Department was running into a problem issuing Marina an entrance visa . Marina Oswald was the first family to leave the U.S.
 Congress had prohibited the State Department from issuing any visas whatsoever in the Soviet Union . Although she had been granted immigrant status as the wife of an American citizen, she was eligible for a visa . The State Department had to obtain a prior waiver from the Immigration and Naturalization Service .
 Marina would have to be accepted by a third country before she could be issued her visa . The Immigration Service declined to issue such a waiver . This meant that Marina would need to be allowed to enter a country by accepting a visa .
 Robert I Owens foresaw that this refusal could greatly complicate the situation of all the other Soviet citizens waiting for exit visas . The refusal could allow the Soviet government to argue that it was the United States which was impeding emigration from the Soviet Union by refusing to issue entrance visas .
 Oswald was ‘an unstable character’ who might reverse his decision unless prompt action was taken, he said . Oswald is ‘unstable character” who could reverse decision, he warned . Oswald was an unstable character, he added .
 While the memorandum moved through channels in Washington, the embassy in Moscow was instructed not to inform Oswald of the waiver problem . While the memo was sent to the White House, it was not approved by Oswald .
 Oswald applied for a loan from the State Department to finance his return trip . This meant more forms had to be filled out, and letters sent to relatives in the U.S. Oswald had to wait for word from the embassy .
 This helped him document the fact that he had sought (but not been successful in getting) funds from charitable organizations . He also documented the fact he had been unsuccessful in obtaining funds from charities .
 Oswald also attempted to redress the undesirable discharge that his honorable discharge had been converted into in August 1960 . Oswald was waiting for his discharge to be returned . Oswald also tried to redress his discharge .
 On January 30, 1962, he wrote an angry letter to John B Connally, Jr., who had been Secretary of the Navy in 1961, which betrayed considerable anxiety over his discharge .
 In defending himself, he said he had “always had the full sanction of the United States Embassy’"" during his stay in the Soviet Union . He asserted that he had always had the U.S. Embassy sanctioned .
 Oswald wrote a letter to his Senator from Texas, John Tower, attempting to enlist his help in redressing his undesirable discharge . Oswald also wrote to Tower, a Texas Senator .
 It remained a matter of great importance to him as he prepared for his return, he said . The former Manchester United star said: 'It was important to him'
 An undesirable discharge could make it difficult for him to obtain employment in the U.S. It could also serve as a prelude to eventual prosecution . The discharge could also mean he faces prosecution .
 Oswald spent considerable time working on a long legalistic petition to the U.S. Naval Review Board to reverse his discharge . Oswald spent most of the spring petitioning the board's decision .
 The meticulous citing of the U.S. Naval Code of Justice and the impeccable legal logic of the five-page brief suggest that Oswald had either assistance in preparing the petition or access to an up-to-date legal library in Minsk .
 He argued that he had not been disloyal to the United States, but instead had been forcibly detained by the Soviets . He argued he had been forced to leave the country .
 He said he asked the U.S. Embassy in Moscow for its assistance in returning to America . He explained, “After escaping detention in the city to which the Russian authorities had sent me,” he said .
 The letter dated April 28, 1962, and gave his residence as “Kalinina Street, Minsk,” he did not mail this petition until after he had left the Soviet Union . Although he dated the letter, he gave his home address in Minsk as ‘
 Marina gave birth on February 15 to a girl, named in the Russian patronymic style, June Lee Oswald . While still waiting for her U.S. visa, she gave birth to the girl .
 Oswald, though initially disappointed that it was not the boy he expected, wrote a flurry of excited letters to his mother and brother . Oswald was initially disappointed but was delighted to be reunited with Oswald .
 Marina returned home with June and formally quit her job in the hospital . A week later Marina returned to the hospital and returned to her home with her daughter .
 Oswald’s continuing calls and letters to the embassy did not arrive . Despite Oswald's continuing calls, the visas did not come . Oswald's letters and letters continued to arrive .
 The State Department finally prevailed on the Immigration and Naturalization Service to issue the waiver . Marina Marina was granted a waiver by the U.S. on May 9 .
 A cable was immediately sent to the embassy in Moscow, which in turn notified Oswald in Minsk that all his documents were ready and he could come to pick them up . Oswald was able to pick up the documents . A cable in Moscow was sent to Minsk, which informed Oswald that
 He laboriously wrote out, in one or two sessions that spring, an entire diary that purported to be a contemporaneous account of his first two and a half years in Russia . The diary is purported to have been a chronicle of his time in Moscow .
 His handwriting showed progressively more strain and fatigue as he wrote, or copied, the first twelve pages . Then apparently he took a break before completing the diary .
 Oswald uncharacteristically printed out his words possibly so that they would be read by others . Oswald's words were printed out possibly to be read . Oswald printed out the words possibly in an attempt to make his statement .
 Oswald left Moscow in January 1960, when he left Moscow, until March 1961 . It has remained almost the sole account of the period from January 1960 to March 1961 when he met Marina Marina .
 Oswald and Marina met with Colonel Prusakov just before they left for Moscow . The couple's final words of advice were given by the Colonel before leaving for Russia .
 A series of photographs taken by Oswald and his friends shows them boarding the train with their infant daughter . They waved good-bye to the Prusakovs and other friends from Minsk through a half-opened window .
 Marina's last days had all seemed to go by in a ‘frantic rush” She was leaving behind, perhaps forever, her relatives, friends and country . Marina's final moments seemed to be a "frantic" rush .
 Oswalds went directly to the American Embassy in Moscow on May 24 . Oswalds arrived in Moscow the morning of May 24, 1961 . Oswald's wife, Lee Oswald, was killed in the Soviet Union bombing .
 Marina was fingerprinted and given the United States visa that she had waited almost a year to obtain . After a brief interview with Jack Matlock, the consular officer who dealt with Soviet citizens, she was given the visa .
 She was then taken upstairs to the embassy hospital for a medical examination . She was later taken upstairs for a further medical examination by Dr. Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Davison gave her the phone number of his Russian-speaking mother in Atlanta, Georgia . Davison said he gave her a phone number in Atlanta and gave it to his mother in Russia .
 Oswald was questioned by Joseph P Norbury, Jr., Jr., the United States consul, to determine if any of his activities in the Soviet Union would preclude renewing his passport .
 Norbury found Oswald extremely guarded in his responses, choosing his words with considerable care . Oswald chose his words carefully and carefully, Norbury says .
 He seemed not only “apprehensive and suspicious,” but also at times hostile to the American consul, the report says . The consul seemed to be nervous and suspicious .
 Oswald renewed his passport for travel directly back to the United States . Norbury completed the interview and, satisfied with Oswald’s answers, renewed Oswald's passport .
 Oswalds went from office to office in Moscow to complete their travel arrangements . During the next few days, the Oswalds completed their travel plans . Oswalds were in Moscow for a few days to finalise their travel .
 He paid $81.29 for two third-class train tickets to Rotterdam . He registered his daughter June’s birth certificate and visa, obtained the necessary transit visas for passing through the Netherlands .
 Oswalds again stayed at the Hotel Berlin and had dinner at least one night with an American couple from New Haven, Connecticut . The Oswalds sat at a table at the Leningrad, 19, where they sat at table with Americans .
 Oswald was wearing an American label on his jacket that gave him away . The man, noticing that Oswald seemed to be pretending to be Russian, made a casual comment to him about the label .
 Oswald went to the embassy and signed a promissory note for the balance of his repatriation loan . Oswald signed the note on the morning of June 1 .
 He was given three tickets for the ship SS Maasdam, due to leave Rotterdam for Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 4 .
 Oswald given minimum time for stopping over anywhere in Europe before boarding his ship . The embassy had arranged not only the least expensive route home for Oswald, but also one that would give him the minimum time to stop over .
 Oswalds caught the Moscow-Berlin express with little time to spare . The Oswalds were traveling to Berlin from Moscow to Berlin .
 The next day, a few miles past the city of Brest-Litovsk, the train stopped briefly at the border for a customs and passport inspection . The train then proceeded into Poland .
 Oswald carried out with him a manuscript critical of life in the Soviet Union and his “Historic Diary,” which chronicled his decision to redefect. Among his personal belongings, Oswald also carried out his ‘Historic diary,’ which chronicles the decision to
 From the windows of their compartment, they saw the cities of central Europe flash by—Warsaw, Frankfurt an der Oder, Berlin, Berlin .
 The train pulled into Amsterdam about fifty hours after it left Moscow . It arrived in Amsterdam on Monday morning .
 Oswald family boarded the SS Maasdam on June 4 to begin their crossing to the United States . The Oswald family's brief vacation in Holland ended June 4, when the family left Holland .
 He scribbled out his political philosophy on seventeen sheets of the ship's stationery . While Marina tended to their daughter, he went upstairs to the ship’s library and scribbled it out .
 In these notes he attempted to develop a position for himself that would seem reasonable to Americans . In the notes he attempts to make his position for Americans seem reasonable . He also attempted to make a point for Americans .
 Oswald was prepared to represent himself as a utopian Marxist fully disillusioned with the Soviet brand of communism . Oswald was fully prepared to portray himself as an utopian Marxist .
 He laboriously wrote out two sets of answers to questions he might be asked by the U.S. authorities . The first unguarded and the second an edited version would pass the initial screening .
 The way in which he wrote down words phonetically, struck them out and inserted words between lines suggests that the answers were being dictated to him .
 In the first version he admits writing letters renouncing his allegiance to the United States, while in the subsequent version he flatly denies ever writing such letters .
 He acknowledges being a Communist in the first version of this article but denies it in the second . Similarly, he acknowledges being Communist in both the first and second versions of his autobiography .
 Oswald seemed to be acting on the principle that expediency, rather than truth, should be the only consideration for answering questions designed to elicit political information from him . Oswald seems to have moved from one version to the other .
 The way that words are phonetically scribbled down without regard for spelling suggests that he was using words that were unfamiliar to him and hearing them rather than copying them from a book .
 In both cases, he seems to be writing under the discipline of another person . He seems to have been writing in both cases .
 Marina told her biographer, Priscilla Johnson McMillan, that there was a Russian-speaking waiter named Pieter Didenko who spoke to them during the voyage .
 There is no available ship’s record showing a person with such a name .
 The SS Maasdam docked at the Holland-American Line pier at Hoboken, New Jersey, on June 13, 1962 . It was the first ship to arrive in New Jersey .
 Immigration officers and other officials came aboard, but for some undisclosed reason the 1,400 passengers were not allowed to begin disembarking .
 For more than an hour they milled impatiently around under the broiling noonday sun before the inspector in charge began processing their passports . They waited for more than a half an hour before they were processed by the inspector .
 Oswald and his family were waved through passport control and down the gangplank . After answering a few brief questions about his destination in America, Oswald was waved down . Oswald was allowed to travel to the U.S. and the rest of the world .
 A short, broad, broad-shouldered man was waiting patiently for him by his luggage . He had been in the middle of the night when he arrived at the airport .
 The man asked if he was “Lee Oswald/’ then introduced himself as Spas T Raikin . The man then said he was "Lee Oswald" and introduced himself to the man as "Spas T"
 He had been instructed “to find out as much as he could about the Oswalds’s” by his supervisor, says his supervisor .
 Oswald asked Oswald why he had gone to Russia . Oswald had been traveling with a group of Russians . Oswald was traveling with the group when he was killed .
 Oswald, who seemed extremely guarded in relaying any information, said only that he was “a Marine . . attached to the Embassy” in Moscow . Oswald was a Marine .
 Raikin decided it was best not to “rock the boat” by pressing him . When he refused to elaborate any further on the subject, he said: “I'm not going to rock the boat.”
 Oswald claimed to have met Marina in Moscow and considered renouncing his citizenship so he could remain with her . Oswald decided to return to the U.S. after they both decided they both should return .
 Oswalds turned up at the Travelers Aid Society office on East Thirty-ninth Street . About an hour later, the Oswalds returned to the office . The Oswalds were arrested and charged with murder .
 Cleary F’N Pierre, a Haitian professor, stopped in to visit and was pressed into service since they were shorthanded . Pierre is a former member of the Haitian society who no longer worked for the society .
 Robert Oswald only had $63 left, one caseworker called his brother Robert and asked him to telegraph $200 for plane fare . Oswald had only $63 remaining .
 He went to the caseworker’s superior, Janet F Ruscoll, explaining that he had learned in the Soviet Union always to go to the top person in a bureaucracy . He said he learned in Soviet Union to always go to top of bureaucracy .
 She made clear that he had no choice but to accept a loan from his brother if he wanted to proceed to Texas . Despite his demands that she contact the State Department, she made it clear that she would not have to .
 Robert agreed to accept the $200 which Robert had already said he would send . Finally, he relented and agreed to send the money back .
 A telegram was then sent to inform Robert that his brother would be arriving the following evening . Robert's brother was then informed that he was due to arrive the next day .
 A room was reserved for Oswald at the Times Square Hotel for that night by another caseworker . Oswald had a room reserved for him that night . Oswald was found to be in a New York hotel room .
 F’N Pierre took Oswald to Pennsylvania Station so that he could ship his excess baggage by train . Oswald's excess baggage was shipped by train to New York City .
 Oswald again showed no inclination to discuss his reasons for returning from the Soviet Union and quickly fell silent . Oswald again fell silent during the ride . Oswald had been in the USSR since 1961 .
 As far as he was concerned, the Welfare Department case on the Oswalds was now closed . The case on Oswalds is now closed, he said .
 Robert could see his younger brother walking toward him, looking around anxiously . Robert saw his brother looking anxiously as he walked toward him . Robert could hear his brother's voice in the background .
 A few steps behind him was his Russian bride, dressed in a heavy woolen dress and carrying their child . The couple's Russian bride was also carrying a child in the couple's arms .
 Robert had last seen his brother in September 1959, a few days after he had been discharged from the Marine Corps. Robert last seen him in September .
 He had then looked remarkably happy and fit, in fine physical condition, with a full head of curly hair .
 Robert couldn't help wondering what happened to his brother during the intervening years in the Soviet Union . Struck by this loss of hair, Robert wondered if his brother survived .
 Oswald approached the passenger gate, Robert and Vada ran toward them . Oswald was shot by Oswald in the head as he approached the gate of the plane .
 Oswald kept looking around as if he was expecting someone else . Oswald looked at the airport as they made their way out of the airport .
 Robert tried to point out some of the Texas sights to Marina, but everything he said had to be translated by his brother into Russian . Robert and Marina were traveling from Dallas to Fort Worth, Texas .
 Marina had apparently learned no English despite being married for more than a year . Marina's husband had been married for over a year, but she had not learned English .
 Robert had invited the Oswalds to live with his family at 7313 Davenport Street in Fort Worth until Lee found a job for himself . Robert invited the family to live in the Fort Worth home until Lee Oswald found a new job .
 Robert had risen from being a salesman to being an executive with Acme Brick Company . He now owns a small but comfortable suburban house with a living room, dining room, kitchen and two bedrooms .
 Oswald moved Oswald and his wife and daughter into the extra bedroom . His five-year-old daughter had previously occupied the room . He moved Oswald, his wife, and their daughter, into the living room .
 Marina’s apparent delight over material goods did not carry over to Oswald . Marina's apparent delight with material goods didn't carry over with Oswald . Oswald was the only person in the world to be killed by the assassination .
 Lee and Marina Oswald spent their first weekend in Fort Worth unpacking their scant possessions and preparing for their new life in the U.S. Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald moved to Fort Worth, Texas, for the first time .
 Vada, a beautician by trade, cut Marina’s long hair into a shorter American style and gave her her first permanent permanent .
 Marina pushes her first shopping cart around a local supermarket . She marvels at the endless display of food in the supermarket .
 Oswald showed his brother the notes he had compiled for a book about living conditions in the Soviet Union . Oswald showed the notes to his brother when they returned home, Oswald said .
 Robert read the first fifteen or so pages of the draft, which was mainly about the radio factory in Minsk where Oswald had worked, and was relieved to find that it was not a screeching polemic . The draft of Oswald's draft was mostly about his radio factory .
 He had sharply disagreed with the anti-American views his brother had expressed in Moscow . He now wanted to avoid any further political discussions with him .
 He had long ago accepted the fact that he and his brother did not see ‘eye to eye” in politics . He had accepted that he had long accepted that his brother and sister were not "eye-to-eye"
 Oswald wasted no time in attempting to establish credentials for himself as an authority on the Soviet Union . Oswald spent the rest of his life trying to establish his credentials as a Soviet Union expert . Oswald was assassinated in March 1945 .
 He went to the office of a public stenographer, Pauline V Bates, and offered her the job of typing up his manuscript .
 Oswald wanted to publish a book on "My life in Russia," he said . Oswald lived in Russia for three years and wanted to write a book .
 Bates was taken aback by the gaunt young man with pale eyes which looked almost dead . Bates was shocked to discover the young man had pale eyes almost dead. Bates was stunned by the look of the man's pale pale skin .
 As he stood there in his white T-shirt, dark slacks and zip-up jacket, he looked very young, almost like a high school student . He looked almost like he was a student at school .
 He described how repressive contemporary life in Russia actually was . He described from a first hand point of view how repressive life was in Russia .
 He gave graphic descriptions of the way the Soviet police monitored every aspect of his life . The censors read his mail and read his letters, he said .
 Because of the surveillance, he had had to prepare the manuscript under clandestine conditions .
 Oswald explained that he and his wife taped it to their undergarments when they crossed the border . Oswald said he and wife had taped the tape to their underwear .
 Oswald took out a manila envelope filled with scraps of paper stapled together into two different sequences . Bates agreed to do the typing at the rate of one dollar a page . If they had been searched, he said, they would both have been sent to Siberia .
 The notes were both handwritten and typed in Russian, suggesting that he had had access to a Cyrillic typewriter . The notes are both written in Russian and handwritten .
 Oswald insisted on being present to make sure that she didn’t retain any copies or even make any notes . Oswald insisted that during her typing he would not be able to make any copies .
 As she worked that morning, he paced nervously around the room, his eyes darting past her . He paced nervously .
 At the end of each session he carefully checked to make sure he had taken all the pages from her . He carefully checked each other's pages from each session to ensure they had been taken .
 Bates found the stories “fascinating,” and when she told Oswald this, he explained that a friend of his in Texas was going to help him get the book published . Oswald's friend in Texas will help him publish the book .
 Friend was an engineer of Russian origin who was involved in the oil business, he said . He added that the friend was a Russian-born engineer and involved in oil business .
 Oswald was showing increasing concern about the progress of the typing of his book . Oswald showed increasing concern that his book had not been typed .
 Bates saw that she was up to the part about Kiev . Bates was surprised to see that she had been up for the part . Bates said she was going to tell him about Kiev, but he didn't expect it .
 He paid her $10, which his mother had given him, and told her he could not afford any more typing . Collecting his notes, he paid her the $10 he had given her .
 She offered to complete the job without being immediately paid for it . By now, she had become interested in the material and offered to do the job herself .
 There is no official record of the Soviet city for which there is no record of his ever having visited . His story about Kiev, Kiev, was not to be completed .
 Oswald also sought a job as a translator of Russian during his first week in Fort Worth . Oswald's first week of Fort Worth was also seeking a job in Russian .
 Oswald should contact Peter Paul Gregory, a petroleum engineer of Russian origin who was then teaching a Russianlanguage course at the Fort Worth Public Library . Annie L Smith, a counselor at the Texas Employment Commission, suggested contacting Gregory .
 Oswald met Gregory in his office on June 19 and asked if he could certify and recommend him as a Russian translator . Oswald called for an appointment and asked Gregory to certify him as an English translator .
 Oswald's Russian, the letter noted, was acquired during a three-year residence in the Soviet Union . Oswald's letter noted that he had acquired his Russian during that time . Oswald spent three years in Soviet Union, according to the letter .
 Oswald casually mentioned that he had brought back a Russian wife to Fort Worth . Oswald also showed him a copy of the first few pages of his manuscript . Oswald showed him the manuscript .
 Gregory was impressed by Oswald’s skill in the Russian language and promised to get in touch with him if he heard of anyone needing a translator . Gregory was slightly put off by Oswald's arrogance, but was impressed .
 Oswald had succeeded in making his first contact in the fairly large community of Russian expatriates in the Fort Worth-Dallas area . Oswald's first contact was with the community of Russians living in the area .
 Oswald finally filed with the Naval Discharge Review Board on June 18 . Oswald had prepared a five-page petition apparently in Minsk, apparently in the Minsk .
 He was still concerned with his Marine discharge and with getting the sort of documentation that would allow him to work without any questions being asked in Texas . He says he's still concerned about his discharge .
 Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, arrived from Crowell, Texas, where she was working as a practical nurse . Oswald's mother was working at the hospital in Crowell where she works .
 After meeting Marina, she raved about her beauty and lavished affection on her newest granddaughter, June . She also lavished her affection on June's newest granddaughter .
 She was reserved toward Robert and his family, whom she had not seen in several years, although they lived in the same area . She was more reserved toward the family than she was toward them .
 The Soviet authorities would hold his wife and family hostage for his actions or even his mother’s actions . The family was held hostage by the Soviet authorities .
 Oswald avoided mentioning the critique of Soviet society that he had brought out of the Soviet Union and was now preparing for publication . During the remainder of his mother’s brief visit to Fort Worth, Oswald avoided mention of the critique .
 His own manuscript did not seem to pose the same danger for Marina and her family . His own manuscripts did not appear to pose a similar danger to Marina .
 Oswald’s return to America did not go unnoticed by the FBI . The FBI had been monitoring his activities on and off since his defection in 1959 . Oswald's return to Washington, D.C., in 1959, was not the first time Oswald had returned to America .
 The Soviets often gave Soviet citizens receiving an exit visa some sort of mission, even if it was only as trivial as reporting their addresses to predesignated embassies abroad .
 On May 31 Washington headquarters instructed agents at their Dallas field office to question Oswald upon his arrival there . Oswald's arrival on May 31 instructed agents to question him in Dallas .
 Oswald was settled in Fort Worth, Texas, on June 26 . FBI agent John W Fain asked Oswald to come into the office after hearing that he had settled there . Oswald was later shot dead in the head in August .
 At one o’clock that afternoon he arrived at the Fort Worth FBI office and took a seat opposite Fain and another agent, B Tom Carter . Fain sat opposite Carter and Carter in Fort Worth .
 He also claimed that newspaper stories from Moscow that characterized his attitude as anti-American were false and distorted . He also said newspaper stories about his attitude were false .
 Despite his handwritten letter to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, he flatly denied that he had ever tried to renounce his American citizenship or seek Soviet citizenship . The letter was written to the United States Embassy in Russia .
 By this time it was clear to the interviewing agents that they were dealing with a hostile witness, who was not prepared to volunteer, and would probably deny, any detrimental information about himself . The interview took place in the early hours of October 1, 2012 .
 He was asked point-blank whether he had been recruited by Soviet intelligence while he was in the Soviet Union . Finally, the agents asked him point blank whether he was recruited .
 He denied that he was even approached for any information by any Soviet official . He coolly answered no when asked whether he had been approached by Soviet officials .
 When pressed about statements he had made in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, he scoffed at the idea that he had ever offered to make available any of the data he had learned in the Marine Corps .
 Agents asked him if he would submit to a polygraph examination . They asked him to submit to the test, but he said he would not .
 Oswald categorically refused to take any such lie-detector test and excused himself from the interview . Oswald said he would not take the test and would not have to take it .
 Fain suggested that his Immigration and Naturalization Service records be checked and that Oswald be reinterviewed . Oswald's immigration and naturalization records should be checked, Fain said . Fain "set out a lead" on Oswald .
 Oswald asked Oswald how the FBI had treated him . Oswald had been treated badly by the FBI . Oswald's son asked Oswald to explain the FBI's treatment of him .
 He laughed after telling the story as if it were some sort of private joke which his brother did not understand .
 Marina wrote a letter to the Soviet Embassy in Washington providing her address in Fort Worth and the number of the residency permit which had been issued to her by the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Moscow .
 Gerasimov performed routine consular tasks, along with being an intelligence case officer . It was not clear whether the Oswalds’ contact with him was merely a coincidence or whether it portended a more serious relation .
 Oswald attempted to construct a more independent life for himself in Fort Worth, Texas, in July . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet wound to the head .
 Oswald temporarily moved into an apartment that his mother had rented about ten blocks away on Seventh Street . Oswald's brother's house was becoming cramped for two families to share .
 She had moved back to Fort Worth, intent on living with him and caring for Marina and June, while he found work . She had planned to live with him, Marina, June and June .
 From the beginning, however, this living arrangement strained Oswald's patience . Oswald’s patience was strained by the living arrangement, he says . Oswald's relationship with Oswald was strained from the beginning of his life .
 Marina's mother insisted on speaking English to Marina and assumed that she understood . Marina's father was a very determined woman, his mother insisted .
 His protests that she did not comprehend a word of English were to no avail . He protested that she didn't understand English . His protests were not successful .
 Marina did not seem to mind and went about the house cheerfully singing and helping with the housework . She sang and helped with housework and helped the family out of bed .
 Oswald offered to do manual labor at a minimum wage at minimum wage . Oswald offered the job to the Texas Employment Commission .
 Leslie Welding Company had told the commission it was looking for metalworkers for its louver-door factory in Fort Worth . Smith, the counselor who had previously tried to help him find employment as a translator, sent him to the company . The company had informed the commission that it was
 Oswald filled out the application forms on Friday, July 13, giving Peter Gregory and his brother as references and claiming that he had two and one-half years’ experience working with sheet metals . Oswald filled the forms with references and said he had 2 and 1/1 years' experience
 Eight to nine hours a day assembling doors and windows at $1.25 an hour . It turned out to be a monotonous and grueling job . But it provided him with a paycheck .
 The block was lined with trees, and the apartment was bare, but clean and pleasant . The apartment, two furnished rooms in a duplex, was bare .
 Oswald and his family had left their river-view apartment in Minsk, Belarus . It afforded them their first bit of privacy since they had left Minsk . Oswald's family was moved into a new apartment in the city .
 Robert could hear his mother arguing with his brother when he arrived in his car to help them move . Robert's mother and brother were arguing when he got in the car together . Robert says he heard his mother argue with her brother .
 She apparently felt that she had made a great sacrifice in moving to Fort Worth to help Lee . Now he suddenly was moving out, without even telling her where he was going to live .
 Robert, who had learned long before to avoid such quarrels with his mother, quietly assisted his brother in loading his few suitcases and other possessions into his car . Robert's brother was in the middle of a dispute with his parents .
 Marina, looking bewildered, got in with June, and they drove to the new apartment . The new apartment is about onehalf mile away from Marina's new home .
 Oswald had no choice but to continue working 45 to 50 hours a week at the sweltering factory to pay his brother the money he lent him to fly to Texas . Oswald had to work to pay the rent and expenses and repaying his brother's money he had lent him .
 Marina, who had shed her Russian woolens for short American shorts, took her daughter for strolls in the neighborhood . Meanwhile, Marina wrote long letters to the friends she left behind in the Soviet Union .
 She informed the Soviet Embassy of her new address since she was still a Soviet citizen . She also promptly informed the embassy of the new address .
 Oswald mace no effort to see members of his family, although occasionally he would speak to his brother on the phone . Now on his own, he would talk to his older brother on a phone .
 The only person the Oswalds invited to their apartment was Paul Gregory, the son of Peter Gregory . The Oswalds were married to Peter Gregory's son, Paul Gregory .
 He paid only a few dollars a session, amounting to no more than $40 during the course of the summer . He could practice his Russian with a girl who could not speak English .
 Oswald rarely spent more than $4 for the whole week’s groceries for his family . Oswald spent $4 a week on groceries for the family .
 Oswald would offer Gregory a glass of Hawaiian Punch when they returned to his apartment, Oswald would usually offer him a drink .
 The pair would then begin a conversation in Russian which might last an hour or two . Then they would begin to talk in Russian . The two would talk for hours or two before they left .
 Oswald delighted in criticizing American capitalism, but also criticized the Soviet Union for diverging from the original ideas of Marx and Lenin . Oswald also went out of his way to criticize the Soviet Soviet Union's diverging ideas .
 It was as if he wanted to test out the anti-Soviet line he had drafted during his crossing of the Atlantic . 'It was like he was testing out his anti-Russian line,' he said .
 Marina usually remained silent while her husband expounded his political philosophy . She endorsed such positions as the Soviets’ supplying material to Cuba, though she did endorse such positions .
 Gregory realized that Oswald put enormous effort into appearing to be an intellectual . While not particularly impressed with Oswald's intelligence, Gregory was impressed with his intelligence .
 Oswald was studying the works of Lenin at the time of his wife's death . Gregory was studying Lenin's works at their apartment .
 Oswald ordered a book on the “Teachings of Leon Trotsky,” the archrival of Stalin after the Russian Revolution of 1917 . Leon Trotsky was bludgeoned to death by a professional assassin while in exile in Mexico City in 1940 .
 Trotsky had led a movement which tried to separate ideological Marxists from domination by Moscow . Up to that point Trotsky had been leading an ideological Marxist movement . Trotsky's death was the death of Trotsky .
 He accompanied them to their parked car, where they repeated many of the questions Fain had previously put to him .
 Oswald and his wife were asked if any deal had been struck by either Oswald or his wife with Soviet officials before they left Russia . Over and over again they asked him if any “deal” had been made by either of them . Oswald's wife was killed in November 1963 .
 Oswald denied that either he or his wife had ever been even contacted . Oswald denied he or her wife had even been contacted by the government .
 When it became clear that they would not elicit any information about such solicitations, even if they had taken place, the agents decided to terminate the interview . The interview was terminated .
 A decision had already been made in Washington not to question Marina as part of the ongoing surveillance program of Soviet expatriates . A decision was already made by the Washington government .
 Oswald was not interviewed by any CIA officer, according to testimony from CIA officials . Oswald was never interviewed by a CIA officer . Oswald died in August 1945 at the age of 25, when he was still in the Army .
 The interest in debriefing defectors by intelligence agencies remained high, if only to learn the procedures the Soviets used in processing an American who wanted to renounce his citizenship, this lapse was inexplicable .
 The CIA monitored letters sent from the Soviet Union to selected cities in the U.S. The CIA received further information about the Oswalds during these summer months .
 The question of whether this was an innocuous letter from the daughter of Sobolev or some confusion of names could not be determined by the CIA’s tracing system .
 James Angleton and his subordinates oversaw the program of mail intercepts . It was simply another piece in the jigsaw puzzle for Angleton's subordinates .
 Oswald had attempted to contact members of the Russian-speaking community in the DallasFort Worth area, if only for Marina to have some people to talk to in her native language . Oswald had been trying to reach out to the community throughout the summer to find out what happened .
 Peter Gregory invited him to a dinner party at their home in August . Peter Gregory and his wife hosted a small dinner party . The Gregory family had been friends for years .
 Marina accidentally stumbled with the baby in her arms . Marina's husband says he saw Marina accidentally stumble with the child . Marina and Marina have been married for two years .
 Oswald became infuriated with his wife for dropping their child . In a display of hot temper that Gregory had never witnessed before, Oswald became irate .
 Teofil Meller, a distinguished Russian scholar, his gregarious wife, Anna, 15 and George Bouhe, a Russian-born accountant in his late sixties . Bouhe had been trying to help emigres from Russia settle in the Dallas area .
 Oswald discreetly avoided discussing his politics that night, except occasionally to criticize the Soviet Union . Oswald's White Russians were all staunchly anti-Communist White Russians .
 Marina had lived in Minsk before she moved to Minsk . She could answer all his questions about the status of the palaces, parks and boulevards that he vividly remembered from his childhood .
 At one point, Bouhe felt tears coming to his eyes as they sat together on the floor and meandered through their images of that city . Bouhe said he felt tears come to him as they looked at the images .
 Marina seemed to have charmed all the guests, and Bouhe in particular . Bouhe was determined to use his considerable influence in the Russian-speaking community to help her .
 Later that evening Bouhe tried to engage Oswald in a conversation about the cost of living in the Soviet Union . Bouhe later tried to talk Oswald about the costs of living .
 Oswald had a budget of 90 rubles a month, half of which went for food, Bouhe said . Bouhe ascertained that Oswald had had had a monthly budget of just 90 . Oswald had spent the month on food, he said .
 Oswald was critical of the Soviet government’s economic policies on the grounds that the best products were always reserved for export . Gregory remembers Oswald's being critical of Soviet economic policies .
 Anna Meller says the conversation was mostly small talk about how Marina liked the U.S. and whether Oswald had found a job yet . Meller: "Marina liked the United States and Oswald liked it"
 Marina was shy and told Meller quietly that she needed some things for the baby and clothes for herself . Meller said she needed to buy some clothes for her baby and herself .
 Bouhe invited the Oswalds over to meet Elena Hall, a Russian-speaking dental technician living in Fort Worth, Texas . The Oswalds met Hall the next day . Hall is a dental technician who works in the area .
 He noticed that although Marina was naturally beautiful, her appearance was marred by a missing front tooth . He had noticed that she was naturally an extraordinarily beautiful woman . Marina's teeth were missing .
 He hoped that Mrs. Mrs. could not afford the necessary dental work, he hoped that she would be able to afford it .
 Oswald family's situation approached dire poverty . A major concern of most people was the welfare of the Oswald family . The Oswald family was in dire poverty.
 They collected sweaters and skirts for Marina and found a baby bed, mattress and toys for her six-month-old daughter . The family also collected baby bed and mattress for Marina .
 Marina's English teacher prepared a series of English lessons for her . Bouhe tried to persuade Oswald to allow her to attend formal classes, without much success .
 Oswald insisted that he did not want his wife learning English and even tried to reject Bouhe’s efforts to find clothes and furniture for his family . Oswald insisted he didn’t want Bouhe to learn English and refused to buy clothes .
 Oswald became involved with Russianspeaking emigres who lived in Fort Worth and Dallas . He saw less of his own family as he became involved in the Russianspeaks .
 He stopped seeing his brother and asked his mother not to come by his apartment or speak to Marina Marina . He also asked her not to speak to him or see Marina .
 Marina Oswald sat in the back of a convertible driven by George De Mohrenschildt . The mission took place on October 1, 1962, in Marina Oswald's honor .
 She held her daughter June in her arms and, from time to time, spoke in Russian to De Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne .
 De Mohrenschildts headed for a friend of Admiral Henry Bruton . Bruton had a large house with a swimming pool in Dallas suburb of Farmers Branch . The group was headed to Bruton's home, where he lived with a friend .
 The De Mohrenschildts had made arrangements earlier that morning to bring Marina and her child to the Brutons' home . The Brutons had planned to take Marina and the child to their home .
 Jeanne had said that it would do them both good to have a day in the sun . Jeanne said it would be a good day for them to spend a little bit of sun in sun .
 De Mohrenschildt had met Marina and Lee Oswald earlier that summer under circumstances that he would never fully disclose . He would never reveal how he met the Oswald family .
 Orlov, however, insists that the only time he accompanied De Mohrenschildt to Oswald’s home, the two were already well acquainted . Orlov: "The only time I went to Oswald's home was the time I accompanied him to the home"
 De Mohrenschildt told a friend that he met the Oswalds through the Dallas Aid Society, but no such organization existed at that time . The Oswalds were killed in the Dallas oil industry .
 De Mohrenschildt devoted a large part of his next seven months to arranging—and rearranging—each of the Oswalds’ lives . Although involved in his own diverse business activities in Haiti and the U.S., he was involved in many of his own businesses .
 De Mohrenschildt first appeared as a total stranger at the Brutons’ front door . It was only a few months earlier, at the beginning of the summer, that he had first appeared . The Brutons' front door was the first time they had been confronted by De
 He stood six feet two inches tall, with the physique of a powerfully built athlete and windblown dark-blond hair . He stood at six feet .
 Bruton at first thought he might be a grand duke, and wondered what this extraordinary-looking man was doing at the door of her secluded house eight miles from Dallas . Bruton: "I thought this man was an extraordinary looking man" Bruton thought he was a grand
 De Mohrenschildt was drawn to her house by fond memories of the good times he had had there when it was owned by a friend of his, Colonel Schurger .
 He told how he helped build the swimming pool and the brick barbecue . He also helped build a brick barbecue and a swimming pool .
 Bruton says De Mohrenschildt might be inventing some of his own participation in the design of the house . Bruton: Bruton might have been invented by the architect of the Bruton house. Bruton may have been inventing his own involvement in the house design.
 De Mohrenschildt spoke so convincingly about the former owner of her house that she invited him in to see the renovations she had made since she and her husband had bought the house almost two years earlier .
 She called it the octopus, since it had wings that fanned out in every direction, and found the eccentricity of its design a welcome change from the more conventional houses she had lived in during her years as a Navy wife .
 De Mohrenschildt walked from wing to wing, lavishing praise on changes she had made .
 He also confirmed her initial impression of his aristocratic origins by telling her he was the son of a Russian marshal of the nobility who had been killed by the Communists in the Russian Revolution .
 He had fled Russia when he was still a child . He had gone to school in France and then emigrating to the United States . He entered the oil business in the 1970s .
 When they reached the swimming pool, he asked if he could show it to his wife . He then asked if she could see it to him .
 Jeanne de Mohrenschildt, his fourth wife, was an extraordinarily interesting woman . She was an extremely interesting woman, he says .
 She had been born in Manchuria, the daughter of one of the Russian directors of the Far Eastern Railroad .
 After dancing through China in a ballet company, she emigrated to the U.S. in 1938 . She established herself as a dress designer of some note .
 Bruton invited him to use the swimming pool whenever he liked, and for the rest of the summer the De Mohrenschildts drove to Farmers Branch almost every day to use it . Bruton also invited Bruton's wife to use his swimming pool . Brutan's wife says she
 Admiral Bruton accepted these constant visitors with slightly more hesitation than did his wife . Bruton's wife was not happy with the constant visitors .
 He was a lawyer in Virginia before becoming a submarine commander . He had been a lawyer before he became a sub commander .
 In this capacity he had undertaken to reorganize the global system which the Navy uses to communicate with and control the movements of all its submarines, surface ships, airplanes and missiles . He also had to pinpoint the location of enemy vessels .
 He had supervised this top-secret project until 1960, when he retired from the Navy and joined Collins Radio . He continued to work on modernizing and refining the communications system until 1960 .
 De Mohrenschildt was a likable playboy who seemed interested in telling jokes and amusing women . Bruton said he was a "likable and charming playboy" who was interested in little more than telling jokes .
 Although he professed to be an international entrepreneur, his actual business remained a mystery . His actual business was a mystery.
 The life of George de Mohrenschildt also remained a mystery to the FBI, CIA, Office of Naval Intelligence and other government agencies that had investigated him .
 He was briefly detained for sketching a naval installation in Port Aransas, Texas . His personal papers revealed he was carrying two different biographical sketches of himself .
 The first identified him as being “of Swedish origin, born April 17, 1911”; the second portrayed him as a “Greek Catholic,” born in 1914 .
 The resumes indicated that he had been educated in Belgium and held either a business or philosophy degree . He was educated in either business and philosophy degrees .
 FBI was able to establish that he was not actually earning money from any of these professions . He claimed such diverse occupations as insurance salesman, film producer, newspaper correspondent and textile salesman .
 British mail intercepts in Bermuda at start of World War II indicated that he was closely associated with intelligence agents working against the Allies .
 Though probably of Russian origin, he had served the Polish government in various capacities since the early 1930s, when he was a lieutenant in the Polish cavalry . He had served in various roles since the 1930s .
 While still in the Polish military, he traveled around Europe, supposedly as a correspondent for the government-owned Polish News Service . He is believed to have worked for the Polish government in the past .
 His educational and business activities in Belgium were financed by payments from the Polish government . The Polish government funded his education and business interests in Belgium .
 His allegiance to the Polish government seemed clearly established up until 1939 . His status grew murkier when Poland was invaded and divided that year between Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia .
 From his pattern of associations it was not clear for whom, if anyone, “Von Mohrenschildt” was working . He seemed to have large financial resources at his disposal . Presumably the intelligence agents working abroad were also divided .
 Deuxieme made two extensive trips across the United States to recruit agents . He recruited agents to gather intelligence about petroleum exports to Europe .
 He also made a trip by himself to San Francisco, where he recruited at least one promising agent .
 In June of that year federal agents intercepted a letter from Maydell suggesting that De Mohrenschildt obtain credentials from Nelson Rockefeller to distribute films in Latin America . Rockefeller was then coordinator of information for Latin America, Nelson Rockefeller .
 The venture came to an end in September 1942, when Maydell was arrested on a presidential warrant as a “dangerous alien” and interred for four years .
 The suspicion that De Mohrenschildt was involved with Maydell in an Axis espionage ring was heightened when it was learned that he was corresponding with Germany through Saburo Matsukata, the son of a former Prime Minister of Japan, who was alleged to be coordinating German and Japanese
 His name was also found written in the address book of a woman in Washington, D.C., who was under suspicion of being a Nazi agent .
 In the many-cornered world of intelligence, it is not possible to determine under whose control an agent is working simply by identifying other agents with whom he is associating .
 The fact that De Mohrenschildt was helping French counterintelligence build a network could mean that he had joined the French side or that he was working for another side attempting to penetrate French intelligence .
 Sim180 / LEGEND  ilariously . His association with Nazi agents could have been part of a double game . Sim180 is Sim180 - Sim180, Sim180 .
 Under such circumstances all that the FBI could do was closely monitor De Mohrenschildt’s activities in the hope of tracing his ultimate control . The FBI could only monitor his activities in order to trace him to the right place .
 In 1941 De Mohrenschildt attempted to join the Office of Strategic Services, which was then being organized as the primary U.S. intelligence agency . In 1941 he attempted to become a member of the OSS, but was denied .
 Because of his suspected ties to Nazi and Polish intelligence, he was “security disapproved” for the position . He was suspected of having ties to Polish and Nazi intelligence .
 By this time De Mohrenschildt had found out that he was under suspicion by the FBI, and he crossed into Mexico . Mexico was then becoming the center of German intelligence in the Western Hemisphere .
 With America on the verge of entering the war, countries were attempting to funnel their money into Mexico . Mexico maintained its neutrality .
 Mexican authorities became suspicious of his activities and ordered him expelled . He spent most of the war in Mexico but managed to spend most of it in Mexico .
 During this period he was also the subject of an investigation by the Office of Naval Intelligence . During this time he was subject of a probe by the ONI .
 De Mohrenschildt worked after the war in Cuba and Venezuela for a number of U.S. oil companies . With his new credentials as a “petroleum engineer,’s new credentials, he worked as a petroleum engineer .
 He later claimed that the Soviets offered him the opportunity to return to the Soviet Union as a citizen, but he turned down the offer . He claimed that he was offered the chance to return but turned down .
 In 1946 De Mohrenschildt turned up at the Rangelv oilfield in Colorado . He applied for a job with the oil companies that were developing that field .
 He claimed his father had been a Russian engineer in the Ploesti oilfields in Rumania, who had been captured and executed by the Soviet Army . He claimed that his father was an engineer who had worked for the Soviet army .
 He said that he had been brought up by relatives in Poland, then sent to Paris . He had attended school and worked as a translator before moving to France .
 He claimed that during the war he had risen in the Polish underground to the rank of lieutenant colonel . He said he spent most of his time in London as a liaison officer .
 He said that toward the end of the war he had married the daughter of an American diplomat and had a daughter by this marriage, which lasted only one year .
 He claimed to have worked for the Shell Oil Company in Holland before coming to America . He claimed he worked for Shell oil company in Holland .
 His resume impressed the managers of the Rangely field, and he was hired to help coordinate production among the various companies that were drilling there . He was hired by the field's managers to coordinate production .
 While working in Colorado, he became naturalized as an American citizen . He also married his second wife, Phyllis Washington .
 In 1952 he moved to Dallas and married Winifred Sharpies, the daughter of a well-connected oil millionaire . He later moved to Texas and later married a wealthy Dallas oil magnate .
 With part of the Sharpies' fortunes at his disposal, he had little problem establishing himself in the oil business as an entrepreneur .
 His ventures, which ranged from wildcat drilling to aerial surveillance of oil-promising areas, resulted in few financial successes . His ventures included wildcat drills, aerial surveillance and aerial surveillance .
 Up until his divorce from his third wife in 1956, he lived like a millionaire in an impressive mansion . He lived in the mansion until his death in 1956 .
 CIA became interested in De Mohrenschildt in 1957, when he was recommended as a geologist to be sent to Yugoslavia by the U.S. government . CIA was interested in the geologist's work in Yugoslavia .
 CIA's Office of Security did not object to employing De Mohrenschildt in Yugoslavia as a consulting geologist . The geologist was denied access to classified material, but was allowed access to the material .
 While in Yugoslavia, he tried twice to approach the private island of Marshal Tito by boat, and both times, was fired upon by security guards . Both times, security guards fired upon .
 CIA debriefed by J Walter Moore of the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service . After spending eight months exploring the coasts and interior of that country, he returned to Dallas .
 The information De Mohrenschildt provided to the CIA became the basis for at least ten reports that were circulated within government agencies . The information was the basis of at least 10 reports by the CIA .
 He returned to Africa in 1959 and returned via Poland . Still working for the same syndicate, he went again in 1959 .
 He then married Jeanne, and together they traveled extensively in Mexico . Jeanne and Jeanne traveled extensively together .
 The De Mohrenschildts reemerged in April 1961 in Guatemala, just as the Cubans trained by the CIA were being marshaled for the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba .
 De Mohrenschildt had been in Guatemala for approximately four months . His route took him within a few miles of the CIA training bases .
 From Guatemala, he proceeded through Central America to Panama and then flew to Haiti . He stayed with an elderly friend from Poland, Michael Brightman, in Haiti, where he stayed .
 Brightman provided detailed instructions for their trip at various points en route . Jeanne Brightman says Brightman had provided them detailed instructions .
 After a two-month stay in Haiti, the De Mohrenschildts returned to Dallas . They took up residence again and, several months later, contacted Lee Harvey Oswald . After a visit to Haiti, they went back to Dallas, where they contacted Oswald .
 De Mohrenschildt had told Bruton about a young ex-Marine he knew who defected to the Soviet Union . Bruton had become disillusioned with communism and returned to the U.S.
 Oswald hoped Bruton might become interested in the electronics field and help place him in a job . Oswald hopes Bruton will help him find a job in an electronics field . Bruton hopes that Bruton becomes interested in Oswald .
 Bruton abruptly changed the subject, so De Mohrenschildt did not press the idea . Bruton ended up changing the subject . Brutan was a member of Bruton’s political party .
 After this rebuff, De Mohrenschildt decided to introduce Marina to Mrs. Marina . After this, he decided to meet her again and introduce her to Marina .
 De Mohrenschildt led Marina and Jeanne to the swimming pool behind the Bruton's sprawling one-story house .
 That October afternoon was the first and only time that the De Mohrenschildts had ever arrived with a guest . It was also the first time they had ever come to visit with a friend . The couple's first visit was the last time they'd ever had a guest at the De
 Admiral Bruton was away in Europe on business for Collins Radio, but Mrs. Bruton went on holiday with her husband .
 Bruton, a warm and friendly woman who always enjoyed their company, greeted the guests enthusiastically . Bruton's funeral was held in memory of his wife, who died at the age of 92 . Brutan's funeral will be held in New York City, New York .
 Marina’s deep blue eyes and thick dark lashes were very much like those of the film star Elizabeth Taylor . Bruton was immediately struck with her beauty .
 With Bruton temporarily gone, De Mohrenschildt seized the opportunity to press Marina’s case .
 Bruton told Bruton that Marina and her baby had been cruelly deserted and left without any means of support . Bruton said Marina and baby were 'cruelly deserted and left without any means of support'
 De Mohrenschildt added that since Marina spoke no English, she would have difficulty finding employment . He said she would struggle to find employment because of her lack of English .
 She had no money, he said, and worst of all, no place for her and her child to live . He said she had no place to live, and she had to live with her child .
 He and Jeanne were taking care of the poor woman, but they didn’t have enough room for Marina to stay with them for any great length of time . Marina was taken in by Jeanne and Jeanne .
 She assumed that in bringing Marina to her home, De Mohrenschildt was acting with the concern of a true gentleman . She had come to expect from him .
 The group was still discussing Marina’s situation when suddenly a gaunt young man appeared at the gate . Marina was taken to hospital with a serious injury to her neck .
 Marina's supposedly estranged husband, Lee Oswald, is now approaching them . Lee Oswald is said to be Marina's alleged estranged husband . Marina's husband was Oswald, Oswald's wife of the time, Oswald was killed in Oswald's assassination .
 At the sight of the unexpected visitor, De Mohrenschildt stiffened and became silent . His glare made it obvious that Oswald was not supposed to be there . Oswald's glare showed that Oswald had not been invited to the party .
 Bruton felt decidedly uncomfortable as Oswald approached them, his eyes darting back and forth at the people still sitting around the pool . Bruton's eyes darted back to the pool, darting between them and Oswald .
 She couldn't help noticing that he was a ‘sleazy person’ with his hair combed back and very greasy . She couldn’t help notice that .
 He had a sort of half-smile and half-squint on his face as he introduced himself to the family .
 Bruton offered Bruton Bruton a drink, and he became surprisingly more relaxed and even friendly . Bruton became more relaxed after Bruton was offered a drink by Bruton, who then became relaxed and friendly .
 Oswald’s responses were far more articulate and intelligent than he had expected, given what he had been hearing about Oswald . Weinert, a captain in the Army, broke the ice by asking him about his experiences .
 De Mohrenschildt remained uncharacteristically quiet, but there was little he could say under the circumstances . The incident took place in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Oswald had apparently found out that they were at the Brutons’ home and decided to join them after he had finished work at his job in Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald joined them after his job at his Fort Worth job . Oswald apparently had found out they were there and joined them
 De Mohrenschildt had made efforts to portray Marina as a wife who had been deserted by her husband . But by coming in unexpectedly, he had undermined all the efforts . He had been trying to portray her as a woman who was deserted by husband .
 Clearly Oswald was not acting like a man who had run away from his wife, and from what he said, he still regarded Marina as his wife . Oswald's wife was Marina .
 De Mohrenschildt knew that Marina and Oswald were not estranged and, in fact, were living together at their Fort Worth apartment . Oswald and Marina had been living together in their Mercedes Street apartment in Fort Worth up to that morning .
 Oswald’s blundering in had upset his plan to move the pair to separate quarters . If his plan had been to facilitate the move, it would have upset it, he had upset it .
 De Mohrenschildt again told the story of Marina being mistreated and again tried to find another home for her . Marina was found by a chemical engineer and then a consulting geologist .
 After a polite pause, De Mohrenschildt signaled that it was time to go . Jeanne, Marina, June and Oswald drove off with him in his open convertible .
 Bruton never saw Marina or Oswald again, nor did De Mohrenschildt ever again bring up the subject . Bruton and Oswald were never seen again .
 When Admiral Bruton heard the story of the curious visit, he just shrugged . De Mohrenschildt had always seemed a bit odd to him .
 De Mohrenschildt returned home from a weekend trip to Houston to find that someone had apparently made a series of pencil marks on a long report he had written about his trip through Mexico and Central America .
 He assumed that such telltale marks were used to focus in a camera and that in his absence someone had broken into his apartment and copied his personal papers and other documents . He assumed someone had done so in the absence of him .
 He also had a manuscript that Lee Harvey Oswald had given him to read about his stay in Minsk . He realized that this document might also have been photocopied in the search for the document .
 If this indeed was the case, he decided to confront the CIA and attempt to find out why he was being investigated .
 J Walter Moore, CIA agent in Dallas who debriefed him when he had returned from Yugoslavia, called on him . Moore was the CIA agent who gave him a detailed account of his experiences in Yugoslavia . Moore had been in the country since 1992 .
 De Mohrenschildt asked Moore whether his agency or any other government agency was behind the examination of his personal papers . This time, however, he came directly to the point and asked Moore if he was behind it .
 Moore, taken aback by the accusation, flatly denied that the CIA was in any way involved . Moore: "I don't believe the CIA is involved in this case"
 De Mohrenschildt then asked whether he was under any sort of investigation because of Lee Harvey Oswald . He then said he was not under investigation for Oswald .
 De Mohrenschildt pressed Moore to find out if Oswald was suspected of being dangerous in any way . Moore shrugged that Oswald was merely a “harmless lunatic” of no concern to his agency .
 The following day he wrote a letter to Undersecretary of State George Ball offering to submit to the government travelogues he had prepared on his trip to Latin America .
 Oswald’s descriptions of Soviet cities in his apartment may allay suspicions about what he was doing with Oswald‘s descriptions . This might possibly allay suspicion about what Oswald was doing . Oswald described Soviet cities as Soviet cities .
 In October 1962 De Mohrenschildt’s letter was forwarded to the CIA and retained in his file . The CIA retained the letter in its file .
 In any case, De Mohrenschildt was now ready to assist in situating Oswald in Dallas . Oswald was in Dallas at the time of the assassination .
 George De Mohrenschildt invited his daughter, Alexandra, to meet a young American who had just returned from Russia . Alexandra's father, George, invited her and her husband to meet the young American .
 Lee Oswald lived in Fort Worth with his Russian wife and daughter, who was almost the same age as Alexandra’s son . Lee Oswald was Lee Oswald, a Russian who lived with his family .
 De Mohrenschildt said that he was going that afternoon to see the Van Cliburn competition in Fort Worth . He suggested that they all meet afterwards at the Oswalds’ apartment on Mercedes Street . The four Soviet pianists were taking part .
 She had not seen very much of her father since she had eloped with Gary Taylor, a college student with ambitions toward being a filmmaker . She had been in contact with him for a few weeks before she eloped .
 She knew that there was considerable tension between her father and husband and thought that this invitation might lead to a friendly relation . She knew there was a lot of tension between them and her husband .
 Alexandra and Gary Taylor arrived at the Oswalds’ apartment later that afternoon . They found an odd assortment of people gathered in the living room . The Oswalds' apartment was filled with people who had never been seen together .
 There was Oswald, sitting silently in a T-shirt and slacks, looking slightly contemptuously at the others who were discussing his future, and Marina, who was far more beautiful than Alexandra had expected . Marina, Marina, and Oswald, sat silently in the room .
 Marina was talking in Russian to Elena Hall, the dental technician who had arranged dental treatment for her at a clinic in Dallas . Anna Meller, another member of the Russian community, was also trying to help her adjust to life in America .
 Oswald's mother was also in the room, looking uncomfortable in the company of the more elegant Russian emigres . Oswald’s mother was looking uncomfortable looking uncomfortable .
 She seemed to have the impression that De Mohrenschildt had already arranged a job for her son in Dallas . That's why he had suddenly decided to leave Fort Worth .
 Oswald said he had been fired from his job at Leslie Welding in Fort Worth, Texas . Oswald had precipitated the immediate crisis by saying that he was fired . Oswald was fired from a Welding company in the area .
 As far as Gary Taylor could see, De Mohrenschildt was clearly the leader in planning Oswald’s move to Dallas . Taylor: "As far as far as the . leader in . planning Oswald's move, he was the leader .
 He suggested it would not be difficult for Oswald to get a job in Dallas . Oswald asked those in the Russian-speaking community to see if they could help him .
 Anna Meller knew someone who worked for the Texas Employment Commission . Meller says the commission is responsible for the state's employment commission .
 Marina could stay with the Tayorors or the Halls in Dallas or Fort Worth . Oswald looked for work, Marina could look for work while he looked for a new job .
 Oswalds’ furniture could be stored in the Halls’ garage until they found an apartment in Dallas . The Halls' garage is where the Oswalds' furniture is stored .
 Gary Taylor was impressed, even then, with the role De Mohrenschildt had taken in organizing all the support that Oswald needed for his new life in Dallas . He was impressed even then .
 De Mohrenschildt arranged a job for Oswald and a separate home for Marina, Taylor says . Taylor also got the impression that he was providing for Oswald’s immediate living expenses . Taylor: "I got the distinct impression that De Mohranschildt was providing ... for Oswald
 He knew De Mohrenschildt had traveled around the world, yet he had no visible means of support except his wife’s earnings . He said he was grateful for his wife's earnings, but was unable to support him .
 De Mohrenschildt disappeared for nearly a year, after announcing he intended to take an 11,000-mile walk through Mexico to the tip of South America .
 De Mohrenschildt and his wife stayed without telling anyone at a friend’s house in Guatemala during the period they were supposed to be on their walking trip . Taylor, however, later found out from his wife's relatives that they had actually stayed at the friend's house .
 De Mohrenschildt had become involved with a man who had defected to Russia . Taylor found himself with an unexpected houseguest, Marina .
 No one, not even Marina, was to know his precise whereabouts in Dallas for the next month . Marina was not even allowed to know where he was .
 Marina realized at the time that was meant to conceal his real place of residence . He had told some friends that he was staying at the Carleton Boarding House, but that was a lie . Marina realized that she was staying in the boarding house .
 His apartment, with its balconies overlooking the park and river, was one of the finest in the city of Minsk . His apartment was among the best in Minsk.
 He went to parties at the homes of intellectuals and Communist officials . He was invited to parties by Communist intellectuals and officials .
 He said he knew a number of attractive women at the Foreign Language Institute who had shown an amorous interest in him .
 He had given up this sumptuous life at the top, temporarily, to undertake this trip . He'd given up life at top to undertake trip to Europe .
 He lied to the FBI about his activities in the Soviet Union and refused a lie-detector examination . He had lied to FBI about activities in Soviet Union .
 Even though he had changed addresses three times, the FBI might attempt to keep him under surveillance . The FBI might try to keep the FBI under surveillance.
 Marina had misinformed the immigration authorities about her identity by stating that she had never used any other name or alias . She had also misinformed authorities about using any other alias or alias, she said .
 If Immigration found out that she had lived under the name Marina Alexandrovna Medvedeva, she could be deported . She could also be deported from Russia .
 Marina and daughter would be looked after by acquaintances in the Russian-speaking community in Fort Worth and Dallas . Marina and her daughter will be cared for by acquaintances from the community .
 Oswald went to the offices of the Texas Employment Commission on Tuesday, October 9 . Oswald is charged with failing to pay for a job at the Texas employment commission .
 He was immaculately dressed in a dark business suit and a white shirt and tie .
 Oswald asked Cunningham Cunningham, who was a friend of his, to help him get a job . Cunningham asked Cunningham to help Oswald find a job, and asked her to get it . Cunningham was Cunningham's friend . Cunningham died of a heart attack at the age of 92 .
 Oswald explained that he had had some photographic experience in the Marine Corps . He preferred to find a position where he could use that skill . Oswald said he wanted to use his photographic experience .
 Cunningham turned Oswald over to Louise Latham, a job placement expert . Latham specialized in the sort of clerical photography work in which Oswald seemed most interested . Cunningham turned him over to Latham .
 Oswald sent Oswald to an architectural firm that had a job opening for a messenger . She first sent Oswald Oswald to the firm that offered him a job . Oswald was a messenger for the firm .
 Oswald was sent for an interview at JaggarsChiles-Stovall, a large typesetting firm in Dallas . The employment commission’s records note that Oswald returned to them and was then sent on October 11 for a job .
 Oswald met John Graef, the director of the company’s photographic department, when he met him . Oswald made an effective first impression of Graef's photographic department .
 Oswald learned he had the job as photo-print trainee . Oswald learned that he had won the job that day . Oswald was a photo print trainee.
 Oswald reported to work in the “print shop’s” in downtown Dallas . The next day Oswald worked in the "print shop" Oswald was found dead in Dallas .
 He filled out an employee identification questionnaire, gave Gary Taylor’s address and phone number as his own . Gary Taylor's address, phone number were his own, he gave them as his .
 Oswald would learn how to use the various cameras and reproduction equipment . The foreman, Leonard Calverley, took Oswald to the phototypesetting department, where he would begin learning .
 It was to be a six-day-a-week job, for which he would be paid $1.35 an hour . The job would be six days a week, and he would get paid just under $1 per hour .
 The main business of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall waspreparing printing mattes for newspapers, magazines, catalogues and advertising agencies in the Southwest .
 This required reducing photographs in size, photosetting typescript and using sophisticated lenses and equipment to arrange advertising displays and charts .
 Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall also had a contract from the Army Map Service to set the typescript for its maps .
 Although the maps themselves were not on the premises, this was nevertheless highly classified work .
 Maps were made from secret aerial photographs presumably taken from spy satellites, U-2 planes and other forms of clandestine reconnaissance . Maps were likely made from aerial photographs taken from U.S. spy satellites and U.2 planes .
 Oswald with a group of Marines waiting to board USS Terrell County . For another, the lists of names of cities and areas in the Soviet Union, China and Cuba were being set .
 A MVD training school B KGB training school C Belorussian Radio and Television Factory D Oswald's apartment E Prusakov’s apartment F Palace of Culture G MVD-KGB headquarters H Hospital where Marina Oswald worked I Home of Alexander Ziger and family J Home of
 Oswald with Eleanora Ziger and one of her boyfriends in a park in Minsk . Oswald with one of his boyfriends . Oswald . Ziger .
 Oswald on his arrival in Russia, Oswald and Marina on their balcony from a photograph taken for after their wedding . Oswald on arriving in Russia: "I am happy to be here," Marina said .
 Oswald had complete access to the worktables on which the secret lists of place-names for the Army Map Service were kept . Oswald worked in the typesetting department at the time of his death .
 In theory, these were supposed to be “restricted areas” in which only employees with a security clearance from the FBI were allowed to be present . In theory it was meant to be "restricted areas" in which employees with security clearance had no security clearance .
 In fact, little effort was made to enforce these restrictions, says CNN iReporters .
 There were no guards or security measures which prevented employees from entering the areas in which the classified work was done .
 The phototypesetting department had to pass constantly through these areas to use the film-drying machine, darkroom and other facilities .
 The foreman was not under instruction to forbid the workers under him from going into these areas . Nor was the foreman under instruction, he was not told to go into the areas .
 It was even possible to use cameras in the plant to reproduce the list of names, Calverly says .
 Given the layout of the plant, it would be virtually impossible to segregate the employees into different sections . In any case, given the layout .
 The employees of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall set the long lists of geographical names, which came from the Army Map Service, on three-inch strips of paper .
 Some of the names were written in Cyrillic characters and identified Russian cities . Others appeared to be Chinese names .
 Some employees noticed the appearance of odd-sounding Cuban names on the list . The new batch of names arrived almost daily . Some of the names are odd sounding Cuban .
 At CIA headquarters in Langley, photo analysts were receiving a similar set of Cuban place-names on the latest batch of U-2 photographs .
 U-2 planes focusing on area around San Cristobal in eastern Cuba photographed newly built structures which could be unmistakably identified as missile launchers for intermediary range missiles . Then, on October 14, the U.2 planes focused on the area around the area, photographed the structures .
 Every city within the eastern part of the U.S. would be vulnerable to these missiles, when operational . When operational, the missiles would be able to target cities in the eastern United States .
 President Kennedy summoned an emergency meeting of the National Security Council . Kennedy summoned the meeting after receiving the report .
 Oswald was taught how to operate distortion cameras, phototypesetters and Robertson vertical cameras . Oswald worked at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, a photographic equipment company .
 He was shown how to reproduce perfectly a pictorial display . Then to reduce or distort it with optical lenses so it fits perfectly on a standard-size printing mat .
 Soon he became proficient at such techniques as line modifications, blowups, reverses and miniaturizations, as he himself noted in an autobiographical sketch .
 Hidell used fake Selective Service card and Certificate of Service in the Marines . Hidell also used fake military service card and military service certificate to get around the country .
 He offered to translate Cyrillic symbols on a list being prepared for the Army Map Service . He explained to the foreman of the section working on this classified material that these were Russian place-names .
 Oswald kept an “old red book on Russian” in his desk, Jack Bowen, a fellow worker . Bowen also noticed that Oswald kept a “red book’s old red book” on his desk .
 Oswald also impressed Dennis Hyman Ofstein, who had taught him how to use some of the photographic equipment, with his fluent Russian . Oswald also couldn’t resist impressing Ofstein with his fluent Russian .
 Oswald tried to speak to Oswald in Russian during working hours . Oswald was not nearly as proficient in the language as Oswald . He tried to practice it by speaking to him in Russian at work hours .
 Oswald was initially closemouthed about himself and volunteered little more than he had been a Marine who had served in Japan . Oswald is a former Marine who served in the U.S. Navy .
 Ofstein asked Ofstein to help him blow up an odd-looking photograph he brought into the shop . Then he asked him to blow up a photograph he had brought in the shop.
 It showed a river in the foreground and an interesting-looking building in the background .
 He changed the subject, as he generally did when he didn’t want to answer a question . Then he changed the topic .
 Oswald told Ofstein that the picture had been taken in Minsk, Russia . Oswald later said that the photo was taken in the city of Minsk .
 The building in the picture was a military headquarters, Oswald said . The building was tightly guarded by soldiers who had orders to shoot to kill any trespassers, he said . Oswald said the building was the military headquarters .
 Oswald told Ofstein more about his stay in the Soviet Union . Ofstein: "Little by little Oswald told of his time in Soviet Union" Oswald's story was told by Ofstein . Oswald: "I'm not afraid to go back to Russia"
 The MVD secret police had one of their headquarter buildings in Minsk . The secret police also had a headquarter building in the city of Minsk.
 He mentioned that he had traveled within the Soviet Union and spent one May Day in Moscow observing Soviet military equipment on parade .
 Oswald casually revealed to Ofstein that he had married a "White Russian" while in Minsk . Oswald married a ‘White Russian’ while he was in the Soviet Union . Ofstein: “Oswold told Oswald that he married a 'White Russian'
 Oswald asked Ofstein if he knew what the term “microdot’s” meant . Oswald: “Microdot” is a word for microdot. Oswald: "Microdot" is a term for a dot dot dot . Oswald asks Ofstein what he
 Ofstein had no idea why Oswald was discussing this espionage technique with him . Oswald had been talking about the technique with Ofstein . Ofstein did not know why Oswald had discussed the technique .
 Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall certainly did not have any facilities for doing microdot photography, he knew . He knew .
 He assumed Oswald “had either read this in a book or had some knowledge of it from somewhere .” he later testified . He assumed that Oswald had either read or had knowledge of Oswald’s actions .
 Oswald carefully wrote the word “microdot” in his personal address book next to the entry for JaggarsChiles-Stovall . Oswald used the word "microdot" to connect the place where he worked with a basic technique of espionage .
 Oswald left JaggarsChiles-Stovall eight months after he left . FBI conducted an investigation of his employment there . Oswald's employment was investigated by the FBI eight months later . Oswald had been employed by JaggarChilesChiles
 Agents showed his fellow workers a photograph of a leather pouch that they believed Oswald might have used to conceal a miniature camera . Agents showed the pouch but no one recalled seeing Oswald with either the pouch or the camera .
 Oswald saw very little of Marina during his first month of work at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall . Oswald saw Marina for the first time .
 Marina moved to Elena Hall’s house for most of October . She stayed at De Mohrenschildt's own house, then stayed at Elena Hall's house . Marina stayed with Elena Hall for several weeks .
 Oswald would get a ride to the Halls’ home in Fort Worth with Gary and Alexandra Taylor . Usually on Sundays Oswald would go with the Halls to their Fort Worth home in Texas . Oswald would often go with Gary or Alexandra Taylor on Sundays .
 He and Marina lived in a small tenby 14-foot room near the factory in which he had worked in Minsk .
 He complained he had to share the kitchen and lavatory with five other families in the building . He complained that he had shared the space with other families .
 Gali Clark, whose family had been Russian aristocrats before the Revolution, had come over almost every day to help Marina shop and look after her baby . Marina's baby is now being cared for by her mother-in-law .
 Her husband, Max, was a prominent Fort Worth attorney . Max was previously head of security for Convair Aircraft Corporation .
 Oswald came by himself that Sunday to Fort Worth and stayed for dinner . Oswald stayed at Fort Worth, Texas, for the first time . Oswald was in Fort Worth that night .
 He made little effort to talk to the Clarks but answered all the questions they put to him about life in Russia . He made no effort to speak to them but answered questions they asked .
 He again portrayed his experiences in Russia as disappointing and bleak . He said he was disappointed and bleak in the country .
 He complained about housing, low pay, poor living conditions and the difficulty of traveling within Russia .
 Oswald stopped over at De Mohrenschildt’s home before visiting Marina the next weekend . Oswald was visiting Marina Marina when he was assassinated .
 Only days before, the United States and the Soviet Union had moved to the brink of war over the issue of the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba . Only days earlier, the U.S. and the . Soviet . Cuba .
 Khrushchev had finally backed down and agreed to remove the missiles . The missiles were eventually removed from the Soviet Union .
 De Mohrenschildt seemed relieved that war had been averted and spoke for a while to Oswald . Oswald was the last man in the world to die . Oswald had been killed by a bomb blast in the city .
 Oswald told Marina that he was making arrangements for her to come to Dallas and live with him . Oswald arrived in Fort Worth that Sunday, Oswald said he was planning to move her to Dallas . Oswald said Marina would be able to come and live in Dallas .
 The next week, after work at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, he found an apartment on Elsbeth Street in the Oakcliff section of Dallas . He found the apartment the next week after work .
 It was on the ground floor of a Tudor brick building and had three small rooms . It was located in the middle of the street and was on ground floor .
 Oswald worked late into the night helping Marina unpack and clean . Oswald left, saying only that he had a room elsewhere for which he had already paid . Oswald says he has already paid for the room .
 Landlady at Elsbeth Street received a telephone call from someone trying to get in touch with Oswald . The landlady received a phone call the next evening . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the murder of his wife .
 Oswald immediately called George De Mohrenschildt . Oswald got the message, and immediately called the man who sent the message .
 Anna Meller received a telephone call from Marina asking to stay at her apartment that evening . Marina Meller said she wanted to stay in her apartment at the time of the call .
 She spent a few nights at the Mellers’ small apartment, then moved to the home of Katya and Declan Ford in Dallas . She spent the night at their home before moving to the Ford family's Dallas home .
 Katya Ford was a Russian-born refugee who had been brought to Germany by the retreating German Army . She was a refugee who was brought into Germany by retreating German army .
 After the war she had come to Dallas, where she had married Declan Ford, a consulting geologist .
 The Fords had met the Oswalds earlier at a lunch at Anna Meller’s house . The Oswalds had met Fords at the Meller's house in Switzerland .
 De Mohrenschildt thought that this would be an ideal arrangement for Marina since the Fords had a large house . He tried to persuade them to keep Marina and her baby there as permanent guests .
 De Mohrenschildt told everyone in the Russian-speaking community that the problems between Marina and Oswald were irresolvable and that they were now separated for good . Oswald and Marina have been separated since then .
 He went into great detail about Oswald’s allegedly cruel treatment of Marina to explain the breakup of the marriage . Oswald was allegedly cruel to his wife Marina .
 Marina suddenly agreed to move back in with Oswald to the apartment on Elsbeth Street . Despite the stories that circulated about a permanent separation, Marina moved back in November 18 .
 Oswald and Marina took a bus to Fort Worth to have a turkey dinner with his brother Robert and his family . Oswald's brother Robert was also in Fort Worth, Texas, for Thanksgiving Day .
 Marina and June had just returned to live with him at his Dallas apartment a few days before . The occasion was a reunion for everyone, including Marina, June and Marina .
 He also saw at Robert’s that afternoon his half brother, John Pic, whom he had not seen since he was a child . John Pic also saw his half-brother, Robert Pic, who he hadn't seen since childhood .
 Oswald had asked Marina to come back to him, and she had . Marina had not been seen since the day Oswald asked her to return to him . Oswald had not seen Marina since late November . Oswald's wife had never been seen again .
 No one in the Russian community was surprised or disappointed when he abruptly disappeared from their lives . He had made a point of not saying exactly where he worked .
 She knew that he had treated the efforts of George Bouhe, Elena Hall, Anna Meller and other Russian emigres to help him and Marina with undisguised contempt .
 Katya realized that his presence at her party would probably make her other guests feel tense and uncomfortable . Katya was worried that her guests would feel uncomfortable .
 Marina was sad that she had nowhere to go for the holidays and wanted to see her friends in the Russian colony . Jeanne De Mohrenschildt had called her that afternoon and said that she wanted to visit her friends . Jeanne called her the next day to say that she was sad to
 He turned instead to a young and exquisitely beautiful Japanese girl named Yaeko Okui . He turned his attention to the young and beautiful girl .
 Yaeko had come to Dallas that year to do public relations work for Nippon Services, Inc., a chain of Japanese department stores . Yaekao was a public relations worker for a Dallas-area department store .
 She was a certified teacher in ikebana, the Japanese art of flower arrangement, and an accomplished musician . She was also a certified ike bana teacher .
 Oswald showed little interest in talking to another musician, Lev Aronson, who brought her to the party . Oswald showed no interest in speaking to Aronson .
 For almost three hours Yaeko sat with Oswald at the far end of the living room and talked . For nearly three hours Oswald sat with him at the end of his living room . Oswald was the only person in the world to be killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Marina, even when she was singing Russian songs with the rest of the guests, watched her husband and Yaeko with concern .
 A number of her friends, including Jeanne De Mohrenschildt, assumed that she was jealous over the attention that Oswald was paying to this Japanese girl .
 Marina’s real concern was that Yaeko might be an American intelligence agent, she later explained to her biographer Priscilla Johnson McMillan .
 At one point she took her husband aside and warned him that Yaeko “may be a spy” She took him aside and said he may be spying .
 Oswald had served in Japan in the Marine Corps before defected to the Soviet Union . Oswald served in the Marines in Japan before defecting to the USSR . Oswald knew that Oswald had defected from Japan in 1960s .
 He wondered whether she might be trying to find out about this earlier period in Oswald’s life . Now, as he watched them talk across the room, he wondered whether they might be talking about Oswald's life .
 Yaeko herself never fully divulged the contents of this long conversation with Oswald . Yaekao never fully disclosed the contents with Oswald, the author of the book .
 Oswald's daughter was a baby-sitter for Oswald’s daughter . She had said that she could not work past midnight. He arranged a babysitter for her .
 Oswald wrote down a number that Yaeko gave him, then followed De Mohrenschildt out of the door . Marina observed that Oswald wrote it down, and then followed him out .
 Oswald began the New Year with a flurry of requests for political literature . Oswald began his New Year's New Year in January with a request for political books . Oswald has been a prolific collector of political literature for decades .
 The End of the Comintern and the Manifesto of the Fourth International. The Coming American Revolution . The End Of the ComIntern and The Manifesto .
 From the Dallas library (where he used fellow employee Jack Bowen’s name as a reference for a card), he took out books about Marxism, Trotskyism and American imperialism in Latin America .
 As a sample of his skills, he sent The Worker a poster he had apparently used the equipment at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall to print .
 He also enrolled himself in a typing course given at Crozier Technical High School . He is also taking part in an evening typing course .
 He explained to Marina that the course was necessary to qualify him for a better job when he eventually left Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall .
 The school was only a few blocks away from the “print shop, as he called it, he could work late on the evenings he had classes, then go directly to them . Since the school was just blocks from the "print shop," he could go straight to classes .
 Oswald arrived with exceedingly dirty fingernails, an indication he had just finished work . Oswald's teacher Gladys Yoakum noticed that Oswald arrived at school with extremely dirty fingails .
 Oswald also sent $206 to the State Department, completing repayment of the $435 loan that had been made to him in Russia the previous spring . Oswald also repaid $206 in January 1963 . Oswald sent $435 in return for a loan made in Russia .
 He was now free to seek a new passport and travel outside the United States . He was free to travel outside of the U.S.
 Hidell he ordered from Seaport Traders in Los Angeles a .38-caliber Smith & Wesson revolver . Hidell ordered the gun from a Los Angeles-based gun dealer .
 De Mohrenschildt arranged for Oswald to meet a young friend of his named Volkmar Schmidt . Oswald met Schmidt in early February . Schmidt was a friend of Oswald's .
 Schmidt had come from Germany to the United States about one and a half years earlier to do geological research for the Magnolia Laboratories in Duncanville, Texas . Schmidt had traveled to the U.S. to work on geological research .
 De Mohrenschildt predicted Schmidt would win a Nobel Prize for his work on petroleum-bearing rock formations . Schmidt was a brilliant geologist and a shrewd analyst of human psychology, he said .
 Schmidt knew Schmidt was fascinated with political ideology and assumed that he might be interested in meeting a self-styled revolutionary who had defected to the Soviet Union and then changed to the U.S. He also knew that Schmidt was obsessed with ideology .
 Schmidt remembers arriving at the De Mohrenschildts’ apartment at 7m. and found Oswald there already with Marina and their daughter . Schmidt says he arrived at 7.30pm and Oswald was with Marina with their daughter and Marina . Schmidt: "Oswaldo and Marina were
 Jeanne had cooked a Russian dinner, and after they had some wine, she set the dishes out buffet style . Jeanne cooked the dinner for the couple .
 In describing the reasons why he had become a Marxist, Oswald talked openly and candidly about the impoverished conditions under which he had been brought up and educated . Oswald talks openly about the poverty of his impoverished conditions .
 Oswald seemed remarkably articulate and objective in comparing social conditions in the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Oswald also seemed remarkably objective in his remarks .
 Oswald seemed emotionally detached from the experiences he was describing . Even when Oswald talked about his own difficulties, he seemed detached from his own experiences .
 Schmidt expected Oswald to express the usual liberal sentiments about the President’s attempting to bring about constructive reforms . When the conversation turned to the subject of the Kennedy administration, Schmidt expected that Oswald would express his usual sentiments . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Even after the Soviet missiles had been withdrawn from Cuba, American-sponsored acts of sabotage and “terrorism” against Cuba were continuing . He suggested that Kennedy’s actions against Cuba had set the stage for a nuclear holocaust .
 He could see that Oswald had extreme and unyielding positions and realized it would do no good to argue with him . He could not argue with Oswald because he had extreme positions and would not argue .
 He tried to win his confidence by appearing to be in sympathy with his political views and making even more extreme statements . Instead of winning his confidence, he tried to impress him with his extreme views .
 It was a technique that he had learned years before in Germany, when he studied and lived with Dr. Dr. Martin in Germany . The technique is a technique he learned years ago in Germany where he studied .
 He compared Walker with Hitler and said that both should be treated as murderers at large . Walker is accused of murdering Walker and Hitler . Walker has been charged with murder in Wisconsin .
 Oswald seized on the analogy between Hitler and Walker to argue that the U.S. was moving toward fascism . Oswald said that America was moving towards fascism .
 As he spoke, he seemed to grow more and more excited about the subject . He seemed to be getting excited about it .
 As he listened to Oswald define more closely his political ideas, he began to work out his “psychological profile,” as he called it . Oswald's political ideas are defined by his ‘psychological profiles,’ as he calls it .
 Oswald seemed to be obsessed with political ideology and bent on self-destruction, author says . Oswald was a “totally alienated individual,” obsessed with ideology, obsessed with self destruction .
 He thought of arranging a small party for him where he could meet and talk to other people interested in political ideas . He said he wanted to organise a party to discuss ideas of political ideas in the UK .
 He broached the idea of having some people over to meet Oswald the next day with Glover, who owned the house . Oswald was invited to meet Glover the next morning . Glover: "It's a great honor for Glover to be the owner of the house"
 Glover had already briefly met Oswald at a party at De Mohrenschildt’s but had formed no real impression of him . Glover had met Oswald briefly at the party but was impressed by him .
 Glover invited Michael Paine and his estranged wife, Ruth, to join him . Glover invited Paine's estranged wife Ruth to the party . Paine is a member of the Paine family .
 He also asked Norman Fredricksen, another geologist at Magnolia, since he had been studying Russian with his house-mates .
 The other member of the household, Richard Pierce, also a geologist at Magnolia, invited his girlfriend, Betty MacDonald, who was working as a librarian at the museum .
 Schmidt had to leave the country on business and did not attend the party . After helping organize the party and paying the expenses, Schmidt himself had to go away .
 On Friday, February 22, George and Jeanne De Mohrenschildt brought Oswald and Marina to Glover’s home . The couple is raising money to raise money for the family .
 Michael Paine had been unable to come that evening, but all the others pulled their chairs up in a circle around Oswald and began asking questions about life in the Soviet Union .
 He gave a graphic description of what it was like to work in a Russian factory and live in Russian city . He also gave a detailed account of his life in Russia .
 He told of the tedium of eating day after day red cabbage in one form or another, of the lack of any decent consumer products and of government censorship .
 He explained that he had gone to Russia not in the expectation of finding an easy life or personal amenities, but because he was a Communist . He said he was in sympathy with the objectives of a Communist society .
 At this point Pierce jumped up and, interrupting Oswald, said that it would be better if he refrained from discussing his political views and stuck to the subject of life in Russia . Pierce said he would prefer to talk about life in the country .
 Going around the room, he answered whatever questions were asked of him . "I'm not afraid to say anything," he said. "I just want to say whatever questions I can answer"
 Paine had been brought up as a Quaker, and at college and afterward she had been interested in fostering better relations between Russians and Americans . Paine was brought up by a young Quaker .
 Working with the East-West Contact Service, she had helped arrange cultural exchanges of Russian and American artists .
 Marina's daughter is now interested in learning Russian, she says . Marina says she wants to learn Russian .
 She suggested that they get together later in the week to see if some arrangement could be worked out whereby she could practice Russian with Marina . Taking down Marina’s address, she suggested that she get together with her Russian friend Marina .
 This brief encounter was to be the beginning of a far more involved relationship between the two women . The two women were engaged for more than a decade .
 When Marina next spoke to Ruth Paine a few weeks later, she told her that she might have to return to the Soviet Union . She said she preferred to stay in the United States .
 Oswald, she claimed, had told her that he no longer wanted to live with her, and not speaking English, she could hardly live on her own in America . Oswald said he told her he did not want to stay with her and not speak English, so she could not live on
 Marina suggested to Marina that she might want to live at her home in Irving, a suburb midway between Dallas and Fort Worth . She suggested the possibility to live in Irving . Marina: "She suggested that she may want to stay at her house in Irving"
 Marina and her daughter were separated from Michael . Marina had some extra room for Marina and daughter .
 It would also be helpful to her since she could learn Russian from Marina, Marina . It would be a good time to learn from her, Marina says .
 The Neely Street apartment was a second-floor walkup in a dilapidated building . The apartment had a shabbily furnished living room, a small bedroom, a study and a terrace .
 It seemed to have no advantage over their former apartment, except to obscure their trail further . The apartment is located in the same location as the apartment they used to occupy .
 Gary Taylor, who had recently separated from his wife Alexandra, stopped over to visit the Oswalds . The Oswalds moved into their apartment on Neely Street shortly after the move .
 She now seemed to have at least a rudimentary understanding of English . She was able to explain to Taylor that Oswald had a job during the day and attended night school .
 She explained to Taylor that if Oswald returned and found her alone with him he would be very upset . Suddenly, she became extremely apprehensive, and explained that Oswald would be upset if she was alone .
 Oswald, meanwhile, had involved himself in another project -- the stalking of General Walker . Oswald had already stalked Walker .
 Photographer used Imperial Reflex camera to photograph alley behind Walker's house in Turtle Creek, Dallas .
 He also made careful measurements of the distances to various reference points around the house . He also collected the timetables of buses that served the area .
 Marina, Marina, says her husband put the photographs and other information into a journal which he kept in his study . According to Marina, he put the photos and information into his journal . Marina says he kept the photographs, other information and photos of his wife and children .
 Oswald picked it up at the post office and brought it back to his office, where he showed it to one of his fellow employees, Jack Bowen . Oswald picked up the picture and showed Bowen to his fellow employee .
 FBI put on notice that his job would be ending on April 5 . Whether because of the poor quality of his work or because the FBI had found out that he was working at a secret work, his job will end soon .
 De Mohrenschildt, still involved in arranging Oswald’s life, made an appointment for him to see Samuel Ballen . A few days later, he arranged to see Ballen again . Ballen died in his home in Switzerland .
 Oswald had known George De Mohrenschildt for five years as a gregarious and charming man-about-town . He agreed to see if he could find him a job in his company . Oswald had strongly recommended his friend, George, as a man deserving help .
 Oswald initially impressed Ballen as a competent and articulate young man . Oswald arrived at Ballen’s office in the midafternoon and initially impressed him .
 He said he had gone over to Russia "to see what it was like over there" then had become disillusioned and returned . He said that he had been disillusioned with Russia .
 He claimed to have worked in Russia on a newspaper or house organ . He said he learned printing and reproduction skills in Russia .
 He said that after returning from Russia, he had worked in a “printing shop” in New Orleans and had there acquainted himself with American photographic equipment .
 Oswald then walked with Ballen to the Republican National Bank, where Ballen had a business meeting . Oswald then went on to meet Ballen at the bank, where he had a meeting .
 Oswald was too much of an ‘‘individualist” to fit in at his company, Ballen said . Ballen got the impression that Oswald was an 'individualist' to fit into his company .
 He decided not to employ him but thought of possibly having him and his wife over to dinner to meet some of his friends . He decided to not employ him .
 Oswald told Oswald that he was temporarily staying at the Y . Oswald had Marina photograph him in their backyard . When he left, Oswald told him that he had been temporarily staying .
 He was dressed entirely in black, with his revolver strapped in a holster on his hip . He was wearing a black jacket with a black holster and a black hat .
 In his other hand, he held two newspapers —The Worker and the Militant . The Worker and The Militant. In the other hand he held a photograph of himself .
 He inscribed one to his daughter, June, and gave it to Marina for safekeeping . He inscribed another to June, June and gave her one to Marina .
 On another copy he scribbled, ‘‘Ready for Anything,” and told Marina he was sending it to the Militant . Marina was sent a copy of the document, which he sent to Marina .
 On the same copy Marina jotted down in Russian, “The Hunter of Fascism.” On the other copy Marina wrote: “Fascism. The Hunter of Fascism” Marina’s copy of the book was also written in Russian . Marina
 The Oswalds went to Irving, Texas, to have dinner with the Paines . The following Tuesday the Oswalds had dinner with them . The Paines were the first family to meet Oswalds .
 Oswald met Michael Paine the week before Oswald and Marina met to discuss their future plans . Oswald met Paine at the end of the week to discuss his future plans with Ruth .
 Paine, who had been educated at Harvard and Swarthmore, had spent a good deal of his life in the company of intellectuals and was willing to listen to the ideas of this dour-looking man who defected to Russia .
 Oswald made it clear that he resented the way workers were treated at the “print shop” by the bosses . Oswald says he resents the way he was treated at his job . Oswald said he was unhappy with the way the bosses treated him .
 He spoke of himself as a professional revolutionary and said that his present work was only a means to an end . He also said that he spoke of his desire to be a revolutionary .
 He suggested to Paine that violent revolution was necessary in America . Paine suggested that a violent revolution in America was necessary for the country .
 Paine, whose father had been heavily involved in the Trotskyite movement, was skeptical of this claim . Paine's father was heavily involved with the movement .
 Oswald asked Oswald to show him how to interpret revolutionary messages in the Militant . Oswald asked him to interpret the revolutionary messages . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in Russia . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 Ruth Paine discussed with Marina the possibility of her coming to live in her home for a while . Ruth and Marina Paine also discussed the idea of Marina coming in to live with Ruth .
 Her Russian was too poor for her to be sure that Marina fully understood her offer, although she seemed interested . Marina was interested .
 Oswald gave Marina Marina $60 from his savings . Oswald gave her the money . Oswald also gave her a $60 bill .
 He reckoned that it would be enough to support her for six weeks in case he had to go into hiding . He reckoned she would have enough money to live off the streets of London .
 Oswald wrapped his rifle in an old raincoat on April 5, 1961 . Oswald wrapped the rifle in a raincoat . Oswald shot Oswald in the head with a rifle on April 4 .
 Robert Alan Surrey, a close supporter of Walker’s, noticed two men peeking in the windows in a very suspicious way . Surrey: Two men peeped into the windows of his home in a 'suspicious way' Surrey: "Two men peeked in the
 Surrey tried to follow them to find out why they were'reconnoitering the general’s house but lost their car in traffic . Surrey police say they were trying to get to the general's house .
 Oswald left a note telling Marina what to do in case he was apprehended by the police, killed or had to flee . Oswald left the note on Wednesday, April 10, telling her to do what she would do if she was apprehended .
 The note gave other terse orders without any explanation, as if none were necessary . The note also gave orders without explanation .
 At 9m. that evening General Walker was seated at his desk in his study, working on his income tax returns . At about 9m that evening, he was seated in the study of his study .
 A bullet crashed through the window and whizzed by his head to embed itself in the wall . The bullet hit the wall and embeded itself into the wall, embedding itself into a wall .
 He was covered by a ghostly-white spray of plaster, but otherwise unhurt . The man was covered in plaster but unhurt by the plaster of his face .
 Kirk Coleman, a 14-year-old neighbor of the general’s, heard the shot and climbed up on a fence to see what was happening . Kirk Coleman heard the shooting and climbed onto a fence .
 He saw one man putting something in the trunk of a Ford sedan . A few feet away, a second man getting into another car .
 He told her that he had just attempted to shoot General Walker and then turned on the radio to hear if there was any news of the incident . He then turned to the radio and told her he had shot General Walker .
 Oswald explained that he had buried it near the scene of the shooting, and then he had taken a bus home . Oswald said he buried the body in a place near the shooting site .
 He said he had spent considerable time preparing this assassination attempt . The assassination attempt is the first of its kind .
 Marina had come to the conclusion that Walker was a dangerous fascist, like Hitler, she said . Marina said her husband had concluded Walker was dangerous fascist like Hitler . Marina: 'He had come out of the way'
 Marina insisted that he destroy his notebook of maps, notes and photographs that he had put together as part of the planning of the assassination attempt . Marina insisted he destroy the maps, photos and notes he put together .
 He kept some of the photographs he had taken of the area around Walker’s home . In one photograph that showed an automobile parked on the street, he apparently took the precaution of obliterating the license plate number by tearing a hole through this bit of the picture .
 Police recovered the bullet, but it was too badly mangled to be ballistically identified . The bullet was recovered from the scene of the shooting .
 The only eyewitness, Coleman Coleman, reported that two men fled from the scene, so it appeared to have been a conspiracy . Coleman: "The only eyewitness" Coleman said the incident appeared to be a conspiracy. Coleman: Two men fled the scene .
 Oswald retrieved the rifle from his hiding place on Saturday afternoon . Oswald retrieved his rifle from a hiding place in Oswald's home . Oswald had been working for Oswald for two decades .
 That evening George and Jeanne De Mohrenschildt stopped by the Oswalds’ apartment . The Oswalds' apartment was the target of the assassination . The couple was married to George Oswald, who later died in a car crash .
 She was equally surprised because he had told her that no one except her knew about the assassination attempt . No one except herself knew about it, she said .
 For De Mohrenschildt, it was a “logical assumption’s that Oswald might be the sniper, he said . De Mohranschildt later testified before the Warren Commission that Oswald was the sniper .
 Oswald had, in recent weeks, become increasingly obsessed with the idea of political activism . He could see that Oswald had become obsessed with political activism, he said . Oswald was obsessed with politics, he added .
 De Mohrenschildt could now see that his remark had greatly disturbed him . Looking at Oswald, he said: "I'm sorry. I'm sorry."
 He appeared nervous, tense and uncomfortable and seemed, indeed, hardly able to get a grip on himself .
 If he had taken the shot at Walker, as De Mohrenschildt suspected, he was dangerously out of control . If he took the shot, he would be dangerously out-of-control .
 De Mohrenschildts and Oswalds parted company, never to see one another again .
 On April 29, without ever being told the reason for the request, the Office of Security issued a summary report . The report was issued without being told of the reason .
 On May 1, after returning to Dallas for only two days, the De Mohrenschildts left for Haiti . They had a contract with the Duvalier government to develop various natural resources . On May 2, they returned to Dallas, Texas, for two days .
 Oswald arrived in New Orleans with only two duffel bags, which contained some hastily packed clothes, his personal papers and the dismantled MannlicherCarcano rifle from which he had fired a bullet fifteen days earlier .
 His rash attempt to assassinate General Walker had left him almost completely cut off from his past acquaintances . His attempt to kill General Walker left him virtually cut off with all of his former acquaintances .
 Even Marina had pressed him to leave Dallas, afraid otherwise that he might be found out or that Walker would even try again to kill Walker .
 In New Orleans he would not have George De Mohrenschildt to help him make contacts, nor could he any longer count on others . He would no longer be able to rely on others in New Orleans .
 He would have to arrange his own life in the city which happened to be his birthplace . It would be the first time he had to move to the city of his birth .
 Oswald telephoned Lillian Murret, an aunt whom he hadn’t seen since he had joined the Marines . Oswald had been in the Marines with his aunt since he joined the Army .
 She invited him to stay with her family while he looked for a job and apartment in New Orleans . She had liked him as a child, and without asking him any embarrassing questions about why he had gone to Russia, or returned .
 Oswald lived in the Murrets’ home on French Street . For the next three weeks Oswald lived there for three weeks . Oswald lived with Murrets in their home in French Street.
 His uncle, Charles “Dutz” Murret, offered to lend him $200 until he got settled, but he declined . Murret was a fairly well-known prizefighter manager, but declined .
 Oswald got on particularly well with his cousin Marilyn Dorothea Murret, a tall attractive woman with long black hair . Oswald was particularly fond of his cousin .
 A schoolteacher by profession, she was also, like him, a world traveler . She had been to many of the same places, including Japan, where she had taught science, and East Berlin .
 She remembered Oswald as a quiet boy who “read encyclopedias like somebody else would read a novel,” she said . Now that he was back from Russia, she wanted to hear all about his travels .
 In telling her how he was able to arrange for his wife to accompany him out of Russia, he explained that her father was a ‘Russian officer’ who used his influence to assist them .
 Oswald said very little of his plans for the future . During this period Oswald said little about his future plans . Oswald said he had no plans for his own life .
 On his first Sunday in New Orleans he journeyed to Lakeview Cemetery to locate the grave of his father, who had died two months before he was born .
 His uncle’s widow, Hazel Oswald, was the only one who was related to him . He methodically went down the list of Oswalds in the New Orleans telephone directory, calling each of them until he found the widow .
 Oswald finally found a job through a newspaper advertisement in the New Orleans Times-Herald . Oswald found a new job at the William B Reily Company . Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Located on Magazine Street in the heart of the city, the company roasted, processed and sold coffee . The company roasted and processed coffee in the city .
 On his job application form, he indicated that he had lived in New Orleans almost his entire life . He omitted any mention of Dallas from his application form .
 He was told he would begin working the next day, lubricating and maintaining the coffee-processing machinery . He said he would work lubricating, maintaining and maintaining coffee processing machinery .
 Oswald rented a furnished apartment on Magazine Street, about a mile from the coffee company . Oswald rented the apartment the same day that he moved into the apartment .
 It had high ceilings, a screened-in porch and a backyard with strawberries growing wild . It also had a backyard, with strawberry plants growing wild, with high ceilings . It was the first home in the world's history .
 Marina’s belongings were packed into her station wagon and left the next day . They bundled Marina's belongings in a station wagon . Marina was the last person to be taken to the hospital .
 Ruth Paine stayed with the Oswalds for three days in New Orleans with them . Paine: Marina seemed less enthusiastic about the new apartment than Oswald .
 Marina complained about the lack of light and the cockroaches . Oswald seemed proud of the New Orleans-style architecture . Marina said she was happy to live in New Orleans .
 Marina's first few weeks in New Orleans were, for Marina, a pleasant change from Dallas . Marina: "I'm glad to have come back to New Orleans," she says . Marina says she's happy to have a job in New York .
 One weekend they went crabbing in the shallow waters of Lake Pontchartrain with Marilyn Murret . They also toured the French Quarter at night and toured the New Orleans area .
 Oswald used to read books he borrowed from the New Orleans Public Library . Oswald read books from the library in the evenings . Oswald was a New Orleans resident who lived in New Orleans .
 Marina had still not had a reply from the Soviet Embassy on her request to return to Russia . Marina was still not having a reply .
 She was now almost five months pregnant and realized that Oswald would soon have to make some concrete decisions about where they would live . Oswald and his wife were soon having to decide where to live in the country .
 In his conversations, as well as in his writings, he had become increasingly alienated from Soviet-directed Communists . In his . conversations, he . became increasingly alienated .
 Khrushchev had clearly acquiesced to Kennedy’s demand for the removal of the missiles from Cuba in October . As far as he was concerned, the Soviets were not revolutionary enough, he said .
 In Minsk he befriended a number of Cuban students who were being trained by the Soviets for positions of leadership in Havana . He had befriended many of the Cuban students he met in Minsk . He died at the hands of Soviet-trained Cuban students .
 Once he got to Havana, he could no doubt find contacts and connections with the Castro government . He could also find contacts with the government .
 He even bragged to Marina that he would become a ‘minister’ in the government . He even at one point bragged about becoming a minister .
 Oswald’s basic desire was to get to Cuba by any means, Marina testified . The problem for Oswald was getting there, she said .
 It was illegal at the time for a U.S. citizen to travel to Cuba . He would have to obtain his visa at a Cuban Embassy outside the country . To do that, he would need some credentials to prove that he was a supporter of the Cuban government .
 His game in New Orleans involved creating just such a record for himself . It was a record-breaking game for the New Orleans Saints .
 Fair Play for Cuba Organization offers conditions for chapter chapters . Lee Lee is the national director of the organization . Lee says he will organize a chapter in Cuba . Lee is a member of the group .
 Oswald could recruit minimum number of members, national director agreed to grant him charter . Oswald was given charter by national director if he could recruit enough members to join . Oswald died of a heart attack in the early 1900s .
 His purpose was not to recruit members and build a functioning Fair Play chapter in New Orleans, but to create a dossier of letters, documents and news clippings which would get him to Cuba . He created the dossier to get himself to Cuba, where he wanted to go to the island
 In June he methodically set about documenting his record as a Fair Play for Cuba organizer . He methodically documented his record in Cuba .
 He asserted that different ‘tactics’ would be necessary in New Orleans from those in other cities . He said different “tactrics” would be needed in New New Orleans .
 Oswald staged a one-man demonstration on the Dumaine Street wharf where the USS Waspwas anchored in mid-June . Oswald staged the demonstration at the site of the Wasp . Oswald is a former member of the Oswald family .
 He handed out ‘Hands Off Cuba’ handbills to Navy personnel and visitors until he was evicted from the wharf . He was unceremoniously evicted .
 Swaldald had to make other arrangements for his family in Cuba . He could not take his family to Cuba .
 In this letter, she asked permission for both her and Oswald to return immediately to Russia and reside in Leningrad . She asked permission to return to Russia .
 If this worked and the Soviet Embassy granted them separate visas, he could use his to obtain a transit visa to Cuba, while Marina and June returned to Russia . He could then use his visa to obtain his transit visa, while his wife and daughter returned to the country .
 Marina Oswald may have returned to Texas to live with Ruth Paine . Oswald may also return to Texas with her daughter Marina .
 Paine invited Marina and her daughter to live in her home and even offered to give her $10 a week pocket money . Paine responded by warmly inviting Marina and daughter to her home .
 Marina continued to refer to this generous offer in her letters to Ruth Paine without mentioning that she had also asked the Soviet Embassy to expedite her return to Russia .
 Oswald, meanwhile, arranged the travel documents he might need for his trip . Oswald has already arranged travel documents for the trip .
 He had already forged a vaccination certificate for himself which was signed by “Dr. ‘Dr. David’s’ Dr. Dr. David. David was arrested for forging the certificate . He was arrested on suspicion of forging the document .
 Dean Andrews is a lawyer with political connections in New Orleans . He was discharged from the Marine Reserves . Andrews sought legal advice from a New Orleans lawyer .
 Oswald did not return after Andrews explained that he would require some money for expenses . Oswald returned to Andrews after Andrews said he would need some money to pay for his expenses .
 He went through the motions of greasing and lubricating the machinery and then quietly slipped out and went next door to the Crescent Street Garage . He spent hours discussing the relative merits of various rifles with its owner, Adrian Thomas Alba .
 Oswald wanted to know about the penetration characteristics of different guns . Alba didn't quite understand why he wanted to ask Oswald . Oswald asked Alba if he could have a gun with a bullet that would penetrate into a bullet .
 He seemed especially interested in buying from Alba a carbine, which was a far more dependable weapon than his own Mannlicher-Carcano . Alba's carbine was a more reliable weapon .
 Oswald tried to persuade Alba to order a similar carbine for him, but he never did . Alba refused to sell him this particular weapon, and Oswald never bought it . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast in November 1945 .
 Alba told Alba that he was going to apply for a position at the Michoud rocket facility . He was not hired there . Alba says he applied for a job at Michoud .
 For the balance of the summer, he lived off his unemployment benefits . For the summer he lived on his benefits, he used to live off his jobless benefits . He says he hopes his story will inspire others to follow .
 Oswald gave a one-hour talk on his experiences in Russia to a group of Jesuit scholars at Spring Hill College in Mobile, Alabama . Oswald gave the talk to a Jesuit scholars .
 The positions he took on the Soviets’ betrayal of Marxism closely paralleled those he had written out during his ocean crossing thirteen months earlier . In his book, he wrote about the betrayal of the Soviet Union .
 The engagement had been arranged for him by his cousin Eugene Murret, who was studying for the priesthood at the University of Cambridge .
 Cuban exile stores are owned by Carlos Bringuier, a delegate of the Cuban Student Directorate . He visited Casa Roca, a Cuban exile store in New Orleans, and visited one of the stores .
 The Cuban Student Directorate, which was based in Miami, was organizing raids against Cuba . Bringuier had been called upon to assist a group of exiles in the area who had been waiting to undergo training in sabotage and guerrilla warfare .
 Oswald browsed among the haberdashery for a few minutes, then casually joined in the conversation . Oswald joined in on the conversation, which he casually joined into a conversation .
 Oswald offered to join Bringuier’s organization and even contribute money to the anti-Castro cause . Oswald is an ex-Marine .
 Bringuier was suspicious because of recent events that Oswald might be an agent for either the FBI or Cuban intelligence . He turned down the offer and told him to send his contribution to the headquarters of the Cuban Student Directorate in Miami .
 He offered to accompany the guerrillas on their sabotage missions into Cuba . He even offered to join them on their missions .
 For an hour or so Bringuier discussed the Cuban situation with Oswald and gradually became interested in him . Oswald was the Cuban leader of the Soviet Union .
 Oswald seemed schooled in some highly sophisticated techniques of sabotage and qualified for the role, according to Oswald . Oswald, from what he said, seemed to be schooled . Oswald's organization needed men who could train exiles, and Oswald was qualified to succeed him .
 This time he openly handed out his Fair Play for Cuba leaflets, with one or two helpers, in the heart of the French Quarter . Only a few blocks from Bringuier's store .
 Oswald staged another demonstration on Friday, August 9, on Canal Street . Oswald staged a demonstration on August 9 . Oswald's demonstration was held in New York .
 Bringuier rushed over to Canal Street to see who was involved in this pro-Castro effort . He says it was a friend of a friend who told him about it from a friend .
 Oswald had just four days earlier offered his services to the anti-Castro movement . When he arrived there, he was “shocked’ to see that it was Lee Harvey Oswald, who had just offered his . services . Oswald was "shocked" to see Oswald,
 Oswald was now wearing a “Viva Fidel’s placard and handing out pro-Castro literature . Oswald was wearing a "Viva Fidel" placard .
 Bringuier, infuriated by this turnabout, began cursing and shouting at Oswald . Oswald was later shot dead in a car crash .
 Oswald and Bringuier were arrested for disturbing the peace . New Orleans police arrived at the scene and arrested the pair . Oswald was arrested by the New Orleans Police Department .
 It would be one more bit of documentation for the dossier he was preparing on his pro-Castro activities . The dossier was being prepared for a dossier on the former Cuban president's activities .
 Oswald and the Cubans were questioned together in a small room in the station house . Oswald was questioned by Cubans in the small room . Oswald and his Cuban colleagues were questioned in the room .
 Oswald was put in jail overnight. Then the Cubans were released on bail, and Oswald was jailed overnight . Then the Cuban government released him .
 Oswald said he had lived in Fort Worth, Texas, since 1959 . Oswald said that before he had moved to New Orleans that spring, he lived in Texas . He had lived there since 1959, Oswald said in a statement .
 He made no mention of the two and one-half years he had spent in Russia or the seven months he spent in Dallas . He also spent seven months in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald said he first got involved with Fair Play in 1958, while he was in the Marines . He recounted how he got into trouble for bringing some of the pro-Castro literature back to the barracks . Oswald said that he first became involved with the organization in 1958 .
 When pressed about the membership of his chapter, he refused to give more than one first name, “John,” who he said was a student at Tulane .
 Oswald was “not receptive,” Martello said . Martello concluded the interview with Oswald . It quickly became clear to Martello that Oswald was "not receptive"
 Oswald asked to see an FBI agent before he was returned to his cell block . Oswald was taken to a cell block by the FBI . Oswald asked for a visit from the FBI to see Oswald .
 Later that Saturday morning John Lester Quigley, an FBI agent from the New Orleans office of the FBI, was ushered in to see Oswald . The FBI agent was ushered into the room to meet Oswald .
 When questioned about Hidell, he said that he had never personally met him but had spoken to him on the phone . He said he had spoken with Hidell on a phone .
 Lieutenant Martello found out from Joyce Mur226 / LEGEND ret O'Brien, Oswald’s cousin, that Oswald had spent several years in Russia . O’Brien's cousin is also a friend of the late president .
 He added that he was in America only temporarily and planned to return to Russia . He added, somewhat incongruously, that he planned to stay in the country .
 Oswald was released by a friend of the Murret family . A little while later bail was arranged for him to be released . Oswald was later released from jail .
 Dutz Murret stopped over at Oswald’s apartment to make sure his nephew would show up for the trial which was scheduled for Monday . Oswald's nephew was convicted of murder in 1963, but his trial was set to begin Monday .
 Oswald asked Oswald whether he was mixed up with Communists . Seeing a picture of Fidel Castro on the mantelpiece, he asked Oswald if he was mixing up with the Communists . Oswald asked him if he had any connection with Fidel Castro .
 Oswald showed up at the Second Municipal Court, which was conspicuously segregated, having separate seating sections for whites and blacks . Oswald attended the court at one o'clock on Monday, August 12 .
 Oswald was fined $10, which he promptly paid . The judge dismissed the charges against Bringuier and fined Oswald $10 . Oswald was charged with assault and battery .
 Oswald organized another demonstration in support of Castro in front of the International Trade Mart . Four days later Oswald organized a similar demonstration in the same place . Oswald organized the second demonstration in Cuba .
 This time he was assisted in handing out leaflets by two young men . The news media had been tipped off in advance about the event .
 Bringuier asked a supporter of his, Carlos Quiroga, to go to Oswald’s home and attempt to find out more about his Fair Play chapter . Oswald was a member of the National Socialist Party .
 Quiroga was to pose as a Castro sympathizer and offer to join the chapter, if necessary . He would pose as an anti-Castro sympathizer, offer to help with the chapter .
 Oswald came out and invited him to sit on the porch and talk about his organization . Oswald came to the porch to meet Oswald . Oswald was invited to sit down and talk to discuss his organization with him . Oswald invited him out to meet with him on his porch .
 Oswald seemed adamant in his support of Cuba . He was willing to accept some “repression” of the Cuban people, he said, so as to advance the revolution . Oswald said he would accept some "repression"
 He later mentioned to Lieutenant Martello that he would consider infiltrating Oswald's chapter if he had the “backing” of either the FBI or local police . He said he would have the "backing" of the FBI and local police if he was successful .
 Quiroga did not see Oswald again . Since such support was not forthcoming, he did not return to see Oswald . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald stood on the porch in military fatigue pants and no shirt . Stuckey explained that he had a radio program called Latin Listening Post on WDSU for which he interviewed controversial people .
 Oswald invited to come to the studio at 5m. to do an interview . He was determined in his views and polite in his presentation of them . Oswald's interview with 5m will be screened at 5pm on Monday .
 Oswald accepted the offer, suggesting that the publicity would be valuable to his organization . Oswald accepted it and said it would be a valuable publicity boost for his organization.
 Oswald gave Stuckey a thirty-seven-minute interview on August 17 . Oswald appeared on time and gave a full interview . Oswald's interview lasted for nearly an hour .
 The news director, John Corporon, however, believed the tape was too one-sided and ordered Stuckey to cut it . Corporon believed it was too much of an interview and ordered it be cut .
 When it was finally aired, the interview was only four and a half minutes long . The interview was a four-and-a-half minute long interview .
 Fair Play for Cuba organizer had defected to Russia a few years earlier . Stuckey arranged a radio debate in which Oswald could be confronted with his own record .
 Oswald arrived at the studio in a heavy gray flannel suit, shirt and tie . August 21 was an especially hot and muggy August afternoon, and Oswald was wearing a heavy suit .
 Communism is trying to destroy Western civilization and principally the U.S. The United States is the target of Communism, President Obama says .
 Bringuier warned not to use the book to organize any “expeditions against Cuba” since it was out of date . Then he saw his Marine guidebook in his hand and laughedingly warned him not to .
 The actual debate, called “Conversation Carte Blanche,” began a few minutes later . The debate is called "Conversations CarteBlanche"
 Oswald found himself attacked by both Bringuier and Butler for having defected to the Soviet Union . Oswald was attacked for defection to the USSR . Oswald had been attacked for his defection .
 Their object was to show that the Fair Play Committee was connected to the Soviets . The committee was trying to prove that the committee was connected .
 Oswald kept composure as they hammered away at him . Oswald kept his composure and control throughout the ordeal .
 Butler was impressed with the way Oswald managed to deflect attention away from the unanswerable charges to points that he wanted to make . Butler, considering himself a professional propagandist, was impressed .
 Oswald seemed to have the attributes, if not the training, of a highly competent agitator, he said . Oswald's lawyer said Oswald seemed like a 'highly competent agiterator' He said Oswald had the attributes of being a highly trained agititor .
 Oswald had turned the argument around so it appeared that his position was to prevent Cuba from inadvertently being forced further into the Communist camp . Without too much effort, Oswald had . turned the . argument around . It appeared that he had turned it around .
 Stuckey took Oswald to Comeaux’s, his favorite bar in the French Quarter, and discussed with him life in Russia until the early hours of the morning . Oswald was impressed with his performance and took him to a bar .
 Oswald explained that it had “gone soft’ on communism; Cuba was the only revolutionary country left . Oswald explained it had gone soft on communism . Cuba is the only revolution left, he said .
 He had established in a few short months an impressive record for himself as one of the leading supporters of Castro in the southeastern part of the country .
 He had appeared on four radio and television programs on behalf of Cuba—and that could be verified . He had also appeared on several radio and TV programs, the Cuban government says .
 He had been arrested and jailed for his activities, and had a record to prove it . He was arrested, jailed and jailed in the 1970s for his role in the Holocaust .
 He sent a similar message to the Militant, which was also under close FBI surveillance .
 By writing these letters, Oswald effectively ghosted a false trail for himself . Oswald had effectively ghost-ghosted himself for himself, says historian .
 He intended to brief the Cuban Embassy on his political activities and obtain the necessary documentation to get to Cuba . The Cuban Embassy in Cuba is where he planned to meet with Cuban officials .
 Oswald applied for a tourist card to visit Mexico at the Mexican Consulate in the Whitney Building in New Orleans . Oswald then arranged for Ruth Paine to pick up her and June from New Orleans and take them back with her to Texas . Oswald went to the Mexican consulate to apply for a
 He told Marina that she might never see him again—at least not in America . He told her he might not see her again, even if she lives in the U.S. Marina said he may never see again .
 CIA case officers met with Dr. Dr. Juan Carlos in a safe house in Sao Paulo, Brazil, in September . Dr. Carlos was found in the same safe house as Dr. Carlotta .
 Cubella said he was disillusioned with Castro and offered to defect to the U.S. Some two years earlier Cubella had said he wanted to defect . Cubella was a member of the Castro family .
 Cubella was in a unique position to provide intelligence about the intentions of the Castro government . A former comandante of Castro's army, he was a hero of the revolution and a close personal friend of Castro himself .
 CIA persuaded him to stay in place in Cuba in the hope that it would have in him a source within Castro’s inner council . The CIA hoped that he would be a source in Castro's inner council, which he was in .
 Case officers went to the meeting with the expectation that he might have some hard intelligence for them . The case officers were hoping he would provide them with hard intelligence .
 He was interested in seeing the overthrow of the whole regime in Cuba, and the first step, as far as he was concerned, had, of necessity, to be Fidel Castro's assassination .
 He said he would be willing to undertake this ‘inside job’ if he could be sure he would have the support of the United States government in undertaking it .
 This extraordinary offer was relayed to CIA headquarters on Saturday, September 7 .
 The SAS, as it was known, was the division within the CIA with responsibility for all covert activities against Cuba . The SAS was responsible for the CIA's covert activities in Cuba .
 On the same day, in Havana, Fidel Castro went to the Brazilian Embassy for a reception, called aside a reporter for the Associated Press, Daniel Harker, and granted him a private interview .
 It raised the possibility that Cubella was a double agent sent over to test the intentions of the Kennedy administration toward Castro . Indeed, it raised the distinct possibility that it was a spy .
 The threat of reprisals against U.S. leaders had to be considered and evaluated by the Kennedy administration . The threat was considered by the administration .
 The CIA’s covert activities against Cuba were then under the direct supervision of a Special Group in the National Security Council . Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Maxwell Taylor were augmented by Attorney General . Taylor was President Kennedy's special adviser to President Kennedy .
 Special Group designated a special committee comprised of Desmond Fitzgerald and a representative of both the Attorney General and the Secretary of State to weigh the risks of proceeding with covert actions against Cuba .
 Three men came to the home of Sylvia Odio, a young and exceedingly beautiful Cuban refugee . The men killed her in Dallas, Texas, on September 25 .
 Her father was involved in a plot to kill Castro Castro the year before . Rolando Cubella had also been involved in the plot, and her father was also involved in it .
 Cubella's father was captured and imprisoned in Cuba . Unlike Cubella, her father had been captured and was still imprisoned in the country .
 The men at her door claimed to be associates of her father in the anti-Castro underground . Now, they claim to have worked together in the underground underground .
 From their “greasy’ and “lower-class” appearance, it seemed at first unlikely to her that these men could be part of her father’s movement, she said .
 They provided “so many details about where they saw father and what activities he was in” that she decided to hear them out, she said .
 One of the Latins introduced himself as “Leopoldo,” then said in Spanish, “We wanted you to meet this American.” Another Latina introduced himself to the American, then said, ‘We wanted to meet him. We wanted you
 As the men were leaving, Leopoldo indicated that they were on their way to Mexico . The men indicated they were headed to Mexico, but said they were heading for Mexico .
 Leopoldo called on the telephone the next day to see what her reaction had been to “Leon,” as he called the American . The next day he called to see if she had responded to him .
 Leopoldo suggested that “Leon’s” was slightly “loco” and could be induced to kill Castro if he could be smuggled into Cuba and put in touch with underground leaders there .
 Odio ended the conversation by saying she knew of no one who could help this American get into Cuba . Odio: "I know nothing about my father's followers"
 Oswald crossed the border into Mexico at Nuevo Laredo, Texas, on the same day . Oswald crossed into Mexico on a Continental Trailways bus . Oswald was killed in September 1963 .
 Oswald explained that he was “en route to Cuba” and had to go by way of Mexico since it was illegal to travel there from the U.S. Oswald said he had to travel to Cuba from the United States. Oswald explained he was en route to Mexico .
 Oswald said good-bye to two Australian girls he had met during the two-day trip . Oswald walked off alone, lugging two suitcases . Oswald said goodbye to two girls he'd met in Australia .
 Oswald then went to the Soviet and Cuban embassies which were located about two miles away . Oswald then visited the embassies of both countries in Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 He could easily go back and forth between the embassies in arranging his transit visa to Cuba . Since the compounds in which both are located are practically adjacent, only a block apart, he could easily get a visa .
 First, he went to the Soviet Embassy to see if it could facilitate the paperwork, as he later explained to Marina .
 He was interviewed by Silvia Tirado de Duran, who had been employed three months earlier in the consular section of the embassy . Then he walked over to the Cuban Embassy, where he was interviewed .
 Oswald explained that he wanted to stop in Cuba on his way to the Soviet Union, where he planned to resettle permanently in Odessa with his wife . Oswald said that he stopped in Cuba to visit Odessa, Ukraine, and planned to stay permanently .
 He was, he insisted, “a friend of the Cuban revolution” and presented documentary evidence he had prepared to show his pro-Castro activities . He insisted he was a friend of Castro .
 This sheaf of papers included the record of his arrest, contacts with the Communist and Socialist parties, and even records he had taken from Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall .
 Senora Duran was impressed with Oswald's credentials . She herself strongly supported Castro, though a Mexican citizen, .
 She asked him to return with the necessary photographs for the visa . Taking down his address and phone number, she took him down .
 His visa still could not be processed, Senora Duran explained, without having a visa to the Soviet Union .
 The Russian visa might take months and require authority from Moscow, she said . After calling the Soviet Embassy, she informed him that the visa may take months . She then called the Embassy in Moscow .
 Oswald, apparently frustrated by this turn of events, demanded to see a higher-ranking Cuban official . Oswald then met briefly with the consul, Eusebio Azque, and met briefly .
 Azque refused to expedite Oswald’s visa so that he could leave immediately for Havana . After a heated exchange of words, Azque said he would not allow Oswald to leave immediately .
 His efforts on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee were not deemed sufficiently important to the Cuban revolution to gain him special treatment he demanded . Evidently, his efforts were not sufficient to gain special treatment .
 He returned the next day, even though it was Saturday and the embassy was officially closed . He returned to the embassy the following day, despite the embassy being closed .
 He suggested that the Soviet Embassy in Washington might be able to resolve the impasse . After a brief session with officials there, he went back to the embassy .
 After Oswald left, the embassy cabled the KGB center in Moscow, requesting guidance on whether or not he should be granted an immediate visa . The embassy asked for guidance from the KGB in Moscow to grant Oswald a visa .
 He ate some of his meals at a small restaurant near the hotel . Aside from a waitress at the restaurant, there are no witnesses to his activities during this hiatus .
 Oswald returned to the Cuban Embassy for a final attempt to get his transit visa . Oswald returned Tuesday to the embassy in Havana, Cuba, to get a visa .
 At his request Senora Duran again called the Soviet Embassy and handed the receiver to Oswald . Oswald was given the receiver by Senora Duran at his request .
 He wanted to know if a telegram had arrived from the Soviet Embassy about his visa . He asked if the embassy had sent him a message to say he had received a visa .
 Oswald spoke to a guard at the embassy, who was apparently unacquainted with the case . The guard asked to whom Oswald had spoken to, but the guard was unacquaintable . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 The same day Pedro Gutierrez, a credit investigator for a Mexican department store, saw an American leaving the Cuban Embassy in the company of a tall Cuban, and both got into a car . Gutierrez says he saw the same day that an American was seen leaving the embassy .
 Oswald checked out of the hotel the next morning and hailed a taxi . Oswald checked into his hotel room at the end of the night . Oswald was the only person in the world to be killed by the assassination .
 At 8:30m. he caught the Transporte del Norte bus for Texas, which he had booked the day before . He had booked a flight to Texas the next day, but was unable to make it .
 Oswald's contacts in Mexico intensified as he left Mexico . Oswald was leaving Mexico at the time of the assassination . The CIA's interest in his contacts with Mexico intensified .
 Its station in Mexico City had been electronically intercepting the phone traffic between the Cuban and Soviet embassies . It had therefore monitored, and taped, the telephone calls concerning Oswald’s case .
 Until October 1 it seemed little more than a routine case of an American citizen attempting to obtain a transit visa to go to Cuba . The case was a routine affair until October 1, when the visa was issued .
 Oswald identified himself by name and said that his case was being handled by Kostikov . But then in his conversation with Obyedkov, Oswald said that he was in contact with the Russian government again .
 Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov had been identified for some time as an intelligence officer for the KGB . He specialized in handling Soviet agents operating under cover within the United States .
 FBI followed another Soviet agent from the U.S. into Mexico and observed his contact with Kostikov . FBI had recently followed another . agent into Mexico .
 The only individual resembling an American who left the embassy at a time coinciding with Oswald’s movements was a heavyset man, about thirty-five years old, with an athletic build and receding hairline .
 CIA headquarters in Washington notified the FBI, the Department of State and the Navy about Oswald’s contact with the Soviet Embassy . On October 10, Oswald was in contact with Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C.
 CIA station chief in Mexico City for CIA told FBI, U.S. Embassy of the development . FBI, Immigration and Naturalization Service and U.N. Embassy informed of development .
 The CIA is not supposed to investigate U.S. citizens abroad without a “special request,” it “did nothing further on the case” according to its own files on Oswald . The CIA requested a photograph of Oswald from the Navy to check against its files .
 According to a not yet fully declassified FBI report, Oswald made wild claims at the Cuban Embassy about what he might do for the Cuban revolution, including possible assassinations of U.S. leaders . Oswald's claims were based on statements attributed to Fidel Castro .
 The consul assumed at the time that Oswald was being deliberately provocative . According to the same report, the consul believed Oswald was deliberately provocative. Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Oswald’s request for a visa to come to Cuba was received by the Foreign Ministry . Oswald's request was received in Havana, Cuba's Foreign Ministry said .
 Cuban intelligence also apparently received a report on Oswald’s contact with the Cuban Embassy in Mexico . Oswald had contact with Cuban embassy in Mexico, according to Cuban intelligence sources .
 Oswald wanted to work for the Cuban government, Fidel Castro says . Oswald visited the Cuban Embassy in July 1967, when he first visited the embassy . Fidel Castro: Oswald said he wanted to help the government in Cuba .
 Oswald provided his own version of what happened during his trip to Mexico . In a letter to the Soviet Embassy from Dallas, which was intercepted by the FBI, Oswald wrote about the trip .
 He did not elaborate on exactly what sort of “business” he had planned to engage in with the Soviets in Havana . He said he was traveling under a false name to Cuba .
 Oswald spent a night in the YMCA, then moved to a rooming house in Oak Cliff Section . Oswald spent another night in a Dallas hotel, then a week later moved back to a Dallas rooming home .
 Marina, who was still living with Ruth Paine in Irving, was forbidden to tell anyone where he was living . She forbade Marina from telling anyone where Lee Lee was living, she said .
 After a brief interview, he was hired to fill orders for textbooks at $1.25 an hour . He was hired by the company at the beginning of the year .
 He had just come back from visiting his wife and daughter at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving . Paine had just returned from visiting with his family .
 He spent the last weekend and the one before with us here and was a happy addition to our expanded family . He was a 'happy addition' to our extended family .
 After visiting Marina in the hospital, he resumed his covert political activities .
 Before he would go ahead with the plan to eliminate Castro, he wanted some sort of personal assurance or “signal” from Attorney General Kennedy that the Kennedy administration would actively support him in this endeavor .
 Desmond Fitzgerald met Cubella as a ‘personal representative’ of Kennedy’s. Overruled objections by his own SAS counterintelligence chief, Desmond Fitzgerald decided to meet with Cubella .
 The risk of possibly compromising the President was apparently outweighed in his opinion by the gains in advancing the coup d’etat, he said . The risk was apparently outweighs the risk of compromising the president .
 Fitzgerald assured Cubella that once the coup had succeeded and Castro had been removed from power, the Kennedy administration would be fully prepared to aid and support the new government . Fitzgerald told Cubella he was prepared to back the government of Cuba .
 Cubella asked for the delivery of specific weapons, including a rifle with telescopic sights and a poison injection . Fitzgerald refused to discuss such specifics .
 Fitzgerald arranged a further ‘signal’ for Cubella and followers in Cuba . Fitzgerald arranged the "signal" two weeks later . Cubella's followers were in Cuba at the time .
 He wrote a section of the speech President Kennedy was to deliver in Miami on November 18 . The speech was to be delivered in Miami .
 It described the Castro government as a “small band of conspirators” that, “once removed,” would ensure U.S. assistance to the Cuban nation . It said it would ensure United States assistance to Cuba .
 The day after Kennedy delivered this “signal,” Fitzgerald ordered the case officer to arrange another meeting with Cubella . The specifics would be discussed, Fitzgerald said .
 Cubella agreed to postpone his scheduled return to Cuba if the meeting could be held that week in Paris . Cubella said he would return to the island if a meeting could take place in Paris next week .
 XV DAY OF THE ASSASSININ swald arose early on the morning of November 22, 1963 .
 The evening before, he had hitched a ride to Irving, Texas, with Buell Wesley Frazier, a fellow worker at the book depository . Frazier was a neighbor of Ruth Paine’s. Frazier was the neighbor of Paine's .
 He had to meet Frazier shortly after 7m. Now, to be back in Dallas in time for work, he had to return to work . He was back in time to meet with Frazier .
 He slipped off his wedding ring and left it, along with $170 of his savings, for Marina in a dresser drawer . He slipped it off and left $170 worth of savings in a drawer .
 A moment later, he walked down the block, carrying with him an oblong package wrapped in coarse brown paper . The package was delivered by a man in his car .
 Oswald had asked Frazier the day before why he wanted a ride to Irving, since he had never before visited his wife in the middle of the week . Oswald explained that he needed to pick up some “curtain rods” for his room in Dallas .
 When Frazier saw Oswald approaching with a package, he assumed it contained curtain rods . Frazier now saw Oswald approach with the same curtain rods he assumed . Frazier assumed the package contained these same curtain rod rods .
 Oswald walked quickly into the building, his package tucked under one arm . Without waiting for Frazier, Oswald walked out of the building with his package .
 Air Force One landed at Love Field in Dallas at 11:40m and taxied to a green and red terminal building usually used for international arrivals . The president's plane landed at the airport at 11.40m on Monday morning .
 President Kennedy stepped out onto the top step of the ramp, and the crowd waiting below cheered . The crowd waited below cheered for the president to step out .
 Governor John Connally and his wife maneuvered their way into the jump seats in front of the President and the wife . Gov. Connally's wife and Gov. George W. Pat Pat Patience sat in the President's jump seats at the White House .
 The President decided against using the transparent bubble top for the motorcade through Dallas . It was a clear November day, and the President decided not to use it .
 The CIA case officer kept his appointment with Cubella . In Paris at about noon that day, Cubella kept her appointment with the CIA .
 President Kennedy had ''signaled' support of a progressive government in Cuba once Castro was ‘removed” from power . As he had been instructed by Fitzgerald, he referred to the lines in the speech President Kennedy made four days earlier .
 The CIA laboratory had fashioned a poison pen just days before . CIA scientist demonstrated how an almost invisible needle shot out from the otherwise innocent-looking bail-point pen .
 Cubella should use Black Leaf-40 poison, which is both lethal and commercially available . He recommended that Cubella use the lethal poison .
 The high-powered rifle Cubella wanted fitted with telescopic sights would be provided to him, he said .
 Employees of the book depository in Dallas were breaking for lunch at the time of the shooting .
 The presidential motorcade was scheduled to pass through the grassy plaza directly in front of the book depository . Many of the workers waited on the front steps of the building for a glimpse of the President .
 At 12:30m. the President’s car passed the book depository, moving slowly down Main Street . The President's car was seen at 12.30m .
 Governor Connally, seated directly in front of the President, felt a sudden thud in his back . Connally was sitting in the Oval Office when he felt the thud . Governor was struck by the impact of the incident .
 He raced up the stairs, preceded by Roy Truly, the manager of the depository . Truly was the first person to rush into the building . Truly died at the age of 92 .
 Oswald encountered Oswald standing near the soft drink machine on the second floor landing . Oswald was standing near a soft drink vending machine . Oswald had been in the building for more than a decade . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 Oswald coolly made his way out of the building after getting a soda from the machine . Oswald then calmly walked away from the building to buy a soda at the end .
 Oswald caught a bus going the exact opposite direction after walking seven blocks up Elm Street . Oswald caught the bus going in the opposite direction . Oswald walked seven blocks from Elm Street to Elm Street before catching the bus . Oswald says he walked the entire way up Elm St.
 He stayed on it for only two blocks, then, after walking another few blocks, hailed a taxi . He walked for only a few blocks before getting into a cab .
 He told the driver to take him to Neely Street in Oak Cliff, only a block from his rooming house on North Beckley Street . The driver told him to go to the Oak Cliff address on Neely St.
 Oswald put on his gray zippered jacket and took from the closet his snub-nosed Smith & Wesson revolver . Oswald dashes into his room, dashing to his room to get his revolver .
 While he was changing, Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper at the rooming house, heard a car horn and, looking out the window, saw a police car stopped in front of the house . The housekeeper said she heard a horn and looked out to the window .
 Witnesses at the scene said he was shot repeatedly by a man in a gray jacket . Witnesses said he had been speaking only minutes before . Witnesses say he was talking to a man who had been shot repeatedly .
 At 1:50m., in Oak Cliff, 16 police officers moved into the darkened Texas Theater, where a suspect in the Tippit shooting had been reported hiding .
 Oswald was seated alone in the second row and didn’t seem to notice the policemen coming up behind him . Oswald was sitting in the back row of the audience at the White House .
 The suspect flailed out at the police with his fist and drew his snub-nosed revolver . Then suddenly, in a last-ditch effort to resist arrest, he drew the gun .
 The suspect shouted, “Police brutality,” to the crowd of onlookers that had gathered . The suspect was dragged out of the movie in handcuffs . He shouted, "Police brutality," to onlookers .
 Police officers asked the suspect his name as they drove to Dallas police headquarters . The suspect's name is not known .
 Two selective service cards were found in the victim's wallet, police say . Then they went through his wallet and found two selective service card cards .
 One identified him as Aleck James Hidell, the other as Lee Harvey Oswald . Hidell and Oswald were both killed in the September 4, 1917, attack . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 At FBI headquarters in Dallas, James Hosty heard from his superior, Gordon Shanklin, that the prime suspect in the Kennedy assassination was Lee Harvey Oswald . Hosty: "The prime suspect" in the assassination is Oswald, the FBI chief says .
 For more than two months he had personally superintended the Oswald file . The Oswald file was the subject of much of the investigation .
 Hosty knew from a CIA report that Oswald had had contact with the Soviet agent Kostikov . Hosty also knew that Oswald's contact with Kostkov was from the CIA report .
 Hosty rushed down to police headquarters to participate in the interrogation . Hosty was questioned by police at police headquarters in New York City .
 In the basement parking lot he ran into Lieutenant Jack Revill, a friend of his who was in the Intelligence Squad of the Dallas police . Lt. Revill is a former Intelligence Squad member who was involved in the shooting .
 Revill clearly understood him to mean the Kennedy assassination . By “this,” Revill said, "this is this," he said .
 Even though he had been friends with the FBI agent for nearly four years, he now blew up at him . The FBI agent was friends with him for four years before he was killed .
 He wanted to know why the Dallas police had not been given the information before the assassination . The Dallas police chief wanted to find out why the police were not told of the information .
 In his forty-one years of police work, Captain Fritz had acquired almost limitless patience in dealing with homicide suspects . Captain Fritz's patience was almost limitless, he said .
 President Obama asked him about his job at the book depository and where he was at the time of the assassination . Then he asked him if he was still at the scene of the shooting . He said he was in the position at the depository in Texas .
 Oswald readily admitted that he, like all the other employees, had access to all the floors where books were stored . Oswald insisted that when the President was killed, he was having lunch on the first floor of the building when he was killed .
 He said he went home, changed his clothes, got his gun and went to the movies . He says he then went home and changed clothes and went back to his home .
 Oswald’s pistol matched the shells found at the scene of the Tippit murder, he could not claim that someone had framed him by using his own gun . Oswald acknowledged that he himself had taken it from his room before the killing and kept it in his possession until he was
 Oswald categorically denied owning a rifle since he had gone to Russia in 1959 . Oswald said he had never owned a rifle in Russia since he went to Russia . Oswald was shot in the head with a rifle at the time of his assassination .
 He seemed to know when to answer questions and when to lie or be evasive . He seemed like he knew when to tell the truth about his actions .
 Oswald might have been trained to resist interrogation, Fritz Fritz suspected . Oswald's answers may have been from his answers, Fritz said .
 Oswald lost his temper only once during his 12-hour interrogation . Oswald was questioned for 12 hours by the FBI for the first time .
 He went on to accuse Hosty of trying to coerce his wife by threatening to send her back to Russia . Hosty also accused him of threatening his wife with threats of sending her home to Russia, he said .
 Oswald asked for John Abt. to be represented by an attorney . Oswald asked Fritz Fritz if he wanted to represent him, Fritz said .
 Oswald's possessions were found in the Paines' garage . Fritz explained that it had been found among Oswald’s possessions in the garage . The Paines’ garage was found in Oswald's home .
 He even suggested that photographs taken of him by the police might have been used in putting together this photograph .
 He was not about to admit that he had ever had this rifle in his possession . He would not be allowed to admit he had any of the weapons he had in possession .
 They broke the session for a police lineup; then the questioning resumed again . The questioning resumed after the lineup was broken up .
 The evidence against Oswald was developing in the days leading up to the assassination of Oswald . Even as the cat-and-mouse game went on between Fritz and Oswald, the evidence was still developing .
 Telltale hammer markers traced back to the revolver Oswald had had in his hand when he had been arrested . Tippit's body was found next to Oswald's revolver . Oswald had been in the police station when he was arrested .
 A number of witnesses had identified him as the man standing over Tippit’s body after firing the bullets into him . Witnesses had identified the man as standing over the body .
 The three bullet shells found just below the windowsill could have been ejected from that same rifle . A bullet and fragments fired in the assassination ballistically matched the rifle, experts say .
 Fritz knew from long experience that any piece of evidence could be questioned and controverted . But taken as a whole fabric, the case against Oswald looked increasingly powerful .
 Justice of the Peace David Johnston stood there somberly with a piece of paper in his hands . David Johnston was a member of the public who was killed in the shooting .
 It was nearly ten hours since he had first asked for the services of John Abt. It had been nearly 10 hours since the first request for his services .
 Oswald remanded to the custody of the sheriff of Dallas County to await trial . The judge wrote on the bottom of the arraignment form, “No Bond—Capital offense” and ordered Oswald to be held without bond .
 Marina and Marguerite Oswald sought refuge at a motel in Irving about fifteen miles away from reporters . Marina Oswald's husband and wife were in a motel at the time of the assassination .
 Marina shredded to pieces the photograph she had taken of Oswald with his rifle and pistol seven months earlier . Marina shredded the photograph to pieces . Marina had taken the photograph of Oswald seven months before .
 Oswald signed copy signed by Oswald and inscribed in his handwriting to their daughter June . It could provide damning evidence connecting her husband inexorably to both murder weapons . The copy of the weapon was inscribed in Oswald's handwriting .
 She herself flushed the burned remains of the picture down the toilet . She herself then flushed the photo down the drain .
 When agents came to the door, she told them they already had her and her husband under surveillance and knew all there was to know about them . She said they already knew all about them and were already under surveillance .
 In the weeks ahead, she continued to conceal potentially important elements of the case from the FBI, Secret Service and other government investigators .
 The FBI had only delivered a head and shoulder shot of Oswald hours before . Each was compared with the FBI's original image of Oswald that had been released hours earlier .
 The photograph was given to the FBI in October with the report on Oswald did not resemble Lee Harvey Oswald . Clearly, the photograph of a heavyset man given to FBI does not resemble Oswald . The photo was taken in October .
 None of the photographs taken by the secret cameras were of Oswald . In fact, none of the photos taken were taken by Oswald .
 Oswald managed to enter and leave the Soviet Embassy on a number of occasions without being seen by the CIA . Somehow, despite CIA surveillance, Oswald had managed to leave the embassy without being spotted .
 For all the CIA knew, his visits with Kostikov could have taken place under clandestine circumstances which evaded surveillance . The CIA knew that the meetings could have been clandestine .
 CIA counterintelligence staff in Washington also began to consider the implications of Oswald’s contact with the embassies in Mexico . Oswald had contact with Mexican embassies, the CIA said .
 Angleton’s staff suggested that the connection might not be totally innocent . Oswald's contact with Kostikov was reported to have planned in advance to depart Mexico City on November 22 .
 J Edgar Hoover sent President Lyndon Baines Johnson a “background” report on Oswald that very day . Hoover omitted any mention that the FBI had an open security case pending on Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 The CIA station in Mexico was told to stop the Mexican police from arresting her . On the express orders of Thomas Karamessines, the assistant director of clandestine services for the CIA, the CIA told her to stop .
 Karamessines feared Duran might reveal during the interrogation that the Cubans were behind the assassination . He later testified that he feared he might reveal that Duran may have been killed by the Soviets .
 If that were to happen, the United States would need time to decide on a course of action . The U.S. would need to decide whether to take action .
 Relations between Mexico and Cuba were an extraordinarily sensitive political issue . Relations between the two countries are an extremely sensitive issue . Mexico's relationship with Cuba has been an extremely difficult political issue for decades .
 Duran stuck to her story that her only contact with Oswald had been in processing his visa request . Under intense questioning, Duran said she had only been processing the visa request for Oswald .
 She acknowledged that she had exceeded her authority in placing a call to the Soviet Embassy on Oswald’s behalf . She admitted having written her name and phone number for him on a piece of paper at the consulate .
 By the morning of November 24 Captain Fritz had completed his questioning of Oswald . Oswald had been questioned by the captain .
 Hidell's whereabouts in the book depository at the time of the assassination and his previous trip to Mexico . Hidell was killed by Lee H Lee and Aleck James Hidell in September 1963 . Hidelling's whereabouts of the depository in Mexico were not revealed . Hidellers'
 Fritz began making preparations to transfer Oswald from police headquarters to county jail . Oswald was transferred to the county jail after the shooting . Oswald died of gunshot wounds to the head .
 A bundle of his clothes was brought in, and he was asked what he preferred to wear . He was asked to wear anything from his clothes to his clothes .
 Inspector Thomas J Kelley of the Secret Service spoke to him quietly out of earshot of the others . Just before he left, he said: 'I'm not here to talk to him'
 Secret Service is responsible for the protection of the President . Secret Service was responsible for protecting President Barack Obama .
 Oswald, still handcuffed, was escorted out of the small office by a phalanx of Dallas detectives . Kelley watched as Oswald was escorted from the small Dallas office by detectives .
 An armored car would serve as a “decoy’s” to distract attention during the transfer . An armored vehicle would be used as a "decoy"
 Additional spotlights were turned on, and television cameras focused on the gaunt man in a black sweater . The man in the black sweater is seen in the video .
 A short man with beady eyes stepped out of the crowd and quickly fired a single bullet into Oswald’s abdomen . Oswald was shot in the abdomen by a short man in the crowd . Oswald's life was saved by a bullet wound .
 Inspector Kelley ran down the stairs, but by the time he reached Oswald he was unconscious . Inspector Kelley was unconscious when Oswald was hit by gunfire .
 Captain Fritz identified the assailant as Jack Ruby, a Dallas bar owner . Oswald had been walking a few steps in front of Oswald . Jack Ruby was well known to the police, a well-known bar owner, who was killed .
 Oswald died at Parkland Hospital at 1:07m. without regaining consciousness or speaking another word . Oswald died in hospital at the time of his death at 1.07m . Oswald's death was the first time Oswald had been admitted to hospital .
 Two hours later Agent Hosty was summoned to FBI headquarters in Dallas . Hosty says he was summoned by FBI headquarters after the incident .
 Hosty says his superior ordered him to destroy Oswald's note and memorandum . Gorden Shanklin ordered Hosty to destroy both the note Oswald had delivered to the FBI shortly before the assassination . Shanklin says Hosty was ordered to destroy the memorandum Hosty had prepared about the incident .
 After returning to his office, he followed his orders and destroyed this evidence, flushing the remains down the toilet . After following orders, he decided to flush the remains of the evidence .
 A guard of honor took the casket of President Kennedy from its catafalque in the Capitol rotunda, and carried it down the 36 marble steps to the plaza below .
 They then gently slid it onto the metal bed of the waiting horse-drawn caisson .
 At 10:59m. , while the bands played ‘Our Fallen Heroes,’ the procession moved off, slowly following the caisson down the route President Kennedy had taken less than three years earlier for his inauguration .
 Shortly after 11 a.m., strains of music wafted toward the offices of the Director of the FBI in the Department of Justice annex . The FBI director's office is located in the Justice Department's Justice annex in Washington .
 J Edgar Hoover had moved very quickly after Oswald’s death to contain speculation about the alleged assassin . Hoover moved quickly after the death of Oswald, who was killed by a single bullet . Hoover had a quick response to the assassination of Oswald .
 Angleton’s counterintelligence staff was tracing names of “all known contacts” of Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov, the Soviet Embassy officer who had dealt with Oswald in Mexico, was being traced through the CIA's voluminous files . Angleton
 Each division of the CIA was asked to cooperate in the “trace,” as the procedure is called, by supplying relevant information in its files .
 Rolando Cubella caused considerable consternation in the SAS division . Cubella was a member of the SAS squad in the 1980s .
 Such operational files were always kept separately by the division handling the agent . Such files are always kept separate from the agent's operational files .
 Fitzgerald ordered the case officer who met with Cubella on November 22 to omit from his report any mention of the poison pen . Fitzgerald also ordered the officer who had met Cubella to omit mention of poison pen in his report .
 A man already known to the CIA as Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko arrived at KGB headquarters in Moscow . Meanwhile, at 2 Dzerzhinsky Square in Moscow, a man was already known . The CIA has not confirmed the identity of the man, but it says he is Yuri Ivan
 He proceeded to a room where a number of other KGB officers, under the command of General Oleg Mikhailovich Gribanov, were discussing the Kennedy assassination . The KGB officers discussed the assassination .
 Gribanov quickly read through the Oswald file . Looking over his shoulder, he quickly reads through the file .
 Some seven weeks later, he would arrange to meet his CIA contacts in Geneva . He would arrange for a meeting with CIA contacts .
 A mole-skinned covered coffin arrived at Rose Hill Cemetery in Fort Worth, Texas, on Monday afternoon . That same Monday afternoon, while intelligence services in far off places were pondering the problems that an unrestrained investigation into the assassination might cause .
 Oswald's grave was actually for Lee Harvey Oswald, who was killed in the September 4, 1945 . Oswald was buried in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 When no pallbearers could be found, seven reporters took off their jackets and carried the coffin to the open grave . The coffin was taken to an open grave by reporters .
 The fate of Yuri Nosenko is in one way or another, the fate of the Russian spy is still unknown . The film is set to be released in September 2014 .
 For nearly three years this extraordinary defector had been imprisoned in a windowless room, with heavy padding on the walls . The CIA had converted the house into a “detention center” just a few miles from downtown Washington, Washington .
 The CIA had no precedent for incarcerating a person inside the U.S. The suspect could not be turned over to the Department of Justice for prosecution without precipitating an international crisis .
 If he were brought to trial by the U.S. government, he would be accused of having been sent over by the Soviet government to misinform the Warren Commission about Oswald's relationship with Soviet intelligence agencies .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy made frequent phone calls to ascertain whether or not Nosenko had broken . Even as the report was going to press, the attorney general made frequent calls .
 CIA interrogators realized that Nosenko was not a man who would easily crack . As the weeks dragged on, the CIA interrogator realized that he was not easily crackable .
 Researchers used various disorientation techniques to convince him it was day when it was really night . They set watches back and manipulated lighting conditions to trick him into thinking it was night when it really was night .
 The interrogators made Nosenko describe the procedures and routines used by the KGB for processing cases . The KGB interrogator made him describe the procedure and routines . The interrogation was part of a KGB training program .
 When these conflicted with an actual case he had described in earlier debriefings, he was asked to explain the contradiction .
 When asked for names, dates and locations which might tend to substantiate his story, he often replied that he had no “memory” for detail .
 Even in describing his own career in the KGB, he claimed that he could not recall the specific spying operations he took part in or superintended which had earned him promotions .
 He made little effort to help his interrogators ‘source’ his information by providing the names and positions of the other KGB officers from whom he had allegedly obtained it . Moreover, he did not provide the names of the officers he allegedly obtained the information .
 The CIA knew Oswald had contacted a known KGB officer in Mexico City in 1963 . Oswald was confronted with the fact that through its own surveillance in 1963 the CIA knew of Oswald's contact with the KGB .
 Dubas received a telegraphic report of Oswald’s visits to the Soviet Embassy just after Oswald had left . Dubas, the head of the Tourist Department in the KGB, had received a report of the visits . Oswald had visited the embassy just after he had left the
 Nosenko concluded that if Oswald had seen any consular officers, it was in their diplomatic rather than intelligence roles . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Up to this point he had forgotten the telegram, Nosenko said with a shrug . "I don't know why I'm here," he said .
 Oswald’s visits to the Soviet Embassy were between September 27 and October 3, 1963 . The interrogators knew the dates . Oswald visited the embassy on September 27 to October 3 .
 Nosenko explained that he just happened to have been in Dubas’ office when the telegram arrived . The telegram was sent to Dubas' office in his office .
 On this point it seemed to his interrogators that Nosenko was merely improvising this chance meeting . It seemed to be an act of improvisation, the interrogators thought .
 The more they pressed him about Oswald’s relations with KGB personnel, the more adamantly he denied even the possibility of such contacts . Oswald denied any contact with the KGB personnel . The more pressed he pressed, he denied any contacts .
 Nosenko insisted that was the first contact Oswald had had, even indirectly, with the First Chief Directorate of the KGB . The telegram had come from Mexico to the KGB in October 1963, Nosenkos said . The KGB is responsible for foreign intelligence .
 CIA interrogators had definitely ascertained through Soviet consular records that Oswald had con260 / LEGEND tacted the Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C, as early as February 1963 . This meant that the First Chief Directorate would have heard of Oswald before he ever got to Mexico .
 The Soviet Russia Division compiled its final report on Nosenko . Gradually, from the transcripts of these interrogation sessions and from other sources it had, the report was compiled . The final report was published by the Soviet Russia division .
 Point by point, it analyzed the contradictions and omissions in the story . The book was published in 2007 and published in 2009 .
 Nosenko was a Soviet intelligence agent dispatched by the KGB for the purpose of delivering disinformation to the CIA, FBI and Warren Commission . He was dispatched to deliver disinformation to CIA and the FBI .
 FBI recommended full-scale investigation of Nosenko and his accomplices in the deception .
 If this effort confirmed the fact that he was still a Soviet agent, then some more drastic form of “administrative action” might be called for . If this is confirmed, then more drastic action might be needed .
 Angleton’s counterintelligence staff forwarded the report to Angleton for further evaluation . The division's report was forwarded to Anglemans counterintelligence .
 Angleton never agreed with the decision to subject Nosenko to hostile interrogation . Angleton had never entirely agreed with decision to interrogate Nosenkos .
 As a trout fisherman he preferred to play his game patiently, according to their own strength . As a fisherman he would play patiently, he would like to play according to his strength .
 With defectors, he believed in eliciting whatever information they chose to divulge . He said he would then gradually assess how their story fitted in with other known Soviet operations .
 By confronting Nosenko with the contradictions in his story, the Soviet Russia Division had, in a sense, given the game away and allowed him to concoct ad hoc explanations, albeit feeble ones . By confronting him with the contradiction, the Soviets Russia Division gave away the game .
 If Nosenko were deported, the answer to this long-term question would be forever lost . The question is still unanswered .
 Chief of research based his analysis solely on the content of the report itself . The chief of research is based on the findings of the study .
 However, he was unsatisfied with the presentation of the division’s report .
 It seemed to be unnecessarily long and convoluted, with inconclusive and essentially irrelevant sections on the defector Anatoli Golitsin, whose code name was Stone .
 Nosenko recommended that the report be re-edited by the Soviet Russia Division to omit peripheral material on Stone . He recommended that it be edited to sharpen the focus on evidence that bore directly on the issue of the credibility .
 Angleton ordered his chief of operations Newton S Miler to fully reinvestigate the Nosenko case .
 The division’s report was evaluated by comparing all the information provided by Nosenko with that provided by other defectors and agents . The report was compiled by comparing the report with that of others provided by defectors, agents .
 Most of Nosenko’s revelations involved worthless information or data about agents who had already been compromised by themselves or others . Most of his revelations involved either worthless information .
 The only seemingly valuable lead was the theft of secret documents from the courier center at Orly Airport by an American sergeant, Robert Lee Johnson . Nosenko had provided a few low-level "throwaway" cases involving American tourists .
 FBI had long argued that the Soviets would never have given away an agent as important as Sergeant Johnson just to establish Nosenko as a disinformation agent . FBI defenders of Nosenkos say the Soviets never gave away a key agent just because it was an important agent .
 Miler instituted a full investigation into the case of Sergeant Johnson . Sgt. Johnson was found dead at the hands of police officers in 2009 .
 Johnson had been arrested by military authorities for selling pornographic films . He had microfilm of classified secrets was found in his possession . Nosenko provided the information that identified Johnson .
 His wife had told military authorities of his espionage activities on behalf of the Soviets . He had been involved in espionage activities for several years .
 Miler concluded that the Soviets had every reason to assume that Sergeant Johnson had been compromised and known to military counterintelligence well before Nosenko provided his information .
 The Soviets might have been merely discarding an agent who they assumed could no longer be of use to them . The Soviets, in other words, may have been discarding the agent they assumed no longer would be of help .
 Chief of operations reached the conclusion that Nosenko was a Soviet disinformation agent . Chief of operation concluded that he had been a Soviet agent .
 Stone assumed that Nosenko had been ordered by the KGB to contact the CIA in Geneva in 1962 for the express purpose of deflecting American intelligence from the information which was being provided by Stone . Stone assumed the KGB had ordered him to do so .
 There was little difference between the Soviet Russia Division and counterintelligence on the question of whether or not Nosenko was a fake . There was considerable disagreement on how his case should be disposed of .
 Angleton feared that any rash action, such as an attempt to deport Nosenko physically, could result in unanticipated consequences . Angleton and his staff feared that such a rash action would result in an unanticipated consequence .
 J Edgar Hoover was apprised by his liaison with the CIA of that agency’s evaluation of Nosenko as a Soviet disinformation officer . Hoover was at FBI headquarters at the time of the incident .
 He realized that unless this verdict was immediately reversed, it could have very serious ramifications for his bureau . The verdict could have serious implications for the bureau, he said .
 It would destroy the credibility of the FBI’s agent in place in the KGB, code-named Fedora . For one thing, it would be completely destroying the credibility .
 A large part of the bureau's counterespionage effort had been built on Fedora’s tips . The FBI had been using Fedora's tips to spy on the government .
 The information Fedora provided was so prized by Hoover that he forwarded it directly to the White House . Hoover forwarded Fedora's information to many White House officials .
 All the classified documents which were used to “feed” Fedora had to be cleared by the Department of Defense, CIA, Air Force, Army, National Security Agency, and other concerned agencies .
 Fedora had gone out of his way to back up Nosenko’s story when he had defected in 1964 . Fedora, however, had gone .
 Fedora would seem to be part of the same Soviet deception, according to Nosenko . Fedora is now ruled a fraud by the courts .
 If Fedora were really under Soviet control, it could bring down the entire FBI counterespionage structure like a house of cards .
 The collapse of Nosenko's story could, moreover, force a reopening of the investigation into Oswald’s relations with Soviet intelligence prior to the assassination . Oswald's relations with the Soviet intelligence before the assassination could also be reopened .
 Oswald worked in a typesetting firm that did highly classified work for the Army Map Service . He was allowed to obtain a second passport and travel freely to Mexico . Oswald had been allowed to work in typesetting firms that did classified work .
 If the CIA pressed for a reinvestigation, all the FBI’s omissions and failures in the original security case involving Oswald would be dredged up again . Now, the CIA is considering a re-investigation of Oswald's assassination .
 New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison was charging in a carnivallike atmosphere of press releases that agencies of the U.S. government were involved in the conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy . Garrison: "This would all come at a time when Jim Garrison, the district attorney in New Orleans,
 Within the CIA, there was also bitter opposition to officially labeling Nosenko’s story a KGB fabrication .
 Nosenko had provided an answer to the puzzle of Kovshuk’s visit to the country . The former Soviet Union leader had been in the country for two years .
 If this explanation were accepted, it would end suspicion of a high-level penetration of the CIA . It would allow the Soviet Russia Division once again to concentrate its efforts on gathering data about the Soviets .
 There was also disagreement within the Soviet Russia Division on how the Nosenko case should have been handled .
 Leonard McCoy, an officer in the Reports Section, protested the confinement and mistreatment of Nosenko . McCoy protested through unofficial channels the confinement .
 At about the same time there began circulating within the CIA an ugly rumor . The CIA is said to have been briefed on the CIA's role in the CIA .
 The head of the Soviet Russia Division, who signed the report indicting Nosenko, suspected himself being a Soviet agent . The FBI liaison told him that he suspected him of being an agent .
 An investigation quickly revealed this to be a canard without basis, but the fact that it was spread indicated the tensions and suspicions aroused by the Nosenko case .
 Late that summer he ordered his new deputy director, Admiral Rufus Taylor, to take personal charge of the case . Admiral Taylor took over the case from his deputy director .
 The insiders who had developed the indictment against Nosenko were turned out . The outsiders came in. The insiders were turned around .
 The reversal began in September 1967, when Nosenko was abruptly transferred from the custody of the CIA’s Soviet Russia Division to that of its Office of Security . The reversal occurred in September .
 The CIA normally handles routine security precautions, but not counterintelligence investigations . The decision to give it control of the Nosenko case was extraordinary .
 His new handler, Bruce Solie, already knew Nosenko . Solie is a taciturn but supremely patient security officer . He says he is happy to work with Solie .
 Rather than confront Nosenko with contradictions, he reviewed with him the main points of his story that had been controverted and allowed him to work out in retrospect explanations .
 In this review he was assisted by FBI agents assigned to the case by J Edgar Hoover . The review of the case was conducted by the FBI .
 In theory, this was supposed to be a tripartite reinvestigation, conducted jointly by the FBI and the CIA’s Office of Security and counterintelligence .
 Bruce Solie of the Office of Security and the FBI agents “spoon-fed” Nosenko plausible answers that neatly fitted all the gaps in his story . In fact, however, the FBI and OSS agents ‘spooned’ him up .
 Counter-intelligence experts found it impossible to determine what information Nosenko had volunteered and what had been fed to him by interrogators . At least this was the view of some in counterintelligence .
 At one point, the counterintelligence staff had Stone prepare a long list of questions for Nosenko, but he never allowed him to answer them . The Office of Security never allowed Stone to answer the questions .
 This test had originally been administered by his own Office of Security . There was almost no precedence for such a ‘fluttering’ to be reversed or disqualified after such an extern sive length of time .
 Some of the CIA officers responsible for the indictment of Nosenko were transferred to overseas assignments . The decision was made to transfer some of the officers involved in the indictment out of Washington .
 The head of the Soviet Russia Division, a Russian specialist for more than a decade, and the division’s deputy chief, an expert in Soviet counterespionage, were reassigned to Europe . Nosenko was the subject of a major inquiry into the death of Nosen
 Other Soviet specialists were dispatched to help prepare the case against Nosenko . They were known within the CIA as Slavs, known as Slav Slavs .
 Stewart, a highly respected officer on the CIA’s Board of National Estimates, knew little about the outstanding issues when he began his review in the fall of 1967 . Stewart was a respected CIA officer who was on the Board of Estimates .
 Taylor provided Stewart with a small office adjacent to his own office, though not with a staff or secretary . Taylor suggested he concentrate on the problem of Nosenko’s future, rather than his past, instead of his past . He suggested Stewart concentrate on his future, not his
 Stewart: "The evidence itself did not ineluctably compel such a categorical conclusion" Stewart: The evidence itself does not compel such an assertion . Stewart: As far as Stewart was concerned, the evidence itself was not enough .
 Stewart saw no reason to jump to the conclusion that he was an agent dispatched by the Soviets . While recognizing that the Soviet Russia Division had undoubtedly proved through impressive research and cross-checking that many of Nosenko’s assertions were blatantly false, Stewart did not believe he was a
 He reasoned that it was possible for Nosenko to have lied about a whole range of subjects, including his actual position in the KGB and his motive for defecting . The former KGB defector says he could have been a legitimate defector who simply wanted to escape .
 The omission of details in his story might be accounted for by a faulty memory . And it might be because he didn't recall the events in his memory .
 The fact that a Soviet agent had confirmed some of the false elements in his story might be no more than a curious coincidence . The Soviet agent's rank of colonel and his claim to have received a recall telegram may be a coincidence .
 Stewart reviewed some of the transcripts of Nosenko’s interrogation and decided that they were conducted in an “atmosphere of excitement” that could conceivably have accounted for the misunderstanding . Stewart: The atmosphere of the interrogation could have been in an atmosphere of excitement .
 Stewart found that the evidence lent itself to more than one interpretation . Stewart: "The evidence lends itself to both an explanation"
 Stewart recommended to Admiral Taylor that the CIA proceed to “distance” itself from the Nosenko case . In early 1968 Stewart recommended that the agency proceed to "distance’s itself" from the case . Stewart: "The CIA should distance itself from itself"
 He argued that the Soviet Russia Division had not proved its case against Nosenko . The fact that he had not confessed during three years of “hostile interrogation” meant that there probably would never be ironclad proof that he was a Soviet agent .
 Even if his defection had been arranged by Soviet intelligence, he was now a “burnt-out case”—useless to Moscow . And even if he defected, he would have been a ‘burnt out case’ – a useless to Moscow.
 The only viable alternative was to provide Nosenko with a new identity and life in the U.S. and retain him on the CIA’s payroll to assure that he would not freely reveal his story .
 The Office of Security, which by now had assumed full charge of the case, received an abridged version of the division’s report . The report was released by the Office of Homeland Security .
 Solie wrote his own report, rebutting what was left of the original indictment and completely exonerating Nosenko . Solie's report was published with assistance from the FBI, and the FBI .
 Solie Report did not even attempt to explain numerous instances in which Nosenko contradicted himself or omitted key facts . The Solie report did not attempt to even explain many instances of Nosenkos' contradictions .
 The substance of the information he provided allowed the FBI to develop important cases against Soviet agents . The FBI argued that the information helped the FBI end espionage operations such as the Orly Airport .
 The report went on to list all the espionage cases that the FBI had developed from Nosenko’s revelations . The report also listed the number of espionage cases developed from the revelations .
 It acknowledged that Nosenko had admitted to lies and mistakes but concluded that these proceeded from a personality problem . It said he had admitted that he had made a series of mistakes but said he was not guilty of wrongdoing .
 Solie investigated the case of Nosenko and won CIA's intelligence medal . Solie's report later earned Solie the CIA’s intelligence medal, but it did not convince those who had originally investigated Nosenkos' innocence .
 The research section of Angleton’s counterintelligence staff found it totally lacking logic . Angleton's research section found it ‘totally lacking logic’
 The former deputy chief of the Soviet Russia Division also was shown a copy of the Solie Report .
 He was astonished to find that it did not address the most damning pieces of evidence in his division’s report, such as the bogus recall telegram and other demonstrable lies, he said .
 Most of the “substance” Nosenko had given was either dated information already provided by other defectors or data rendered useless because agents in question had lost their access to it . It also ignored the findings of the division .
 He submitted a point-by-point rebuttal of the Solie Report, but it fell on deaf ears . The Solie report was published by the president of the United States .
 There were now only a few more details to be taken care of in the renaissance of Nosenko .
 He acquiesced and admitted that in this case he had failed to supervise his subordinates properly . He said he was not in charge of his subordinates .
 They had been mainly responsible for the interrogation and the indictment . The men were arrested and charged with terrorism .
 The former deputy chief had prepared the indictment of Nosenko . The responsibility for the case now clearly devolved on the former deputy deputy chief .
 He asked him if he would be willing, in light of the CIA’s review, to change his verdict on Nosenko . He said he was willing to do so .
 The former deputy chief realized that his career in the CIA was probably at stake . He still found the evidence completely persuasive that Nosenko had fabricated his original position in the KGB, as well as his motive for defecting . Soviet intelligence had attempted to verify this fabrication through channels it controlled
 Nosenko had been sent by the KGB to the United States as a disinformation agent . He was sent to the U.S. as a dissembling agent for the KGB .
 Officer said he could not in good conscience acquiesce to any other conclusion, unless shown new evidence . Remaining adamant, the officer explained that he had to show new evidence to justify his decision .
 In October 1968, the inspector general held a round-table meeting of all the elements still involved in the Nosenko case . The inspector general was finally able to find out what happened .
 Included were Richard Helms, Admiral Taylor, Bruce Solie and others from the Office of Security . Angleton’s counterintelligence staff also attended .
 The inspector general set forth his finding that the case against Nosenko had not been proved and indeed may have been seriously mishandled . He said the case was not proved and the case may have seriously been mishandled by the police .
 He proposed that Nosenko be released, resettled somewhere in the U.S. and treated like any other defector who had chosen the United States over Russia . He then proposed that the defector be released .
 It would cost the CIA very little and enabled the agency to avoid the possibility of a very destructive flap . It would also save the agency from a very damaging flap .
 All the others seated around the table nodded their assent—except for the members of the counterintelligence staff . "All the others," they said, except for the counter-intelligence staff. All the other people in the room nodded .
 They explained that they are still fully convinced that Nosenko was a disinformation agent . They said they still believe that he was a Russian-backed Russian spy .
 The inspector general appeared visibly angry over the unwillingness of Angleton’s staff to award Nosenko his bona fides . Angleton managed to get agreement on how the CIA was to be ‘distanced” from the CIA in the immediate future .
 The Office of Security made arrangements to buy Nosenko a house in North Carolina . Shortly thereafter, the office of security made arrangements for him to move in .
 He would receive from the CIA an allowance of about $30,000 a year, employment would be found for him and he would be granted U.S. citizenship . He would also receive an allowance, employment, and be granted citizenship .
 His three years of confinement, his indictment for being a messenger from Moscow and the subsequent reversal all were to be a closely held secret . He was convicted of three years confinement, indictment and subsequent reversal of his sentence .
 In the winter of 1969 Yuri Nosenko, under a new name, took up a new life for himself . In the 1970s, he was arrested in connection with the murder of his wife . He was found dead at the hands of a police officer in 1969 .
 The years passed, Angleton continued to be intrigued by one aspect of the Nosenko case . Angleton was intrigued by the case until he learned more about the case .
 In his ongoing interviews with the FBI Nosenko brought up certain cases that he had not mentioned previously . In those interviews he brought up some of the cases he had previously mentioned .
 One KGB officer had tried to defect to the Americans in the summer of 1959 but failed . Another was a KGB officer who tried to defraud the U.S. in 1959 . The KGB officer was killed by the Americans .
 Nosenko should have been intimately familiar with the details of this particular case, yet he avoided mentioning it during his initial debriefings . He should have known details of the case .
 This suggested that some Soviet-controlled source was still supplying Nosenko with the answers he was supposed to have to keep his story current . This suggested the possibility that some of the answers were still being supplied by the Soviets .
 Angleton knew that if such a source existed, it had to be someone in the FBI or CIA or possibly an agent on the outside . Angleton: "If such an agent exists, it would have to be an agent in the CIA or FBI" Angleton says he knew that
 In December 1974 the long tenure of James Jesus Angleton in counterintelligence came to an abrupt end . Angleton's tenure as counterintelligence chief ended in December 1974 .
 On December 20, 1974, William Colby, the new Director of Central Intelligence, asked Seymour Hersh to come to his office . Hersh was the first person to meet with the CIA director to discuss the assassination of John Kennedy .
 Colby assured Hersh that there was nothing illegal in this program, which was done at the explicit request of the President . Colby: "There were no violations of the law by the President"
 Angleton directed Hersh's attention to the CIA’s program of opening mail from the Soviet Union, which he admitted was illegal and which had been supervised by Angleton . Angleton admitted that the program was illegal .
 Colby had opposed the role of the counterintelligence staff for some years . Colby said he had been opposed to the counter intelligence staff .
 Colby's dispute with Angleton had come into the open when he headed the CIA mission to Vietnam in the late 1960s . Colby decided to terminate all counterintelligence activities in that country . Angleton was a CIA counterintelligence chief .
 This meant, in effect, that the CIA could not question or evaluate the sources of its information in Vietnam . The CIA was not allowed to question its sources of information in the country . This meant that it could not evaluate or evaluate its information .
 Angleton had tended to inhibit the collection of information from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe . Angleton questioned the validity of information supplied to the CIA by double agents .
 It made the CIA’s task of measuring the intentions of the Soviet Union that much more difficult . The CIA's task was made by the Soviets in the early 1950s .
 Among those “purged,” as Angleton put it, were the authors of the counterintelligence reviews and evaluations of the Nosenko case . Angleton: Among those "purged" were those who had reviewed the case and evaluations .
 Leonard McCoy, the reports officer who had become one of Nosenko’s champions, was appointed the new research head of counterintelligence . Leonard McCoy was appointed as the head of the new counterintelligence research head .
 A year later John L Hart, a retired CIA officer, was given the task of writing another report on the Nosenko case .
 In July 1976 he called on the former deputy chief of the Soviet Russia Division, who had left the CIA four years earlier . He called on him to meet with the ex-Deputy Chief of the Russian Division .
 Hart casually asked his former colleague if he could give him any cogent reason for not doing so . Nosenko's bona fides as a legitimate defector were now fully established, Hart said . Hart asked him to give him no reason for refusing to do so .
 Former deputy chief did not believe that it was possible for anyone to review tapes of years of interrogation sessions with Nosenko and thousands of pages of analysis in only six weeks .
 He said he would be willing to change his opinion on Nosenko if there were some new evidence confirming his story, such as a more recent defector . Nevertheless, he said he was willing to give up his opinion if there was new evidence .
 It concluded that Nosenko had been a genuine defector and therefore, therefore, the information he provided about Lee Harvey Oswald's not being involved with Soviet intelligence was valid .
 In the winter of 1976, twelve years after his defection, Nosenko’s bona fides were assumed to be established . In the 1970s, he defected to the Soviet Union, but was never officially recognized .
 Miler's handwritten notes on Fedora and Nosenko were destroyed after he left his office . In 1977 he spoke to Miler, who had just heard that his notes had been destroyed .
 Nosenko is considered a legitimate defector, according to former captain . He still expressed concern over the acceptance of the defector as a legitimate defector .
 It is an indictment of the CIA and, if the FBI subscribes to it, that Bureau . The CIA and FBI are accused of being complicit in the CIA .
 The ramifications for the U.S. Intelligence community, and specifically and particularly the CIA, are tragic . The ramifications are tragic for the United States Intelligence community and the CIA .
 Acceptance of Nosenko’s information as accurate and of him as a reliable and knowledgeable consultant about Soviet intelligence will surely cause innumerable problems for incumbent and future estimators, intelligence collectors, and especially, any remaining counterintelligence officers .
 Acceptance of his information inevitably will cause the acceptance of other suspect sources, including Nosenko, to support his lies and misinformation . Acceptance will inevitably lead to other sources who have dovetailed and supported even Nosenkos’s proven lies, the author says .
 CIA officer who had originally developed the case against Nosenko discussed Miler's assessment with the CIA officer . Miler’s assessment was also discussed by the CIA who had developed the original case .
 With Nosenko accredited and the counterintelligence staff purged, the CIA had truly been turned inside out . With the CIA having turned the CIA inside out, the agency had truly turned itself inside out.
 I have also interviewed James J Angleton and members of his counterintelligence staff who were involved with the Nosenko case, and Sam Papich, the FBI liaison to the CIA during this period .
 William Sullivan, then assistant director of the FBI, and other FBI officers have also discussed the case with me . William Sullivan was the FBI director in the late 1980s and early 1990s .
 Hoover’s handwritten notes are from a memo to Clyde Tolson . Gale, assistant director of the FBI's Inspection Division, gave the memo to Tolson on December 10, 1963 . Gale was the director of an FBI's inspection division in 1963 .
 The material about the State Department derives from documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act .
 The section on the Warren Commission is based on interviews with the commission’s members and staff which were originally conducted in 1965 and on more recent interviews with W David Slawson, Wesley J Liebeler and Leon Hubert .
 Executive minutes of the Warren Commission meeting on January 27 are the source for all the material regarding the commission’s questioning of Marina Oswald . The minutes were obtained under the Freedom of Information Act .
 Staff memorandum on Marina was examined in the National Archives and first quoted in Inquest Inquest . Staff memorandum examined in National Archives examined in national archives .
 The quote from Slawson’s handwritten notes was likewise obtained from the National Archives . The quote was obtained from a handwritten note from the author's handwritten notes .
 The so-called Coleman-Slawson report was prepared for the Warren Commission . The report was obtained under the Freedom of Information Act .
 The information comes from discussions with Thomas Fox, then chief of counterintelligence of the Defense Intelligence Agency . Fox participated in the debriefing of Stone, William Sullivan, James Angleton and William Sullivan .
 The portions on the executive decisions of the CIA come from personal interviews with Richard M Helms, then deputy director of Plans, and Walter Elder, then executive assistant to John McCone, the Director of Central Intelligence .
 The meeting between Chief Justice Warren and Helms was described to me by Helms . The meeting described to be described as a 'meeting' between the two sides of the aisle .
 Marina's testimony on Oswald's visit to Mexico derives from a comparison of the pertinent FBI reports with the Warren Report . Everything concerning Marina’s testimony is based on comparison of FBI reports and Warren Report.
 The KGB descended from CHEKA of the revolutionary period and has passed through several name changes . The Soviet Committee for State Security, best known by its initials, KGB, is descended from ChEKA . The KGB was founded in the 1950s .
 Russia shares responsibility for foreign espionage activities with the GRU . The GRU is the intelligence component of the Ministry of Defense .
 The first mention of Nosenko had provided information on the Oswald case came from documents given to author in 1965 by a lawyer on the Warren Commission’s staff .
 Lawyer Wesley J Liebeler committed a serious security breach in allowing Nosenko’s name to come out . This brief mention was subsequently published in Inquest . Inquest later heard that he had committed a significant security breach .
 The next public mention of Nosenko's connection to the Oswald case was in John Barron’s KGB in 1974 . The next mention of the case in 1974 was in Barron's KGB in that year .
 Nosenko had walked into the Reader's Digest office in Washington and volunteered information . He had walked in and volunteered to help in Washington .
 In 1975 the Rockefeller Commission reviewed the CIA’s treatment of Nosenko from the point of view of his public rights, and his name was again reported in the press . The Rockefeller Commission review of the CIA's treatment of him was reviewed by the commission .
 A Soviet journalist approached the French magazine Paris Match with an offer to provide photographs of ‘Colonel’ Nosenko’s deserted family . In another extraordinary development, a Soviet journalist offered to provide photos of the family of the late colonel .
 The research chief of CIA’s counterintelligence later commented that there was no precedent for the Soviets providing photographs of defectors . He considered the offer a suspicious attempt to establish Nosenko publicly as a defector . The offer was considered suspicious .
 Angleton had no doubt that the Soviets had the capacity for mounting disinformation operations . Angleton looked upon the ‘Trust’ of the 1920s as the model for such deceptions .
 In the ‘Trust,’ Soviet intelligence deliberately created an anti-Soviet underground that it could control . In the 'Trust' Soviet intelligence intentionally created a anti-Russian underground underground .
 The group could carry out spying and sabotage missions for anti-Soviet groups outside Russia . It could also coordinate the flow of information from the Soviet Union to the Western intelligence agencies cooperating with the anti-Russian emigres .
 The insects are unable to differentiate between the man-made and the real larvae . They attempt to breed with the artifice . The artifice is sterile .
 Soviet intelligence arranged a series of initial successes for the anti-Soviet underground to prove the efficacy of the ‘Trust” inside Russia . In this case Soviet intelligence .
 “Trust” was established as the mainstay of the Soviet resistance movement, the Soviet agents operating it spoon-fed to Western intelligence agencies . Soviet agents operated it out of Soviet agents .
 The fabricated reports from the ‘Trust’ were confirmed by other fake anti-Soviet groups set up by Soviet intelligence . The fake reports were then confirmed by another fake group .
 Moscow persuaded Western governments that it was abandoning its plans for world revolution and was moving more toward nationalism than communism . This wellcoordinated campaign of disinformation channeled through intelligence agencies helped Moscow .
 For a complete account of this case, see Bruce Page, The Philby Conspiracy . For a more detailed account of the Philby conspiracy, read Bruce Page's book, "Philby Conspiracy"
 The Soviets managed to promote their own agent, Heinz Felfer, to the head of counterintelligence through an intricate series of maneuvers in which they sacrificed their own agents in a chess game .
 Chief of operations wrote out what he considered to be the mode in which the Soviets would handle a defector such as Oswald . Oswald's defector was Oswald, a member of the Soviet Union's intelligence staff .
 Popov himself had provided one ‘answer’ to the question in his last meeting with the CIA in Moscow in 1959 . Popov: "I'm not sure what happened to the CIA. I'm sure it's a good thing to know"
 The KGB allowed him to attend a prearranged rendezvous with his CIA case officers . At that time he had already been caught by the KGB and had been imprisoned .
 The KGB officer handed the American a six-page note written on scraps of toilet paper . He said he had been wired for sound with a hidden microphone and was under KGB control .
 If this explanation was accepted at face value, it meant no betrayal was involved in the case . If this was accepted, it would have been a sign of no betrayal .
 Popov was known to be a prisoner at the time he handed this extraordinary message to the CIA . But since Popov's "answer" was a KGB fabrication, there was some suspicion that he had not been followed . The CIA says Popov’s ‘answer’
 Only other confirmation of Cherepanov came from Yuri Loginov, a KGB agent who posed as a CIA double agent until 1967 .
 After his capture in South Africa, he redefected to the Soviet Union in 1968 . He was captured by South Africa in 1968 and renamed to the USSR .
 Between 1962 and 1964 he was seen in activities of the Second Chief Directorate . Nosenko first contacted the CIA in 1962, when he first contacted them .
 Prior to 1962, how 7 ever, there seems to have been only one independent identification of such activities .
 The material about Oswald’s early history comes from testimony before the Warren Commission given by Marguerite Oswald, Robert Oswald, John Pic and Lillian Murret .
 It is also drawn from the probation reports included in the Warren Commission exhibits of John Carro, Dr. Dr. Carro and Dr. Martin Carro .
 FBI reports on some of Oswald’s young friends, including Palmer McBride, William E Wulf and Edward Voebel . Other sources were FBI reports, published books, and two published books .
 More than 35 of the men stationed with Oswald in the Far East recall details of the U-2 . With varying descriptions, more than 35 men stationed in Far East recalled details .
 He recalls that the plane had “tremendous lift” on takeoff and would soon be out of sight . The plane was soon out of the sight, he says .
 He remembers little wheels under the wing tips that would fly off when the plane was airborne . The plane's wheels would also fly off under the wings tips .
 Persons believes he knew the craft as a U-2 at that time and thought it was a weather plane . Persons believes that he knew that he believed the craft was a U2 at the time .
 Joseph Macedo was on Oswald’s radar crew and is now a railroad engineer working out of Chicago . Macedo saw the U-2 many times .
 He recalls that the plane took off very quickly, using only one-half to three-quarters of the runway . The plane had little wheels under the wing tips that dropped off on takeoff, he says .
 He believed that it was a test plane of some description and thinks that photographing it would have been simple . But he believes there was a base regulation against taking pictures of any of the planes .
 He describes the plane as others do, but he doesn't remember its being called a U-2, only that it was a test plane . He says anyone could have taken a picture of it, adding that anyone would have been able to .
 Pete F Connor was aware of the U-2, while walking guard duty at Atsugi, because of the high whine like an electrical generator, which was different from the muffled explosive noise of a jet . Connor was able to hear the noise of the aircraft .
 Richard Cyr, now a police lieutenant in Needham, Massachusetts, states that on the basis of the amount of time the U-2 would be aloft, the men deduced that it had to be a glider that used its engines only to take off and gain sufficient altitude for
 Despite security regulations, Cassisi and his friends never had difficulty getting into the radar bubble to watch the blips and listen to the radio signals . Cassisi says he enjoyed doing it .
 Cassisi was present once when a request for “winds aloft at ninety thousand feet” came in, indicating that any special security measures were not strictly enforced . The request could have come only from the U-2 .
 Cassisi always heard the aircraft called the U-2, understood that it was a spy plane . Cassisi believed that the aircraft was usually out twelve to sixteen hours . He believed that it usually was out for up to 16 hours .
 Oswald’s interest in the U-2 is a former lieutenant in the Marine Corps. The officer who recalls Oswald's interest is John E Donovan, a former Marine . Donovan is an ex-Marine Corps. officer .
 Donovan remembers clearly that Oswald called his attention to radar images of the U-2, and that this incident took place at Cubi Point . Donovan says Oswald called him to look at the radar images . Donovan: "This incident happened in the U.S.
 Oswald's unit did not set up radar operations at Cubi Point at that time . However, other officers and enlisted men from Oswald’s unit remember that their unit didn’t set up .
 One possible explanation is that a number of different Marine squadrons were temporarily camped in the same vicinity . Oswald may have come into contact with Oswald while his individual units were together at Cubi Point .
 Donovan was also Oswald’s officer at the Marine Air Station at El Toro, California, in 1959 . Donovan worked constantly with Oswald in the radar bubble . Donovan also worked with Oswald at the base .
 Donovan is believed to have been involved in an incident involving him in the past . Donovan has been in the hospital for nearly 20 years . He has been with the U.S. Army since 1993 .
 In any case, since there are no other witnesses, it cannot be resolved where, and if, this incident took place .
 Edward Voebel, his closest friend in junior high school, does not recall his ever mentioning his father . Marguerite, Robert, John Pic or Lillian Murret remember him being curious about the parent he never knew .
 Lee made an effort to locate members of his father’s family in New Orleans in 1963 . Only in 1963, when he was twenty-three years old, did Lee make an effort . Lee's father's family was found in 1963 when Lee was 23 .
 In 1965 Marguerite Oswald told author Jean Stafford that Lee once told her excitedly that he’d spent the entire day riding the subway rather than attending classes . Lee told her that he'd spent that day on the subway instead of attending class .
 Oswald wrote most of his letters by hand, and they contain numerous spelling and grammatical errors . Oswald's letters were written by hand and often contain spelling and grammar errors .
 Some observers have suggested that he might have suffered from dyslexia . Since many of these involve the transposition of letters, some observers suggest that he may have been dyslexic .
 None of the social workers or clinical psychologists who examined him while he was alive ever noted such a learning disability . However, none of them ever noted that he had any learning disabilities .
 Oswald later wrote from New Orleans in many of the letters he later wrote . Oswald's letters later wrote in New Orleans do not appear to have been made mistakes .
 It is therefore possible that his poor spelling resulted from his being largely self-educated .
 At least six of the witnesses who served with Oswald at Atsugi reported a belief that such armaments were available . Despite a treaty with the Japanese that banned the presence of nuclear weapons on U.S. bases, at least six said they believed such weapons were available.
 Lieutenant Charles Rhodes was playing golf with one of the senior colonels on the base . Rhodes reports that one afternoon he was playing with the colonels .
 Colonel invited Rhodes to come along with him for golf game . Colonel said he had some business to attend to, and invited Rhodes along .
 No one told Rhodes what he saw that afternoon, and he never asked about it, sensing that it was none of his business . Rhodes never asked what he'd seen that afternoon . Rhodes: "No one told me what I saw, and it's none of my business"
 Rhodes knows nothing about nuclear weaponry, so even today he does not claim to know what he saw . Rhodes says he has no idea what happened to him . Rhodes: "Even today, even today, I don't know what I saw"
 He and the colonel went down into a heavily guarded area that was at least three stories below ground . He and a colonel were able to reach the area in a matter of minutes .
 He remembers that the cave seemed to have full facilities for living and, he specifically recalls, running water and toilets . He also remembers that he remembers that there were running water, running toilets .
 The main feature of the cave was a long, wide concourse with railroad tracks running down the middle . The cave is located in the middle of a long concourse .
 Lining each side of the concourse were large bays—or indentations that appeared to be about 20 feet long and about 18 feet high . The indentations were about 20 ft long and 18 ft high, according to the Smithsonian .
 In each bay was a large, “fat-looking” armament that, Rhodes assumed, was a bomb of some description . Rhodes assumed that the armament was a big bomb . Rhodes was killed in the Battle of Britain in June 1944 .
 He recalls that there were a “good number’s of them, but he declined to guess how many . He says there were “a good number” of them .
 Rhodes was there for several minutes while the colonel spoke to someone, then they left . Rhodes was at the scene of the incident, Rhodes said . Rhodes said the colonel left Rhodes in the middle of the conversation .
 Oswald had met Communists in Japan . Oswald had never met Communists . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 . Oswald died in August 1963 .
 De Mohrenschildt later repeated this to me in an interview in March 1977 . This comes from the testimony of George De MohRenschildt, who later repeated it .
 He explained that savvy Marines could breeze right through such treatment, laughing off the insults and swapping them back .
 He seemed to take each insult seriously and responded with a quiet fury that he seemed to be incapable of converting into physical violence . But he was unable to convert his anger into violence .
 Pitts says he was never friendly with Oswald but never harassed him either . Pitts remembers certain areas, such as indecent references to his mother, that really set Oswald off .
 Pitts believes Oswald felt the men were picking on him strictly because he was Oswald . He never seemed to realize that he was bringing the trouble on himself by reacting as he did .
 The unit even had a medium-sized mongrel, named Macs, as the mascot of the MACS-1 unit .
 Marines would even give him bowls of precious vodka to lap up, says Macs . Marines would also give him a bowl of vodka to drink with him .
 On paydays they would take him along with them to bars and brothels, where they would pay the girls to cavort with Macs . And on paydays, they would also take him to the bars, where he would cavort .
 Witnesses recall a wild place in Yamato pronounced “Negashaya,” pronounced ‘Negashya,’ where men wore dresses and lipstick . Several witnesses recall the wild place where men wear dresses and lipsticks .
 One witness described the place as a ‘queer bar’ and reported that he and Oswald once went there at Oswald’s suggestion . Another witness said that Oswald and Oswald took out two deaf-mute girls .
 The Warren Commission did not pursue this in its final report . The Warren commission did not, however, pursue this .
 Connor recalls Oswald and the girl sat apart from the rest of the crowd, who were watching a floor show . He doesn't recall that they danced or showed any affection toward each other .
 Marina Oswald later told her biographer that in 1963 in Dallas, Oswald had vaguely described a number of women he had been involved with in Japan . Oswald's wife Marina Oswald said he had told her he was involved with women in Japan in 1963 .
 Lieutenant Charles Rhodes recalls an incident at Atsugi w 7 hen a girl he was friendly with informed him that she was sorry to hear that he was going on maneuvers to Formosa . Rhodes recalls a girl who told him she was going to be happy to hear he was leaving .
 MACS-1 air controller says there are no plans for the unit to go to Formosa . She says she was misinformed by an air controller assigned to the unit .
 Descriptions of the same incident by different men seem to vary remarkably . Descriptions from the same man seem to be remarkably different .
 Three witnesses think the incident occurred in the daytime . Three of the witnesses think it was daytime . John Radtke, Pete Connor and Jerry Pitts think it happened in a daytime .
 Thomas Bagshaw 7 believes that the discharged bullet hit the ceiling, not Oswald . Bagshaw believes the bullet hit Oswald's desk, not the top of the ceiling .
 Oswald was playing with a derringer, which discharged and sent a bullet seven inches above Connor’s head to slam into a wall locker . Connor insists that Oswald was not playing with the gun and the bullet hit Connor's head .
 Connor concedes that he and some others had been tormenting Osw ald and that the initial suspicion was that the shot could have been on purpose, but today Connor believes the pistol went off by mistake .
 Connor is adamant in his account, although he notes that he “vaguely remembers” another incident in which Oswald w r ounded himself . Connor is also adamant in the account .
 Oswald was removed from the barracks for a few 7 days and then returned . Connor reports that after the incident in w 7 hich he was almost hit, Oswald was taken off the base .
 Connor and some of his friends had been moved to a different part of the barracks . Connor and his friends were moved from the barracks to another barracks .
 Pitts recalls hearing about the incident the w 7 ay Connor reports it while conceding that he did not witness it firsthand . Pitts says he heard the news of the incident from Connor Connor . Connor reports the incident .
 Oswald sustained a minor injury, but Radtke believes Oswald sustained only minor injuries . The incident happened in the early afternoon, although Oswald is said to have sustained minor damage . Radtkke is certain Oswald was injured during the incident .
 Oswald sustained a minor injury, but none of these three is able to place a time for the occurrence . Three other witnesses recall the incident, all agreeing that Oswald sustained minor injury .
 Medical personnel involved in the incident are not remembered by the medical personnel involved .
 In the late '90s, Bob Greene's career spanned more than 30 years . He now has a practice in Ukiah, California, where he now works as a physician .
 Russell, now in Honolulu, could not recall signing the report of the shooting incident to Oswald’s commanding officer . Russell, who now lives in Hawaii, said he signed the report to Oswald's commanding officer but could not remember signing it .
 Given such lapses and conflicts of memory after twenty years, one is compelled to resolve the conflicts on the basis of the contemporaneously written medical reports . The author's memory lapses after 20 years, he says .
 Godfrey Jerome Daniels, George A Wilkins, Jr., Zack Stout (face obscured by Oswald), Bobby J Warren and Bobby J. Warren were killed . James R Persons, Bobby Warren and James R. Persons were also killed .
 The rates of exchange in the local economy broke down to one U.S. military blanket being worth 12 pints of rum . According to Marine sources, one United States military blanket was worth 12 rum .
 James R Persons, the first man to reach Schrand, believes the weapon was “right beside the body,” not a matter of feet away . James Persons says he believes the gun was right beside Schrand’s body .
 Persons also recalls picking up the gun at one point and being told to put it back where he had found it, thus raising the possibility that the gun was moved after the shooting . Persons says he was asked to put the gun back in the place he found it . Persons recalls being told
 A number of Marines asserted that Oswald was on guard duty that night and possibly involved in the Schrand incident . Oswald was possibly involved with the incident, according to a number of reports .
 Oswald was a witness to Schrand’s death, but no evidence suggests he was even a witness . Oswald was killed by Schrand at Cubi Point in June 1945 . Oswald's death was the first known assassination of Schrand .
 Rhodes says he later told Rodriguez that he believed a sound thrashing would have been just what Oswald needed . Rhodes says that he later said he believed he believed that Oswald would have needed such a thrashing . Rhodes: "I believe that Oswald's life would be better if he'd been
 Rhodes recalls that Oswald had been complaining to him that Rodriguez had been picking on him . Rhodes recalls how Oswald had complained to Rhodes that he was being picked on by Rodriguez . Rhodes: "I'm not surprised that he picked on me"
 Rhodes, who knew Rodriguez and remembers him as a well-respected sergeant, went to Rodriguez to discuss the matter . Rhodes says Rodriguez treated the men evenhandedly .
 Oswald told Rodriguez he was not being picked on and that he was beginning to get tired of his constant carping about it . Rodriguez told Oswald that Oswald was wrong . Oswald was not picking on, he said, but he was being picked up .
 Rhodes then told Oswald that he was imagining things if he thought he was being singled out for undesirable assignments . Rhodes then said Oswald was being unreasonable . Rhodes told Oswald he was not being unreasonable and said he was just imagining things .
 Rodriguez recalls a meeting of NCOs shortly before his trouble with Oswald at which they were told there was going to be a crackdown on Marines who persisted in getting into fights in bars . Rodriguez does not claim to understand the incident, but says he does not think he did .
 Rodriguez believes that he possibly would have been demoted if he had got into a fight with Oswald at the Bluebird . Rodriguez believes he could have been relegated if he fought Oswald .
 The doctors who treated Oswald were not able to recall their specific contact with him, citing the routine nature of his ailments . Oswald died in 1945 at the age of 92 .
 This chapter is based on personal interviews with Marines . Chapter III, The Defector, is the first chapter of this book .
 The section about Nelson Delgado is also based on FBI and Secret Service reports on him, as well as a personal interview he had with him in Germany . The section is based on reports on Delgado from the FBI, Secret Service and FBI .
 The parts on Oswald's relatives are based on their Warren Commission testimony or on Robert Oswald’s book Lee . The parts are based either on their testimony or that of their relatives' book .
 The section on Oswald’s date with Rosaleen Quinn derives from a personal interview I had with her . The section of this article is based on an interview with the author .
 The material on Oswald’s travel from the United States to the Soviet Union is based on FBI reports from the National Archives and CIA documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act . The material was based on reports obtained from the FBI and CIA .
 Church and the affidavit Billy Joe Lord submitted to the Warren Commission . The affidavit was part of an affidavit written by Billy Joe's attorney .
 Oswald's activities at the American Embassy in Moscow were described to me by Richard Snyder and John McVickar . Oswald was involved in the embassy's activities .
 I consulted their Warren Commission testimony and FBI reports for a more contemporaneous account of their contact with Oswald . I also consulted the Warren Commission .
 Oswald's letters which are quoted can be found in the exhibits of the Warren Commission . All of Oswald’s letters are quoted by the Warren commission .
 Of the journalists Oswald saw in Moscow, the material about Robert Korengold and Aline Mosby comes from personal interviews . The part about Priscilla Johnson derives from the interview notes she submitted to the Warren Commission investigators .
 The section dealing with the CIA’s subsequent interpretation of Oswald derives from interviews with James J Angleton and his staff . The section at the end of the chapter deals with . the CIA's subsequent interpretation .
 Oswald objected to nonclassical music to the extent that he once broke a Johnny Cash record owned by a corporal . He once broke the record, which was owned by an officer .
 William Alexander Morgan, formerly of Toledo, Ohio, had served with the Army’s 82nd Airborne Division in Japan . Morgan was killed in Japan during the war .
 The ill-equipped guerrilla band joined with Castro’s 26th of July Movement . After capturing a large part of Las Villas Province, the group captured the province .
 When Castro took power in January 1959, Morgan was given command of the southern port city of Cienfuegos . Morgan acquired the title Major when Castro took over .
 In August 1959 Morgan received publicity in the U.S. when Castro credited him with the suppression of a counterrevolutionary plot . Morgan received extensive publicity in August 1959 .
 Morgan duped Generalissimo Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina of the Dominican Republic into believing that he, Morgan, was leading a counterrevolutionary band in Las Villas .
 When Morgan’s guerrillas ambushed the plane, they took as prisoners the ten armed men Trujillo had sent . Fighting broke out between Morgan's forces and the true anti-Castro forces in Las Villas .
 The counterrevolutionary group was crushed, and Morgan became a heroic figure in Castro’s Cuba . Morgan was a hero in Castro's Cuba, where he became a national figure .
 In May 1975, former CIA liaison with the Warren Commission prepared a memorandum for the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States on possible foreign conspiracies in the assassination of President Kennedy . The memo was published by the CIA's former liaison to the commission .
 The belief that there was Soviet and/or Cuban connection with Oswald will persist and grow until there has been a full disclosure of all elements of Oswald’s handling and stay in the Soviet Union and his contacts in Mexico City .
 The analysis concluded that Delgado’s testimony has the cast of credibility . Delgado's testimony has ‘Cast of credibility’, analysis concluded .
 Delgado’s presumption is that he was from the Cuban consulate in Los Angeles . Delgado: "I'm not sure if he's from the consulate in L.A. He's not sure where he came from."
 In 1964 Delgado was sharply and hostilely cross-examined about his knowledge of Spanish, even though it was the language spoken in his home . Delgado: "In 1964, in 1964, he was sharply . hostilely . cross-examination" of his Spanish knowledge was
 Delgado, a cook with the U.S. Army in Germany, is unable to recall what led him to the conclusion that the stranger who visited Oswald was connected with Cuba . This led to considerable confusion in Delgado's testimony, and today Delgado cannot remember what led to his
 Another Marine, James Botelho, also vaguely remembers Oswald having these spotter photographs . Oswald's photo was taken by the spotter in the early days of his life .
 In his first interview with him in Germany, he mentioned the photographs to me, but indicated that he had shipped them to an address in Brooklyn . The photographs were sent to a Brooklyn address, but he said they were shipped to Germany .
 In subsequent interviews, however, he recalled that he had merely left the photographs in a locker . He said he had only left the photos in the locker .
 In any case, there is no record of these photographs or what happened to them . The photographs were taken at the end of the day .
 The letter was apparently designed to further the impression that he actually planned to attend the college . It was intended to make the impression he actually intended to attend college .
 Oswald's mother had recently written him of an injury she sustained while working at a candy store at the time that he was trying to secure an early discharge from the Marines . Oswald had a fortuitous coincidence that his mother had written him about the injury she had sustained .
 Marguerite had already spent six months trying to collect on an insurance claim against a Fort Worth, Texas, store . She hurt her nose when a large jar of candy fell off a shelf . Lee wrote her in June that she had already tried unsuccessfully to collect a claim .
 The three or four doctors she saw in the weeks after the accident could find nothing wrong with her, as she complained to Robert . But she was apparently still pressing the suit six months later . Robert: "I'm sorry for what I've done to my daughter, but I'm not
 He had deposited this when on leave in December 1958, after returning from Japan .
 Oswald would have had about $950 when he left Fort Worth on September 14, 1959 . With the $203 he withdrew from his Fort Worth savings account, Oswald had $950 . Oswald left the Fort Worth area with $203 .
 The gap led some investigators to speculate that he might have flown in a private aircraft . The gap in time was thought to have been the size of the plane .
 Oswald could have entered and left Sweden from Finland from Finland without having had his passport stamped . Sweden and Finland are in the same customs union, so he could have left without having a passport stamp .
 Oswald paid $15 fare from Fort Worth to New Orleans, $220.75 for a ticket to Le Havre, $20 for a flight to Helsinki . He paid an estimated $5 for a night at the Liberty Hotel, and $44 for train fare to Moscow .
 Since he could have saved no more than $950, this would have left him with a little over $100, taking no additional expenses into account . Since there were no more expenses to take out, he could save only $950 .
 In England he declared to Customs officials that he had $700, suggesting he had been supplied with additional funds by an unidentified source, or he had lied to officials .
 The State Department was later concerned that Oswald had received his visa in Helsinki in a shorter period of time than usual, which would indicate that there might have been some preparation for his defection . Oswald's visa was issued in Helsinki at the time of his departure .
 Oswald made known his “strong sympathy with the Communist cause, his intention to defect and possibly even the fact that he had been a radar operator in the U.S. Marine Corps . A second scenario they considered was that Soviet authorities were entirely ignorant of Oswald’s pending arrival
 Without access to full Soviet records, it is impossible to determine whether Oswald ever actually applied for Soviet citizenship . Oswald's family is believed to have lived in the Soviet Union .
 Oswald was never interviewed regarding obtaining Soviet citizenship . In documents sent by the Soviet government to the Warren Commission, there is no application for citizenship, nor is there any indication that Oswald was ever interviewed .
 Oswald made critical remarks about the State the citizen of which he was, could not, of course, be decisive in considering his application . Oswald's comments could not be decisive, as he was a citizen of the state, the author says .
 The fact that he mentioned the word “application” four times makes it unlikely that he said it erroneously . The word ‘application’ was mentioned four times .
 Light overcoat, no hat or scarf and non-Russian button down shirt & tie . Light over coat, no scarf or scarf, and no hat .
 Mr Oswald outside, who says he’s here to dissolve his U.S. citizenship . She rises, and taking my passport goes into the open inner office, where she lays the passport on a man's desk, saying “There is a Mr Oswald”
 Removes the letter from his typewriter and adjusting his glasses looks at me . Removes his letter and adjusts his glasses to look back at the letter .
 I said “I’ve requested that I be allowed to sign legal papers devasting myself of United States citizenship," she said . She said she wanted to "devastate herself" of her U.S. citizenship .
 Snyder explained that he wanted to delay action in the Oswald case because he thought the Soviets might expel Oswald shortly . Snyder said he wanted the case delayed because he feared the Soviets would expel Oswald .
 This reasoning was based on the embassy’s recent experience with would-be defector Nicholas Petrulli . The embassy has not been able to track down any of the potential defections .
 In fact, Petrulli had mailed the embassy a statement of renunciation on September 3, 1959 . He was only one of several civilians seeking Soviet residence in 1959 .
 The Office of Security and the Office of Intelligence Resources and Collection, Bureau of Intelligence Research, both of the State Department, undertook to identify Americans who had defected to the Soviet bloc and to Communist China .
 With the help of Richard Bissell, the CIA’s deputy director of Plans, and of the FBI, they were able to identify 14 such defectors . The CIA was able to find the 14 defectors, including those from the U.S.
 Of these, five were servicemen stationed in Germany who had crossed into East Germany . Two were mathematicians from the National Security Agency; and one couple defected to China .
 There were four civilian defections to the Soviet Union excluding Oswald . Oswald was the only person to defect to the USSR . Oswald died in August 1944 .
 All these civilian cases presented complications for the embassy, since after varying periods of residence in the Soviet Union, they all decided to return to the U.S. The embassy says the cases were presented with complications .
 Oswald appeared at the American embassy in October . The embassy was uninformed of the whereabouts of another American couple who had arrived in the Soviet Union in July .
 This couple was next heard from in December, when a propaganda piece attributed to one of them appeared in Pravda-Ukraini . The couple's last heard from was in December .
 The article stated that the husband was living in Odessa and working as a metalworker in a ship-repair yard .
 The following July the wife, apparently separated from her husband, appeared at the embassy to request that her American passport be renewed . The next July she went back to the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C., to renew her passport . The wife's husband was killed in
 She was told that it would be renewed when she made final her plans to return to the U.S. She has been told that she will be able to renew her visa .
 She next appeared at the embassy in March 1962, when she sought passport facilities for herself and her husband, with whom she was reunited . She was reunited with her husband in March 1963 .
 The State Department considered their case and determined that neither had committed anyexpatriative act . State Department: Neither man nor woman committed any act of terrorism .
 In January 1963 the wife signed such an affidavit, but the husband refused to do so at the time . The wife signed an affidavit in January 1963, 1963 .
 The embassy was authorized to issue her a passport and her husband an Emergency Certificate of Identification for return to the U.S. The embassy issued the passport and an emergency ID for her husband .
 It took the Soviet Union until May 1964—well over a year after the U.S. agreed to readmit them—to issue them exit visas . The Soviet Union took more than a year to issue exit visas for those who wanted to leave the country . The United States has agreed
 This telegram also included a request for information about Robert Edward Webster, a former Navy officer who had renounced his citizenship just two weeks before Oswald arrived at the embassy . Webster was a Navy officer, but had been born in the United States .
 Webster had visited Moscow twice during 1959 to represent his employer, the Rand Development Corporation of Cleveland, at the American National Exhibition . Webster was a plastics technician of about thirty, and had been visiting Moscow twice .
 Webster discussed the possibility of remaining in the Soviet Union with a Russian official, FBI says . The FBI says Webster discussed with Alexander Shiskin, an official at the exhibition, in July . Webster says he discussed staying in the USSR during his third visit .
 Webster had to fill out a questionnaire on his background and his reasons for wanting to remain in the Soviet Union . Shiskin arranged an interview with Mr Popof, who had Webster fill out the questionnaire .
 Webster wanted to stay in the USSR because he objected to the fact that the government controlled all business in the United States. His initial reason was that he wished to better himself in the plastics industry. Webster changed it to state that he wanted to remain in the country .
 Webster later told the FBI that he had been interviewed four times by Popof and others to determine his certainty that he wanted to defect . Webster later said he was interviewed to determine whether he would defect and to determine technical qualifications .
 Webster continued to work at the American exhibition, even remaining to help pack up his company’s exhibit . Webster helped pack up the exhibit and helped pack it up .
 Webster's employer reported his disappearance to the State Department . The United States Embassy in Moscow wrote a note to the Soviet Foreign Ministry requesting information on Webster .
 Rand returned to Moscow when he had received no reply regarding his former employee by October 14, 2013 . Rand had been waiting for a reply from Moscow since October 14 .
 On October 17 he and Richard L Snyder of the American Embassy obtained an interview with Webster at the Police Department’s section for the registration of foreigners . The interview took place at the police department’‘I’m not a stranger,’ says Webster .
 Webster handed Snyder a signed statement renouncing his U.S. citizenship and declaring that he chose to remain in the Soviet Union . Webster had been brought to Moscow from an undisclosed address in Leningrad, Russia . Webster, who had traveled to Moscow, was brought to Russia from an
 He told Snyder and Rand that the Soviets had promised him Soviet citizenship . He said they had asked him about his personal history and motives for defecting .
 He told Snyder that he would send him his American passport as soon as he returned to Leningrad . Snyder says he will send his passport back to the U.S.
 Webster worked as a plastics technician at the Plastics Institute of Leningrad . According to official documents, Webster worked at the institute . Webster worked in Russia as a plastic technician .
 Webster said he wished to return to the U.S. in a letter to his father in March 1960 . Webster: "I wish to return home to the United States. I wish to be back in the USA"
 Webster applied to the Soviet government for an exit visa on August 5, 1960 . Webster went to the American Embassy in Moscow on May 4, 1960, and applied for a visa . Webster was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 On October 24, 1960, he was told that his request had been denied and that he should reapply in one year . He was told to reapply for a job in the next year .
 On May 8 he filled out the final papers at the American Embassy in Moscow . On May 15, 1962, he left for the U.S. two weeks ahead of Lee Harvey Oswald . He left the United States two weeks before Oswald .
 Oswald and Webster may have been mistaken for each other . The close coincidence between the movements of the two men may explain their not dissimilar appearance .
 Fritz Dieter Jaeger of the German Merchant Marine told the FBI in 1963 that he had met Oswald in Leningrad in 1961 . Jaeger said he had gone to the movies with Oswald and met him in 1961 and gone to see the movies .
 A psychologist working on assignment for the CIA might have confused Webster with Oswald . Webster was a psychologist working for CIA .
 Webster was a Russian-speaking defector who had come across a Russian speaking defector . Webster was not Oswald, but Webster was the man who had defected . Webster's defector had been mistaken for Oswald .
 The communications indicate a possible effort to conceal the extent of Oswald’s activities in the Marine Corps from the Soviets . The communications between the agencies indicate a potential effort to hide the extent .
 Oswald had been stationed in Japan, Formosa, the Philippines or any base outside the United States . A November 2, 1959, memorandum from the Office of Naval Intelligence to the FBI omits from its summary of Oswald’s Marine record .
 In a short section on American defectors to the Soviet Union she discusses (without mentioning names) the cases of Webster and one other defector . But she omits mention of Oswald .
 At the time her encounter with Oswald did not leave a strong enough impression for her to include it . She says she was not impressed enough to include the encounter .
 Oswald did not fit into either of the two main categories of defector, she says . Oswald's interview with Oswald prepared for the Warren Commission . Oswald was not a major defector .
 Only Oswald claimed to be motivated solely by his ideological beliefs . Of the several American defectors to the USSR in 1959, only Oswald said he was motivated by ideology . Oswald was the only American to defect to the Soviet Union .
 The official record of this investigation remains missing or unavailable . Official record of the investigation is missing or at least unavailable .
 The FBI inquired about it after the assassination but apparently never received it or, in any event, never turned it over to the Warren Commission . The FBI never received the FBI's request .
 In the course of his research, the Marine Corps searched its files but found no trace of the investigation . The Marine Corps was otherwise extremely cooperative, the author says .
 The Office of Naval Intelligence and the Naval Investigative Services replied to my Freedom of Information request by stating that the report of the investigation was not in their files . The report was not found in the files of the report .
 The Air Force Office of Special Investigations, which was responsible for base security at Atsugi, also denied partaking in any such investigation . Air Force also denied involvement in any investigation .
 The practice of doing net damage reports also persisted immediately after Oswald defected . The practice continued immediately after the defector defected to the UK .
 An Army sergeant defected in July 1960, and a private in August 1960 . An Army private defected from the U.S. Army .
 Army counterintelligence suspected both had had prior contact with the KGB while serving in the Army . Both were under military investigation at the time of their defection .
 Two defectors from the National Security Agency in June 1960 were also suspected of having had prior KGB connections . The two defectors were suspected to have had prior ties to the KGB .
 In all military cases where defectors had access to classified information, there was some indication of a predefection relation with the KGB . But since Soviet records are never available, such contact is never positively established .
 The traces on individuals inside the Soviet Union were done by the CIA and have become available under the Freedom of Information Act . The traces of individuals inside Soviet Union have been made available under FOIA .
 Chief Justice Warren asked for statements from Soviet citizens who might have met Oswald during his residence in that country, but they were never provided . Warren asked the Soviet Union for statements .
 In 1977 I requested permission from the Soviet Foreign Ministry to interview some alleged witnesses to Oswald’s life . In 1977, I asked permission to interview alleged witnesses . Oswald's life may have been the subject of an assassination investigation .
 Andrei Gromyko turned down by Andrei on the grounds that none of the witnesses I requested to see desired to be interviewed . After a wait of nearly six months, the request was turned down . Andrei's request was rejected on the basis that no witnesses desired being interviewed .
 Nosenko defected from the Soviet Union to the United States in 1964 . The Soviet press attache to the Washington embassy, Igor Agou, suggested to me at an informal meeting that I might speak to him . Agou had defected to the U.S. in 1964
 I had already interviewed Nosenko, but I found this an extraordinary suggestion coming from a Soviet official . I was already interviewed .
 Oswald’s account of his attempted suicide does not accord with Moscow hospital records . Oswald's account of attempted suicide is not accorded with hospital records, sources say .
 He told the examining physician there that he had no intention of returning to the U.S. He said he was not going to return to the United States .
 He was moved to a psychiatric ward for observation a day or two later . He was later moved to the psychiatric ward .
 He told the psychiatrist that he regretted his action and intended to return to the U.S. after his release from the hospital .
 The stitches were removed on October 27, and he was released on October 28 . He was released from the hospital in New York City .
 Oswald slashed both wrists and had a male interpreter, which is inconsistent with hospital records . According to Nosenko’s recollection, Oswald slashed his wrists . Oswald had an interpreter, according to the hospital records, which are inconsistent with records .
 The CIA considered the possibility that Oswald’s suicide attempt was an entire fabrication, a CIA liaison with the Warren Commission says . Oswald's suicide attempt may have been a fabrication, the officer says .
 Oswald would thus have been conveniently removed from contact with the Western world and subjected to whatever analysis or training the Soviets felt was appropriate . Oswald would have been able to have his own analysis and training .
 Another defector was also hospitalized shortly after his arrival in Moscow . This theory is supported by the fact that another defector also was hospitalized .
 According to a statement to the FBI in 1964, he spent twenty-one days in a Soviet hospital . According to his statement, he said he spent . 21 days in Soviet hospital, according to the statement .
 The CIA asked the FBI to search for the elderly American Oswald had identified in his diary as having been in his hospital ward . The CIA wanted to determine whether or not Oswald was ever actually in the hospital, the CIA said .
 Mr Kara-Patnitsky insisted he had never met Oswald or any other American when he was in the hospital . He insisted that he never saw or met Oswald .
 The scar on Oswald’s inside left wrist found upon autopsy could confirm the attempted suicide . Oswald was found to have tried to kill himself . Oswald had a scar on his inside left arm .
 Marina Oswald testified that she asked Oswald about this scar shortly after they married, but that he did not answer . Marina Oswald said she asked him about the scar but he didn't answer her .
 He never told any of his friends or relatives about the suicide attempt . The suicide attempt was an attempt to kill himself, his family and friends .
 Doctors who performed the autopsy found such a scar consistent with a suicide attempt . They couldn’t exclude the possibility that it had occurred from any number of other injuries .
 "The presence of the scar does little to confirm or dispute the suicide," says the author of the book .
 Oswald signed a statement acknowledging that the residence and travel regulations for persons without citizenship had been explained to him . Each identity card was valid for up to a year, so that in January 1960, 1961 and 1962, Oswald signed the statement .
 Before he set out, he left Marina a list of things to do in the event that he did not return . Marina left the list of what she would do if he didn't come back .
 Marina was unable to tell the Warren Commission whether Oswald might have had the MVD, the “Red Cross” that had helped him in the Soviet Union, in mind . Marina had no idea whether Oswald had the Red Cross, the "Red Cross"
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs, or MVD, was for many years the designation of the organization responsible for civil law enforcement and administration of prisons and internal controls .
 During part of its history it directed vast economic combines and forced labor camps on behalf of the Soviet state . During the Soviet era it also directed economic combines, forced labour camps and economic combines .
 In January 1960 the central or all-union MVD was abolished, and its powers were transferred to the MVDs of the several Soviet republics .
 A further change took place in the summer of 1962, when the republic MVDs were renamed Ministries for the Preservation of Public Order and Safety . The republic was renamed in 1962 .
 Oswald later wrote about a Rosa at his twenty-first birthday party . There is a Rosa Kuznetsova listed in his address book .
 The Minsk Radio and Television plant is known throughout the Union as a major producer of electronic parts and sets . The plant is located in Minsk .
 Workers are awarded thirty days vacation a year, the maximum for workers . These workers are awarded the maximum of 30 days a year .
 Automation is now employed at a fairly large number of factories, especially the war industry . Automation has been used in a large part of the industrial revolution .
 The Kollective, or intershop group, with shop or section party chiefs and foremen, are the worlds in which the Russian workers live . However for civilian use, their number of civilian use is still small .
 It seems inconsistent with reports of Russian fear of contact with Westerners that Oswald’s fellow workers would have received him so enthusiastically . Oswald's fellow workers were enthusiastic, the author says .
 Oswald worked at the Byelorussian radio and TV plant during the time Oswald worked there . Workers went out of their way to avoid being seen with Oswald, a defector to the United States says .
 Communist party secretary issues instructions as to what time demonstrators are to arrive . Directives are passed down the communist party line until they reach the factory shop .
 Names are taken well in advance of the march so that late comers and absentees may be duly noted, neither one is allowed . At the arrival point, names must be taken well .
 At the collection point, signs, drums, and flags were distributed and marchers formed in ranks .
 In the city of Minsk on such days, all roads are closed by driving trucks across them, except the prescribed route . In Minsk, trucks must drive across the roads, except one of them .
 This, as well as meticulous attention to attendance, insures a 90 9c turnout of the entire population . This is due to a 90-9c turnout .
 Alexander Romanovich Ziger and his family remained close to Oswald throughout his stay in Minsk . They continued to correspond until at least September 1962 . Ziger's family and Oswald's wife remained close .
 He returned to his homeland in 1956 with his wife and two Argentina-born daughters . He moved to Argentina in 1956 and returned to the country in 1956 .
 He reportedly spoke English with an American accent, having worked for an American company in Argentina . He reportedly worked for the American company .
 The key person in the shop, as everyone appreciates, is Comrade Liebezen, 45 years old, the party-secretary . The key to the shop is the key to success, says the party leader .
 During the war, he was for a short time a tankest , but his talents seemed to have been too good for that job . He was made a military policeman after the war so he started at this newly built factory .
 This movement was started under Stalin a decade ago in order to get the most out of the extreme patriotism driven into Soviet children at an early age . It was started by Stalin under the Soviet government in the 1980s .
 The provenance of the thirty-page manuscript on Soviet life that Oswald brought back to the U.S. with him in June 1962 is not clear . Oswald returned to the United States with the manuscript in June .
 The analysis of Oswald’s handwriting here and elsewhere was done for me by Thea Stein Lewinson, a psychologist who specializes in using handwriting as a diagnostic tool for determining states of mind . Oswald's handwriting was analyzed by a psychologist .
 She generally does this diagnosis for other psychologists and psychiatrists who send her samples of their patients’ handwriting . She says she does it for others who send samples to her .
 Oswald had written these documents at separate sittings or in one continuous session, she says . She also asked her to determine whether Oswald was ever writing from dictation or copying from other documents .
 The downing of the U-2 on May Day, 1960, and of the RB-47 in July of that year provided the Soviet press with evidence for its anti-American stands on a number of matters . The U.2 was the first U.S. aircraft to be
 The repercussions of the incidents were made to extend far beyond the issue of espionage into indictments of capitalism’s inherent immorality, cruelty and warmongering . The repercussions extended far beyond espionage to indictment of capitalism .
 As the furor over the espionage flights finally died down in early 1961, the Berlin crisis began to occupy the headlines . Berlin crisis became the focus of the story in 1961 .
 Soviet news was full of reports that “aggressive German militarism” was on the rise in West Germany . As summer approached, Soviet news reported that ‘aggressive German militaryism’ was on its rise .
 To the reader of the Soviet press during this period, war with the Western nations, including the United States, was all but imminent . War with the West, including U.S. and the U.K., would have all but likely been inevitable .
 Oswald could not have avoided the virulent anti-Americanism in the Soviet press in 1960 and 1961 . He must have been moved by it one way or another, says the historian .
 Oswald’s membership in a hunting club might also have been an effective means of covering the fact that he was receiving some kind of instructions or training from Soviet authorities . Oswald's membership may have been a cover for the Soviet government .
 This particular training school, well known to citizens of Minsk because of its one-way windows and the high stone wall surrounding it, was identified to me by a former engineer who defected to the United States in 1968 .
 In 1964 the CIA informed the Warren Commission that it had no firm evidence that such a training facility existed in Minsk . The Warren Commission found no evidence of the training facility in the country .
 The engineer is sure he pointed it out to his CIA debriefing officer in 1968 . The engineer says he pointed out the mistake to his debriefer officer .
 On arrival in Japan in 1957, he told fellow Marines that he had never had sex with a woman . On arriving in Japan, he said that he'd never had a woman in the Marines .
 When he returned to California in 1959, he remained celibate so far as is known . Although he subsequently apparently had a girlfriend in Japan, he apparently had no girlfriend in 1959 .
 The section about Francis Gary Powers is based on personal interviews with Powers and on his book, Operation Overflight . Chapter V, Wreck of “Race Car” is Chapter V .
 The importance of the U-2 to intelligence was confirmed to me by Richard Bissell, Richard Helms and Kelly Johnson, the U.2's designer of the plane . The U.S. Air Force One was the first to carry out the mission to the Soviet Union in the
 The letters from Oswald to his brother Robert are all reproduced in the Warren Commission exhibits . Oswald's letters from his brother were all reproduced . The Warren Commission is investigating the assassination of President Kennedy .
 The assessment of the Soviet press coverage of the U-2 was done by an examination of Pravda and its Byelorussian edition during the relevant period . The assessment was done through an examination by Pravd and its byelorussia edition .
 Khrushchev and the Soviet press made a major propaganda point of this poisoned needle . The Soviet press was a major part of this propaganda point .
 A photograph of the poison pin was included in the May exhibit of U-2 memorabilia in Moscow . A photo of the pin was also included in a May exhibit in Moscow, Russia .
 Lieutenant Robert Gulyassi, who had commanded Oswald’s radar crew at Atsugi, said in 1977 that he remembered Powers calling in over the radio in 1958-59 and heard him calling in .
 Marina, Marina, was supposedly honeymooning with her in Minsk in 1961 . In 1962 he was frantically preparing his return to the U.S. Marina says he was preparing to return to Russia in 1962 .
 Oswald refused to take a polygraph test after returning from the Soviet Union, FBI says . FBI didn't mention any mention of the fact that Oswald had been asked to take the test . Oswald was the only person to be interviewed by the FBI in the case . Oswald, who was killed
 Schweiker Committee published its final report in 1976 . This fact did not become known until the Schweiker committee's final report was published by 1976 .
 Copies of FBI Agent John W Fain’s report on his interviews with Robert and Marquerite Oswald were obtained from the National Archives . Fain interviewed Oswald and Oswald at the time of the September 4, 1945 .
 Richard Snyder described for me in a personal interview his reaction to getting a letter from Oswald in February 1961 . Snyder describes for me how he reacted to the letter . Snyder: "It was a very difficult time for me to think of Oswald"
 The text of this letter and all the other correspondence between Oswald and the embassy in Moscow can be found among the Warren Commission exhibits . Oswald wrote the letter to the embassy, which is now in Moscow .
 For a more contemporaneous account of Snyder's handling of Oswald’s repatriation, I consulted his Warren Commission testimony and his many State Department reports . For more of the story, you can read Snyder's testimony and reports from the Warren Commission .
 The section on Oswald’s interaction with Katherine Mallory comes from a personal interview with Miss Mallory . The section of the interview comes from an interview with Mallory herself .
 Soviet authorities would intercept letters they suspected might be detrimental or harmful, according to KGB defector Anatoli Golitsin . Soviet authorities often intercepted letters suspected to be harmful or harmful . The letters were often intercepted by Soviet authorities .
 Oswald claimed to have sent a letter to the U.S. Embassy in December 1960 never arrived, suggesting that Soviet authorities did not want Oswald to begin the process of repatriation at that time . Another letter Oswald said he sent to the United States Embassy never arrived .
 Katherine Mallory cannot swear it was Oswald that she met in Minsk . Mallory says she cannot swear she met Oswald in the Soviet Union .
 After the assassination, her mother suggested that the American Katherine had written home about might be Oswald . Miss Mallory herself said she couldn’t be absolutely positive .
 When the FBI contacted her in January 1964, they showed her many pictures of Oswald . She agreed that the man she had met was Oswald . Of all American defectors to the Soviet Union, only Oswald could have been in Minsk in March 1961 .
 Monica Kramer accidentally photographed Oswald in Minsk while taking a picture of the Palace of Culture . Monica Kramer took the picture of Oswald in August 1961 . The picture was taken by an American tourist, Monica Kramer .
 Oswald signed a statement at the time he was first given permission to stay in the Soviet Union . Oswald said he had been told the travel regulations and penalties for violating them had been explained to him .
 He was correct in assuming that a person in his position would require permission to travel within the Soviet Union .
 In 1964 the CIA advised the Warren Commission that bearers of a Soviet “passport for foreigners” were required to obtain travel authorization from the Visa and Registration Department (or Passport Registration Department) in smaller towns . In 1964, the CIA told the Warren .
 In the FBI’s interrogation of Nosenko, he was asked whether an individual could travel between cities in the Soviet Union without official permission, he answered, “Certainly,” which was technically correct . In the interview, he said he was traveling between cities without official
 CIA instantly pointed out that Nosenko’s answer referred to Soviet citizens, not to a person like Oswald who carried a stateless passport . The CIA said that the answer was irrelevant to the issue at hand . Oswald was a Soviet citizen .
 The story of Marina’s family and early life was gleaned from her testimony before the Warren Commission and from the reports of her many interviews with the FBI and Secret Service . Marina's story is told in this article .
 The section on the CIA's concerns regarding Marina’s identity derives from documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act . The section is based on documents obtained from the FOIA obtained by the government .
 CIA’s Soviet specialists prepared as a guide for the Warren Commission to use in questioning Marina . They include a set of probing questions prepared by the CIA's Soviet specialists . The Warren Commission will use the questions to question Marina .
 The only other source of information about Marina’s life is the new biography Marina and Lee .
 The Soviets have strictly retained the Russian custom of the patronymic . Every person's middle name consists of a form of the father’s first name, which indicates the person's paternity . The Soviet Union has retained the custom .
 Marina did not offer any explanation to Warren Commission for use of patronymic Nikolaevna . Since her surname, Prusakova, is her mother’s maiden name, commission assumed she was born out of wedlock .
 Marina told her biographer that her father’s name was Nicolai Didenko, but offered no explanation of why she withheld this from the Warren Commission . Later Marina said she did not know her father's name, but gave no explanation to the Warren .
 Marina’s mother Marina had several children with her mother . There is some confusion over how many children Marina's mother actually had .
 It's possible that a third child was born of this marriage sometime after 1949 . It is possible that the couple had another child in 1949 .
 The CIA was interested in the seeming ease of Medvedev’s move from Zguritsa to Leningrad, Russia . The CIA wanted to know how easy it was to move from the city to the Russian capital .
 Counterintelligence analysts at the CIA were amazed that Marina had quit her first job after only one day . Marina was amazed that she quit her job as a counterintelligence analyst after just one day.
 Whether or not there exists a right to a three-day trial period such as Mrs. Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy-Jacqueline is asked whether or not she has a trial period of three days .
 Marina provided a few details about her work at the hospital . Marina provided the FBI and the Warren Commission with few details of her work .
 She declined to give the names of her supervisor and co-workers . She was afraid of retribution against the people with whom she had worked .
 Marina has said that her aunt and uncle refused to accept any contribution toward the cost of her living expenses . Marina said that she is not allowed to receive any salary .
 Oswald shunned the nickname Lev because it is considered primarily a Jewish name . It is possible, however, that he shunned it because of his Jewish heritage . Oswald's nickname Lev may have been Lev .
 He himself used the nickname Alik because of all the letters he signed that way . In any case, we know that he himself used it .
 Marina Oswald's apartment was located in Minsk, Belarus, more than two years before she met her future husband . Marina later told the FBI that she had first noticed the building on a vacation trip to Minsk two years earlier . Oswald's wife Marina Oswald said she first saw the building
 She had admired balconies with their lovely river views, never imagined that she would ever live in one of them . At that time she had admired balcony views .
 Marina Oswald first learned of her husband’s plan to return to the U.S. It has not yet been determined exactly when she learned of his return . Oswald's wife is believed to be in a coma in Cuba .
 In her testimony before the Warren Commission she claimed not to have known about Oswald’s plan to repatriate until a month after their marriage . She said she didn't know about Oswald's plan to return home until after a month of marriage .
 Oswald had told his wife that it was impossible for him to return to the U.S. Oswald had given up his documents at the American Embassy and stated publicly his intention of becoming a Soviet citizen . She said that this discovery came as a surprise in light of a conversation they had had
 James Allen Mintkenbaugh was brought to the Soviet Union for training in espionage techniques in September 1959 . He was asked to marry a Soviet agent whom Soviet intelligence wanted to establish in the Washington, D.C., area .
 When Marguerite Oswald testified before the commission, she wondered aloud why her daughter-in-law had both the names Nikolaevna and Prusakova .
 The material in this chapter derives largely from personal interviews with American Embassy and State Department personnel . Chapter VIII, The Russian Gambit—Accepted SOURCE NOTES .
 Alex Davison, as well as the testimony some of these witnesses gave to the Warren Commission, will appear in a new documentary, "The Warren Commission" The Warren Commission will hear testimony from some of the key witnesses .
 The information regarding the CIA’s mail cover of correspondence between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is described in the Hearings Before the Senate Select Committee .
 Letters Oswald wrote to Senator Tower, John Connally, and the Naval Discharge Review Board can be found in Volume XXII of the Warren Commission . Oswald wrote the letters to the Senate and Naval Discharges Review Board .
 Oswald’s writings, including the notes he wrote on Holland American line stationery, can be found in Volume XVI of the Warren Commission . Other of Oswald's writings, which include the notes, are found in volume XVI of Warren Commission Volume XVI .
 The analysis of Oswald’s handwriting was done for me by Thea Stein Le win son . Oswald's handwriting was analyzed by Stein Lewin's son .
 The State Department never resolved the issue of whether Oswald could have traveled from Minsk to Moscow without permission . Oswald traveled to Minsk in 1961 without permission from the U.S. State Dept. never resolved whether Oswald was allowed to travel to Moscow .
 Another defector was fined for not getting permission to go from Odessa to Moscow . This was based on the case of another American defector who was fined in Odessa .
 All of Marina’s co-workers were informed of her visit to the American Embassy before she returned to Minsk, according to her testimony . The Soviets must, in fact, have known of Oswald's trip, she testified .
 Marina told her biographer that Oswald had brought with him to Moscow, a letter from Alexander Ziger to the Embassy of Argentina . According to the version, Marina told the biographer, Priscilla Johnson McMillan, Oswald brought the letter with him .
 Oswald had agreed to mail this letter from the American Embassy . Since Soviet citizens are prohibited from contacting foreign embassies, Oswald agreed to send it to the U.S. Embassy .
 Marina Marina does not explain why Oswald, who himself was in Moscow illegally, would undertake such a mission . Marina says she does not know why Oswald would have carried out the mission .
 Oswald referred in his 1961 manuscript to the film festival then going on in Moscow, noting that the anti-Stalinist film Clear Sky had won first prize in the competition . Oswald later referred to the festival in which Clear Sky took first prize .
 The Hotel Berlin is one of the two main hotels used by the KGB to keep foreigners under surveillance . The Metropole is the other main hotel used to spy on foreigners . Hotel Berlin was one of two main hotel rooms used by KGB in Berlin .
 Webster denied to the State Department that he had ever met or spoken with Oswald . Webster himself denied to State Dept. that he ever met Oswald or spoke with him .
 Foreign national was obliged to depart the USSR alone and either return to escort his wife out, or arrange for her exit while he was still abroad . In almost every case available for review, the foreign national was forced to leave the country alone .
 The CIA pointed out later in the same report that the majority of the cases reviewed bore little similarity to the Oswalds . None involved a defector who married prior to repatriating .
 Marina's uncle, Yuri Mikhailov, was married to Polina Vasilyevna Mikhailova, who was Marina's mother’s sister . This uncle was also married to Marina's mom's sister, who is Marina's aunt and sister .
 According to Marina, he held a “very responsible and influential position” in the building trades program . Marina: He was a ‘responsible and influential’ figure in the program .
 Marina stayed in a comfortable three-room apartment when she visited her husband's home . The apartment was one of the perquisites of his job as a social worker .
 Marina was already four months pregnant when she made the trip to Kharkov . She spent most of her time there resting and relaxing .
 Marina later told the FBI that her Kharkov trip was of three weeks' duration . She returned five days after Oswald’s birthday, which would be October 23 . Marina later said she had returned to Russia five days later .
 Oswald said Marina was expected back on the twentyninth, while in his diary he says she returned on November 2 . In a letter to his mother Oswald said she was expected to return on the 31st .
 The handwriting analysis of this letter to Connally indicates that it was spontaneously written . It was written spontaneously, according to handwriting analysis .
 Oswald apparently was under great pressure to do something about his discharge and felt himself in a difficult predicament . Oswald apparently felt himself under pressure to act .
 The handwriting suggests that he was venting considerable anger toward Connally . Further, stresses in the handwriting suggest that Connally was angry .
 Compared to the letter to Connally on the same subject, this letter is almost tranquil . The letter is nearly tranquil compared to the same letter Connally wrote to him .
 A handwriting analysis of the document indicates that it was prepared under active tutelage by a second party . The handwriting analysis indicates that the document was prepared by a third party .
 Oswald seemed to be put under great pressure to succeed—e to reverse his discharge . In writing it, Oswald seemed . to succeed . Oswald seems to have been put under . great pressure. to succeed.
 June Marina Oswald wants her name to be June Marina Marina Oswald . But bureaucrats say her middle name must be the same as her first name .
 The handwriting analysis leaves little doubt that this ‘diary’ was prepared at one time rather than reflected separate entries on different dates . ‘The handwriting analysis left little doubt’ that this diary was prepared one time .
 Titovets was in his fourth year at the Medical Institute and could speak English very well . They met at the age of 16 when they met each other at the Institute of Medicine in Moscow, Russia .
 He remained in contact with Oswald until at least September 13, 1963, the date of his last known letter . Oswald's last known known letter is a letter from the same date .
 Prusakov only advised Oswald and his wife not to speak critical of the U.S. According to the account furnished the CIA by Yuri Nosenko, he had only advised them to not speak critically of the United States .
 If they were given any further briefing in Minsk, Nosenko omitted to mention it . If they had been given any more briefing, he would not mention it.
 The Oswalds were seen off by Pavel Golovachev and probably by Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Oswalds . Pavel and Mrs Golovovachev were also likely to have seen them off .
 Pavel, in a letter to the Oswalds addressed to Davenport Street, Fort Worth, dated July 4, 1962, states that he is enclosing the photos he took . Pavel was in Minsk when he took the photos when he was leaving Minsk in 1962 .
 He also refers to Erich Titovets, who regretted missing seeing the Oswalds off . Erich was also said to regret missing seeing them off .
 Pavel was not at home the day they left, Pavel writes, and did not know they were leaving . Pavel writes that he was not there at the time and didn't know he was leaving .
 Oswald had written in his diary in March that he intended to wait until the last minute to tell Titovets that he was leaving the Soviet Union . Oswald had planned to wait till the end of the year to tell her about his plans .
 Davison was expelled by Soviet authorities from Moscow because he was alleged to have acted as the contact for the CIA with Colonel Oleg Penkovskiy, who was arrested by the Soviets in March 1963 for spying and was subsequently executed . Davison's expulsion from Moscow was due to be
 Oswalds’ total savings amounted to $64.29 at this point, or approximately 90 rubles . The Oswalds' savings were supposedly included the money they received for their furniture and personal effects in Minsk .
 It was cut off after his communication with the American Embassy in February 1961 . The American Embassy cut off his communications with the embassy .
 They were married ten months while she was salaried, May 1961 through March 1962, for a total of 4,500 . The couple were married for ten months during that time .
 Marina said they were first registered at the Hotel Ostankino but later moved to the Hotel Berlin . Marina said the couple moved from the hotel to the hotel where they registered .
 Oswald never gave his name to the couple but was identified by them in 1964 from photographs . Oswald's name was never given to them but they identified him in 1964 .
 In his letter, Pavel Golovachev expressed regrets at missing them . He’d received their card informing him that they would be passing through Minsk too late, because it had been addressed wrong .
 Marina Prusakova, also referred to their trip through Minsk in a letter to Marina . The couple's trip to Minsk was referred to as a trip through the city .
 She explained that her husband had been away on a business trip . She said she hadn't wanted to go to the station alone at that hour .
 Other foreign travelers have complained about having had their written material confiscated at the border .
 Oswald wrote about the manuscript to his mother on March 27, 1962 . The KGB presumably knew Oswald would be earning this manuscript out since he wrote about it to her .
 He had “about fifty pages of longhand notes” about his trip to Russia that he would consider turning into a “story” on his return, he said .
 Even Oswald stated that international mail was read by Soviet authorities . Even Oswald said that even Soviet authorities read international mail .
 The handwriting of this document suggests that Oswald wrote these answers in an upset frame of mind . Oswald wrote the answers in a 'upset' frame of his mind, according to the document .
 He apparently did not like the job and showed impatience and carelessness in writing down the answers . He apparently showed his impatience .
 Analysis: Near the end, according to this analysis, he became particularly rebellious toward the task . The analysis says that near the end of his life he became more rebellious .
 Handwriting analysis shows that both documents were written under conditions where wave and motor vibration existed . Analysis shows both documents written under vibration conditions .
 The Warren Commission was not able to locate any witness, other than Marina, who saw him aboard the SS Maasdam . Marina was the last witness to see him on board the ship .
 Worth and their relations with Oswald’s family derives from the testimony of Marguerite, Marina, and Robert Oswald . Worth and Oswald's relations with the family are based on testimony from Robert Oswald's book Lee . Worth's relationship with Oswald's family is based on the testimony from
 Oswald’s efforts to have his manuscript typed were described for me by his typist, Miss Pauline Bates . Mr Bates' efforts were described by Miss Bates as his efforts to be typed .
 I learned about his contacts with the Russian community in Dallas and Ft.W. D.C. and Dallas, Texas . I also learned about the contacts he has with the Dallas community .
 Interviews with Paul Gregory, Elena Hall, Max Clark, Ilya Mamantov, Bishop Dimitri, and Lydia Dymitruk . Interviews are based on testimony given to the Warren Commission .
 The portions on the FBI’s interest in Oswald come from a memorandum prepared by the FBI for the Warren Commission and from the Schweiker report . The portions of the memo on Oswald's interest are based on a memorandum from the FBI .
 I reviewed the notes of Special Agents John Fain and Tom Carter of the FBI on their interview with Oswald . Oswald was interviewed by the FBI in the days before the assassination .
 The speculation that Oswald may have been given a mission by the Soviets was discussed with me by Thomas Fox of the Defense Intelligence Agency . Thomas Fox also discussed the possibility of a mission to Oswald .
 The portions on the Oswalds’ correspondence with the Soviet Embassy in Washington comes from a document prepared by the CIA . The document was obtained under the Freedom of Information Act . The portions of the document were obtained under FOI .
 The information on Osw'ald’s dealings with the Texas Employment Commission is taken from FBI interviews and from the testimony of Mrs. Osw’ald . The information is based on interviews with the FBI and from testimony from her family .
 F'N Pierre told Harris that he left the Oswalds at the railroad station, assuming that they would soon be departing by train . F’N Pierre said he left them at the train station, thinking they would be soon leaving by train.
 These details were not included in FBI Agent Hopkin’s report of this interview . FBI agent Hopkin says the details of the incident were not disclosed .
 Oswald may have taken a train to Washington, D.C., that evening . It is possible that Oswald took a train that evening to Washington .
 A psychologist on assignment for the CIA claimed to have interviewed a Russian defector at the Roger Smith Hotel who resembled Oswald . A psychologist code-named Cato on assignment said he interviewed a defector .
 Oswald could have returned in time to visit the Welfare Department the following morning . Oswald could then have returned to the welfare department the next morning .
 Oswald himself blamed the hair loss on the severe Russian winters . His brother later speculated that it might have been caused by medical or shock treatments .
 Robert was not questioned extensively about the manuscript he read, nor was his typewriter ever analyzed to see if it corresponded with the typing Oswald had done . Robert's typewriter was never analyzed to compare it with Oswald's typing .
 There is nowhere any indication that Oswald had an English-language typewriter, or any typewriter for that matter, while in the Soviet Union . Oswald had a typewriter in the USSR .
 A typewriting analysis done for me by Joseph P McNally indicates that only ten pages of the forty-page manuscript found after Oswald’s death were typed by Mrs. Oswald . Only ten pages were typed .
 This machine was never located or identified by the FBI or Warren Commission . It was never identified by either of the two .
 Peter Paul Gregory' was born in Chita, Siberia, and came to the United States in 1923 after a two-year residence in Japan . Gregory' came to America in 1923 and died in 1946 .
 Gregory was a consulting geologist for several oil companies . He was chairman of a group of engineers supervising activities at a Pecos County, Texas, oilfield . Gregory is a resident of Fort Worth .
 In mid-July John Tackett, a reporter for the Fort Worth Press, heard that Oswald had brought some notes out of Russia with him . He attempted to contact Oswald through his brother and Peter Paul Gregory . Oswald's notes were found in the book .
 He wrote Oswald a long letter asking him to contact him, but it went unanswered . Finally, on June 22, he wrote him a letter asking for him to come forward .
 The fact that Osw'ald was asked and refused to take a lie-detector test was not acknowledged by the F BI until 1975 . It was published in the report of the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities .
 The commission promised to “check out’s’ allegations, but it never did . The commission never did, and the commission never found out .
 Marguerite Oswald was convinced that Marina could speak and understand a considerable amount of English at the time of her arrival in the United States . Marina's mother was convinced she could speak English .
 Oswald insisted that his wife knew no English and spoke to her only in Russian . Oswald, however, insisted that he spoke to his wife in Russian only in English . Oswald's wife was killed in the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Peter Gregory was questioned by Peter Gregory on why he did not help Marina learn English . When questioned he said he was not helping her learn English, he said: 'I'm not sure why I'm not helping Marina'
 Oswald said he had no objection to Marina’s learning it, but he would not help her because he was afraid of losing his fluency in Russian . Oswald said that he would help her learn it but would not be able to help her .
 There is some dispute about how content the various participants were with this living arrangement . There is also some dispute over how content some participants were .
 Ramon Mercador spent almost five years creating a legend for himself as Jacques Mornard, a Belgian . Mercador was the assassin of Trotsky, and spent the rest of his life in Belgium .
 Isaac Don Levine’s The Mind of an Assassin . For a detailed examination of the case and a tracing of the assassin through the phases of the legend building, see Isaac Don . Levine's The Mind Of an Assassin.
 The FBI decided against a separate investigation of Marina Oswald because they felt that her activities would be adequately surveyed in the ongoing investigation of her husband . Oswald investigation was about to be terminated when the investigation was terminated in 1975 .
 William Colby was interviewed by Dan Rather and Les Midgely of CBS News in 1976 . Colby's interview with Dan Rather was broadcast on CBS News on October 1, 1976 .
 Thomas Fox, former chief of counterintelligence for the Defense Intelligence Agency, said in 1977 that he found it inconceivable that the CIA and other friendly intelligence services would not have an operational interest in ascertaining details about the levels of interrogation to which Oswald was subjected .
 Such information would be necessary if any of these agencies had decided to “plant” a fake defector on the Russians . Such information is necessary if the agencies decide to ‘plant’ a fake .
 Psychologist recalls being asked by CIA case officer to examine an American recently returned from the Soviet Union in 1962 . Psychologist says he was asked to examine a recently returned American .
 He met the American at the roof garden of the Roger Smith Hotel in Moscow . He heard a story of defecting to the Soviet Union several years before, marrying a Russian woman .
 He noted that this defector was extremely self-centered, almost to the point of being a megalomaniac . He said he was unpleasant in the way he asserted himself .
 Robert Edward Webster defected and returned at almost the same time as Oswald . When I discussed this debriefing with him, he became uncertain whether the person he examined was Oswald or Webster . However, when I told him that another American, Robert . Edward Webster, had defected,
 The psychologist was shown photographs of both Webster and Oswald, but was unable to distinguish between them . He was then shown photos of both Oswald and Webster, but couldn't distinguish them .
 If the CIA had enough interest to debrief one American who had redefected, it would seem logical that it would want to examine the second American who redefected less than one month later so that it could corroborate their experiences .
 She left the Sov iet Union in 1934 with the German Army and traveled to Germany by way of Poland . She was a member of the Nazi Party in the early 1930s .
 Her husband, Teofil, had been born in Poland and attended two universities . He qualified as a professor of philosophy and a teacher of physical education .
 The Mellers came to the United States in 1952 as refugees and moved to Dallas shortly after . They moved to the U.S. as refugees .
 Her husband pursued neither of his two vocations and instead worked for twelve years for a Dallas department store . His wife says he has been married for more than a decade .
 In the early 1920s he was an office boy for the American Relief Commission in New York City . He was a member of the Commission in the 1920s .
 When the office closed in 1923, Bouhe’s supervisors arranged for him to emigrate to the United States . Bouhe's supervisors arranged to him emigrate in 1923 .
 Elena A Hall was born in 1926 in Teheran, Iran, of Russian parents, who had fled to Iran in 1920 to escape the Communists . She was born to Russian parents .
 In 1959 she met her future husband, John Hall, who convinced her to marry him and go to Texas rather than Iran . She met him in Texas and married him in 1959 .
 Because of De Mohrenschildt’s history of relations with intelligence agencies and his close relationship with Oswald, I conducted an extensive investigation into his life . Chapter X, The Handler. Chapter X: The Handler . Chapter XI: De Mohranschildt's life is based on
 In the course of this research, I interviewed dozens of De Mohrenschildt’s friends, business associates, and relatives .
 Hundreds of pages of material on De Mohrenschildt compiled by the various intelligence agencies released under the Freedom of Information Act .
 On two separate occasions, I met with De Mohrenschildt, the first in Dallas in the spring of 1976, and the second in Palm Beach in March 1977 .
 The sections in this chapter on De Mohrenschildt and Oswald’s association with Admiral and Mrs. Mrs. De Mohranschildt are discussed . The sections on this chapter include the sections in which they discuss the relationship between the two men .
 De Mohrensehildt told the FBI in one of his original interviews in Haiti that he had met Oswald through George Bouhe or Max Clark, but both Bouhe and Clark have stated that they were not present at the original meeting between Oswald .
 Bouhe did say that he might have been the one to give De Mohrensehildt Oswald’s address . Bouhe says he may have been one of the ones who gave the address to Oswald .
 In his interview with the author, De Mohrensehildt was vague, again suggesting that he met the Oswalds in Orlov’s company .
 Colonel David L Schurger owned the house in Farmers Branch between 1954 and 1958 . He designed part of the glider program in World War II and served in Air Force intelligence .
 De Mohrensehildt was acquainted with Schurger during this period, but he did not contribute to the design of the pool or landscaping . Schurger says he might have helped with the barbecue .
 De Mohrenschildt was never officially involved in the case . For undisclosed reasons, he was not officially involved for undisclosed reasons .
 De Mohrensehildt was using Matsukata only as a channel for communicating with his father, who he claimed was then living in Germany . He claimed to have been able to reach out to his father in Japan .
 The intelligence war in Mexico during this period is discussed in William Stevenson’s A Man Called Intrepid . William Stevenson's book A Man called Intruder is published in Mexico .
 De Mohrensehildt attributed the expulsion to the fact he was having an affair with the mistress of the President of Mexico, rather than to any subversive activity on his part .
 ONI investigation is listed in CIA summary records on De Mohrensehildt . The Navy denies it has any record of this .
 He married Dorothy Romagne Pierson, an heiress, in Palm Beach in 1944 . He had a daughter, Alexandra, on Christmas Day of that year . He was divorced by his wife in 1945 .
 De Mohrenschildt died in 1977 at the age of his death in 1977 . This version of this article is based on the work of Jim Savage, a friend of the famous explorer .
 The Warren Commission had access to the extensive files both the CIA and FBI had on De Mohrensehildt, including those quoted in this chapter .
 Mikoyan was shocked that a Russian-speaking person had somehow got through his security and quickly drew away from her . De Mohrenschildt was shocked by the incident and said he was shocked .
 The period of time in Guatemala could only be dated only from November 1960, when he left Mexico and turned in his tourist card .
 Bruton has no recollection of discussing Oswald with De Mohrenschildt, though he states that it is certainly possible that he did . Bruton says he did not recall discussing Oswald in the 1930s .
 Bruton were questioned by the FBI, Secret Service, Warren Commission, or any other investigation agency . Bruton was a member of the Warren Commission. Bruton died at the age of 92 in 1966 . Brutan was the only person to be interviewed by the Secret Service or the FBI
 Jeanne De Mohrenschildt later told her husband that she had come across these crosses while searching through bureau drawers in the Bruton home and later told him about them .
 De Mohrenschildt’s assertions about his meeting with J Walter Moore have not been confirmed, denied or commented on by Moore . Moore has not commented on the matter .
 CIA policy prohibits agents from commenting to journalists, says CIA spokesman . CIA policy forbids agents from speaking to journalists .
 De Mohrenschildt's claim that he would not have continued associating with Oswald, without Moore’s assurance that he was “harmless,” was made in his last interview with me on March 29, 1977, about three hours before he committed suicide . De
 De Mohrenschildt suspected that there were other break-ins in the years that followed . The break-in was the first of its kind in the area .
 When he lived in Haiti in 1964, he was certain that his home was searched because of his relations with a Kuwaiti sheikh named Mohammed Fayad .
 The section on Oswald's employment at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall grew out of interviews with Louise Latham of the Texas Employment Commission and Oswald’s fellow employees, including Jack Bowen, Dennis Ofstein, Dennis Calverley .
 Alexandra De Mohrenschildt Taylor remembers that her father w r as involved in arranging Oswald’s job in Dallas . Jeanne De Mohranschildt insists that her husband helped him get his job .
 The lack of security is corroborated by other former employees, including Dennis Ofstein and Jack Bow r en .
 The president of the company testified before the Warren Commission that the security procedures were enforced . Robert Stovall, the president, testified that Oswald would not have had access to the classified materials .
 All the employees who were interviewed insisted that security procedures were not enforced . However, all the employees insisted that the security procedures weren't enforced .
 Calverley claims the employees were instructed not to discuss with anyone Oswald’s access to classified material . The firm was instructed to withhold classified material from Oswald's access, presumably because it could endanger the firm's contracts with government .
 Bowen’s real name was John Caesar Grossi, but since he had been convicted of bank robbery and served time in prison, he frequently changed his name . Bowen was convicted of a bank robbery, but he often changed names frequently .
 Marina, strictly speaking, was from Arkhangelsk and Leningrad, neither of which is in Byelorussia . Marina was born in Russia, but she is not in the country's borders .
 Leonard Calverley, who was questioned by the FBI about the leather pouch, asked never to discuss the interview with anyone . He recalls finding some false identification papers Oswald had apparently reproduced .
 During the month of October Gary Taylor presumed that Oswald was living at the YMCA since he often dropped him off there . Oswald was found dead at the end of that month .
 The October 27 meeting took place after De Mohrenschildt had dinner with Dabney Austin and his wife . The meeting was the first meeting between Oswald and the Austin family . Oswald was the son of a prominent New York businessman .
 The Christmas party at Declan Ford’s house was described for me by Lev Aronson, Yaeko Okui and the De Mohrenschildts . Chapter XII, Out of Control, is out of control . Chapter 12, Out Of Control .
 George Bouhe and Katya and Declan Ford testify about the case . Additional details were taken from the testimony of George Bouhes and Katyya . The case is set to be re-opened in New York City .
 Oswald’s political activities in early 1963, including his correspondence and reading material, is documented in numerous Warren Commission exhibits . Oswald's political activities, including correspondence, reading material is documented .
 The gatherings at De Mohrenschildt's and Everett Glover’s were described for me by those present . Betty MacDonald, Norman and Elke Fredricksen, Volkmar Schmidt, and Ruth Paine, were present .
 Information on the backgrounds of Ruth and Michael Paine comes from FBI reports obtained from the National Archives . Paine and Paine were married at the time of their deaths .
 Oswald and Marina had copies or had written on any of them . It was not known at the time, however, that Oswald or Marina had made copies of any of the originals .
 De Mohrenschildt gave me permission to see his copy of the picture with the inscriptions that Oswald and Marina had written on it . Oswald's wife, Marina, wrote inscriptions on the picture .
 Oswald's attempt to assassinate General Walker is well documented in the Warren Commission’s Report . Oswald attempted to kill General Walker in an attempt to kill him .
 The Shark and the Sardine is a long tendentious and unrelenting attack on U.S. policy toward Cuba . It accuses the Kennedy administration of everything from political assassination to economic sabotage .
 Added to $63 he had brought back with him from Russia, this makes a total of $1,516 for this period . Added to the $63 brought back from Russia he had returned $63 .
 This makes a total of $654.41 in known expenses, which left him with $861.59 . This makes him have $862.59, leaving him with more than $700,000 .
 Oswald would have had to have bought food, clothing, bus fares, postage, drugs and other supplies for a family of three . Out of $53.32 a month then, Oswald would've had to buy food, clothes, bus fare, postage and drugs .
 Oswald voiced his opinions to Schmidt . The opinions that Oswald voiced to Schmidt seemed to echo what he was reading in the Militant . Oswald subscribed to the magazine he subscribed to .
 The January 21 Militant reprinted portions of a speech by Fidel Castro in which he denounced President Kennedy as a “vulgar pirate chieftain’s” guilty of murder and sabotage . President Kennedy was found guilty of murdering and sabotage, the Militant said .
 The experiments had been interrupted in 1944, when Kuertemayer had become involved in the plot to assassinate Hitler and had been forced into hiding from the Nazis . The experiments were interrupted by the discovery of the plot in 1944 .
 Oswald had earlier sought employment from the man from whom he had sought employment . The other guests included Chaim Richmond, a Dallas nuclear physicist, and Samuel Ballen . Ballen was Ballen's employer .
 Glover suggests, though his memory is admittedly hazy, that Schmidt was present at that gathering, but Schmidt categorically denies it . Glover also suggests that Schmidt also was present, but he says he was not .
 On October 8, 1962, Marina and Oswald both moved from Mercedes Street in Fort Worth to an unknown address . Marina then moved to Elena Hall’s in . Fort Worth, George De Mohrenschildt’�s, Declan Ford’'s, and Anna Ray
 Oswald then moved to the YMCA between October 15 and 19 and to another unknown residence from October 20 to November 4 . Oswald moved to an unknown residence between October 20 and November 4, according to reports .
 Oswald and Marina moved to Elsbeth Street on November 4, though Marina left again almost immediately, not to return until November 18 . Marina returned to her new home on November 18, not returning until November 4 .
 Taylor's conversation with Marina in the spring of 1963 raises a question about Marina’s proficiency in English . Taylor: ‘Marina’�s conversation with Marita raises questions about her English .
 Marina's friends in the Russian community in Dallas insisted that she understood only Russian . Marguerite Oswald claimed that Marina had some understanding of English at the time she arrived .
 Lydia Dymitruk, a Russian-speaking emigree, once drove the Oswalds to a hospital in November 1962 when their daughter June was ill . Lydia's daughter June died of a heart attack in November 1963 . Lydia drove June Oswald to hospital when she was ill in 1962 .
 Oswald told a nurse a false story about being unemployed, and Marina instantly called him a liar in Russian, Dymitruk says . Marina understood the exchange, which indicates that she understood at least that one exchange .
 Marina and Oswald dined at the home of Oswald’s aunt, Lillian Murret, in the spring of 1963 . Oswald's aunt was the aunt of Oswald's wife, Marina .
 Murret’s impression was that Marina was able to understand what her husband was saying, yet Ruth Paine, with whom Marina had lived just prior to this, says that she and Marina could only communicate only in Russian .
 The FBI was able to determine precisely the date of the photographs taken by Oswald’s camera by dating the construction work shown in the background . Oswald's camera was taken by the same time as the other .
 Jim Savage said he had inadvertently given Marina Oswald the money Oswald used to buy the rifle . The money was used to pay Marina Oswald for the rifle, according to Savage .
 Ballen testified before the Warren Commission he was unsure of the exact date of his meeting with Oswald . Ballen said only that it might be late 1962 or early 1963 . He testified that he met Oswald in 1962 or 1963 .
 In an earlier FBI report, however, he had stated that he had seen Oswald only a few days after he had been at De Mohrenschildt’s house with Regnar Kearton and his wife Chris, who was his stepdaughter .
 In 1977, Kearton reviewed his records and found that he could only have been in Dallas during the last two weeks of March or early in April 1963 . Kearton's records show he was in Dallas at the time of 1963 .
 Ballen and Oswald must have met during the last week of March or the first two weeks of April . The meeting must have occurred in the last two weeks in April . Ballen is believed to have been Ballen's first meeting with Oswald .
 This would explain why he did not tell Ballen about his previous job and lied about where he had acquired photographic skills he claimed to have .
 The Militant was not able to find a copy of the photograph in its files after the assassination .
 Dallas police, Warren Commission or other investigative agency. Dallas police. Secret Service, Dallas police . Warren Commission . Dallas police and Warren Commission. Warren Commission will investigate .
 Both Jeanne and George De Mohrenschildt confirm, however, that it was Marina who wrote on it . A handwriting analysis supports that conclusion .
 George De Mohrenschildt brought up the subject of this photograph in an interview with me only a few hours before he committed suicide . The photograph was taken in the early days of his suicide .
 At that time he claimed that he had found the photograph after the assassination . The photo was taken in the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy .
 Marina would not have sent such an incriminating photograph to De Mohrenschildt after her husband shot at General Walker on April 10, 1963 .
 Oswald wrote this note on the “Red Cross’s” ship coming back from Russia in June 1962 . Oswald wrote it on the "Red Cross" on the ship coming home from Russia .
 In discussing the matter with me in March 1977, he said that he knew Oswald had taken the shot through some sort of ESP which he had with Oswald . He said he had ESP with Oswald, which he said was ESP, and that Oswald had shot .
 It is not clear how he knew that the rifle had telescopic sights . It's not clear, however, how he did not know that the sights were telescopic .
 In his testimony he said he never actually saw the rifle, but his wife had told him about it . He said he didn't actually see it .
 His wife, however, testified that she knew little about rifles and could not have discerned telescopic sights .
 The section on Oswald’s trip to New Orleans and first few weeks there is drawn from the testimony of his relatives, the Louisiana Department of Labor, and his coworkers at the Reily Coffee Company . Chapter XIII, Oswald's Game, is written in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 The material on Marina’s arrival derives from a personal interview with Ruth Paine . The material is based on an interview with Paine.
 Oswald’s personal and political activities during this period were described for me by Adrian Alba, Carlos Bringuier, Orest Pena, William Kirk Stuckey, Edward Butler, John Corporon, Bill Slatter and Lt. William Slatter . Oswald's personal and
 The tape of William Stuckey’s interview' with Oswald was made available to me by Mr Stucke . The tape has been made available by the former president of the United States .
 For additional information on activities and events relating to Cuba, I relied on FBI reports obtained from the National Archives, and transcripts of speeches made by Fidel Castro and President Kennedy .
 I also did a survey of the Militant 's coverage of Cuban-American relations, since Oswald was known to be an avid reader of that publication . Oswald was also known to have been avid readers of the magazine .
 Marina also claimed that Oswald had attempted to assassinate Nixon a week or so after his attempt on Walker but that she had thwarted him by locking him in the bathroom . Oswald also claimed she had locked him in a bathroom after Walker's assassination attempt .
 This story, which she told in 1964, while discussing the sale of her memoirs to Life magazine, contradicted earlier statements . This story was made public in 1964 when she was talking about the sale .
 From January 28, 1963, w^hen he repaid the State Department loan (see Note 3, Chapter XII), to April 25, 1963 . Oswald earned a total of $693.34.34 .
 On April 2, he gave Marina $60, which she may later have returned to him . Marina may have returned the money to her boyfriend .
 Oswald told the same story to William Stuckey, a New Orleans radio interviewer, later that summer . Oswald said the story to the same interviewer . Oswald later said the same thing to a radio interviewer .
 Marina, it will be recalled, insisted to investigators that she never knew her real father or even his name . Marina's stepfather was not in the military, she said, and her stepfather did not work for the military .
 On his application with the A-l Employment Agency, he claimed to have left Jaggars-ChilesStovall because of a “cut in the night shift” and listed his supervisor as “John Grieves” instead of John Graef .
 He also went to the Commercial Employment Agency, where he was interviewed on May 7 . Don Pecot interviewed him at the agency .
 Soviet Potentials by George B Cressey, Portrait of a President by William Manchester, Russia Under Khrushchev by Alexander Werth and Profiles in Courage by John F Kennedy. Portraits of a Revolutionary by Robert Payne, Soviet Potential by William .
 At the end of June, he turned increasingly toward science fiction, James Bond novels and historical novels . He also read books about communism .
 Oswald contemplated hijacking an airliner with Marina's assistance, Marina says . Oswald even considered hijacking a plane with her assistance . Marina says Oswald even contemplated taking part in a hijacking .
 Oswald had had previous contacts with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee . Oswald had been involved in the campaign against Cuba .
 In the summer of 1962, while still living in Fort Worth, he had written asking for pamphlets . He had written to the Texas governor asking for information about his work .
 In the spring of 1963, Castro staged a one-man demonstration in Dallas, wearing a “Hands Off Castro” placard around his neck .
 Marina wrote to the Soviet Embassy, asking them to expedite her requests . Subsequently, on July 8, she wrote again to the embassy, asking for expedite requests .
 FBI should have had a lookout card in Oswald’s State Department files which would have alerted the bureau if he applied for a new passport . Since he had been a defector, it should have been able to alert the FBI if he was applying for new passports .
 Oswald's lookout card was never placed in Oswald’s file . For reasons that were never satisfactorily explained, such a lookout card never was placed in his file .
 Oswald was accompanied to his office on at least two occasions by a well-built Mexican, Andrews testified . Andrews was unable to identify further details of Oswald's visit .
 He also claimed that Oswald was referred to him by a young blond homosexual named Clay Bertrand . Oswald was also referred to by a blond homosexual, he said .
 The FBI was never able to find a trace of this person . Jim Garrison, the New Orleans district attorney, erroneously identified him as Clay Shaw . He was never found .
 For a fuller discussion of this bizarre incident, see my book Counterplot . For a more detailed discussion of the incident see Counterplot.com .
 Two of his fellow employees at Reily coffee company, Alfred A Claude and John D Branyon, both got jobs during this period at Michoud .
 The Jesuits were very impressed with Oswald’s speaking ability, though not with his politics . Oswald was very popular with the Jesuits, but not with their politics .
 One seminarian, Robert J Fitzpatrick, compiled a five-page summary of Oswald’s talk .
 No evidence that any student or professor ever joined Oswald’s chapter . There are a few unmistakable traces of his activity . Oswald was a student and professor at the University of Cambridge .
 One Tulane graduate student had one of Oswald’s handbills tacked on his door . Oswald had been involved in Fair Play activities elsewhere . Oswald was a graduate student at Tulane, who had been .
 Oswald’s handbills were reported by the New Orleans police intelligence unit to have been found in the car of a professor there, Leonard Reissman . Oswald's handbill was reported to be found in a New Orleans professor's car .
 Another student, Vereen Alexander, believes she attended a party with Oswald and other pro-Castro students in the summer of 1963 . Another student believes she was at the party .
 Oswald himself told Carlos Quiroga that he was taking a language course at Tulane and told his aunt that he visited a language professor there . Oswald himself said he visited the language professor at the university .
 Above the list in his address book is the name of a New Orleans reporter, David Crawford, and a city editor, Cowan . The list suggests that the list came from one of these newsmen .
 Only a week before, the camp had been closed down because of FBI pressure . Bringuier was helping the exiles return to Miami .
 Fernando Fernandez came into his shop to make arrangements for his return trip to Miami . Earlier that week Fernando Fernandez, who was part of the group under training, came into the shop to discuss his return .
 He was identified by the FBI as a Cuban intelligence agent, and Bringuier was informed . He was subsequently identified as an intelligence agent .
 The FBI had also been attempting to find out the movements and plans of anti-Castro organizations that summer . Just a week before, the FBI had raided and closed down a major exile arms depot on Lake Pontchartrain .
 Bringuier went to Canal Street, accompanied by two other anti-Castro Cubans, Celso Hernandes, who had originally spotted Oswald protesting .
 Oswald’s pro-Castro sympathies and his unexplained trips to Los Angeles, Marines recall . A number of other Marines in his unit during that period recall both Oswald's pro- Castro sympathies .
 Nelson Delgado recalls Oswald having pro-Castro material in the barracks . Oswald had material in his barracks . Delgado says Oswald had pro- Castro material in barracks .
 Oswald assumed that he was in contact with a pro-Castro group; Delgado assumed it was the Cuban Consulate . Oswald assumed the mail he received was from the Cuban government . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast at the Cuban Embassy in 1961 .
 The pamphlet was by Corliss Lamont and entitled The Crime Against Cuba . Lamont was the author of The Crime against Cuba . The pamphlet is titled The Crime
 Oswald also told Quigley that he had married “Marina Prossa” in Fort Worth and omitting any mention of his residence in the Soviet Union or Dallas . Oswald also lied about his marriage to “Prossa,’s wife, and o
 Oswald was certain that Quiroga was an ‘infiltrator’ from the start but played along with him, Marina says . Marina: Oswald was sure that he was a ‘filmmaker’ but played with him . Marina says Oswald believed Qui
 Bringuier had wanted him to “expose Oswald, however, not to give him air time to present his views . He said he wanted to expose Oswald, but not to present him with his views.
 Oswald was reported to have been in the Habana Bar, which is located a few doors away from Bringuier’s shop on Decatur Street . The only other bar Oswald is reported to be in was the Habana Bar . The Habana is located just a
 The bartender, Everisto Rodriguez, and the owner, Orest Pena, claim to have seen him there . Both the bartender and owner of the bar say they saw him .
 His known expenses for Fair Play activities were $37.73 for printing, $5 for a rubber stamp set, a $10 fine, and $2 for distribution expenses, making a total of $54.73 .
 He also rented an office (and may have given the landlord rent of $30 or $40) He also hired an unknown assistant and had telephone and transportation expenses .
 Oswald’s total income for this period including wages, income tax refund for 1962 and unemployment insurance, was $803.81.81 . Oswald's total income in this period, including wages and income tax refunds for 1962, was . Oswald received unemployment insurance for 1962 .
 He was left with $452.44 for twenty-one weeks’ living expenses for his family, as well as the balance of his political expenses .
 Oswald had moved and left no forwarding address . Agent Hosty had visited his Neely Street address in Dallas but found that Oswald moved . Oswald was found dead at the scene of his assassination .
 On August 22 the FBI obtained a transcript of Oswald’s interview with WDSU . On August 23 the New Orleans office was asked to submit to Dallas office a report on its investigation of Oswald .
 The story of the CIA’s involvement with Cubella is taken almost entirely from the Schweiker Report . Chapter XIV, The Cuban Connection, is based on Chapter XIV of Chapter XIV .
 I also interviewed Senator Richard Schweiker in relation to the hearings his committee held . Senator Schweiker is a former Republican Senator for the Senate .
 Sylvia Odio’s contact with the three unidentified men was described for me in a lengthy personal interview with Miss Odio . Sylvia O'Brien says she was contacted by the unidentified men in an interview with her .
 Oswald had stayed in Mexico City hotels where he had stayed . Oswald was killed in November 1963 . Oswald had been killed in August 1963 .
 There is some dispute among CIA officials about whether it necessarily included ‘assassination’ or simply sought to get rid of Castro in a coup d’etat . Some dispute among the CIA officials involved in overseeing this operation .
 Cubella believed it was an assassination operation . CIA case officer who dealt with Cubella is certain, however, that Cubella thought it was assassination . Cubella was certain, but the case officer is certain .
 The members of the Special Group were CIA director John McCone, State Department director Alexis Johnson and State Department secretary Roswell Gilpatric . The Joint Chiefs of Staff, McGeorge Bundy, the National Security Adviser to the President, was also in the group .
 Sylvia Odio is not sure if this occurred on Wednesday, September 25 or the next day . Sylvia O'Brien is unsure if this happened on September 25 . She is unsure whether this occurred the day before or after .
 Oswald was in Mexico the next day, but it must have occurred on the twenty-fifth . Oswald was not in Mexico that day, and he was likely to have been in Mexico .
 The Warren Commission lawyer who interviewed her, J Wesley Liebler, took her to dinner with Marina Oswald’s lawyer, according to Miss Odio . The Warren . Commission lawyer took her out for dinner at the end of the interview .
 During the conversation, the question came up of what Warren would do if he found evidence of a conspiracy . Warren: "If I find evidence of conspiracy, I would find it very difficult"
 Liebler may well have been joking or venting his personal annoyance with the Chief Justice . Miss Odio interpreted his chance remark to mean that the Commission did not want evidence that Oswald was involved with others .
 Her sister, Annie Odio, was staying at her house that evening and witnessed the arrival of the three men . The three men were found dead in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 After seeing pictures of Oswald on television two months later, she recognized him as one of the three . She recognized him two months after he was found dead .
 Oswald apparently boarded the bus at 2:35m.m. the night before in Houston . Oswald had been in Houston, Texas, the day before the attack . Oswald was the last person to board the bus in the city .
 When he was told Twiford was not in Texas, he stated that he was “flying” to Mexico . When asked why he was not there, he said he was "flying" to Mexico, police say .
 Oswald had struck up a conversation by offering to help them with their baggage . He ended up discussing his trip to Russia, claiming that he had gone there to study . Oswald said he went to Russia to study and was studying there .
 Oswald's prior visit to Mexico found no record of prior trip to Mexico . Oswald had been in Mexico at the time of the September 4, 1917, assassination . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family of Tex Tex Texan .
 In 1976, 1 interviewed employees of the Hotel Cuba and found a chambermaid . The chambermaid was found in the hotel room .
 She said confirmation of this could be gotten from a former employee, Guadalupe Ramerez . She said she hopes to get confirmation of the allegations .
 Ramerez had emigrated from Mexico by that time and 1 was unable to locate her . Unfortunately, she had left Mexico and emigrated to Canada .
 Nosenko claims to have been consulted when the telegram arrived in Moscow since the First Chief Directorate had no prior record of Oswald . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 He would have had to have rendered an opinion without having read the file, he said . Therefore, he would have been able to make an opinion, he added . He said .
 Only car resembling the one described by Guitterrez was a Renault which the FBI traced to the household of Silvia Duran . The FBI traced the Renault to a household of Duran's wife Silvia .
 Oswald referred to him in 1963, when neither the CIA nor the FBI was certain of his activities in the Thirteenth Department . Oswald's CIA and FBI were not certain of Oswald's activities .
 The erroneous substitution of “Henry” for “Harvey” was apparently a transcription error .
 David Phillips’ book, The Night Watch, is published by David Phillips . Phillips' book is called "The Night Watch" and features interviews with Phillips .
 The FBI report was forwarded to the Warren Commission in 1964 and released under the Freedom of Information Act in 1976 . The Warren Commission released the FBI report in 1964 .
 If Oswald did, in fact, discuss assassinating President Kennedy at the Cuban Embassy, as both Castro and the FBI suggest, then it tends to confirm information provided by Gilberto Alvarado, a Nicaraguan agent who had been infiltrated into the Communist underground .
 Alvarado had contacted the CIA in Mexico City on November 26. 1963, and said he had seen Oswald receive $6,500 from a dark-skinned Cuban with red hair . He said Oswald had suggested that he was “man enough” to kill Kennedy .
 Alvarado failed a polygraph examination and then admitted his story was a fabrication . He then turned over to the Mexican police for interrogation, admitting his story to be a lie .
 CIA source says she saw Oswald with two Cubans at a 'twist party' at Silvia Duran’s home in September . Alvarado's description of the Cubans matching description matched description of Cubans provided by the CIA source .
 One possible explanation is that Alvarado heard the story from someone else who was in the embassy the day Oswald had his argument with the consul . Another person may have embellished it with untrue details, such as the $6,500 .
 Jim Bishop’s The Day Kennedy Was Shot is The Day of the Assassin . The book that I found most reliable in giving a general view of Oswald and President Kennedy's movements during the day of November 22nd was The Day Oswald Was Shot .
 For details of the funeral, 1 relied on William Manchester’s The Death of a President. For details on the funeral of the former president, visit the funeral page of this article .
 Schweiker committee report was used to determine Desmond Fitzgerald’s movements . Fitzgerald's movements were determined by the Schweiker report . Fitzgerald was found dead at the age of 92 . Fitzgerald is believed to have been in a coma since his death .
 Michael Paine, Marguerite Oswald, Jesse Curry, Lt. Jesse Curry and Lt. Lt. William Paine are interviewed by Ruth and Michael Painain . Ruth and Jesse Curry are interviewed for personal interviews .
 I also spoke several times with Ilya Mamantov, who translated for Marina on the day of the assassination . Ilya spoke with Marina's translator, who also translated for her, on the assassination day .
 Isaac Don Levine’s book, Eyewitness to History, also provided useful insights . Isaac Don . Levine's book, The Eyewitness To History, is published by Isaac Don. Levine .
 This and all other times given in this chapter are Central Standard Time, except where noted . This is the first chapter of this novel .
 Hosty denies that he ever told Revill that he had information that Oswald had the "capacity" to do the assassination . Revill denies that Hosty ever said to Revill he knew Oswald was capable of killing JFK . Hosty says Revill never said to Hosty that Oswald
 The credibility of this denial is seriously undercut by the fact that he had received a threatening note from Oswald . Oswald had deliberately withheld this information from the Warren Commission even w r hen he testified under oath .
 He testified that he had no reason to believe Oswald had a potential for violence . In fact, he said he didn't think Oswald would be violent .
 If the note did contain a threat, as both receptionists assert, then Hosty seriously misinformed the commission . Both receptionists say the note was not a threat . Hosty has been accused of misleading the commission over the issue .
 The twelve hours of interrogation of Oswald were not tape-recorded since Captain Fritz had not been given the recording equipment he had requested . Captain Fritz was not given the equipment he requested .
 FBI, Secret Service, postal authorities, homicide detectives and U.S. marshal witnessed various parts of the interrogation . stenographic notes were not taken .
 The questions and answers are based on the recollections of Fritz and the other participants . Fritz's answers will be based on his recollections from Fritz and other participants.
 Marina's false statements about Oswald’s trip to Mexico were not corrected until her testimony before the Warren Commission in February 1964 . Her denials about the rifle were on November 28, November 29, and November 29 .
 Oswald himself lied about the same points in the interrogation . He denied that he owned a rifle, or used an alias, or went to Mexico . Oswald also lied about going to Mexico, or not mentioning Walker shooting .
 No investigation was ever instigated to determine either his identity or business at the Embassy during this period . According to the available records, no investigation was instigated .
 CIA officials explained that the Cuban camera was broken during part of Oswald’s visit . The Soviet camera was not used on weekends, accounting for the absence of photographs on September 28 . CIA officials said in 1975 that the cameras were not used during the weekend .
 Oswald visited the Soviet Embassy on September 27 and October 1 . The camera was operating on October 1, when Oswald again visited the embassy . Oswald's visit was the first time the camera had been operating .
 No explanation was provided for why he wasn’t photographed on dates .
 The report of Kostikov’s intended travels on November 22 was contradicted by information later received by the CIA . The CIA later received information from the CIA that the CIA later learned .
 The remaining seven questions dealt with Oswald’s travels and residences in the Soviet Union and with whom he saw at the Cuban Embassy . Oswald's travel and residence in the USSR were among the questions .
 Mexico was one of the few countries in Latin America to have relations with Cuba . The government was under pressure by right-wing factions to sever them and by left-wing .
 Senora Duran was rearrested on November 28, when it was suspected that she might flee to Cuba . She was back in the U.S. after it was believed she might have fled the country .
 Staff lawyers say she was subjected to torture by the Mexican police during the second interrogation . According to information which staff lawyers said was available to the Warren .
 Hosty’s supervisor confirmed in an affidavit in 1975 that he had found the note and memorandum in his workbox and brought them to Shanklin . Hosty's supervisor said he found the memorandum and found it in the workbox of Hosty .
 This is a normal CIA procedure designed to protect agents from those who do not have a need to know about operations they are not involved in . The procedure is designed to keep agents from being told about operations .
 Counterintelligence records include only biographical data; divisions maintain the operational data . Counterintelligence files include biographical and operational data; counterintelligence records are compiled by divisional intelligence officers .
 When a trace is ordered in the records, case officers in the division are automatically notified of who is requesting the information .
 In the context of intelligence operations, “provocation” is the term used to describe any act of an adversary designed to provoke a specific reaction . “Provocation’s” a term used in intelligence operations . The term is used by intelligence operations in the context
 The epilogue is based on information provided by sources and documents specified in the notes to the prologue . Inside Out is available on Amazon.com/Inside Out .
 Details of Nosenko's detention and final establishment in U.S. society come from conversations with Stanley Pottinger .
 Interviews with Gordon Stewart, John Hart, Admiral Rufus Taylor and Victor Marchetti were conducted by Gordon Stewart and John Hart . The final resolution of the case was decided by the Supreme Court .
 The CIA officer who accused his superior was at that time the case officer of a Soviet double agent, Yuri Loginov . Loginov was a KGB agent who worked for the CIA in the 1970s .
 None of the agents had access to classified information or had been recruited as agents . None of them had been trained as agents, they said . None had been in contact with classified information, the agents said .
 Jaffe later lost his job and found himself unemployable, but he was not allowed to confront his accuser . Jaffe says he was forced to resign from his job .
 William Colby said that there was no evidence against him . Eventually, when he pressed the FBI for the basis of the charges against him, he was referred to the CIA, where he said no evidence was found .
 Senior officials in the FBI believed that there might have been a Soviet penetration in the bureau’s counterespionage section during this period . For other reasons, senior officials believed that . Officials believed that the FBI might have had Soviet penetration .
 In the early 1960s, three top secret documents were reported missing from the Washington field office . They later turned up in the possession of the Soviets . The documents were later found in the hands of the Soviet Union .
 The documents were traced to an FBI agent who habitually made contact with his Soviet “control” from a phone booth in suburban Maryland . Subsequently, these documents were tracked down to an agent who made contact from a certain telephone booth .
 The FBI had the booth put under surveillance and the man was observed receiving a call . Since the test proved inconclusive, he was permitted to resign from the bureau without publicity .
 At one point, counterintelligence had even raised some questions about Colby’s own contacts with a French citizen in Saigon who was suspected of being a Soviet agent .
 All CIA personnel were supposed to report contacts they had with foreign nationals in Vietnam and Colby failed to report meeting this person . Colby did not report meeting a foreign national .
 When questioned about it, it appeared to have been merely an oversight on his part . When questioned, he said it was merely a mistake .
 The best available evidence on the nature of the wounds inflicted on President Kennedy and Governor Connally is the photographs and X rays of the President taken during the autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital . The path of the bullets is the subject of this article .
 This evidence was withheld by the Kennedy family until 1966, leading to considerable doubt as to the validity of the Warren Commission’s conclusions . The evidence was not examined by the . Warren Commission or its staff .
 In 1968 a panel of four prominent physicians—three pathologists and a radiologist— reviewed this material . The panel was appointed by Attorney General Ramsey Clark, appointed by Ramsey Clark .
 Cyril H Wecht, the coroner of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, was permitted independently to examine the autopsy evidence . Wecht was the president of the American Academy of Forensic Science and a critic of the Warren Commission's findings .
 All the doctors who performed the autopsy and the Warren Commission agreed, without any dissent, that all the bullets that hit the President and Governor Connally were fired from above and behind, confirming the conclusions of all the doctors .
 The path and dispersal of fragments can be clearly traced from back to front . In the autopsy X rays and photographs, the path can be easily traced from the front to back to back .
 Analysis of President’s jacket and shirt fibers show that they were pushed inward from a projectile entering from behind . Analysis of the President's jacket shows that he was pushed inward .
 No fewer than five eyewitnesses actually saw the rifle in a window of the depository before or during the shooting . Five eyewitnesses said they saw the gun in the window of a window .
 Howard L Brennan, for example, told police immediately afterward that he saw 7 a man firing and reloading in a window of the depository as the President’s motorcade passed by . Brennan said he saw a man fire and reload in the window .
 A second witness, Amos Lee Euins, testified that he saw 7 the rifle protruding from the window . The witness said he saw the gun protruding out of the window of a window .
 Three other witnesses claim to have seen a rifle in the window moments before the shooting . Carolyn Walther, Arnold Louis Rowland and his wife, Barbara, said they saw a rifle . The shooting occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Since the building was sealed off minutes after the assassination, there is no reasonable basis for assuming that this rifle and the cartridge cases were carried into the building after being fired from another building .
 From the motion of the head backw ard, they argue, he must have been hit from a frontal direction . The defence say he was hit in the frontal direction of his head .
 This argument makes the fallacious assumption that the impact from the bullet was the only factor governing the direction that the President’s head moved. This argument is fallacious, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There were actually two other factors which would acccount for the President’s head moving backward, no matter from which direction it was hit . No matter which direction the President was hit, his head would move backward .
 President's central nervous system’s reaction could have jerked his head backward . President's reaction to the incident could have been caused by the reaction of his head jerking .
 From the film, it is impossible logically to decipher the cause of this movement . The film is based on the book, "The Man of the Day"
 After the assassination three different FBI agents fired this exact rifle and scored bull’s-eyes two out of three times . Three different agents fired the exact rifle after the assassination .
 Four witnesses saw Oswald with a rifle, and therefore, little credence can be given to his denial . Four witnesses said Oswald had a rifle . Oswald's denial is unlikely .
 The Warren Commission postulated that the firing of all three shots occurred within 5. seconds . V The Elapsed Time of the Assassination was 5 seconds .
 It established this time period by analyzing a motion picture taken by a bystander of the assassination . The time period was based on a film taken from a witness's perspective .
 The third and fatal shot could clearly be seen occurring on the 313th frame of the film . The film's final shot could be seen in the final frame of film .
 The commission assumed that the initial shot could not have occurred before the 210th frame of film, since before this frame the President’s car was blocked from the line of sight by an oak tree .
 The commission, however, made a serious error in reckoning the elapsed time . The commission made the error, but the commission made it very difficult to calculate .
 The assassination occurred on November 22nd. when the deciduous tree had no foliage . But the assassination occurred when the tree was no foliage.
 The sniper could have possibly fired as early as the 186th frame and would have had an elapsed time of 7 seconds . It's possible that the sniper may have fired at least as early .
 The difference between 5. seconds and 7 seconds is an important one . All three experts who tested the rifle were able to fire accurately three times within 7 seconds .
 From paths of the bullet delineated in the autopsy photographs and X rays, it can be concluded that Kennedy and Connally were hit by two separate bullets . A third bullet then hit Kennedy, according to the autopsy photos .
 The sequence of the bullets is not relevant to the question of whether there was more than one sniper, since it would be possible for a single assassin to fire three accurate shots . In any case, the sequence of bullets are not relevant .
 From the physical evidence, it is logically impossible to rule out the possibility that more than one sniper was involved . The number of snipers involved in the shooting is unknown .
 Microballistic analysis indicates fragments were fired from Oswald’s weapon . Even if it were determined that all the bullets fired came from the same rifle, it would still be theoretically conceivable that the rifle was passed from the hands of one sniper to another .
 The question is whether such a hypothetical possibility would be advantageous to a conspiracy intent on assassinating the President . President Obama has been accused of being the victim of an assassination attempt .
 Use of more than one rifleman would necessarily increase the chance of detection both before and after the act without necessarily increasing the probability of success . The use of multiple riflemen would increase the chances of detection .
 If multiple assassins were captured, it would be impossible to limit the investigation to a conspiracy, whereas, if only a single assassin were captured it might be assumed he was a lone operator .
 The evidence is conclusive that Oswald repeatedly shot Officer Tippit about one hour after the assassination of President Kennedy . The evidence was inconclusive that Oswald shot Officer . Oswald's actions were consistent with the murder theory . Oswald was shot by Oswald about an hour after Kennedy's assassination .
 The cartridge cases found at the scene of the murder had firing pin marks that microscopically matched the firing pin of Oswald’s revolver, to the exclusion of all other guns . The firing pin was found in the cartridge cases .
 Oswald admitted that it was his gun and that he had gone home after the assassination to get it and had it in his possession . Oswald said that he'd gone home to get the gun after the shooting and that it had been his .
 Oswald identified in a lineup as either the person who shot Tippit or person who fled the scene . Several witnesses also saw Oswald in a line-up with the shooter . Oswald was a prominent figure in the White House .
 There can be no reasonable doubt that Oswald’s rifle was used in the assassination of President Kennedy . The possibility exists it was used by another party to frame Oswald,* the possibility exists .
 If Oswald was totally innocent, it would be expected that his activities after the assassination would reflect his lack of knowledge and involvement in the event . Oswald was never involved in the assassination, and his activities would reflect that .
 He fled the building immediately after the assassination, changed his clothes, armed himself, fatally shot a policeman and then resisted arrest by, according to two witnesses, attempting to shoot still another policeman . Instead, he fled the scene and changed clothes and armed himself .
 He lied consistently during some twelve hours of interrogation, he lied consistently about evidence pertinent to the assassination, he said . Moreover, during some 12 hours of interrogations, he told the FBI about evidence relevant to the murder .
 Oswald's behavior indicates a definite consciousness of guilt about being apprehended and owning the assassination weapon . Oswald’s behavior subsequent to the assassination, especially his murdering a police officer and the lies he told, indicates a conscious guilt, he says . Oswald's actions indicate he was conscious of guilt
 The evidence that Oswald was at least involved in the attempt on General Walker’s life involves three major elements . X The Attempted Assassination of General Walker, April 10, 1963 .
 Oswald left a note in Russian to Marina which included directions on what she should do if he was arrested . After the assassination a bullet in nearly perfect condition was found on a stretcher in Parkland Hospital . The bullet perfectly matched Oswald’s rifle .
 The suspicion was raised that this bullet was “planted” hut such an exercise would seem pointless in light of other fragments found in the car match the rifle and the fact that in order to plant the bullet, the putative conspirators would have to had prior control of the
 If the conspirators actually had possession of the rifle and used it to fire the bullet that fragmented, it would seem implausible that they would have ‘‘planted” a bullet to frame an already ‘guilty” rifle . And if the . conspirators
 Note can be dated by information in it to the period around the Walker shooting . Walker was shot in the head in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Photographs taken with Oswald’s camera were found among his possessions after the Kennedy assassination . Walker's photographs of his house were found with Oswald's camera .
 FBI used construction work to determine that the photographs had been taken on March 9 or 10, 1963 . FBI says construction work in the background was behind the scenes .
 Marina testified that her husband told her immediately after the shooting, but before it was on the news, that he was the sniper . Marina testified she told her husband that she knew he was a sniper .
 None of this evidence proves that Oswald was the only person involved in the shooting or that he even fired the shot, it suggests that he was involved . The evidence suggests that Oswald had a role in the incident .
 Critics of the Warren Commission have suggested that the assassin who was captured, interrogated and killed was impersonating the real Oswald . The double Oswald Theories are based on the fact that Oswald was captured and killed .
 Oswald’s fingerprints match those of the assassin, and his mother and brother visited him in jail and identified him as Oswald . However, such a theory is untenable, since Oswald's fingerprints match his fingerprints .
 The basic problem of all such “double Oswald’s theories is that they presume that the object of the conspiracy was to frame Oswald, rather than kill the President . The problem is that all such theories presume that Oswald was framed, not killed .
 Jack Ruby fatally shot Oswald . Ruby shot Oswald in the face of Oswald in Oswald's assassination . Ruby was involved in the shooting of Oswald .
 Ruby was tried, found guilty, sentenced to death and died of cancer about four years later . Ruby was found guilty of attempted murder and sentenced to be executed . Ruby died about 4 years later of cancer .
 Oswald and Ruby were often seen together in public places . Oswald was the leader of the White House during the Second World War . Ruby was assassinated in September 1945 .
 If true, it would seem to argue against rather than for the possibility that Ruby was a professional killer hired to kill Oswald before he could divulge embarrassing information . Such claims, if true, would argue against .
 It would seem unlikely that a group of conspirators would employ for such a mission a person who could be associated with Oswald . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 He submitted to polygraph examinations, which showed no signs of deception . He spoke freely to lawyers, federal investigators and police officials and personally testified before Chief Justice Warren .
 On none of these occasions did he suggest he had been hired or incited by anyone to assassinate Oswald, he said . He said he did not suggest he was incited or hired by anyone .
 None of these facts precludes the possibility that Ruby was hired by others to kill Oswald . Ruby was simply very effective at maintaining a cover story, says historian .
 Those marked with an asterisk* gave testimony before the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission is the subject of a series of investigations into the CIA .
 Those witnesses who gave signed affidavits or FBI reports but did not testify before the commission have not been marked with an asterisk . The asterisk does not include those who gave affidavits, FBI reports .
 Oswald’s Defection to Moscoiv: September 14, 1959-January 7, 1960 . Oswald's relatives: Marguerite Oswald* Robert Oswald* and Vada Oswald . Unknown booking agents for the Marion Lykes line (from whom LHO obtained his ticket)
 Marina Prusakova Oswald* (pharmacist, Minsk; met LHO in March 1961 and married him one month later . She was also known as Marina Alexandrovna Medvedeva .
 People with whom Oswald corresponded: Eric Titovets and A Ziger and Pavel Golovachev and E 1 . Chester A Riggs .
 LHO was evicted LHO from picketing on a wharf in New Orleans, New Orleans . LHO members of Jones Printing Company were arrested for picketing .
 Oswald came into contact with Adrian Thomas Alba* (owner of Crescent Street garage, next door to Reily coffee company) Dean Andrews, Jr. Dean Andrews and Dean Andrews Jr. William Gallot and Frank Hayward and Frank Wilson .
 Oswald saw Oswald before he reached Mexico: Mrs. Mrs. Oswald . Oswald was killed in Mexico City, Mexico, in October 1963 . Oswald's wife says she saw him before he left Mexico .
 Holmes* Robert Nash Fay M Turner* Elmer Boyd* Elman Boyd* Holmes* Holmes Holmes*
 Describe routine handling procedure of U.S. tourists to the Soviet Union . Describe the handling procedure as routine procedure of United States tourists to Soviet Union. Describe it as a routine procedure .
 Describe as fully as possible the KGB elements involved, the KGB personnel involved, and the progressive steps taken, the time required . Describe the steps taken and the progress of the steps required. Describe .
 Describe the methods used in as much detail as possible . Did the KGB make a psychological assessment of OSWALD? Describe it as possible. Describe them as well as possible; describe the methods .
 In a letter written in February 1961, OSWALD referred to a previous letter which he claimed he had sent in December 1960 . In the letter, he claimed to have sent a letter dated from December 1960 to February 1961 . In February 1961 he said he had written a letter to OS
 Your statement indicated that the KGB was familiar with Marina’s background and character. Marina was a KGB officer, according to your statement . Marina's character was known to the KGB as a member of the KGB, the source said .
 Questions for the CIA, Director of Central Intelligence . Questions for CIA, CIA Director of Intelligence .
 George Sergius De Mohrenschildt told me in an interview a few hours before he committed suicide in 1977 that he had been encouraged to maintain contacts with Lee Harvey Oswald by an employee of the CIA’s Domestic Contact Service in Dallas, in 1962 .
 De Mohrenschildt also gave sworn testimony to the Warren Commission that he had talked to Moore about Oswald . He also testified that Moore talked to him about the Oswald case .
 Oswald was interviewed on his return from Russia by the Domestic Contact Service or other ‘suitable channels” so as to provide possible data for the biographic and foreign personality dossiers the CIA maintains . Oswald was a CIA staff member who suggested that Oswald be interviewed .
 In October 1962 De Mohrenschildt claims he complained to J Walter Moore about papers in his home being surreptitiously photographed . In October of that year he claimed to have been photographed by Moore .
 Oswald had Oswald’s account of his experiences in a factory in Minsk in his home . He suggests that this intrusion took place at a time when he had Oswald's account in his . home . Oswald was in the factory at the time .
 A psychologist who claims to have done “indirect examinations’ of individuals for the CIA says he did such an examination in 1962 of an American citizen recently returned from the Soviet Union who resembled Oswald . The psychologist says he examined the American citizen in 1962 who resembles Oswald .
 The psychologist examined photographs of Oswald and another American who defected and returned at about the time Oswald defected . The psychologist said he couldn't be sure it was not Webster he examined .
 CIA reported to FBI in Mexico City that Oswald had contact with Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov . On November 9, 1963, the CIA reported that Oswald was in contact with the Russian man .
 CIA identifies Kostikov as a KGB officer of the Thirteenth Department, which is the division responsible for assassinations, sabotage and kidnapping . In a report subsequent to the assassination the CIA identifies the KGB officer .
 Oswald apparently managed to enter and leave the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City without his movements being recorded by a CIA surveillance camera . Oswald apparently entered and left the embassy without being recorded . Oswald's movements were recorded by the CIA .
 In 1964 the CIA informed the Warren Commission that it had no information to indicate that the KGB had a training facility in Minsk from 1960 to 1962, when Oswald was a resident there . The CIA said in 1964 that no information had been made available to the CIA .
 Oswald took part in a discussion group in 1963 with Norman Frederickson, Everett Glover, Richard Pierce and Volkmar Schmidt . The group was the subject of a report to the CIA after the assassination . Oswald's role in the discussion group was subject of CIA report .
 Oswald offered to furnish the Soviet Union with classified information he had acquired in the Marine Corps . Oswald was a former Marine who served in the Army and served in World War II .
 In cases in which a defector offers to provide military secrets to the enemy, a “net damage assessment” is done of the defector’s access to military information . A former chief of counterintelligence for the Defense Intelligence Agency says such cases are rare cases .
 Four Marines who served with Oswald claimed that they were interviewed by civilians after Oswald defected in 1959 . Four Marines said they had been interviewed by civilian after the defection .
 Oswald’s reported offer to provide “classified information” to the Soviet Union . In the first group of questions, you request information concerning the results of, or reasons for the lack of, a “net damage assessment” in connection with, a "net damage
 Enclosed is an excised copy of a message from the American Legation, United States Naval Attache , Moscow, which is believed to be the document referred to in your letter .
 Oswald’s offer to provide information concerning radar to the Soviets is reported . Oswald offered to give information about radar to Soviets .
 The excision on this document was to remove the name of an individual who was subsequently determined not to be associated with Oswald . The name of the individual was removed from the document to remove .
 Also enclosed is a similarly excised copy of the Chief of Naval Operations response to ALUSNA Moscow Moscow .
 Oswald had no security clearance at Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, but may have had access to CONFIDENTIAL information . Oswald was not cleared for security clearance, but was allowed to have access to confidential information .
 Oswald's lack of access to classified material could not be too damaging because of his lack of knowledge, document says . Any information Oswald could have provided the Soviets could not have been too damaging, document states .
 Oswald's clearance was considered, but no formal damage assessment was conducted because of his low level of clearance . Oswald had a low level clearance, but his clearance was too low to be considered .
 Four Marines who served with Oswald claimed to have been interviewed by civilians after Oswald defected in 1959 . Reference is made to the above comments regarding investigative jurisdiction . In regard to your second group of questions .
 It cannot be visualized that representatives of any agency within the Department of Defense, other than special agents of the ONI, would have conducted such interviews . The ONI is the only agency that would have been involved in the interviews .
 NIS does not have a copy of the CIA document referred to, but in connection with the previous FOIA request the CIA was contacted . The NIS has not been able to obtain the document from the NIS .
 A representative of the CIA advised the NIS representative that the document indicated that the ONI and Military Intelligence may have information concerning DeMohrenschildt . A representative from the CIA said that the CIA had information about DeMohranschildt.
 Oswald and DeMohrenschildt were both married . Oswald and his wife were married at the time of Oswald's death . DeMohranschildt was married to Oswald's wife . Oswald died in August 1918 .
 James Allen Mintkenbaugh, who admitted spying for the Soviet Union, said he was brought to the USSR for the purposes of training in espionage techniques . He was asked to marry an agent whom the Soviets wished to establish as his wife in the Washington, D.C., area .
 The overwhelming majority of questions posed in your enclosure involve matters of apparent speculation on your part concerning sources and methods utilized by the FBI in its intelligence investigations, as well as identities of persons who may have been subjects of such investigations .