 Norris Cotton of New Hampshire reminded his constituents a week after President Kennedy announced that the U.S. was imposing a quarantine against Cuba to force Soviet missiles from the Caribbean island . Cotton was a New Hampshire congressman . Cotton: The quarantine was imposed in response to the threat of Soviet missiles .
 Barry Goldwater of Arizona suspected that Kennedy administration had played politics with foreign policy to help Democrats in the congressional elections of November 6 . The claim and fear that presidents play politics is familiar and often well founded, says Goldwater .
 Throughout American history, presidents take unusual and sometimes extreme steps, sometimes extreme diplomatic or military steps, to improve their own and their party's chances .
 Kennedy invited imputations that he exploited foreign policy issues for political gain or that he made diplomatic decisions in response to domestic political pressure . Like political leaders before him, Kennedy invites imputations of exploiting foreign policy for political reasons .
 American Jews had lobbied intensely for the sale . Some of them withheld contributions from congressional candidates until they saw Kennedy act on the deal .
 The Story of the Draft Goldwater Movement, 82; and Frank S Meyer, ""The 1962 Elections: The Turning of the Tide,"" National Review, Dec., 1962, 434. The Story . of the draft Goldwater movement is 82 .
 Many congressional manuscript collections contain letters from constituents who charged Kennedy with political gamesmanship in his handling of the missile crisis .
 "The reason it was done was politics,"" the U.S. ambassador to Egypt, John S Badeau .
 The president and his aides eagerly looked to the forthcoming elections to produce a more sympathetic Congress . President Barack Obama's aides eagerly look forward to the election results . The president's aides looked to be looking forward to a stronger Congress .
 The Democratic administration could never count on a working majority for its domestic proposals . Yet the Democratic administration never had a majority of votes in Congress .
 House committees were chaired by conservative southerners; in the Senate, Republicans and southern Democrats often teamed up to thwart Kennedy's requests . Kennedy's request was often thwarted by Republicans and Democrats .
 Medicare failed by a 52 to 48 vote; farm bill lost by five votes in the House . Medicare failed in a 52-48 vote; the farm bill failed in the Senate . The farm bill also failed in Congress .
 In 1961 only 48. percent of Kennedy's legislative initiatives gained approval; in 1962, 44. percent gained approval . In 1962, only 44 percent of JFK's legislative proposals gained approval. In 1961, only 48 percent of the initiatives received approval.
 Democratic gains or the prevention of losses in the 1962 elections, then, pro ,to ease or not to aggravate Kennedy's struggle with Congress, then . Kennedy's struggles with Congress may have helped ease or at least not aggravate .
 James A Nathan, Barton J Bernstein, and others have suggested that Kennedy boldly confronted the Soviets and eschewed quiet diplomacy to resolve the conflict . Public display of toughness would disarm Republicans who had been lambasting the administration over Cuba .
 Sorensen and Schlesinger have downplayed or discounted politics in their accounts of presidential decision making during the crisis .
 Even they have noted a link between the election results and the crisis . But even they've noted a linkage between the elections and crisis .
 Hilsman's memoir stressed questions of strategy and international prestige over domestic politics . He later explained that by ""domestic politics"" he meant, not the forthcoming elections specifically, but genera bureaucratic politics .
 The Soviet Union found Kennedy's behavior rooted in U.S. intentions to crush the Cuban Revolution, not in American politics . Kennedy's actions were found to be rooted in United States intentions to kill Cuban rebels .
 Scholars cannot now be definitive about the relationship between politics and the Cuban missile crisis . Scholars can't say if politics and missile crisis were to blame for crisis .
 Presidents make decisions that derive from a complex mix of private thoughts and public pressures that historians can't easily disentangle . Presidents, however, necessarily make decisions based on private thoughts, public pressures .
 American voters are usually influenced by many issues - some personal, some local, some national, some international . A-kd American voters usually influence many issues .
 Scholars can refine the problem by posing precise questions and by applying extensive and heretofore largely unexplored research materials, they can refine it further . Still, by posing questions and applying to the problem, scholars can refine their answers .
 We address it here with five sets of questions, organized chronologically . The questions include: "What do you think? What do you know about the world's most important question?"
 President Kennedy's National Security Council Executive Committee also held 'informal meetings' for which there appear to be no records .
 Republicans lost four seats in the Senate and gained only two in the House in midterm elections . The Republicans lost only two seats in Congress in the midterms .
 The political climate appeared favorable to the Republicans in 1962 . Political climate was favorable for the Republicans .
 Only once in the twentieth century, in 1934, had an incumbent president improved at midterm its position in the House of Representatives . Not since that year had the party in power in the White House enhanced its strength in the Senate . Only once, in the 1930s, had a party of
 In midterm elections from 1938 through 1958 the party out of power gained 75, 46, 55, 28, 21, and 50 House seats and 7, 9, 13, 5, 1, and 15 Senate seats . In fact, in midterms between 1938 and 1958 the parties out of
 In 1962 Republican leaders projected gains of 10 to 20 House seats for their 6-seat majority . The 1962 ""campaign kit"" of the Democratic National Committee was devoted almost entirely to Medicare issue .
 Historian and presidential assistant Schlesinger urged Kennedy to distance himself from the elections so as to avoid being personally blamed for the expected defeats . The historian said Kennedy should not be personally responsible for the election .
 With his legislative program under attack and fearing the loss of 15 to 20 House seats, the president decided instead to campaign actively . The president decided to campaign instead of campaigning .
 The nature of the Kennedy victory in 1960, for example, sugges that midterm election tradition was likely to be broken . Kennedy's 1960 victory suggests that midterms could be broken in midterms .
 In 1960, for the first time in the twentieth century, the party that regained the presidency after being out of the White House failed to increase its congressional representation . The party that gained the presidency in 1960 did not increase its representation in the House .
 Kennedy ran further behind the congressional candidates of his ticket than any other president elected since the beginning of the two-party system . Kennedy ran behind any other presidential candidate since the first party system .
 John Blatnik of Minnesota believed that in his state the candidates actually helped Kennedy more than he helped them . John Blatsnik said that in Minnesota, the candidates were actually helping Kennedy more .
 On a national basis in 1960, Democratic House candidates ran five percentage points ahead of Kennedy . Kennedy won the White House on a national level in 1960 .
 Normally the successful presidential candidate attracts votes of both party loyalists and independents . The successful candidate carries into office marginal nominees of his own party . The winner of the presidential election is expected to be a Democrat .
 The marginal candidates must run without the benefit of the presidential coattails, and many lose . Then, in the midterm contests, they must run in the midterms without the benefits of the president .
 In 1960, Kennedy did not help to elect such vulnerable representatives . Kennedy didn't help to help elect vulnerable representatives in 1960 .
 The type of person most likely to be defeated by Republicans in 1962 was not holding office . Thus the type of Republican most likely candidate for president was not in office .
 The probable outcome of the midterm elections was a new Congress that would resemble the old one . From that perspective, the probable outcome would be a new congress that resembled the old .
 American voting behavior, especially that of the independent voter, also suggested that the Democrats would score gains in 1962 .
 One-fifth of the electorate that year considered itself independent of party affiliation . One- fifth of voters considered themselves independent of political affiliation .
 Independents of that time were less prone to vote in off-year elections than Republicans or Democrats . People who identify themselves as independents were less likely to vote as independents in that period .
 The Democratic party is the more popular party by a four-to-three margin in registrations, an analyst for the Democratic National Committee read this to mean that the Democratic party would actually pick up seats in both houses .
 Democratic gains would be made among voters who had cast ballots against Kennedy in 1960 because he was a Roman Catholic . And, he advised, given the fading of the religious issue, Democratic gains will be made .
 I United States Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the United States, pt. , 1083; Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 1962 , 1034. I . U.S. Census Bureau: 1083 .
 Polling data also revealed the improbability of a Republican victory in 1962 . Polls data also showed the unlikely Republican victory .
 Gallup's organization measured party preference throughout the year . Throughout the year George H Gallup's group measured party preferences .
 Gallup polls released October 24 and November 5 were particularly telling . The polls were released by Gallup on November 5 .
 The interviews for the October 24 release were conducted between October 1 and 7; polling data for the November 5 release were obtained between October 29 and November 2 . The polling data was obtained from October 29 to November 2.
 Gallup completed one set of interviews after Cuba had become a serious campaign issue but before the missile crisis . Another set after both Kennedy's public confrontation with the Soviets and the Soviet decision to remove the missiles were removed .
 Gallup also asked Americans which political party they thought ""could do a better job of handling" the country's problems . Americans also asked which party they think could do better job with the problems .
 Democrats consistently outscored the Republicans . Another polling organization, Louis Harris and Associates, Inc., provided the president with data and recommendations based on its findings .
 Louis Harris told Kennedy that he was ""more in control of this election than ever before" provided that he continued to stress the Republicans' dangerous partisanship on foreign and domestic issues . Louis Harris said he was more in control if he continued stressing Republicans' partisanship .
 By early October, civil rights, war and peace, and medical care had emerged as dominant issues . Civil rights and war were dominant issues, Harris reported .
 Democrats could emphasize the need for the type of strong leadership Kennedy demonstrated by his sending of federal troops to Mississippi, as well as hit Republican obstructionism on other domestic issues .
 Majority opposed going to war in Cuba . Majority of Americans applauded Kennedy's toughness in holding the line in Berlin .
 Overall, then, the pollster Harris sketched for the president a rosy election picture just a couple of weeks before the missile crisis . The pollster also sketched the president's election picture .
 Nowhere in the document was there the slightest hint that another foreign crisis, well managed by the White House, would help Democrats .
 The precrisis information from analysts from analysts pointed to an impressive Democratic performance in the midterm elections . Analysts say that the precrisis data from analysts thus pointed to a Democratic performance .
 Democrats had asked why Castro and the increasingly radical Cuban Revolution were permitted to rise and flourish . When the Republicans were making foreign policy under President Dwight D Eisenhower, Democrats asked why .
 Republicans charged that the Kennedy administration was doing too little to unseat Castro . Kennedy administration did little to stop the Soviets from turning Cuba into a Communist outpost .
 The next month President Eisenhower ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to train anti-Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of their homeland . President Eisenhower also ordered the CIA to train ex-Cuban exiles to prepare for the invasion .
 Injuly, in an attempt to cripple the Cuban economy, the administration cut Cuba's sugar quota, virtually stopping imports from the island . In October most American exports to Cuba were prohibited .
 Those events in the deterioration of Cuban-American relations sparked debate in the U.S., particularly in the 1960s .
 Kennedy repeatedly upbraided the Republicans, charging that they had let Cuba become a Communist satellite . Kennedy: "Let Cuba become Cuba's Communist satellite" Kennedy: 'Let's go'
 Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations with Cuba just before leaving office . Eisenhower also broke diplomatic ties with Cuba before he left office .
 In April 1961, the bungled CIA operation at the Bay of Pigs was a major failure . The CIA operation was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Operation Mongoose, begun in late 1961, included sabotage, paramilitary raids, disruption of the sugar trade, circulation of counterfeit money, and other so-called dirty tricks . The clandestine operation was known as 'dirty tricks'
 The secret war against Cuba did not weaken Castro's hold on the island, and it probably stimulated Cuban requests for Soviet protection . The war did not strengthen Castro's control of the island .
 The Kennedy administration could not take public credit for such activities . Nor did the covert operations disarm the Republicans, because the Kennedy administration, of course, couldn't take credit .
 The United States-engineered expulsion of Cuba from the Organization of American States in 1962 . The imposition of a complete United States embargo on trade with Cuba the next month . The U.S. then imposed a complete embargo on Cuba .
 State Department complained about ""SinoSoviet bloc"" military aid to Cuba in March . As Cuba inched toward a closer relationship with the Soviet Union, the U.S. complained .
 The question of a Soviet arms buildup in Cuba took on serious political dimensions in the summer of 1962 . Republican leaders began to mount an unrelenting attack against the Kennedy administration .
 The growing Soviet military presence in Cuba, of course, held significance in itself as a challenge to U.S. hegemony in Latin America . The United States was alarmed by the growing Soviet presence in the region .
 The White House has been criticized for its handling of foreign policy . But it also provided an effective campaign issue that probed one of its most vulnerable spots .
 The Republican Party has been criticized for its opposition to popular New Frontier programs . The GOP has a history of missteps in the New Frontier program program . The Republican party has a long history of anti-government programs .
 Republicans strove to make Cuba, not Medicare, the leading topic of the congressional campaigns . Cuba is now a major issue for Republicans in Congress, but Medicare is a priority .
 Kennedy argued that Soviet technicians had been stationed on the island, Republicans called them troops . Republicans called it troops .
 Republicans demanded immediate action -either a blockade or an invasion of Cuba . Decrying a Soviet besmirching of the Monroe Doctrine, Republicans demanded action .
 Uneasy Democrats dismissed such pleas as election-year high jinks but could not shed the charge that Kennedy was timid in curbing the flow of Soviet arms and personnel to Cuba .
 Kennedy himself admitted at a press conference on August 22 that supplies ""in large quantities"" had reached Cuba . Kennedy also admitted that supplies had been sent to Cuba .
 The president insisted that technicians, not troops, were accompanying the arms . Homer E Capehart, who was seeking reelection in Indiana, won the election .
 In speech after speech Keating presented details that made him appear authoritative . Keating: "In speeches after speeches, he presented details of his authority."
 On September 4 in the Senate, Keating added more details on the Soviet military buildup . He made little distinction between short-range, ""defensive,"" surface-to-air missiles and longer-range missiles .
 The president tried to quiet the clamor by meeting with congressional leaders of both parties . Neither Soviet combat troops nor ground-to-ground missiles existed in Cuba, he said .
 January 1 to December 31, 1962, 638, 652. Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President, Jan. 1 to . Dec. 1 .
 Former President Eisenhower warned against making Cuba an object of partisan fighting . Many Republicans were determined to do just that in the congressional campaigns .
 Even if there were threatening missiles in Cuba and he denied that there were, the U.S. could destroy them in one day, he said . The United States could destroy the missiles, he added .
 One should not "lose a night's sleep worrying about the might of Cuba,"" Humphrey remarked . Humphrey: "One should not worry about themight of Cuba"
 The next day three Republican senators proposed amendments to the reserve mobilization bill . They would empower the president to ""take such action as is necessary" to prevent the violation of the Monroe Doctrine in Cuba . Unmoved, on the next day the amendments were proposed to the bill .
 Keating claimed that short-range missile facilities in Cuba could be transformed into intermediate-range sites . Still, the Republicans pressed the attack .
 On September 29 the Senate adopted the Cuba Resolution expressing U.S. determination to use arms if necessary to prevent Cuban subversion or aggression in the hemisphere . The island's conversion into an externally supported military base endangering United States security .
 Mail poured into politicians' offices demanding forthright action against Cuba . Mail poured in to politicians's offices demanding action against the country .
 A "Directomat" machine gives Republican Sen. John McCain a chance to win a seat in New York City's Senate . The machine gives the Republican senator a seat on the Senate .
 Professional polls showed that Cuba had grown intd a prominent issue for the U.S. electorate . Professional polls show that Cuba has become a major issue for American voters .
 In a campaign swing through the Midwest on October 5-7, the president barely mentioned foreign policy . The president is on a national tour of the Midwest .
 In that speech Keating boldly claimed that intermediate-range missiles, capable of striking targets in ""the American heartland," had been installed in Cuba .
 He possessed no conclusive evidence about Soviet ""offensive"" missiles in Cuba . No conclusive evidence that the missiles were Soviet missiles .
 On October 14 intelligence officials learned from photographs taken during a U-2 surveillance flight that such missiles were in Cuba . The missiles were captured by U.S. officials on October 14 .
 Bad weather prevented U-2 aircraft from flying over Cuba on October 11, 12, and 13 . Officials could have had hard, confirming evidence at the same time Keating was making his public case about intermediate-range missiles .
 U.S. officials had all along been monitoring (U-2 planes made runs over parts of Cuba on August 29, September 5, 17, 26, and 29, and October 5 and 7) The flow and positioning of Soviet weapons was monitored by the United States .
 When they discovered the ""offensive"" missile sites in western Cuba, they acted vigorously against them, as they said they would if and when they received proof .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk: President needed more than "speculation, guesswork, fears" before he could confront the Soviets . He had to have "very clear and precise and hard information" that weapons were in Cuba before confronting the Soviets, he said .
 A Minneapolis Tribune poll of late September found that 78% thought Cuba a ""serious threat"" to the United States . 78% of Americans think Cuba is a serious threat to the U.S.
 Kennedy criticized the Republicans for having ""ignored" Latin America in the 1950s . Once during his campaign swing, Kennedy said the Republicans had ignored Latin America .
 He may have received information from Florida-based Cuban exiles and their organizations, or from officers in the Department of Defense, he says .
 On the eve of the missile crisis, then, the Republicans seemed to have outmaneuvered the Democrats over Cuba . But not so much so, analysts and pollsters reported, to deny the Democrats an impressive showing .
 By mid-October, monotonous Republican accusations had lost some of their punch . Press coverage of Cuba had decreased, and other events had diverted attention .
 The new information might boost the Republicans by demonstrating that they had been right all along . Still, the new information may boost the GOP by proving that they were right .
 President Kennedy presented aerial photos of missile sites in Cuba to the president on October 16-October 22 . A specially constituted group of advisers, later called the Executive Committee, met frequently to debate courses of action .
 The options of invasion, bombing, blockade, and diplomacy were explored in exhausting sessions often marked by frank disagreement and changing minds .
 The chief decision was to quarantine Cuba to prevent further military shipments to the island . The quarantine was to impress the Soviets with the serious American intention of forcing the missiles out .
 U.S. officials feared a plane would be hit by a surface-to-air missile . Only the western portion of the island was covered in the Sept. and Oct. 2012 .
 Intelligence data from a variety of sources, including U-2 flights, reached top-level officials such as Vice Pres. George W. Bush .
 McCone interview by Joe B Frantz, Aug., 1970, John A McCone Oral History Interview, ibid. McCone interviews by Joe Frantz in 1970s .
 The transcripts of the two meetings of October 16, Sorensen's private papers, National Security Council documents, Defense Department briefings, Defense Dept. briefings, former President Eisenhower's memoranda of conversation with Kennedy and CIA officials, notes or recollections of such legislative leaders .
 Politics did not determine the choice of the naval blockade of Cuba . Politics was very seldom discussed in Cuba .
 Historical records indicate that the tactic of a surprise television address rather than a private advance warning was shaped by politics, although questions cloud this issue .
 Kennedy felt compelled to act decisively against the Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba . For many reasons Kennedy was compelled to take action against the Soviets .
 The Soviets had told the United States on more than one occasion that they would not put into Cuba missiles that could reach the U.S. First, he felt he felt tricked, for the Soviets had said they wouldn't put missiles into Cuba . He said the Soviets would refrain from taking
 Kennedy was, of course, also cognizant of his Repub29 The October 16 transcripts , National Security Council minutes, Sorensen's papers, oral histories, Frank A Sieverts' report, ""The Cuban Crisis, 1962$' and the president's appointment books and
 Kennedy acted in a political arena, and politics demanded that Kennedy remove the missiles . Kennedy acted as a politician to fulfill promises, but politics demanded Kennedy remove missiles, he says .
 Presidents have always enjoyed considerable freedom of action in the making of foreign policy . Politics or anxiety over the congressional elections did not decide specific courses of action . But, in this case, anxiety over congressional elections didn't decide specific policies .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara appreciated the distinction between acting in general and acting in particular . McNamara recognized that the administration had ""a domestic political problem"" on its hands because of previous statements .
 McNamara preferred a blockade of Cuba instead of a military option . McNamara, for one, preferred to a blockade, instead of military options .
 At the two ExCom meetings of October 16, there was scant political discussion .
 In the first meeting the advisers worried about keeping the news secret until they had decided on policy .
 Keating's name came up, prompting speculation about his sources of information . Keating has been accused of leaking confidential information to the media .
 Participants discussed the operational status of the missiles, alternatives for removing them, and Soviet motives . The participants in the meeting largely discussed the issue of removing them .
 Nowhere in the transcripts of the two October 16 meetings are there comments to the effect that the administration or the Democratic party would suffer in November or after if a certain decision was not made .
 While his advisers puzzled over policy, the president went on the campaign trail . President Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of leadership .
 Campaign plans had called for Kennedy to travel across the nation, especially on weekends in late September and October .
 Kennedy kept his political schedule until October 20 . On that day, feigning a head cold, he canceled his politicking and returned to Washington . Kennedy faked a cold to feign his illness .
 His speeches before then, as Harris had advised, recommended the election of Democrats to insure the passage of critical domestic legislation . Harris advised that Democrats should be elected in order to pass critical legislation .
 Kennedy gave little attention to foreign policy and gave no hint of an impending crisis . Kennedy gave no hints of impending crisis, but did not give any hint of a crisis .
 He did not try to entice Republicans into statements they would find embarrassing after the missile crisis became public . He didn't try to persuade Republicans to make such statements .
 This curious document is one of the few time-of-crisis records that speak directly to the relationship between politics and decisions .
 It came from a Republican serving in a Democratic administration-a Republican who seemed strangely to favor a Republican defeat in November .
 Dillon was using the political argument only to move the advisers toward his hardline position that decisive military action must be taken against Cuba . The position was losing ground to the option of a blockade .
 Dillon apparently concluded that the president was not thinking politically and that a political case would persuade him to accept the use of substantial military force . Dillon: "I'm not sure what I'm thinking politically. I'm sure I'm not thinking that way"
 The president and his aides may have pondered the impact of their decisions on the congressional elections, but neither their records nor their decisions demonstrate such . Neither their records or their decisions show such .
 A quarantine held the potential of a drawn-out crisis, and could not prevent the assembly of missile components already in Cuba . And they did not accept Dillon's recommendation for an air strike, which would have been more attractive to voters .
 As Dillon knew, moreover, Kennedy had no intention of ever accepting operational missiles . Kennedy had never accepted operational missiles, Dillon knew .
 The question was never whether to act but, rather, when to take which action . The question is whether or not to act is whether to take action, rather than when to act .
 Politicians not privy to the secret deliberations of the president's advisers continued to spar over Cuba . Meanwhile, politicians in the U.S. are sparring over the issue .
 The Cuban issue, Kennedy remarked to Sorensen, was ""very harmful to the Democrats,"" because it proved that the Republicans had been right . Kennedy said the Cuban issue was very harmful to Democrats .
 Some critics would condemn the Democrats for having been ""soft" on Communism and Castro . Others would soon denounce them as a war party .
 Kennedy believed ""that whichever way he turned it was politically damaging at home,"" Sorensen recalled . Kennedy believed "whatever way it turned it would be politically damaging" at home . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Eisenhower quarreled with his party chairman's designation of Cuba as the dominant issue of the campaign . Eisenhower, having not yet been consulted or briefed by Kennedy officials, perhaps sensing forthcoming momentous decisions regarding Cuba . Eisenhower had not been consulted .
 "37 western states, did speak about ridding Cuba of Castro and the Soviets. At least I hope so."
 His speeches were probably prepared before October 16 and were not coordinated with missile crisis officials in Washington . But his speeches are probably prepared by October 16 .
 At noon the White House had announced an important 7:00 P.M. presidential speech, and journalists had already determined that Cuba was the topic .
 Some twenty congressional leaders -Congress was not in session, and members were campaigning or vacationing - were summoned to the nation's capital for a special meeting with the president .
 Kennedy convened the full National Security Council at 3:00 p.m. ET . Kennedy was in the middle of the day .
 Rusk's comments suggest that some administration officials worried that critics elled DNC headquarters to ""kill"" the paper .
 Kennedy said little about the political ramifications of the crisis during the crisis, according to Sorensen . Kennedy spoke little about political ramifications during the time of crisis, he says .
 The president may have thought simila P.M. legislative leaders' meeting was to explain his ultimatu position of a naval blockade . President may have been trying to convince him that the blockade is illegal .
 Republicans in the g some Democrats, in a tense exchange with the presiden ator Russell, chairman of the Armed Services Committ chairman . Some Democrats in the House of Representatives went further . The Republicans in Congress are divided on the issue .
 Khrushchev and Castro were told of American plans to force the missiles out of Cuba . If no satisfactory reply was received within forty-eight hours, Kennedy would go on television to announce the installation of the blockade .
 The president and his advisers decided to surprise the Soviets with a public address . But in the end, they decided to give it to the Soviets .
 It was believed, too, that a dramatic media speech exposing Soviet perfidy would rally world opinion to U.S. policy, it was believed .
 ExCom members feared that Khrushchev might issue a ""blustering ultimatum"" and delay negotiations until all the missiles became operational . ExCom feared that the talks would be delayed until all missiles had been operational .
 Fulbright believed that an invasion would be less likely to lead to nuclear war with the Soviet Union because it would pit American soldiers against Cubans rather than against Russians, who might stand aside . Fulbright: "An invasion of Cuba would not lead to a war with Russia"
 It is difficult to understand the importance of ""initiative"" in this crisis . The crisis has been described as a 'humanitarian crisis'
 U.S. military superiority in the region was never doubted, and any shift in initiative would have been short-lived . Indeed, United States military superiority never doubted .
 The journalist Walter Lippmann published a widely read column of October 25 criticizing the president for suspending diplomacy-for not showing Gromyko the photographs . The U.S. would soon announce a policy to force the dismantiling of the missiles, he said .
 Gromyko's prevarication in that meeting convinced some Kennedy officials that private diplomacy would not work . Kennedy officials believed private diplomacy was not working .
 It is plausible that the speech was selected for its anticipated domestic political impact . Although little evidence is now available to sustain such an argument, it is plausible .
 First, a dramatic speech announcing bold action would surely rally Americans around the Democratic administration . First, the dramatic speech will surely rally the Democratic Party .
 A tough-minded speech would take the campaign issue away from the Republicans, and possibly disarm critics who thought Kennedy was pusillanimous toward Communism . Second, a tough speech would also take the issue of Communism from the GOP, away from its focus .
 Kennedy might have reasoned that quiet, private negotiations could not have been conducted in secret for very long . Third, Kennedy might also reasoned that negotiations could have been held in secret .
 The inevitable leaks would perpetuate charges that the administration was concealing information and underplaying the military threat . Leaks would perpetuate claims that the U.S. is hiding information from the public .
 Republicans would sneer that unsavory deals with the archenemy had been struck in secret or that opportunities for purging the Western Hemisphere of Castro and the Soviets had been squandered . And even if negotiations proved successful, Republicans would snicker .
 Obama's speech warmed Democrats, for the public response to the president's stand was positive . Whatever the case, the speech's effect warmed Democrats .
 After his televised statement Kennedy and his aides waited anxiously for the response . October 23-October 28 is the time Kennedy and aides waited for his response .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy exchanged letters, and Soviet officials met secretly with Americans in Washington . The Soviet Union and the United States secretly met secretly in Washington, D.C.
 On October 28, the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missiles, and the United States promised not to invade Cuba in the future . The United States also promised to never invade Cuba .
 The promise to end a dangerous crisis did not spring from domestic political calculations but from a desire to end the crisis . That promise was made by President Obama in 2008, but not by domestic political considerations .
 A pledge not to invade Cuba would hardly satisfy Republicans, who could be expected to argue in the 1964 presidential campaign that Kennedy had permitted the ""Red menace" to remain in the Western Hemisphere .
 The president spent little time on political considerations, writes David Frum . Frum says the president was exhausted from the ordeal of decision making . He says he was worried that some naval officer might make a military mistake .
 He did work to reduce the partisanship over Cuba, hoping to create a national consensus . But he did not reduce the partisanism over the issue .
 Khrushchev could not count on exploiting divisions within the U.S. He says unity at home would show he could not rely on exploiting division . It would also take the issue out of the congressional campaign .
 For the most part, Republicans quickly endorsed the president's immigration policy .
 Republicans back Kennedy's policy, but say it's politically motivated . Republicans also grumbled that the crisis was politically motivated, too .
 Some crowed that the president would not have acted had it not been for the opposition party's pressure . Others criticized the administration for not going all the waygetting rid of the Castro regime .
 The release of low-level photographs of the missile sites might help, thought the Kennedy advisers thought . The release was intended to prove the existence of missiles .
 President Eisenhower urged Republicans not to make the Cuban crisis partisan . He called Eisenhower and urged Republicans to not make the crisis partisan.
 Kennedy sent Republican public servant John J McCloy to join Ambassador Adlai Stevenson at the U.N. McCloy . McCloy was a public servant who served in the Senate .
 Nearly every account of the crisis quotes a discussion of October 24 between the president and his.brother Robert . The latter related in his memoir, Thirteen Days, which the latter .
 At the time Soviet ships were heading toward the naval blockade; violent confrontation seemed possible . At the same time, the Soviet Union was threatening a naval blockade .
 President Kennedy intended to act, to force the missiles from Cuba, from the moment he learned about them, he says . "It demonstrates little, because it demonstrates little," he writes .
 He never hesitated in that intention; thus impeachment for inaction was a farfetched notion . President Obama never hesitated to take action, but he did not hesitate to do so .
 President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton reportedly spoke to each other in a heated exchange of words . The conversation was reported to be an exaggeration perhaps by the tensions of the moment .
 If the president engaged in political partisanship during this period, it was understated . If he engaged in partisanship, it would have been understated, he said .
 On October 25, for example, he wrote a letter intended for public release to Gov. Chris Christie . Christie says the letter was intended for release to the governor .
 Gaylord A Nelson was running for the Senate in Wisconsin . He was running against incumbent Republican Alexander I Wiley . Nelson is a Democrat who was elected to the Senate .
 The letter amounted to a campaign document exploiting the Cuban crisis to help a Democrat . Since there could have been no doubt about the nation's ""critical test"" at that moment, the letter amounted . to . use .
 Even Lyndon B Johnson, the most political of politicians, jotted down nothing of a political nature during highlevel meetings in that period . Even Johnson, who was political of the day, was not political .
 The politics of the Cuban question heated up again with the midterm elections . October 29 to Election Day, November 6 is November 6 .
 Cuba remained a Soviet military ally; the Monroe Doctrine stood repudiated . Castro still sat atop a Communist regime, bent on subversion in Latin America . One way of ousting both the Castroites and the Soviets from the island in the future invasion had been denied by presidential pledge .
 Castro's obstruction of onsite inspection by U.N. officials led to suspicions that the missiles were not being removed .
 Stories circulated by Cuban exiles suggested that the missiles were being hidden in caves . Unsubstantiated stories circulated by ex-cubais suggested that they were hidden .
 Kennedy called attention to such stories, which, he was told, were never substantiated . Kennedy: "There was no substantiated. At the November 6, 1962 ExCom meeting, Kennedy called .
 U.S. surveillance planes cross Cuba with the risk of being shot down, as had happened once already . And to gather evidence of dismantling, American surveillance planes crossed Cuba on October 27 .
 Kennedy now approved such intelligence flights on a one-byone basis . He was apprehensive of an attack that would inflame Cuban-Soviet-American relations .
 The political damage at home would also be great, for it would seem to confirm Republican complaints that Kennedy had not really solved the Cuban problem . It would be great for the president, but it would confirm that he had not solved the problem .
 The former president had not long before urged that Cuba be taken out of the campaign, but now he turned partisan . He turned partisan.
 Only Republican prodding, evident in the Cuba Resolution, had enabled Kennedy to act forcefully in the crisis, he said . Only Republican intervention in Cuba helped Kennedy act forcefully .
 The next day several right-wing Americans organized the Committee for the Monroe Doctrine . The Committee for Monroe Doctrine was organized by a group of right-right-wing activists .
 Backed by some Republican congressmen, by pundits such as William F Buckley, Jr., and by former military officers such as Adm. William F. Buckley . Backed . by some congressmen .
 Committee protested that Kennedy had guaranteed a ""Communist colony"" in violation of the Monroe Doctrine's invocation against the extension of a foreign ""system"" into the Western Hemisphere .
 House Republican campaign committee chairman asks president to abrogate agreement with Soviet Union . Rep. Bob Wilson is chairman of the House GOP campaign committee . Wilson: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 They were puzzled about how to go about it without appearing to be crass . They did, but they did, and they didn't want to appear crass, they said .
 The Democratic National Committee prepared drafts of some ""fairly rough speeches"" on Cuba for candidates, but whether they were used is not clear . The DNC prepared drafts for candidates .
 From the beginning of the crisis, the White House had managed the crisis . The president restricted his advisers, telling those present at the ExCom m of October 30, for example, that all discussions with the press had to hav authorization .
 He wanted a consistent story to come out of the State and th fcaw departments . He also sought to prevent Cuban exiles from buying tine to attack U.S. policy .
 Kennedy aides thought that a large voter turnout on November 6 would help the Democrats . Kennedy's aides thought a large turnout would help Democrats . A large turnout is expected to help Democrats in November .
 Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman proposed that friendly commentators be encouraged to urge citizens to vote Democratic in ""this hour of crisis"" to demonstrate to the world national backing for the president's policy .
 Council prepared several announcements and on October 29 sent them to every television and radio station in the U.S. They were sent to every TV and radio stations in the United States .
 The White House asked the council to produce a one-minute film of Eisenhower's appeal for a large vote . A similar film, provided by the White House, of Kennedy's saying much the same .
 The administration effectively linked the president's successful handling of the crisis with the elections . Through that supposedly nonpartisan effort, the administration tried to link the election with the crisis .
 Analysts remain uncertain how the Cuban crisis will affect voters . Analysts say it is unclear how the situation will affect the Cuban government .
 Kennedy decided on November 5 not to release pictures or information gathered from aerial reconnaissance missions on November 4 . Kennedy decided instead of releasing information from reconnaissance missions .
 The Republican and Democratic manipulations of the Cuban issue just before the elections aroused voter interest . Surely the Republicans and Democrats manipulated the issue to raise voter interest?
 The elections of 1962 barely changed party alignment in the House . The elections were held in the U.S. House of Representatives .
 On the whole incumbents did well, and because most incumbents were Democrats, Democrats did well by the measurements of previous midterm elections . Democrats did better by the measurement of previous elections .
 Democrats lost only four seats, and the Republicans gained only two . Thus the Democrats lost four seats in the Senate .
 Domestic-policy issues, local political peculiarities, the nature of the 1960 election, the strength of the Democratic party in voter registration, reapportionment, and the ancient practice of gerrymandering best explain the GOP's failure to make significant gains in the House .
 Reapportionment had allocated ten additional congressional districts to the West . Democrats won all but one of those new districts .
 Eight of the new districts were in California; Democrats won seven of them in large part because of a radical gerrymander . Democrats won 7 of the districts in California .
 Rousselot represented Richard M Nixon's old district . He was a member of theJohn Birch Society .
 After gerrymandering, this conservative Republican district was transformed . Democrats enjoy a 62 to 38 percent advantage in registered voters in the district .
 Democratic State Assemblyman Ronald B Cameron defeated Rousselot by earning 53. percent of the popular vote . Cameron earned 53.9 percent of votes .
 Hiestand, another John Birch Society member, was a sixth-term congressman . He lost to Everett G Burkhalter of the Los Angeles City Commission in the 1950s .
 After the state legislature altered Hiestand's district, it had 37,000 more registered Democrats than Republicans . The district is now home to more than 40,000 Democrats .
 McDonough, an eighteen-year House veteran, suffered as well from the gerrymandering of his district . He was elected to the U.S. House in 2010 .
 He found himself with a new district in downtown Los Angeles, politically inhospitable for a conservative Republican . The new district is a tough district for conservatives .
 The state assembly had given his opponent, Edward R Roybal, a liberal on the Los Angeles City City Commission, a lead of 47,000 registered voters .
 Wilson and Richard T Hanna won House seats by comfortable margins . Wilson and Hanna both won seats in the House of Representatives . Hanna won a seat in the Florida district .
 The intrusion of the crisis into the campaign season may not necessarily have helped Democrats . The missile crisis affected voters in California and elsewhere in the West .
 In the West both successful Republicans and successful Democrats had favored a strong stand against Cuba . Cuba has been a source of tension in Cuba for decades .
 Keller concluded that voters on the whole preferred incumbents, regardless of party . Keller: "Voters prefer incumbents to incumbents"
 The briefing the administration gave to incumbents such as Younger ""hurt,"" because it marked them as leaders . Younger says the briefing was "hurt" because of how it marked him as a leader .
 The crisis caused the president to cancel his campaign visit to the Golden State . Second, the president canceled his visit to California .
 Missile crisis may have set back Nixon's California gubernatorial candidacy . On the other hand, the missile crisis may set back his California gubernatorial bid .
 Walter H Judd of Minnesota had to seek reelection in an altered district . Judd is a prominent, conservative Republican spokesman on foreign policy and a twenty-year veteran of the House .
 His district was changed to include all of Minneapolis, including the Democratic Farmer-Labor party stronghold of North Minneapolis . His district includes North Minneapolis, a longtime Democratic stronghold .
 Democrat Neil Staebler beat his Republican opponent largely on domestic issues . The Democrat was elected to an atlarge seat on Tuesday .
 Kennedy's handling of the Cuban issue before and after the crisis produced mixed results, according to Staebler's postelection analysis . The Cuban crisis was one of the most divisive moments of Kennedy's presidency .
 Before October 22 Staebler had opposed a naval blockade of Cuba, scolding his Republican rival for advocating one .
 Staebler struggled to "minimize the damage"" to his campaign . Then, when Kennedy imposed a blockade, he had to struggle to ""minimize" the damage .
 He believed that the Cuban crisis was ""a very helpful emotional stimulant, arousing many more people to vote""; it meant ""a net change in our favor"" but not enough to have decided the election .
 In Michigan's Sixth District, the incumbent Republican candidate won, and domestic issues were preeminent . ""the Cuban triumph"" yielded very few votes for the Democrat .
 In Kansas incumbents Robert Dole and J Floyd Breeding were pitted against one another in a new district . Dole, Breeding and Dole are both incumbents in Kansas .
 Breeding failed to carry twenty-one rural counties from his old district . Breeding campaigned in support of the farm program; he not only lost to Dole - he also failed to win twenty-21 rural counties .
 Peter F Mack, Jr. was upended by Republican Paul Findley, another incumbent . Mack was defeated by Findley in a landslide .
 Findley's active opposition to the farm bill apparently secured his victory . Findley opposed farm bill, which he said would be needed to pass .
 Every Republican incumbent from a farm district who sought reelection was victorious . Overall in the nation every Republican incumbent in a farm congressional district won reelection .
 Democratic candidate Alice Franklin Bryant lost very badly to Republican Congressman Thomas M Pelly . In Washington, a Democratic candidate lost to Republican Thomas Pelly.
 In Montana, both incumbent Congressmen won -one a Democrat and the other a Republican . Cuba was only one of many issues, and Cuba was just one of them .
 In the First District, Arnold Olsen ran on a platform of support for Kennedy's domestic legislation . Arnold Olsen is a liberal Democrat who ran for the first time .
 In the Second Dristrict, conservative Republican James Battin targeted Kennedy's farm program . Battin won the farm program in the second district of the Second District .
 Republican Charles E Chamberlain beat Democrat Don Hayworth in the Sixth District . Republican Charles Chamberlain won in the 6th District of the Sixth district .
 Votes for Republican candidates surpassed previous levels throughout the region . Republican candidates surpassed previous levels of support for Republicans .
 Seven southern states suffered attrition of eight seats in the national redistribution . All those seats were Democratic . Florida gained four seats, Maryland one, and Texas one .
 They also gained one seat each in West Virginia and North Carolina, where reapportionment matched incumbents .
 Cuban crisis was but one of several influences on voters choosing members of the House . In the East, as elsewhere, voters were influenced by the Cuban crisis, as well as other factors .
 Five incumbent senators were defeated in 1962 -three Republicans and two Democrats . As for the Senate races, five incumbents were defeated .
 Republicans Capehart of Indiana and Alexander Wiley of Wisconsin lost for reasons unrelated to the Cuban issue .
 If anything, the missile crisis may have helped both showings . The missile crisis helped both to better showings.
 The defeat of the third Republican, Joe H Bottum of South Dakota, was due to a combination of factors, only one of which was the Soviet-American confrontation over Cuba .
 He was actually an interim senator who had resigned the governorship to be appointed to the national position . He resigned to be an interim state senator .
 Milward L Simpson, was a popular figure who campaigned on a states' rights, anti-Communist, be-tough-with-Cuba platform that also included rejection of Medicare . Simpson also campaigned on an anti-communist platform that rejected Medicare .
 Dominick hammered Carroll for not having earlier taken a hard stand against the Soviet military buildup in Cuba . Public dissatisfaction with long-term Democratic control of state politics and perhaps anti-Catholic bias decided the election .
 A closer look at the losses of the Republican incumbents reveals that while Cuba was an issue other issues counted as much as much or more .
 Francis Case died inJune 1962, the governor turned the choice of a successor over to the central committee of the Republican party . Francis Case's successor was chosen by the Republican Party .
 Many candidates vied for the position, and after a rancorou meeting lasting ten hours, Bottum won the interim seat and was duly appointed . Bottum was appointed after a ten-hour meeting .
 The Republican party was rife with squabbling factions, and Bottum proved a weak and vulnerable candidate . Bottum had a reputation as a ""hatchet man"" for his party .
 George McGovern also ran an effective campaign, which included a Charles Guggenheim film, The Dakota Story . McGovern ran a successful campaign .
 Bottum slipped in the polls before the Cuban missile crisis . Bottum has a substantial lead at the beginning of the campaign .
 By election day McGovern had taken the lead, helped in part by Kennedy's handling of the crisis . McGovern took the lead in the polls, helping Kennedy's campaign .
 He, more than anyone else seeking reelection, had spoken to the Cuban issue . The Cuban issue has been a hot topic in the U.S.
 The White House also asked Louis Harris to conduct an intensive survey of Indiana voters . Louis Harris has been asked to conduct a survey of the state .
 Capehart's lead over Bayh was modest in the early stages of the campaign, despite the fact that Capehart was a three-term incumbent with name recognition . Harris: Capehart had a modest lead over the former senator .
 Harris learned too that Capehart evoked little enthusiasm among the electorate . Capehart was a candidate for a seat on the House of Representatives .
 Capehart had a negative rating on taxes, Medicare, unemployment, and inflation . Capehart also had negative ratings on Medicare, taxes, unemployment and inflation.
 Some complained about the senator's ""intemperate views on going to war with Cuba,"" but in the Harris poll only 1 percent of his constituents saw Cuba as the paramount issue .
 It does not appear that voters turned Capehart out because of his stand on Cuba or because of the president's stewardship of the crisis . Capehart failed to establish a positive image on issues and as a personality against a young, energetic candidate .
 The Cuban missile crisis may have actually helped Capehart because it permitted him to use the ""I was right all along"" refrain . Capehart may have been able to use that refrain because of the crisis .
 Age, asperity, and the issue of Medicare best explain the defeat of the dean of Republican senators, Wiley of Wisconsin . Wiley was a conservative Republican who served as a senator from Wisconsin .
 Throughout the campaign Wiley displayed a grumpy explosiveness and carelessness . Wiley displayed an explosiveness throughout the campaign .
 In early October a reporter asked him whether he had changed his opposition to Medicare . He said he had no intention of changing his stance on Medicare .
 Wiley told reporters before a press conference that he wanted questions ""without any nigger in the woodpile,"" and he shouted down still another reporter . Wiley later shouted down another reporter and shouted down a reporter .
 Nelson believed he had Wiley ""on the run,"" in part because Congress had recessed and Wiley had come home to display his offensive style . But then the Cuban missile crisis intruded .
 Wiley claimed headlines, making much of his supposed importance during the crisis . Wiley claims to have been a hero during his time in charge of the CIA .
 Senator Wiley also has been conferring with top defense and intelligence officials . One press release rea rea said Wiley was called to Washington by the President for consultation on the Cuban situation .
 The Cuban missile crisis may have reinvigorated Wiley's campaign, but Democrat Nelson won nonetheless with 52. percent of the vote .
 The president's handlin of the crisis, then, actually boosted the Republican-just as Kennedy had feared might happen . Kennedy had been worried that the crisis might happen, but it did .
 In New Hampshire a fractured Republican party permitted Thomas J McIntyre to become his state's first Democratic senator since 1932 . McIntyre is the New Hampshire Republican Party's first openly gay senator .
 In Idaho, Democrat Frank Church and Republican Leonard B Jordan won. In Idaho the two incumbents won. Frank Church. Church and Leonard B. Jordan. Jordan .
 Gracie Pfost's record on foreign and domestic issues was similar to that of Church's . Pfost was elected to the House of Representatives in 2008 .
 Republican incumbent Wallace F Bennett had urged a blockade and war against Cuba before the missile crisis . Bennett's position on the Cuban issue may have helped him in Utah .
 In South Carolina local Democrats believed that the missile crisis augmented Sen. Sen. John McCain's ability to speak to the media .
 Olin D Johnston's vote count by diverting attention from Mississippi controversy diverts attention from the Mississippi controversy .
 AsJohnston told the president by telephone in the midst of the missile crisis, ""Your stand . . meant a lot to our party down down," he said . The missile crisis was the height of the U.S. missile crisis .
 For criticisms of Alexander Wiley, see also Sheboygan Press, Oct., 1962; and Janesville Daily Gazette, Oct. 1962 .
 Johnston's drawing of 57. percent of the vote, however, suggests that he had the election well in hand before the Cuban crisis . Johnston: "I'm not surprised, but I'm glad to have had it all right before the crisis"
 Sen. Dirksen, Senate minority leader, defeated Democratic Rep. Ed Begala in a Senate race . Sen. Begala is a Democrat, a Republican, and a Republican .
 Kennedy had only given only lukewarm support to Yates . But by then, the senator's reelection seemed certain, and Kennedy had given little support .
 The state's other senator, Democrat Paul H Douglas, concluded that Dirksen and Kennedy had essentially struck a bargain whereby the president would not work to unseat the senator . Douglas concluded that the president and the senator had struck a deal .
 At one point during the missile crisis, Kennedy had remarked personally to Dirksen that he did not need to campaign . Kennedy had said he didn't need to be campaigning .
 The press speculates that Kennedy had written off a member of his own party . The press had picked up this bit of news, speculating that Kennedy .
 A familiar theory holds that voters tend not to favor newcomers in times of crisis . Voters tend to tend to favor new people in crisis times, says CNN's John D. Sutter .
 Cuban missile crisis benefited Senate and House incumbents-and 1962 was a good year for incumbents . To the extent of this, this is true, the Cuban crisis benefited incumbents in 1962, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Thomas B Curtis of Missouri later explained, "gave all the incumbents running for reelection a great build-up"
 This is what saved the Democrat-controlled Congress, the great plus given to incumbents . This is the best way to keep incumbents in Congress, says Julian Zelizer .
 In some cases, reapportionment paired incumbents against one another in new districts, ensuring the defeat of some . Some incumbents were paired against each other in new congressional districts .
 The crisis helped some Democrats and hurt some Democrats; it buoyed some Republicans and weakened some Republicans . The crisis also helped some Republicans but hurt some Republicans, including Democrats and Republicans .
 The historian cannot identify one election in 1962 decided by voter reaction to the missile crisis . Not a single outcome where the Cuban issue made the difference between victory and defeat .
 Kennedy did not engage Cuba and the Soviet Union in the missile crisis in 1962, 1962, in Oc67 Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 1962 . William 0.0.1032 .
 As Kennedy knew before October 16, the Democrats already enjoyed a formidable position in the elections . Kennedy knew that he was in danger of losing his seat .
 Republicans had taken the initiative on Cuba through their constant scolding of the administration, but they had not persuaded voters to dump Democrats . Republicans took the initiative in Cuba by scolding the administration .
 The Democrats had no political need to manufacture a war scare, and Kennedy did not welcome a new Cuban crisis . The Democrats did not want a new war scare .
 Kennedy's choice of quarantine was not dictated by politics, although the tactic of the television address may have been . From October 16 to October 22, Kennedy's quarantine lasted from October 16 until October 22 . Kennedy: "The quarantine is not a political ploy, but a quarantine is a quarantine
 From the alarmist speech to the fading of the crisis on October 28, Kennedy ruminated about the political effects of the imbroglio, but, again, his decisions did not reflect a partisan stance . Kennedy did not shift from the potentially unworkable quarantine to immediate and decisive military
 From October 28, when Khrushchev capitulated to Kennedy's ultimatum, to the election on November 6, both parties exploited Cuba for political advantage .
 Neither party, it seems, particularly profited from the Cuban missile crisis on election day . The politics of the Cuban issue in the fall of 1962 was spirited and acrimonious but had limited impact .
 Kennedy's personality traits, calculations of national security and hemispheric hegemony, and perceptions of international power, prestige, and credibility, will help shape his decisions in the Cuban missile crisis . Scholars will find answers in the study of his personality traits .