 Photographic evidence brought back by the U-2 shows Soviet missiles being set up in Cuba . The U.2 returned to the U.S. in Cuba in June 1945 .
 President John F kennedy broadcasts to the nation about the crisis on October 22, 1962 . He announces measures being taken by the USA to address the situation .
 Air Force Sergeant, photo interpreter, reads wet film in a base laboratory . He is a photo interpreter for the Air Force .
 U.S. Naval officers and sailors in Command Center viewing large wall map of the world . United States Navy officers and . sailors in command center . Command Center .
 Soviet ship bound for Cuba being monitored by U.S. aircraft overhead . Soviet ship headed for Cuba was monitored by United States aircraft over Soviet Union .
 Helicopter flying over sandy beach area of Hyannis Port, Massachusetts . Helicopter flies over sandy beaches area of the Massachusetts coast .
 The helicopter parked and Undersecretary of State, Averell Harriman, steps from the helicopter and is later seen with President Kennedy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk .
 Harriman reports on the successful negotiation of a limited nuclear test ban treaty . Harrimans: The treaty is a result of a successful negotiation by the UN .
 United States Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, Soviet Foreign Minister,Andrei Gromyko, and British Foreign secretary, Alexander Douglas-Home, signed the document for their respective nations, August 5, 1963 .
 She was billed as Nancy Davis in the film . Although they were married since 1952, she has been married since 1954 .
 Best Man, William Holden and his wife, Ardis Ankerson share the moment with them . William Holden was the best man at the wedding of his son's best friend .
 Next he is seen in a chair on the set of the TV series,""General Electric Theater,"" which he hosted from 1953 until 1962 . He hosted the series from 1953 to 1962 .
 He also toured General Electric plants to talk about the benefits of the free enterprise system . The free enterprise is a model of free enterprise .
 He is seen seated sharing a meal and posing with women employees of General Electric .
 Film shifts in time to the year 1932, when Reagan was first eligible to vote . Film shifts from 1932 to 1984 . Reagan was the president of the United States .
 Camera focuses on men's feet and they shuffle on a line at a soup kitchen . Video shows men shuffling on line at soup kitchen in New Zealand .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt is seen seated in an open car chatting with people surrounding it . Roosevelt was seen sitting in the open car with friends and family members .
 On inauguration day, March 4, 1933, he and his Vice President Henry Wallace are seen in the back of an open car . He is seen with Wallace in the car .
 Harry Truman sworn in for a second term as President . Truman was sworn in by Chief Justice of the United States Fred Vinson on January 20, 1949 . Truman's second term in office began in 1949 .
 Dwight D Eisenhower was the Republican Party's candidate for President in 1952 . Eisenhower won the Democratic Party's nomination for President . Eisenhower was nominated by the Republican National Convention .
 Reagan favored Richard Nixon over Democrat John F Kennedy in the 1960 national election . Reagan favored Nixon over Kennedy in 1960 presidential election .
 Goldwater was a Republican presidential candidate in 1964 . Goldwater ran for the second term in 1964, 1964 . He was the first to be elected to the presidency .
 Still photo of Goldwater next to Reagan, and then of Reagan defending Goldwater in a nation-wide address . Goldwater and Reagan met in 1964 .
 Reagan and wife Nancy, Nancy, and son, Ronald, walked together across field at their ranch in California . Reagan's ranch is located in California, California .
 Billboard advertising Reagan for Governor, and views of him on the campaign trail . Reagan ran for Governor of California in 1980s .
 Governor Edmond Brown won the governor's second term in November . Brown has been in office since November 2010 .
 Reagan spoke during the campaign, and then seen with Nancy when he won the gubernatorial election . Reagan won the governor's election in 1986 .
 Story of Cuban missile crisis in the month of October . United States Date: 1980, December 4 .
 Ben Bella is then seen with Cuban leader Castro who receives him in Cuba . Ben Bella has been in Cuba for more than a decade .
 Scientists in America reviewing designs for fallout shelters and visiting banks, stores, and municipal buildings and garages to assess them for worthiness as bomb fallout shelters .
 The fallout shelter supplies are seen transported by rail to defense department warehouses for distribution by local authorities to Community Fallout Shelters . Local authorities distribute the supplies to the shelters .
 Forklifts working at Naval Supply Center Oakland in California to arrange supplies for shelters . Vessels were used to transport supplies to shelters .
 Former President Harry Truman makes a speech at American Legion meeting . Truman attended the meeting in Washington, D.C.
 Former President Eisenhower gives a speech in Connecticut endorsing some candidates . Eisenhower endorsed some candidates for president in Connecticut .
 Air Force helicopter flies overhead and then seen landing on White House lawn . Helicopter lands on the lawn of the White House on the grounds of the Capitol .
 Historic view of soldiers marching beside monument to Battleship Maine in Havana . Historic view from soldiers marching alongside monument to battle ship .
 Monument to Battleship Maine destroyed in Havana . Crane atop monument as a wing is cut off .
 Fidel Castro and Che Guevara marched into Havana in 1959 with cheering throngs after succeeding in revolt against Batista . Fidel Castro was one of the leaders of the Cuban Revolution in Cuba .
 Fidel Castro and Soviet leader Khrushchev greeted each other at United Nations in 1961 . Fidel Castro was one of the leaders of the Soviet Union at the time .
 Soviet deputy premier Anastas Mikoyin greeted by Castro and crowd at Havana airport in 1960 . Soviet deputy prime minister Mikoyan was the leader of the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Cuban refugees in small boats being rescued by United States Coast Guard . U.S. Coast Guard rescues small boats carrying Cuban refugees . Cuban refugees were rescued by the Coast Guard in small boat boats .
 Military specialists examining films of aerial views of suspected missile installations in Cuba . Military experts say they have never seen any of the Cuban missile installations .
 Strategic Air Command disperses aircraft to possible needed locations . Air Force says it will send aircraft to the U.S.
 STRAC or Strategic Army Corps seen meeting after being assigned to the new command of United States Forces Atlantic . U.S. Forces Atlantic will be under command of U.N. Atlantic .
 Alerted U.S. Army units on training exercise to maintain combat readiness . Alerted units on exercise to keep readiness .
 Armored division tanks being loaded onto rail for transport from Fort Hood Texas to Fort Stewart Georgia . Then a MATS C-124 again is seen overhead .
 USAF F-104 Starfighter supersonic interceptor aircraft makes a landing . F-100 Starfighter fighter jets are a high-tech fighter jet .
 USAF F-105 Thunderchief supersonic fighter-bombers are armed by airmen at an airfield . USAF Thunderchiefs are armed with their weapons .
 Barbed wire obstacles are set up along a beach by U.S. troops . The beach is a popular tourist destination for the first time ever .
 A USAF RB-66 Destroyer reconnaissance aircraft takes off from an airstrip . The aircraft was a reconnaissance aircraft .
 United States Marines reach United States Navy Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba . The base is located in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, which is home to the U.S. Navy's Guantanamo Bay .
 Northwestern and Ohio State teams meet in a football game at Northwestern Stadium . Northwestern's long touchdown run is one of the longest touchdown runs of the season . Northwestern won the game by a score of 14-13 .
 Chuck Hiller, a Giants player makes the first National league grand slam ever in World Series play . Hiller made the first grand slam in the World Series . The grand slam is the first in the history of the National League .
 As play shifts to San Francisco, it rains for a long time delaying continuation of the series . The World Series is now in San Francisco .
 A crowd cheers at a baseball game between the Yankees and the San Francisco Giants . The Yankees beat the Giants 3-2 on Tuesday night .
 Jackie Kennedy with children of foreign diplomats . The First Lady of the United States. Jackie Kennedy . Jackie Kennedy. The President of United States .