 John Swift examines the events that led the world to the brink of nuclear catastrophe . John Swift looks at the events leading up to the nuclear crisis .
 For 14 days in October 1962 the world stood on the brink of nuclear war . President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting . ExCOMM met for 14 days on October 31, 1962 .
 The Soviet Union had secretly stationed nuclear weapons on the island of Cuba . The U.S. government demanded their withdrawal . The most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War followed .
 A single miscalculation made either in the White House or the Kremlin could have precipitated catastrophe . A single mistake made in the U.S. or Russia could precipitate catastrophe .
 In January 1959, Fulgencio Batista, the brutal, American-backed Cuban dictator, was overthrown by the guerrilla army of Fidel Castro . The Cuban Revolution was the result of the overthrow of Batista .
 Eisenhower’s administration welcomed the Cuban revolution, for Batista had long been an embarrassing ally . A friendly, democratic government in Cuba, addressing urgent social reform, would be far more stable .
 For America, Cuba provided a naval base at Guantanamo; it was an exotic, but conveniently close, tourist resort; and low paid Cuban labour made it an attractive investment area . Much of the island’s agriculture and industry was Americanowned .
 Governments in Washington have never hesitated to intervene to protect American interests . Hence governments in Washington had never hesitated .
 Castro could never tackle desperate problems of poverty, ill-health and illiteracy without harming US interests . Castro was never able to tackle those problems without harming U.S. interests . The problem was that Castro could not tackle those issues without harming his country .
 U.S. domination was a root cause of Cuba's problems, and it must be ended, Castro says . Castro: American domination was the root of Cuba’s problems and must end .
 Castro in fact articulated a widespread revulsion against this humiliating position . Castro said he spoke out against the idea of a state of state of mind .
 As American property was expropriated by the new government, Castro’s defeated enemies were treated mercilessly . Elections were postponed while Castro secured his grip on power .
 The Cuban leader's anti-American diatribes came from the new leader . Yet his popularity in Cuba grew as his anti-U.S. diatribe grew .
 Castro was certainly to turn to communism in the face of U.S. hostility . Whether this was true then is debateable, but it is not debateable .
 Eisenhower ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to overthrow him, and the CIA orchestrated sabotage raids on Cuba to destabilise the regime . The CIA orchestrated a series of attacks on Cuba in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Economic sanctions were imposed, especially against Cuba’s sugar crop, which was its main export . Cuba was hit hard by the sanctions, but it has since recovered .
 Castro is an increasingly bitter and vocal enemy of the U.S. Castro's hostility has made him more secure, he says . Castro is now an increasingly vocal and vocal opponent of the United States, he writes .
 In the logic of the Cold War, this made him a potential partner of the Soviet Union . In the 1970s, he was seen as a strong ally of the West . He was a key ally in the Soviet Cold War .
 U.S. feared growing ties with the USSR made him appear a growing threat to US hegemony in the western hemisphere which could not be tolerated . Steadily growing ties .
 Among the steps taken by the CIA to remove Castro, a brigade of about 1,400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles was raised . The Bay of Pigs was one of the CIA's first steps in removing Castro from Cuba .
 The CIA decided to use this force in a largescale invasion of the island, with the backing of its own air force . The CIA used this force to invade the island in a massive operation .
 This, it was assumed, would trigger mass risings and overthrow Castro’s government . It was assumed that this, along with the Castro government, would lead to mass uprising . This, however, was not the case .
 Eisenhower, who had after all been Supreme Allied Commander at D-Day, recognised the risks of failure and hesitated . Eisenhower was the supreme Allied commander at the Battle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Kennedy would be left to decide whether or not to launch the invasion . Kennedy would then be left with the decision .
 Castro hoped that a new president would be less hostile to his revolution . Perhaps Castro hoped a new leader would be a less hostile president . Castro hopes that the new president will be a more sympathetic president .
 Business interests alarmed that if Castro was left unpunished he might start a fashion for nationalising U.S. investments in Latin America . Cuban exile groups were determined not to allow him to forget it .
 Kennedy seems to have been offended by Castro, who defied the might of the U.S. and refused to be intimidated . Furthermore, Kennedy seemed to be personally offended .
 Kennedy became obsessed with the fear that Castro might prove able to export his revolution to other Latin American nations . Kennedy feared Castro might be able to do so in Latin America .
 Defence Secretary Robert McNamara admitted the administration was ‘hysterical’ over Castro . Defence Secretary McNamara later admitted that the White House was 'hysterically' over the Castro affair .
 Kennedy was even more hostile to Castro than Eisenhower had been, and a great deal less cautious . Kennedy was less cautious than Eisenhower, and less cautious, in Cuba .
 Kennedy was unaware that there were risks attached to the CIA’s plan . Kennedy was probably unaware of the risks attached .
 He approved the project, which was put together in a remarkably slip-shod manner . The project was approved by the government, but it's not clear why .
 Mass risings were expected on the basis of nothing more than wishful thinking, says the author of the book "Mass risings" and "wishful thinking"
 Virtually nothing seems to have been done to prepare a new government that might enjoy some degree of popular support . Virtually no preparations have been made to prepare the new government .
 The brigade of Cuban exiles was expected to withdraw into the interior and launch a guerrilla campaign . If no mass risings occurred, then the brigade of exiles would withdraw . The brigade is expected to launch guerrilla campaign in the interior .
 The chosen landing ground, called the Bay of Pigs, led only to a swamp – and so there was no possibility of this happening . But the chosen landing grounds, called The Bay of Piggy, were only a swamp - and so no .
 Kennedy was convinced it would be possible to launch this invasion without the world being aware of American involvement . Most bizarrely, Kennedy believed the world would not be aware of the invasion .
 He felt he could convince the international community that Cubans were liberating themselves, using only their own resources . He wanted to convince the world that Cuba was liberating itself using only its resources .
 There was speculation in the press that the CIA was planning an invasion, this belief was quite astonishing . Yet as there was already speculation that the U.S. was preparing to invade, the belief was astonishing .
 Kennedy appears to have been swept along by a sense of urgency, and warnings that the whole idea was half-baked were ignored .
 He made it very clear to the CIA that United States forces would not intervene if the plan went awry . U.S. forces will not intervene in the event, he says .
 CIA officers convinced that once the invasion was launched, U.S. prestige would be so bound up in its success that Kennedy would have to support it . Senior CIA officers were aware of the weaknesses of the plan, however, .
 1,400 ill-trained, poorly equipped exiles were committed to what became a humiliating fiasco . Perhaps this explains why, in April 1961, they were willing to commit to what was a humiliating affair .
 Most ammunition and communications equipment were destroyed before it could be landed . Most of the ammunition was destroyed before the plane landed .
 There were no risings, and United States forces did nothing to support the exiles . U.S. forces did not support exiles, and the U.N. did nothing, and there was no uprising .
 The Bay of Pigs was a shattering blow to Kennedy, who had to face international ridicule for the fiasco . Operation Mongoose was the first operation to try and defeat the Soviet Union .
 A U.S. invasion was not an option in the wake of the Bay of Pigs, since Kennedy could hardly claim to be liberating a people who had rallied to Castro . A United States invasion of Cuba in the 1960s was not a viable option .
 The President did authorise the CIA to undertake Operation Mongoose . But he did not authorise it to undertake the operation .
 Castroites were assassinated, Castroites assassinated, foreign suppliers bribed to send faulty goods to Cuba . Sabotage raids multiplied, Castroite was assassinated . Foreign suppliers were bribed into sending faulty goods into Cuba . Castroites had been assassinated .
 Kennedy also warned the Soviet Union against challenging the U.S. in the western hemisphere . Kennedy warned the Soviets against challenging America in the west .
 Sending defensive weapons, such as surface to air missiles, would be tolerated . Surface to surface missiles, which carried nuclear warheads, would not be allowed .
 40,000 U.S. military personnel practised invading an unnamed island to overthrow a dictator threateningly codenamed Ortsac in 1962 .
 The Soviet government had welcomed the Cuban revolution, and as American hostility to it grew, so did Soviet support . The Cuban revolution was a major source of U.S. support .
 Cuba was growing increasingly dependent upon Moscow for military and economic aid . Cuba was never really an unquestioning servant of Moscow, but the state was never unquestioningly loyal to Moscow .
 In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, Castro declared his commitment to Communism for the first time . Castro declared himself committed to Communism in the wake of the attack .
 In Moscow, as in Havana, there was a growing conviction that Kennedy was preparing to invade Cuba . And in Moscow, there were growing concerns that the president was preparing for an invasion of Cuba .
 As it was the only communist state in the western hemisphere, Khrushchev could not allow this . Khruschev was forced to step down from the Communist Party in the West .
 Kennedy had campaigned for the presidency proclaiming he would match the supposed Soviet advantage, closing the ‘missile gap’
 Kennedy ordered a major expansion of U.S. ICBM forces . Even when he found that the strategic balance was, in reality, heavily in America’s favour, Kennedy still ordered a massive expansion of forces .
 Khrushchev was desperate to divert resources from the military to domestic reform . He faced ruinous expense to fill a very real ‘missile gap’ that was in America’s favour .
 In 1962 American Jupiter missiles were stationed in Turkey, well within range of Soviet targets . In 1962, the missiles were deployed in Turkey . The U.S. Jupiter missiles had been stationed in the country .
 This would be a cheap way to offset the American missile advantage, it would deter an American invasion of the island, and it would make the U.S. more accommodating over other issues, such as Berlin . It might make the United States more accommodating .
 Its very existence repudiated the East German government’s claim to be the legitimate government of all of Germany . The East-East German government was overthrown by the West in the 1980s .
 Twice war had seemed near as the Soviet Union tried to force the west out . Twice war seemed near in the 1980s as the west tried to take advantage of Russia .
 In 1961 the Berlin Wall had been built to prevent a mass exodus from the East to West Germany . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to prevent an exodus from East Germany from the West .
 According to international law, if Cuba was willing to accept these weapons, it was perfectly legitimate to send them . Also, according to the law, the weapons were allowed to be sent to Cuba by Cuba .
 In 1962 Khrushchev decided to send secretly three MRBM and two IRBM regiments to Cuba – a total of about 80 missiles in all . About 80 missiles were sent to Cuba in total .
 Also sent were 12 tactical, or battlefield, nuclear missiles, to be used by the Soviet commander, at his own discretion, if the island was invaded . Also sent was 12 tactical or battlefield nuclear missiles .
 Khrushchev felt the need to assert himself in the Kremlin, where he still stood in Stalin’s shadow . Documents released after the end of the Cold War also suggest that he was always a gambler, always gambler .
 His only doubt seems to have been that Castro might refuse the missiles, though he accepted them with little hesitation . The Cuban leader accepted the missiles without hesitation .
 The Blockade was meant to be kept secret until the missiles were operational . It was intended to be a fait accompli for the USA, which would have to live with them .
 Soviet technicians were told that speed was their first priority . They made few attempts to camouflage their work, which would probably have been impossible completely to disguise anyway .
 By August 1962 the first rumours of Soviet missiles in Cuba, from émigré reports and CIA leaks, appeared in the U.S. press . The first rumours appeared in August 1962 .
 This made the sense of shock when they were discovered by a U-2 spy plane, on 14 October 1962, even more profound . The discovery was made by the U.S. Air Force in 1962 .
 Khrushchev had never considered that the presence of missiles in Cuba would be deemed a monstrous threat in the U.S. He says he never considered the threat posed by missiles in the country .
 Kennedy and the U.S. would not tolerate the massive blow to their prestige that would result if the weapons were allowed to remain . Nor had he realised that Kennedy or the United States would .
 In fact the weapons would make very little difference to a strategic balance that was massively in America’s favour . In fact, the weapons weapons would have made little difference .
 In the Cold War appearances were vital for the U.S. But their presence would give the appearance of a weakened America . In the 1960s, it would have been seen as a weakened nation .
 The Bay of Pigs had taught Kennedy the dangers of acting impetuously . Yet the Bay had taught him to act impetuous .
 President Obama formed a special advisory group to weigh various options . This was named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council .
 Excomm – made up of ‘hawks’ who favoured the immediate use of force and ‘doves’ – met almost continuously for 13 days and subjected proposals to intense scrutiny . Excomm were made up 'hawks' who favoured immediate force and 'doves' who
 An unprovoked attack, involving air strikes probably followed by an invasion, would be hard to justify . Castro’s forces would resist and could be expected to fight a prolonged and bitter guerrilla war, the author says .
 At least ten per cent of the missiles might survive an air strike . Also, large numbers of Soviet technicians would be killed, and this might lead to war between the Superpowers .
 Even the 'doves' in Excomm were largely agreed that the missiles must go, and without American concessions in return . Nevertheless, even the ‘doves’ in ExComm were .
 President Roosevelt’s term ‘quarantine’ was preferred by Kennedy, as it would be seen as less of a warlike act . Yet there was an alternative to invasion – a naval blockade of Cuba, though .
 This would violate international law, and while it would prevent new weapons arriving, it might do little to remove those already on Cuba . This would be a violation of international law . While it would stop new weapons from arriving in Cuba, it would also remove existing weapons .
 It was a limited and measured response, which would avoid forcing Khrushchev into a corner where he have to fight to avoid utter humiliation . But it was a more limited response to the crisis, but it was not as severe as it was expected .
 Only on the 22 October, when the blockade was prepared, was news of the missiles and America’s response made public . The blockade was only made public on 22 October .
 It caused immense shock in the USA and internationally – it had to, to drown out the Soviet response that they were acting legally and responding in kind to United States actions in Turkey . The Soviet response to the U.S. action in Turkey had to be drowned out by the United States
 Khrushchev’s reply was to bluster that the USSR would assert its rights on the high seas . He accused Kennedy of bringing the world to the brink of a nuclear catastrophe .
 27 Soviet ships headed towards the blockade, many carrying military equipment, presumably including missile parts . Kennedy had assumed that Khrushchev would back down, but had to consider what to do if his blockade was defied .
 News reached Kennedy that the first Soviet ships had stopped and turned back . As the world stood on the brink of nuclear war, news reached Kennedy . The first Soviet ship turned back and was the first to turn back .
 Nuclear missiles remained on Cuba and Kennedy was determined to remove them from Cuba . Kennedy: "I'm not going to let them go. I'm going to keep them forever"
 A resolution had to be found, and quickly, before Kennedy was pushed by national panic he had generated to launch an attack on Cuba . A resolution must be found before Kennedy could be pushed by the national panic .
 Both leaders, it is clear, had become horrified at the prospects in front of them . Both leaders became horrified at what they had become .
 Kennedy ordered the navy to allow Soviet and Soviet-chartered merchant ships not carrying arms to pass unsearched . Kennedy was desperate to avoid pushing Khrushchev too far, to the disgust of Excomm ‘hawks’
 Khrushchev, for his part, sent a long, rambling letter to Kennedy, appealing to reason and trust to prevent a catastrophe . Kennedy insisted that if U.S. threats to Cuba were ended, the issue of weapons would disappear . The letter was sent to Kennedy by Kh
 Castro was urging Khrushchev to use the missiles if Cuba was invaded . Castro was reportedly urging the use of the missiles in Cuba if the country invaded .
 Khrushchev’s response was to order his military commander in Cuba to do nothing of the sort without direct orders from Moscow . The incident occurred in the early 1950s .
 A new message was received from Moscow offering a specific deal by which the missiles in both Turkey and Cuba would be removed and the USA and USSR would jointly guarantee the security of both nations . A new deal was offered by Moscow offering to remove missiles from both countries .
 This was deemed unacceptable by Excomm, as it would mean backing down in the face of Soviet pressure . This would have led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 On 27 October a U-2 was shot down over Cuba – it later turned out on the order of the local Soviet commander on his own initiative . The incident happened in Cuba on 27 October . It was later revealed that the local commander had ordered the shooting .
 It seemed initially that Khrushchev was escalating the crisis, something he was in fact desperate to avoid . But it seemed initially, initially that it was a mistake to try to escalate the crisis . The crisis in the 1960s was a time of crisis in which he was trying to avoid
 Kennedy outraged the ‘hawks’ by ordering the Turkish missiles to be disabled to prevent any accident . Kennedy angered the 'hawks' by ordering them to disable the missiles to prevent an accident .
 In the message to Khrushchev agreed by Excomm, Kennedy insisted that the missiles in Cuba must be removed . Kennedy offered to end the blockade and pledged not to invade Cuba if that happened .
 Had Khrushchev rejected the deal, it is likely that an American invasion of Cuba would have been launched within days .
 Had the Russian used tactical nuclear weapons, whose presence was not suspected by the Americans, a full-scale thermonuclear war would probably have followed . Had the Russians used tactical weapons, their presence would have been not suspected, the U.S. says .
 Khrushchev was himself desperate to find a settlement and aware that a non-invasion pledge would meet his most important need, did agree . He did agree, but was also aware of the need to avoid invasion .
 Castro was enraged that Khrushchev had not consulted him over the settlement . The negotiations followed over the means of verifying the departure of the missiles, largely caused by Castro .
 In the end the Russian ships departed with their hatches uncovered, allowing the Americans to see the missiles leaving . The Russian ships left with their hatsches uncovered . The Americans were able to watch the missiles leave .
 Kennedy refused to confirm the pledge not to invade Cuba . To repay Castro for his awkwardness, Kennedy refused the pledge . Kennedy refused .
 In fact, however, it was observed, though small-scale sabotage raids by the CIA continued . The CIA continued to use the CIA to sabotage the CIA .
 Credit and Blame Kennedy certainly came out of the crisis with a reputation greatly enhanced in the west . Kennedy's reputation was enhanced by the crisis in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev, for his part, was deemed by his colleagues to have suffered a humiliation . The crisis was one of the issues that led to his being deposed .
 Both men showed responsible leadership and a determination to find a peaceful resolution, says CNN.com .
 Both rejected hard-line advice and were careful not to escalate the crisis . Both reject hard-liners' advice and are careful to not escalate the situation .
 Khrushchev might even be said to have shown greater courage in making what was publicly seen as the larger concessions . The Soviet Union was seen to have made the largest concessions .
 In the aftermath of the crisis they both worked to improve relations and prevent a recurrence of such a confrontation .
 Kennedy’s hope to build on these steps, brutally ended by his assassination in November 1963, further heightened his statesman-like image . Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Khrushchev should have realised the dangers of surreptitiously introducing nuclear weapons into Cuba, writes Andrew Hammond .
 U.S. reaction should have been predictable, and the US reaction should be predictable . They could not realistically be kept secret, and they could have been kept secret . The US reaction to the revelations was predictable .
 Conventional forces, perhaps a couple of Soviet armoured brigades, should have been enough to deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba, without risking major confrontation .
 Kennedy allowed his vendetta against Castro to overcome good sense . Kennedy, for his part, allowed good sense to overcome bad sense . Castro was the leader of the Cuban revolution .
 A secret message to Moscow, requiring the quiet removal of the missiles, might have avoided a confrontation . Khrushchev might have given him the chance to prevaricate until the missiles were operational . The message might have prevented a confrontation with Moscow .
 Perhaps Kennedy felt he had to make a tough stand after the Bay of Pigs . He may have had an eye on the impact this would have on the forthcoming Congressional elections .
 In the final analysis, the world was fortunate that the greatest crisis of the Cold War arose when it did . The world was lucky that the world's greatest crisis arose at the time it did, he says .
 In 1962, Kennedy and Khrushchev had days to consider their position and think through their options . Kennedy had a few days to think through his options . In 1962 they were able to make a decision .
 At a later date, when technological advances had made missile launch times shorter and submarines quieter and when decisions could be made in minutes, the consequences could have been catastrophic .
 John Swift is a Lecturer in History at St Martin’s College, Lancaster . He is author of The Palgrave Concise Historical Atlas of the Cold War .