 Decisions are seldom final and tend to lack concrete beginning and ending points . Decisions often don't have concrete beginning or ending points. Decisions tend to be final and often have no concrete end points .
 There is an imperfect link between the policy process and the policy outcome, says David Cameron . Cameron: "There is a perfect link between policy and the outcome"
 Decision-making is much more complicated than just weighing external factors, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Dangers of worst-case analysis and wish-only thinking . Specific and cumulative historical experiences . Specific historical experiences. Specific historical historical experiences. Dangers .
 The individuals who share power disagree on what should be done because they are located at different places in the government and see different aspects of the problem . The individuals in power disagree because of different parts of the government .
 Government leaders are merely constellations of loosely allied organizations on top of which the government leaders sit . They are merely Constellations . The government leaders are simply the leaders of the country .
 The constellation acts only as component organizations perform routines . The constellation is only one of the constellations that perform routine routines .
 To ensure predictable performance, the standards are often limited, unduly formalized, and sluggish . The standards should not be limited, and should be more formalized and formalized .
 A free and open exchange because there will be no organizational interests to protect . A free exchange is a free exchange because of no organization interests to be protected .
 Social practices enabled people to act, frame policies as they did, and wield power . What social practices enabled them to act and frame policies? What did social practices enable people to do so?
 "Value of the status quo and be risk adverse with respect to gains and risk accepting when it comes to losses" Leads them to value status quo . Risk-adverse attitude to be more risk adverse .
 Take more risks to defend the state\u2019s international position than to enhance it . Take more risk to defend state's international position, rather than enhance it, officials say . Take risks to 'defend' state's position in the international community .
 Pluralist and bureaucratic models help explain why policy makers act as they do once they are in place . But they tell us little about how they got there, such as how they did .
 The more open the policy process and the longer the agenda is on the policy agenda, the more useful will be the bureaucratic and pluralistic models . The more successful models will be bureaucratic, pluralistic and bureaucratic models, says David Cameron .
 Fidel Castro was able to mobilize the disaffected rural peasants in Cuba to topple Fulgencio Batista in 1959 . Fidel Castro mobilized disaffected peasants to topple the Batista regime in Cuba .
 Castro assumed dictatorial powers and announced his goal was to create a society based on Marxist principles . Castro said he wanted to create an 'society based on Marxism' Castro assumed power in 1959 .
 The invasion took place at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and proved to be a disaster . The invasion was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Instead of rallying to the invaders, the local population supported the Castro government . The Castro government was overthrown in Cuba in 1959 .
 Failure embarrassed the United States and weakened President Kennedy in the eyes of the Soviet Union . The failure embarrassed the U.S. President Kennedy .
 Kennedy: "It strengthened my resolve to act more vigorously in any future crisis" Kennedy: 'It strengthened his resolve to take action after the crisis'
 In Oct 1962, United States spy planes discovered missile sites under construction in Cuba . U.S. spy planes found missile sites in Cuba under construction .
 CIA agent observed the rear profile of a strategic missile, but transmission time to Washington of such information routinely took 9 to 12 days and was not available for the USIB to consider .
 The USAF argued that the increased danger of the U-2 being shot down necessitated a uniformed rather than a CIA pilot . The U.2 was shot down by the USAF in the 1950s .
 The Navy saw issue as implementing the blockade without meddling and interference from political leaders . The Navy said it was implementing the issue without interference from politicians .
 Anderson picked up the Manual of Navy Regulations, waved it in McNamara’s face, and shouted, It\u2019s all in there . Anderson then waved the manual in the face of McNamara .
 McNamara replied, I don’t give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done; I want to know what you are going to do, now. McNamara . McNamara: "I want to see what you're going to be doing now, now" McNamara
 The Bay of Pigs had left Kennedy looking weak . Cuba was Kennedy’s political Achilles heel .
 Khrushchev had directly challenged Kennedy where he knew the President was most vulnerable after assuring him he wouldn't do so . Kennedy had assured Khruschev he wouldn’t challenge him in such a vulnerable place .
 George Ball is Under Secretary of State for Economic, Business, and Agricultural Affairs . Ball is a former Secretary-General of State . Ball has been in charge of the U.S. National Security Council since 2009 .