 His speeches generated a great deal of hope and expectations in Eastern Europe . But his speeches generated great expectations for the region .
 Khrushchev's speech was followed by a terrified silence only broken by his own voice . This was followed, followed by the silence of Khrushvic himself . The world's most famous photograph of a Soviet Union leader was taken in 1956 .
 Space Race began with launch of Sputnik satellite in 1957 . He started to build up Russian power  Space Race started with launch .
 On November 4th, 1956 Soviet tanks and troops moved into Budapest to crush the revolution . The revolution was the start of the revolution in Hungary .
 The United States owned 90% of the island’s mineral wealth and had other major economic investments in the country . The U.S. owned the island's mineral wealth, and other major investments .
 In 1959, a Communist revolutionary named Fidel Castro overthrew the corrupt Cuban government . Fidel Castro was the leader of the Cuban Revolution . Castro was overthrown by the government in 1959 .
 Castro promised free elections, but instead moved to take absolute control of government, media, and all major organizations . Castro promised to take full control of the media, government, and government . Castro has been in power for more than a decade .
 The U.S. was not at all happy about the loss of American property in Cuba, nor about having a Communist country right off the coast of Florida . America’s Response: America”s response .
 Further threats and economic pressure pushed Cuba closer to the Soviets . Cuba's relationship with the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s was a point of friction .
 In the U.S., the Central Intelligence Agency trained a small army of Cuban exiles with the intention of sending them back to Cuba to overthrow Castro . In the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the CIA sent the exiles back to the United States to topple Castro .
 The “invasion” was a complete failure as the Cuban military quickly overpowered and arrested the invaders . The Cuban military was quick to arrest the invaders and quickly overpowered them .
 At first, the Soviet leader Kruschev threatened retaliation, but the Soviet Union did not really want to get involved in a war on America’s doorstep . The U.S. did not want to go to war on its doorstep .