 General Parker Admiral Sharp General Burchinal General Hayes General Hayes . General Hayes made a series of decisions concerning the Cuban crisis . Hayes made the most important decisions during the Cuban Crisis .
 Subject chronology comprises the important decisions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff relating to Cuba taken during the period 15 October 28 November 1962 . Includes summaries of pertinent intelligence data and implementation of decisions where considered appropriate and informative .
 It also contains a list of highand low-level reconnaissance flights over Cuba, and brief resumes of Service activities during the crisis .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff hold executive sessions . Joint Chiefs meet in Washington, D.C., for the first time in a year . Joint chiefs of staff hold executive meetings .
 Decisions and actions of, or guidance given, given by, higher authority, except in a few instances where inclusion was considered necessary? to explain JCS actions?
 o$ JL :-• • DISAjDFWSW) <P7,TS-£££ £7~i »/^k~^js^sssc 4. Routine decisions, or decisions of so minor significance as not to warrant inclusion . o
 Also attached is a draft report of the operational aspects of the Cuban Crisis prepared by j'-3 for submission to OSD . Draft report is for use by the Secretary of Defense in Congressional meetings .
 It was based on the attached condensed version of the Chronology and a Cuban Chronology prepared by the Department of the Navy .
 It is requested that you review the attachments in order to discuss at an early meeting the terms of reference desired for the formulation of Congressional presentations for the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 It is further requested that the attached documents be returned to the Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff, as soon as practicable .
 Beginning mid -July 1962 an unusual number of i voyages of Soviet passenger and cargo ships to Cuba were observed . Evidence of military cargoes on cargo ships, including vehicles and construction and electronic 3 gear .
 On 5 August a high-altitude reconnaissance flight failed to reveal any significant military buildup . The flight was part of a reconnaissance mission to find out what was happening in the region .
 On 13 August DIA reported indications that C Soviets were possibly equipping Cuba with.ECM equipment . DIA: C Soviets may have been equipping the Cuban government with ECM .
 Highaltitude photography of 29 August revealed the first glgnif leant developments in Cuban military posture . In 31*r-4*ijGi> £:ellminary interpretation of highaltitude . photography .
 Further analysis in following days revealed an additional site, a possible MIG-21 and 5 aircraft crates, and a possible SSM missile site . The last was a coastal -defense, cruise-missile site .
 Also reported indications of heavy tanks, artillery, etc. etc., all evaluated as defensive in character . Heavy tanks and heavy artillery are also seen in the area .
 Two high-altitude reconnaissance missions were s flown on 26 and 29 September . Two missions were carried out on the same date .
 The DIA established a special Cuban Situation Room with personnel and facilities for a 24-hour operation . On 4 October, in recognition of the developing C Cuban situation and in order to focus the DIA effort on Cuba .
 DIA sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff which stated that these crates had been equated to the type used to carry IL-28 fuselages, and that this information was the first hard evtd indicating th* probable a *n
 On or about 10 October the information, together with a summary of the preceding Cuban missions during August and September, was briefed to the 0A3D/ISA and Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Scarf .
 SAC instructed to prepare for a tf-2 overflight of Cuba, to be flown the first available date beginning 14 October 1962 . Department of Defense assumed operational responsibility for reconnaissance flights over Cuba .
 SAC was instructed to penetrate and exit Cuba at specific coordinates which would entail photographic coverage of the previously mentioned Pinar del Rio search area . DIA had selected as an area suspected of being associated with MRBMs. SAC had been instructed to enter Cuba at certain coordinates .
 It consisted of a single pass across the western end of the island in accordance with the above instructions .
 This mission 5 TOP SECRET did not elicit any defensive reaction from Cuban air defenses . The mission was carried out by a U.S. Navy strike on the Cuban coast .
 SAC was authorized to conduct several additional missions with a view toward obtaining complete photographic coverage of the island as quickly as possible .
 To ask CINCONAD for estimate of the air TS defense situation in the South East CONUS and recommendations on further steps . To ask for estimate . of the . air defense situation . in the . South East . CONUS .
 Planning for operations against Cuba TS should assume some form of mobilization initially not to exceed the 150,000 authorized by the current Congressional Joint Resolution . The current Joint Resolution says the U.S. military will not be able to mobilize 150,500 troops against Cuba .
 The maintenance of secrecy with respect to any projected operations against Cuba was fundamental to success, particularly between the . time of decision and the time of the air strike and implementation of the invasion plans .
 Photographic evidence of an aircraft fuselage, probably an IL-23, and 21 aircraft crates was presented . Aircraft fuselage was found in the wreckage .
 Cubans may attack U.S. and Guantanamo, high combat losses, loss of surprise . Selective MRBM strike dangerous not eliminate total missile threat, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Must also strike tanks and all other significant military targets -.those which can affect United States or its forces . Must strike tanks, all other . significant military . targets . Must also target tanks and other significant . military targets . -those which . can affect U.S. or its
 What air defense measures should Oe Augment orbiting patrols to 75 vs. 2 a 12. Ode Augment will be orbiting around the world .
 Consideration should be given to declaration of emergency . Up to 150,00C should be considered as a possibility of emergency declaration .
 Cuba waS sufficiently great to w-rant attac* even afer afer "" the missiles were operational . Cuba was so great that it was able to launch missiles into Cuba .
 CINCONAD was to be authorized to augment the air defense of southeastern United States implementation On 17 :ctober, JCS directed TS CIN CONAD to taKe necessary a:tion without delay .
 Soviet reaction to U.S. action in Cuba could be additional pressure on us (Berlin, Quemoy, Iran, Turkey, Korea, Korea) most likely place Berlin . Soviet reaction could be further pressure on the United States .
 Implementation The JSSC produced a study, which the Chairman, JCS, took to a meeting of the ""Inner Council"" at 1600. Implementation The study was carried out by the Chairman of the JCS . Implementation
 In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, the JCS confirmed their viev/s, presented orally the day before, advocating air attack against all missile sitrs, all -cmbat aircraft and nuclear storage . The elimination of the Castro regime would require an invasion, preferably under
 The total launcn sites identified co date were two confirmed and one o-obable MRBM sites and two MR/IR5M sites under construction . In 29 August photographv, only the initial construction of one of the MR-IRBM 3ites appeared .
 Li: It was decided that only an air attack would be executed against ni3sile sites, IL-2Sa should also be hit . Li: Only an air strike would be carried out against the sites, instead of a direct strike .
 Implementation CJC3 to present view to State and Defense Departments . Implementation CJ 3 to present views to state and defense Departments. Implementation CJ3 will be presented to State, Defense and Foreign Office .
 Implementation Decisic . overtaken by cancellation of Exercise on 20 Oct. 2015 . Cancellation of Exercise due to be held on October 20 .
 Implementation CINCLANT completed negotiation for use of JBH^HHHSitf on 22 October; -used as a staging and supply base . Implementation Cinclant completed negotiation .
 Analysis of 17 October photography revealed two more MRBM field launch sites, of which there had been no evidence as late as 5 September . October analysis of 17 . October photography found two more . MRBM fields launch sites .
 The total MRBM field launch sites now numbered four confirmed and one probable, with a total of 16 MRBM launchers and an expectation of 8 more launchers soon to be deployed . Sixteen 1100ra. missiles were considered operationally ready, capable of being launched .
 The two MR/IRBM sites reported on 18 October were now evaluated as probable 2200m. Additionally, the two sites reported to have been evaluated as possible 2200 m. The two sites were now considered probable 2199m.
 On 20 October Navy became engaged in preparation of position and policy papers, a scenario, and implementing instructions re limited blockade . Position papers completed and provided to White House on same day .
 U.S. must realize strain would be placed on United States alliances and problems would arise with respect Berlin . Berlin. United States must realize strains would be put on alliances, says U.N. diplomat .
 Implemencacion jcs provided tneir individual and corporate views to the President at 1000 hours on 19 October . Implemancacion Jcs provided the President’s views to him .
 On 19 October CINCSAC directed movement of nonalert aircraft from TS 5 . Requirement existed for movement of one TS *• SAC authorized to move aircraft from T5 .
 White House approves "Cuban Scenario" for white House use . JCS actions taken and projected through 29 October . White House approved the scenario .
 To approve warning order to CINCSTRIKE regarding his Army and Air Force units passing to CINCLANT in event latter «s OPLANS approved for implementation » To approve order to . Cincstrike regarding his . Army and . Air Force . units pass to C
 Army and Air Force units put under OPCON of CINCLANT on 21 October . Implementation in accordance with JCS directive, appropriate STRICCM Army and . Air Force .
 SecDef PHIBRIGLEX cancelled on 20 October . Implementation of PhibRigleX cancelled after approval of SecDef PhIBRigLEX .
 The total number of MRBM sites remained at five, four of which were confirmed . Two of the confirmed sites had an emergency capability to launch some of their missiles eight hours after decision to launch . The other two confirmed sites could be operational by 26 October .
 To approve a ""Military Scenario for Use TS of Armed Force Against Cuba,"" outlined the action already taken by the JCS and the actions requiring JCS approval, on a daily basis, between 20 October and 2 November; CJCS authorized to use scenario, in his discussions with
 Certain tasks would be assigned, as follows J Preparation of acinar ic «si^port blockade plan . Navy. Navy. would be tasked with carrying out tasks .
 Preparation of ne. air strike plan against missiles . Navy. Air Force. c Prepared to attack missiles . Air Force prepares to launch missiles against missile range .
 Preparation of air defense plan to protect United States territory and shipping Air Force and Navy . U.S. Air Force, Navy and Air Force will use air defense plans to protect U.N. territory .
 A total of -wo :.:.:r.:irmed and one possible ri:c-iJ I.12M sites, and si/, fielj :iH5M 3ites containing f:ur ii-^icner3 2acr., had been 
 Implementation SAC ini.rv.te2 ;n TS 22 October; by 24 October . JH_fl Hjwere dispersed dispersed.
 F:r prctecti.cn of United States shipping in Florida Straits, winder* Passage, and Yucatan. CINCLANT .
 Implementation CINCLANT instructed on 22 October; air and surface fcrtes already assigned task on 21 October . Implementation Cinclant instructed to 22 October . Air, surface and aircrtes assigned task to 21 October. Implementation C inCLANT instructions on 22 Oct.
 i'tEZ never established; instead ""Special Civil Air Regulation"" issued by FAA on 24 October . Implementation On 22 October Air Force and S FAA representatives agreed to scope of MEZ, but MEZ was never established .
 Emergency operational capability as of 17 October; POC as of 22 October . POC has been declared operational capability since October .
 At least five Soviet missile regiments would become operational in Cuba, each regiment to have eight launchers and at least 16 missiles . There were ""clear indications"" available on 22 October .
 This represented a first salvo potential of 40 missiles, with a refire capability of another 40 . This represented the potential of an initial salvo of 40 . missiles .
 A total of two nuclear weapons storage sites have been identified to date . Another possible nuclear storage site has been found in the area .
 Ann*v*v:'eras*it of extension TS of enlistments until reserves call*i up . To hold up ann.*v*i: It will hold up an extension of enlistment until reserves are call* i up .
 Navy and Marine Corps personnel tours of duty extended indefinitely on 23 October . Implementation Reserves not called up, r; except for Air Force units indicated above .
 Security code word category to be eliminated unless SecDef feels it should be retained . SecDef will have to decide whether to retain the category .
 USCINCEDR to be instructed to destroy TS or make inoperable JUPITERs if any attempt made to fire them without specific authorization of President. USCincedR. to be told to destroy or make JUPERs or make them unusable . USCINC
 Latin American and NATO attaches and TS NATO Military Committee to be briefed prior to President's speech . Latin American, NATO attaches, TS NATO military committee will be briefed before President's address .
 Implementation Task Porce CHARLIE began departing Port Hood on 23 October, closed Port Stewart on 29 October . Port Stewart was closed October 29 . Port Hood began leaving Port Hood 23 October .
 "Cinclant go be requested to modify his TS message concerning command set-up for CINCLANT OPLAN 314" "CINCLant OPLan 314" is a command that can be used to send messages to the user of the command line .
 JCS answer to President's question conTS cerning action in event Soviet build-up in Cuba continues to be that blockade should be stepped up . Decision on general attack reviewed well in advance of IRBM operational date or Khrushchev's next estimated political move against Berlin .
 To send message to Chairman, United States TS Delegation IADB, requesting him and Lt. Lt. C. W. G. T. H. A. M. B. D. Hagan requested him to write to him and his colleagues .
 SAC, at llacretlon, to lmpleaen* dt. dt . Persal plans for B-47 f „„” „ „ 1S "" October. be81nnlnln8 1S0 ° h °
 President to be informed through SAC/150D channels . Recommendation would probably be for immediate retaliation against most likely surface to air site, and probably u-2 flights would be continued . Implementation Recommendation overtaken by guidance from higher authority .
 CSA directed S to provide 1 HAWK Battalion and CINCSTRIKE 1 NIKEHERCULES Battalion to CINCONAD . Air Force to check with Air Staff and air defense experts, TMPiftifttation TMPTation .
 White House authorization to execute six low-ievel reconnaissance flights at once . Inform CINCLANT, CINCONAD, and NASA TS immediately of White House approval .
 TS increased security at U.S. domestic bases . To amend and approve message directing TS increased . security at United States domestic bases.
 Recommend to SecDef on urgent basis that TS Presidential authority be obtained to load multi-stage nuclear weapons on U.S. strike aircraft on QRA status under USCINCEUR's command .
 USCINCEUR notified, 27 October., . Restricted Dcia Aiomic Energy Act cf 38 1S54 JQg flEOniifP6.6 .
 Continuing analysis of photography taken between 14 and 20 October had revealed a total count of 33 MRBMs and 23 erector/launchers . The ultimate total was estimated to be 48 such missiles and 24 erector-launchers, the U.S. military said .
 The first low-altitude photography indicated, moreover, that camouflage was in use at several sites . The first photos were taken at the height of the Soviet Union .
 CStf to answer o«e ^ . m responding that iiuw dentine Mr W W W reap T£ WPt informea. moWllz atlon, CS* to *»• 3 . ln event or ^ ^^ „ M ava
 A revised Army Task Organization for CINCLANT OPLAN 3l6-6l was approved . The revised Task Organization increased the combat TS TS TS ^3 ■ TOP SECRET 26 October .
 No more missiles or erectors have been seen at the site . There was no sign of any intention to move or dismantle the sites . No further missiles were seen, but there was no intention of moving or dismantling them .
 The Chairman, JCS would present to the Secretary of Defense and the White House the views of the JCS concerning a United States suggestion that the Brazilian Ambassador in Havana discuss with, Castro alone, Cuba's predicament resulting from its Soviet ties .
 To approve a memorandum for the SecDef concerning a Brazilian proposal for a nuclear free zone in Latin America and Africa, in which they reaffirmed their orally expressed views that the United States should neither propose nor accept any discussion of such a proposal .
 They recommended discussing only the immediate objective prompt removal of the missiles . The missiles are believed to have been launched by North Korea .
 Two MSTS transports on the West Coast were diverted to routes from which they could be rapidly shifted to the Cuban operations if needed . Two of the transports were subsequently diverted to other routes .
 Approved a memorandum, transmitted 29 October to SecDef, expressing the opinion that the current crisis had demonstrated again the Jwhxzr TS TS TS-RD-RD -rep-Mr shortage of sequential timers for low-level nuclear weapons .
 JCS recommended that the Atonic Energy Commission be urged to accelerate production of the item . The JCS said that the item should be accelerated production .
 To direct CINCLANT to abandon further TS planning and preparations for OPLAN 314* Instead to concentrate on O PLAN 316 . Instead to direct Cinclant to abandon planning and . preparations for . OPLANN 316 .
 The U.S. was going to start around-the-clock reconnaissance. To recommend public announcement that TS the United States was . The United States. was . going to . start around the clock reconnaissance. It was not the first time it had been announced .
 To present to the SecDef an analysis of possible actions that might be taken against Cuba should the quarantine not result in the removal or withdrawal of offensive missiles .
 The previously reported rapid pace of construction at Cuban missile sites was confirmed by analysis of 25 and 26 October low-level reconnaissance . Analysis of 25-26 October reconnaissance confirmed the construction of missile sites .
 There continued to be no evidence of any intention to halt construction or dismantle or move sites .
 Five of the six MRBM sites are now considered fully operational . The sixth would probably achieve this status ou 28 October .
 At that time, the capability would exist to launch 24 1100m. missiles within six to eight hours of a decision to launch, and to refire with 24 additional missiles within another four to six hours . The capability would be able to launch an additional 24 missiles within a matter of hours
 Photography of 25 October had confirmed the presence in Cuba of tactical missiles, unguided rockets with a range of 20 to 25m. The photos were taken in Cuba .
 A probable PROG launcher had been detected in a large camp and vehicle park, in company with 31 probable T-54 medium tanks and at least 31 other armored vehicles . A probable launcher was detected in the camp and a large . camp and . vehicle park .
 Possible nuclear storage sites had been identified at five of the launch sites, as of 25 October . Possible nuclear warhead storage sites have been identified .
 Long-range conventionally powered Soviet torpedo attack submarines had been observed near quarantine area in recent days . Submarine attack submarines have been seen in quarantine area .
 In a memorandum to the Chairman, JCS, DIA concluded that the Soviets had staged their buildup in Cuba probably because l) they desired to improve their nuclear attack capabilities against the US, and 2) they estimated that the United States could not prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power into
 The JCS would assign missions through the Joint Reconnaissance Center, CINCLANT would conduct operational planning and exercise operational direction . The DOD would obtain approval for missions .
 An outline operation plan for an air quarantine of Cuba to be submitted to the SecDef . t>7 raised an Inquiry raised by an Inquiry on 22 October .
 Implementation Plan submitted to SecDef for approval for approval on 29 October . Copies forwarded to CDfCSAC, CINCLAirr and CINCOMAD for development of supporting plans .
 To seek approval to drop six million <*s leaflets over Cuba explaining the cause, purpose, and scope of the quarantine . The government is seeking approval to send six million leaflets explaining the quarantine.
 Implementation Program was submitted to SecDef/ on 29 October project cancelled and on 7 November CINCLANT authorized to destroy leaflets . Implementation Program for project submitted to secDef/ was submitted on same day .
 If pattern of actions elsewhere in NORAD/COMAD system indicated the existence of a Cuban and Sino -Soviet attack, nuclear weapons could be used .
 JCS advised CINCONAD to the above effect, emphasizing that CIN CONDO' s authority under his ""Rules for Engagement" (NORAD Regulation 55-6) had not been changed by the Cuban contingency plans .
 This message did not change the rules of engagement in the contingency plans, the JCS said . The JCS further advised that non-nuclear armaments were not changed .
 Memo provided to Chairman for use as he saw fit . JCS recommended rejection of all except the last, approval of which they recommended .
 In view of recent intelligence data on Soviet equipment in Cuba, to request recommendations from CINCLANT on any changes necessary . particularly whether United States invasion and supporting forces should be equipped with tactical nuclear weapons .
 Implementation Message dispatched the same day; CINCLANT replied that he considered it prudent that U.S. air and ground forces earmarked for Cuban operations have an atomic delivery capability .
 Low-level reconnaissance flights for late afternoon, one of which would cover eastern Cuba . One of the flights would fly through any fire encountered . The flights are scheduled to take place in late afternoon .
 U.S. reconnaissance over Cuba should continue until UN observers arrive, says U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry . Cuba should also be struck by missile sites that fired on U .S. planes, he says .
 JCS thought it might be an insincere proposal intended to gain time . To draw' to the attention of the CINCs TS operational commanders the latest Khrushchev message, he said . The JCS believed it was intended to draw attention to the Cincs .
 Key West International Airport is not necessary at this time to obtain the airport, it was not necessary to obtain it, it said .
 On 31 October, the JCS TS decided to authorize CINCLANT to commence negotiations with local authorities for the use of the airport . Implementation Implementation Implementation on 31 October is underway .
 By a message on 3 November, CINCLANT was given discretion to preposition 53 — -BOr 3ECTE T TIM CtfflCT logistical support and to make ready she operational facilities at the airfield . No aircraft were to be moved to the field .
 Camouflage and other concealment measures are becoming more effective, says CNN.com . "Camouflage" is becoming more common in the U.S.
 The latest photography, taken prior to the Soviet statement, showed that construction was proceeding rapidly . The latest photos show that construction is continuing rapidly .
 To conduct aerial reconnaissance of TS Cuba during this day, but without UN observers in aircraft, and that the UN shpuld be so informed . UN observers should be informed of the situation .
 To forward to the Secretary of Defense an outline plan for the UN to use in connection with inspection for offensive weapons .
 The plan provided for ropssagr aerial, ground, and port inspection by technically qualified UN personnel .
 The JCS recommended that the 03 fleet remain deployed as it was, that OS reconnaissance flights be continued, and that the existing covert intelligence efforts continue .
 The United States should insist for reasons of safety, on having a United States pilot aboard the aircraft, and also a photographer, if possible . That if the UN undertook photo-reconnaisTS aance flights over Cuba in c-l 3 0's with Indonesian crews, the
 The suspension of U.S. air reconnaissance for two days would be acceptable, but resumption on third day would be necessary . That suspension of United States air reconnaissance is acceptable . Resumption of air reconnaissance would be needed to avoid further delays .
 To CINCONADfs rotation and reduction in TS dispersal of aircraft necessary to maintain combatready posture in view of maintenance needs of aircraft and weapons, short of complete cessation of dispersal .
 Services should continue the T S current level of activity in exploiting training benefits of Cuban contingency force movements, without starting new projects .
 CO, CONARC should be instructed to plan but not to implement a scheme for deploying the School Brigade from Ft. Hill Hill . School Brigade should be deployed from Fort Hill .
 The elimination of all nuclearcapable delivery systems, including sur face-to-surf ace missiles, bomber aircraft, bomb., air-to.-surface rockets and missiles, warheads for any of these weapons, supporting and operating , equipment, and missile fuel .
 Members of any UN inspection team should come from neutral or non-aligned countries and rot from the Communist bloc . Any inspection must include ports and airfields as well as missile sites as well .
 The withdrawal of United States forces or the reduction of the build-up until the U.S. has been assured of the elimination of Cuba's offensive weapon capability . The withdrawal will not be allowed to take place until the United States has been guaranteed of the .
 Conditions for raising quarantine should be effective inspection team support, support and clear evidence of outward shipping .
 A practical system of inspecting outbound shipping at the ports was necessary . For verifying the removal of offensive weapons, a practical system was necessary. For verification, the system was needed .
 Air reconnaissance should resume on 1 November and continue as needed until all offensive systems are removed . Air reconvoyance should resume as needed .
 In the event UN pilots were used, United States personnel should plan the flights and operate the photo equipment . U.S. personnel should also plan and operate photo equipment.
 U.S. policy towards Cuban refugees should be the same as towards other national groups . No aid should be given to groups like the Alpha-66, and no aid should given to them .
 Available evidence still did not indicate S Soviet preparations for dismantling or vacating the offensive missile sites . Available evidence does not indicate plans to dismantle or vacate the sites .
 Many of the missile erectors had been removed on 29 October from their hardstands . This was not believed to have had any effect on their full operational capability .
 There was no evidence that the Soviets were dismantling their offensive weapons in Cuba . Thsre was evidence of additional construction as well as of extensive concealment measures . 4. There was evidence that there was additional construction and extensive concealments .
 S Pour Soviet cargo ships and 5-« tankers were continuing toward Cuba; Five other dry -cargo ships were apparently continuing toward Soviet ports . Fourteen Soviet dry-cargo vessels, one passenger ship, and three tankers are presently in Cuban ports; Fourteen . dry
 To recommend a maximum air reconnaisTS sance on 1 November, and, in view of incomplete radar coverage of 17-2 that was shot down, an airborne radar watch, tracking by Guantanamo radar, and fighter CAP accompanying lew-level flights .
 A significant number of Soviet 3 ubmarines had been positively identified off the U.S. East Coast .
 The Df » ^^g^H.itw in Cuba were now being or had been . Mantled according to £ e f ££ royed had stopped and installations had been partially destroyed . Cuba-was capab^of carryin^ S s orttBMs
 Jcs oonoluded ^ sine, there were nuclear-capable delivery systems ., Cuba the possibility of enemy uae of nuclear weapons to repel Invasion had to be accepted . OS could respond with overwhelming nuclear force against military targets .
 Medical plans drawn up to accommodate 18,500 casualties m first ten days assuming nuclear weapons not used . It was not expected that this figure would be reached .
 Soviet withdrawal of offensive weapons in three phases . TS for verfying the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons . TS TS for . verfied the withdrawal . of Soviet . weapons .
 The JCS advised that the threat from Cubanbased offensive weapons could not be entirely eliminated until a friendly government controlled the island . The weapons in question could easily be hidden .
 The deployment of additional air TS defense artillery units to the southeastern United States was not necessary at this time . Up to three HAWK battalions would be made available to augment CINCONAD forces if circumstances changed .
 A message to the above effect was dispatched to CINCONAD on 3 November . Implementation A message was sent to the CIN CONDO on November 3 .
 An increase in missile-related equipment had been noted for the first time at Mariel port .
 This is the first indication that the equipment is on its way to ports, of which Mariel is at least one . The equipment is expected to arrive at Mariel .
 Two aircraft were not flyable, five were in varying stages of assembly; and 19 shipping crates were dispersed through the area . Two aircraft not flownable; five were assembled; 19 crates were scattered around the area.
 Implement ati on The San Julian area was photographed on 3 November . The San Julan area was captured on camera in November .
 The pictures reveal the presence on a nearby railroad siding of four IL-28 shipping crates . The crates were apparently en route to the airfield .
 That the 5th MEB should continue through the Panama Canal into the Caribbean, without change of destination and mission. That is the case, says the U.S. Navy .
 U-2 flights were recalled because of apparent firing preparations at 71 Cuban SAM sites . U.2 flights would be scheduled for 7 November so as not to expose more than one plane to hostile fire at any one time .
 Tc. Tc continue to hold MSTS troopships in TS port on standby for OPLAN 316 . MSTs troopships remain on standby . Tc continues to hold troopships .
 To approve CINCONAD *’s request for authorTS ity to implement his OPLAN 1-62, including Rules of Engagement and institution of MEZ-SCAT, upon implementation ef any option of CINCLANT . Instead of only on the
 That procedures for checking outbound, missile -bearing vessels should extend beyond observation and photography and should include boarding vessels for close observation of missiles . That procedures should extend to include boarding ships for close inspection of missiles.
 Apparently above merely constituted guidance for future discussions . Implementation of the discussion was merely a form of guidance .
 On 5 November four possible MIG-213 were seen at San Antonio deles Bancs, the first noted in the western sector of Cuba . A general dispersal of MIG aircraft might be uSe^ay^ncT three MIGs had been seen at Holgu
 Three Soviet snips which had been loading missile-related equipment at Mariel might have left . The snips may have been loading missiles with equipment .
 A new cruise missile site had been identified frcm photography of 4 November, at La Sierra near the port of Cienfuegos . The site is located in La Sierra, near the town of La Sierra .
 The site appeared to be operational and contained the same elements as those found at the Banes site . It appeared to contain the same essential elements found at Banes .
 8 November reconnaissance should comprise 5 U-2 flights and 1U aircraft for low-level reconnaissance, the latter to cover ports, Isle of Pines, and 7 caves . Identified as possible weapons storage sites .
 The reconnaissance approved TS for 8 November was 5 U-2 and 10 low-level missions . The missions were actually flown, with 2 U-1 and 12 low level missions .
 Full attack on all airfields and air defense weapons systems in Cuba, and consideration of additional measures, if hostile act Judged to be part of deliberate program of resistance to U.S. air surveillance . Protest to USSR representatives ■ at the UN; and either; Full . attack on
 S^oo self-propelled lo T-54 medium tanks, an d ninS -^ <&„.--” Issault guns. S.u.S.u . The T.54 medium tankers, an .d ninS .
 Two obviously finable IL-28s had been seen; two ethers were probably flyacle, and five more were in various stages of assembly . Two ethers had also been seen, as well as five more .
 The current location of four IL-28 crates observed at railhead on 3 November is not known . The location of the crates is unknown .
 An estimated total of 39 MI'J-21s had been seen at three airfields in quantities suggesting that one squadron was based at each field .
 Five others, previously leaded, were now at sea heading for Soviet ports . Five others were now on the way to the Soviet Union .
 SAG authorised T3 to reduce ifc3 alert status effective 15 November while maintaining 1/8 airborne alert . CINCSAG had requested SAG to reduce alert status . SAG also authorised T
 B-47B to occupy all disp~r 4 . Agre ed that ,^r objections to paper by TS „ e^itlea ■*. -oval of IL-aS's fro. -oval . of IL, a .oval of . IL-AS
 Attack all 3AM3J Attack all IL-2Ss; Attack all air defense syabws. Attack all . air defense . targets . Attack all three .AM3Ss Attack all  IL-Ss and attack all air . defense systems .
 At Mariel port a total of 17 erectors had been observed, but no missile transporters have been seen . No missiles were seen at Mariel Port .
 At Casilda port eight transporters and seven erectors were observed at Casilda Port . The port is located in Casilda, Portugal .
 The total number of MRBMs observed to date at the ports was 31; the total erectors, 25, were 25 . The total total MRBM observed at ports has been observed at 31 .
 Photography of 7 November indicated the continued assembly of IL-28s at San Julian . Photographer: "Continued assembly" continued . Photography was taken on 7 November .
 Seven planes now appeared assembled* while two others were in early stages of assembly . Two others appeared to have been assembled already .
 Eight of the nine ships designated by the Soviets to remove missile-related equipment were believed to be under way this date . The Soviets believed to have removed the equipment from nine ships .
 Soviet troops associated with the SA-2 system and the cruise-missile sites in Cuba were estimated at about 4,400 . About 4,000 Soviet troops are thought to have been involved in the system .
 Personnel associated with the former MRBM/IRBM sites were probably in the process of leaving Cuba . There were strong indications that some had already left Cuba . Some of the sites were likely to be closed .
 Twenty -four SA-2 battalions, together with support personnel— an estimated 3*900— were located in the country . Twenty-four battalions and support personnel were located at the 24 SA-Battalions and three SA-Two support sites .
 The Soviets were believed to havs at least an additional 1,230 troops, formerly used for defense of the MRBM and IRBM sites . The Soviets are believed to be believed to have had at least 1, 230 troops .
 The tank battalions were located at Remedios, Artemisa, Holguin, and Santiago de las Vegas . The tanks were located in Remedio, Artisis, Santiago de Las Vegas and Artisia .
 The possible SNAPPER unit had been last seen near Remedios ^ 25 October . The FROQ battalion had been located at 82 Artemlsa on 6 November and the possible SNAPper unit had not been located .
 Since the beginning of the dismantling of the known MRBM/IRBM sites, there had been a report S of a ship departing Havana with decks crowded with Russians .
 It would be preferable if IL^'s reTS mained in Cuba, relieving United States of obligation concerning guarantee of Cuba . U.S. should not have to rely on Cuba to guarantee guarantee of Cuban territory .
 Implementation CINCONAD was asked on 21 November for his recommendations on permanent augmentation of southeastern defenses after the Cuban crisis ended .
 Revised Course of Action in Contingency that a Surveillance Plane is shot at or Destroyed . Revised course of action in contingency plan .
 The JCS recommended an amendment outlining reaction to an indication of general intention to resist U.S. air surveillance . The amendment was approved by the JCS, but the amendment was not required .
 There was no increase in the number of cC low-level flights during the period ending 15 'Jovember, the usual number being ten . I To continue seeking authorization for largest possible number of low level reconnaissance TS .
 IL-28's TS only offensive weapons United States believes remain in Cuba, approved ASD paper . U.S. believes only weapons believed to be in Cuba . United States quarantine suspension would be extended briefly to permit progress on above .
 Memo recommended accepting IL-28's as Cuban, not Soviet, responsibility, thus disengaging Soviets and UN from issce and leaving so United States and OAS . No noninvasion guarantee to be given and surveillance to continue . Memo reconsidered on 12 TS November; revision
 Air-to-air missiles apparently were being readied for mounting on MIG-21 aircraft at Santa Clara . Photograohy of 10 November indicated that air-tension missiles were being prepared for mounting at Santa .
 Photography of 9 November showed no additional IL-28s uncrated at San Julian and none opened at Holguin . No additional crates were opened at the San Julian facility .
 At San Julian work apparently was continuing on engines of three of the IL-2 s . MIG-21s and 13 mig-15s/17s were at Santa Clara . At Santa Clara work was apparently continuing on three engines .
 All but one of the nine Soviet ships carrying offensive missile components out of Cuba had been inspected by U.S. ships . The United States inspected the nine ships .
 Photography had confirmed a total of 42 missile transporters were carried on eight of these ships . Photography had also confirmed that 42 missiles were carried by eight of the ships .
 Canvas covers had been removed from at least some missile transporters on all ships inspected . The covers were removed from some of the ships inspected, officials said .
 The military camp near Holguin, photographed on 9 November, contained nine canvas -covered SU-100 assault guns, four PT-76 tanks, and nine possible SNAPPER antitank missiles mounted on armored vehicles .
 As of 11 November a total of 34 missiles and 26 erectors had been observed at the ports . As of November 11 November, 34 missiles had been seen at ports .
 Assembly of the IL-28s was continuing at San Julian airfield, but there was no evidence of assembling the aircraft at Holguin Airfield .
 Low-level photography over the four major military camps revealed detailed in£c-rm a * io on modern equipment to include T-54 tanks, PROG missiles, and SNAPPER antitank missiles . Low-low photography over four major camps revealed .
 Air-to-air missiles had been identified for the first time at Santa Clara Airfield . Air to air missiles were identified at the airfield .
 To concur in a memorandum from the ™o to the SecDef on ""Quarantine Operations,"" which was in response to an ASD request for a olan for quarantine more effective than the current ""hail and pass" procedures .
 Otner boards wouia os announced as they occurred . 92 •j k Mflvember ^^ at1on derived from derived 'nine'
 CIHCLANT was advised to expect hostile reaction, to omit the most hotly defended targets, and to ready GREY W0 LF mission . After being informed of hig-ierlevel deciTS sion to cancel low-level flights for 16 November in view of a-ro
 To recommend to SecDef that existing force levels of GFLAN 3l6 be accepted as probably adequate . 5th Infantry Division and C:d»at Command of 2d Armored Division earmarked as ready reserve . National Guard divisions not be called up to reconstitute strategic reserve
 There was an immediate requirement for activation of 11 LST's, a cost estimate of which was included . The Guantanamo Defense Force was considered adequate for defense of the present perimeter .
 A memorandum to the above effect was dispatched to the SecDef on 20 November . Tm plementation of the memorandum was sent to the SecretaryDef on November 20 .
 The total SA-2 sites now identified are 27, of which three were apparently alternate, unoccupied sites . Three of the sites were apparently unoccupied . The total number of sites identified is 27 .
 Eleven were assembled, or nearly so, but determination of assembly status was hindered by camouflage . Eleven of the 11 assembled were. assembled .
 CINCONAD was to be authorized to maintain the current deployment . in southeastern US, but elsewhere to recall fighter-interceptor aircraft to their home bases . CIN CONAD 1 s proposals for the force posture that could be . indefinitely maintained should be approved .
 To provide the text of the JCS memorandum on ""Status of Readiness for the Cuban Operation,"" which had been discussed with the President on 16 November, and to instruct the three commanders to maintain the current readiness posture .
 To reaffirm their views on ""Recommended United States Reaction to Hostile Attack of U.S. Reconnaissance Aircraft over Cuba/' which they had forwarded to the Secretary of Defense on 7 November . They had forwarded their views to the secretary of Defense .
 To recommend a larger number of reconnaissance flights than usual involving 16 targets and 16 aircraft . To recommend for 21 November a larger . number of . reconnaissance flights . involving 16 . targets and . 16 aircraft involved .
 TS had been dispatched to CINCLANT on 20 November as an interim reply, which was confirmed by a message on 21 November . Rules of engagement are promulgated in situations requiring measures of self-protection .
 There was no photographic evidence to substantiate a report of a Soviet submarine base being located at Cayo Largo .
 There was no photographic evidence to substantiate a report of unusual military activity in Las Villas Province .
 On the DEFCON and return of units, assuming relaxed reaction times as follows: U-2 flights an average of no more than two per day in any 10-day period . No more than five flights in one day in 10 days .
 Local reprisal strike aircraft same readiness as BRASS KNOB and BLUE MOON missions plus two hours . Same readiness for BRASS KILLOB and BRUE MOONS missions .
 CINCONAD: On the permanent augmentation of air defenses in southeastern U.S. following termination of Cuban incident, and on the phasedown of the current reinforcements of the area, assuming normal status by 20 December .
 CINCSAC:on the level f readiness for SAC during the next 30 days, sx:.udlng U-2's. CinCSAC . SAC will be ready for the U.S. military in the coming 30 days .
 All three commanders were given intelligence objectives requiring aerial reconnaissance during the next 30 days . The mission was to find intelligence objectives required for reconnaissance .
 A report by SACSA on ""Cuba Planning"" had been overtaken by events. That a report by the agency had been taken by events in Cuba .
 In , . or3 ip.-ed should be under«— Wl * 0aUt T', r .nCl vers!., nr . nr « P— -tt,dM T^«^ ^considered. ^^^iia---— ^ 4
 These views to .;e used by CJCS in possible discussions at higher level . CJCS will discuss the views of the community at a higher level.
 To defer reexami nation of the requirement for retention of the United States Naval Base, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, until such time as required by the international situation .
 After making amendments, to approve a n^morandi^ to SecDef on r» a ::ir.ess posture requirements. After making amendments, the Senate will vote on an amendment to the policy .
 Hhl* ^ ^t an average * ,-, r^« per *, ‘..«. ^ ve thftr a maximum of fi/e .any 10-day period and n,t <n”re U-2 lights on any one day .
 All of the ar echelon and about half of each of the other components, however, were directed to stag, from home bases, and so did not have to move . All of them were directed from their bases .
 They began leaving their home stations on 23 October and had all arrived at designated stations by 7 November . They began arriving at stations 23 October .
 Group headquarters, one HAWK Battalion, one NIKE -HERCULES Battalion, and one automatic weapons battery were stationed at Homestead Air Force Base .
 These deployments began on 22 October and had been completed by the 31st .
 By JCS directive of 28 November, all deployed TS Army forces except certain headquarters elements were directed to return to their home stations .
 Of fensive weapons were defined to include surface-to-surface missiles, bomber aircraft, bombs, air--o-surface rockets and guided missiles, warheads for any of the above weapons, and mechanical or electronic equipment .
 Ships that refused to stop when ordered to stop would be forcibly halted . Ships that refuse to halt would be forced to be stopped by the Navy .
 If crews offered organized resistance to boarding parties, the ships would be sunk . The ships would have been sunk by boarding parties . If the crews offered resistance, they would have sunk .
 On 25 October, eight Soviet merchant ships that had been sailing towards Cuba reversed course . Eight Soviet ships that were heading towards Cuba were reversed course.
 Her cargo was checked visually and determined to contain no contraband . No contraband was found in her cargo .
 The following day the Lebanese -flag, Soviet -chartered, freighter Marucla was intercepted and boarded . The Lebanese - flag, Soviet-chartered freighter was intercepted by the Soviets .
 She, too, was found to be carrying no contraband and cleared to proceed . She was cleared to continue .
 This vessel was the only one boarded by U.S. naval forces while the quarantine was in effect . It was boarded by United States naval forces .
 The perimeter of the Intercept area has been extended to 2500 nautical miles . By this addition, the perimeter of this area was extended to 2,000 nautical nautical miles .
 On 30 October, a shorter quarantine line was put into effect . The quarantine line runs from a point Just north of Puerto Rico to a point off the Florida coast .
 This line contained only eight stations and could be manned by fewer ships . This line was designed to be able to use fewer ships than the other .
 Quarantine was suspended during U Thant's visit to Cuba and at his request . The quarantine was suspended from 30 October to 1 November .
 On 20 November, after the Soviets had agreed to remove all IL-28 bombers from Cuba, President Kennedy ordered the quarantine ended . The quarantine ended on 20 November .
 All were cleared to proceed after their cargoes had been determined to contain no contraband . All of the passengers were allowed to board the plane .
 The Navy sent all seven operational Polaris submarines to sea fully armed . The Navy, in addition to conducting the quarantine operations, sent all of the seven to sea .
 By 26 October, all the boats were on their assigned stations and on 15-mlnute alert . By that time, the boats had been deployed to 15 stations .
 The Navy also furnished Carrier Air Group 10 to TS CINCAFLANT as a component of the attack forces required by OPLAN 312 . The Navy has also furnished carrier air groups with the carrier .
 Another mission was low-level aerial reconnaissance of Cuba . The mission was carried out by Navy and s Marine F-3tJs .
 The first sortie was flown on 23 October; by the end of November, 82 sorties had been flown . The first of these sorties was flown by 23 October .
 All of the units of the Force/ were deployed afloat between the 26th and 31st of October . The first group, designated Landing Group Vest, was deployed .
 A second force of Marines] TS was assigned to reinforce the Ouantanamo Bay Naval Base and arrived there on the 22nd and 23rd . The second force arrived at the base on November 22 .
 TS Vwa. ordered » » »*•« which -*««< ab0U *""^f.a lll n 8 ordra on October 8 . These reinforcements brought the total M arine strength at Ouantanamo to aboatl ^ Landing Group last
 It ***"" ' ^ Mtvie . n ». 5 th and — tranSi "" ed "" Reeded — * 9O8lU0r ' S 7th of November, ana p ln — •*»— • ^ £oree , ^ »
 By the end of October, 26 sorties had been flown; and during November, an additional 67 sorties were carried out . The U.S. has flown more than 100 sorties since October .
 During October 16, sorties were flown; during November, there were 68 sorties . During November, 68 sortie were flown, including 68 during October .
 Surveillance of Atlantic warsrs by SAC in support of CINCLANT's quarantine operations began on 25 October employing 21 aircraft . B-52s in flight on their regular missions reported on shipping when flying over .
 Prepositioning of materiel began on 1-1 October and had been completed by 20 October . The operation began in October .
 Most of the requirements to support the plans were in place, including a supply of munitions, fuel tanks and pylons . By this date, most of the plans had been completed .
 Air Porce also took steps to bring air TS defenses of the U.S. to inaximum readiness .
 Such measures included the dispersal and placing on alert of the CONAD interceptor force and reinforcement of the air defenses in Florida area .
 Of this force J^BUere in Florida, m ^rerere on 5 -minute alert^J^n 15-minute alert, and l-to-3 hour alert . J^ BUere are on 5-minute alerts, 15-minutes alert and 15-
 The Strategic Air Command also took steps to achieve the highest possible state of readiness to execute its mission .
 One eighth of the B-52 bomber force went on airborne alert in October . Readiness measures began on 22 October when one 8th of the force went airborne alert .
 Selected elements of she B-47 force began Jisp ersal and completed their movemendCB^^te ^i^^^^^^^f|24 hours later .
 With the beginning of the naval quarantine of Cuba on 24 :ctober, SAC readiness was stepped up by declaration of DEFCON 2 . Ground alert o ^BBalrcraft in addition to thrf| ^Qon airborne alert .
 Between 2 and J No vember, the airborne alert figure was increased . The B-52H modification program made more planes available .
 Additional measures to improve combat readiness included the deployment on 22 October of ff*as reflex force in t h alio Increased bjJ^Bfcircraft . Additional measures include the deployment of a further deployment on 29 October .
 The Air Force began to stand -down from its alert posture on 20 November, the date when the quarantine of Cuba was ended . Cuba was quarantined by the U.S. in November .
 On that date, the JCS directed SAC to return to the airborne alert status in effect prior to the Cuban crisis . SAC was ordered back to the alert status .
 On the 24th, the JCS authorized SAC to terminate the dispersal of the B-47 force .