 The ensuing crisis proved to be the closest approach to a superpower nuclear war during the entire Cold War era . The resulting crisis was the closest to a possible nuclear war .
 The crisis pitted Kennedy against Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, and Fidel Castro, who had seized power in Cuba in 1959 . Kennedy was assassinated in September 1968 .
 This process is experimental and the keywords may be updated as the learning algorithm improves . This is the first time the keywords have been added to the system .
 This is a preview of subscription content . Use this week's weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport .
 At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation Mongoose… 2.30 a.m. ET . The Attorney General was briefed on the operation in his own office .
 The Attorney General opened the meeting by expressing the “general dissatisfaction of the president” with Operation Mongoose . The attorney general expressed the ‘general dissatisfaction’ with the operation .
 In order to do this, he will hold a meeting every morning at 0930 with the Mongoose operational representatives from the various agencies . The Mongoose team will meet every morning with operational representatives .
 The other optimum would be to get every missile before it could, becomes operational, says President Obama . Mr Obama was impressed with the importance of getting a strike with all the benefit of surprise .
 "Once we have destroyed as many of these offensive weapons as possible, we should, should prevent any more coming in, which means a naval blockade," he says . "I would also mention among the military actions we should take," he adds .
 The establishment of a “trading position’s” to force removal of United States overseas bases and Berlin . The establishment . of a . ‘trading . position” would force removal from U.S. overseas bases .
 The U.S. should not act without warning and thus be forced to live with a “Pearl Harbor indictment” for the indefinite future . However, the United States should not be able to live without warning, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "Give them 24 hours to commence dismantling and removal of MRBMs, coastal defense missiles, surface to air missiles, IL 28s and all other aircraft which have a dual defensive-offensive capability, including MIG 21s .
 Notify the American public and the world of the situation created by the Soviets. Notify U.S. public and world of situation . Send photos of the Soviet invasion of Crimea .
 If Khrushchev and Castro fail to act at once, we should make a massive surprise strike at airfields, MRBM sites and SAM sites concurrently . The U.S. should attack airfields and SAM targets concurrently, writes David Cameron .
 Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson to President Kennedy, October 17, 1962 . Stevenson: "I know your dilemma is to strike before the Cuban sites are operational or to risk waiting"
 The Cuban government says it can't negotiate with a gun at our head, a gun that imperils the innocent, helpless Cuban people as much as it does the U.S. If they won’t remove the missiles and restore the status quo ante we will have to do it
 The word “negotiable” is double underlined in the source text . In short it is they, not the U.S., that have upset the balance and created this situation .
 CNN.com: "Let me just say a little, first, about what the problem is, from my point of view. Let me tell you what I think is the problem."
 If we go in and take them out on a quick air strike, we neutralize the chance of danger to the U.S. of these missiles being used, he says . "If we go into and take [the missiles] out, it would neutralize [the] chance
 On the other hand, we increase the chance greatly, as I think they—there’s bound to be a reprisal from the Soviet Union, there always is—of they’re just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point . And we prevent a situation
 On the other hand, if we begin the blockade that we're talking about, the chances are they will begin a blockade and say that we started it . Which leaves me with only one alternative, which is fire nuclear weapons, and begin a nuclear exchange .
 I just wanted to say that these were some of the problems that we have been considering. So I don’t think we’ve got any satisfactory alternatives. We have no satisfactory alternatives, he says .
 CNN.com: "I would just say one thing and then turn it over to General LeMay. Well, I would just . turn it around to General . LeMay"
 Berlin's strength in Berlin, any place in the world, is the credibility of its response under certain conditions, says David Cameron . "We'd all be unanimous in saying that really our strength is to our credibility," he says .
 I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps perhaps, that we don’t have any choice except direct military action . I would emphasize that we’re not having any choice, perhaps, perhaps . We’ve got no choice but to go to military action,
 If we do this blockade, missiles are going to disappear into the woods, particularly your mobile ones, he says . The first thing that’s going to happen is that your missiles will disappear into your woods, he adds .
 "It's a small possibility. But the way they’ve lined these others up, I would have to say, it’s a small . possibility," he says .
 If they were going to hide any of them, then I would think they would have hid them all, he says . If they had hidden any of the photos, they would've hid them, he adds .
 The only danger we have if we haven’t picked up some that are setting there in plain sight. So the only danger is that we have to pick up some of these things, he says .
 If we do low altitude photography over them, this is going to be a tip-off too . If we knock off Cuba, they're going to knock off Berlin .
 If we don’t do anything to Cuba, then they’re going to push on Berlin and push real hard, he says . "They’ve got us on the run," he says of the Cuban regime .
 I don't think they’re going to take any reprisal if we tell them that the Berlin situation is just like it’s always been. I don’t think they're going to . tell them . Berlin . situation is like it's always been, says
 CNN.com: "I don’t think this changes the Berlin situation at all, except you’ve got to make one more statement on it"
 The Fog of War: Lessons from the Life of Robert S McNamara . McNamara, 64, was killed in the Vietnam War .
 I ask you to recognize clearly, Mr Chairman, that it was not I who issued the first challenge in this case, and that in the light of this record these activities in Cuba required the responses I have announced . I repeat my regret that these events should cause a deterioration in our relations
 This letter was received at the State Department between 6 P.M. and 9 P.m. October 26, 1962 .
 James N Giglio and Stephen G Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency, 8–9. Giglio, Stephen G. Rabe and Giglio discuss the Kennedy presidency . Giglio: "The Kennedy presidency is not a failure to be a failure"
 Sorensen also helped Kennedy write a book, Profiles in Courage, describing how eight U.S. senators risked their careers by upholding their personal beliefs . The book was published by Kennedy and Kennedy .