 The effects will vary according to a broad variety of circumstances and interactions, some of which are not well-understood . Some of the effects of these interactions will vary depending on a variety of factors and interactions . The effects of this type of interaction will vary, say experts .
 " mitigation" is not well understood, and will not take place quickly . Likewise, mitigation will not be well understood and not taken quickly . Climate change is a major problem in the United States .
 Public awareness should follow a coordinated strategic communication plan that focuses on maintaining credibility . Public awareness needs to be followed by a coordinated strategy to maintain credibility .
 Alternative approaches and cost-benefit analyses must be run to establish what can be done, when, and at what cost . The alternative approaches must also be run, says Mr Hammond .
 "I happened on it one day while looking for some information about something else," says author of the book .
 4 page article discussed the implication of global climate change . That was the summary of the article .
 The Strategic Studies Institute is part of the U.S. Army War College . It is based in Washington, DC .
 It was just an ordinary day, I had to get up at the crack of dawn when the grandchildren decided to have a riot in their bedroom and Missy decided to join me in bed .
 The parts came for the hot water heater yesterday and they installed them . The parts were sent to the home in a bid to save the water .
 Yesterday was Wednesday and we'd been without hot water since Saturday . Yesterday, Wednesday was Wednesday, and we were without water for three days .
 They were bringing a new one today for only $20 more than we'd paid for the now totally broken one . A new $20 new one was being brought in for less than we paid for .
 We were hard up as usual and I told Sharon to not bother filling my prescriptions, which would pay for most of it . Sharon told Sharon not to fill her prescriptions, and that would pay most of the bill .
 The night before I watched an interesting show on TV about earthquake storms, I watched it on the night before . It was interesting to see how people react to earthquake storms .
 The Landers Earthquake was a magnitude 7.2 magnitude earthquake that occurred on June 28, 1992 . It was the largest earthquake in the world since the Landers earthquake .
 Many people were awakened in Las Vegas, with many reporting dizziness or trouble walking . Many people reported dizziness, trouble walking and dizziness .
 Reports were filed as far north as Carson City, Nevada . One woman reported waking up, hearing chimes in her house ringing .
 The Hector Mine earthquake was the largest earthquake in that area since the Landers earthquake of June 28, 1992 . The Hector mine earthquake is the largest in the area since Landers' earthquake in 1992 . Hector Mine is located in Hector Mine .
 Foreshocks were felt from as early as 7:41 PDT on October 15, with the largest foreshock measuring at 3.8 . The largest foreshocks measured at 3 .8 .
 The earthquake was centered on the Mojave Desert with no settlements for 14 miles . Nearly no damage was reported in the immediate area of the earthquake .
 Amtrak's westbound Southwest Chief was an unusual victim of the earthquake . Amtrak says it was a "unique incident" for Amtrak's Southwest Chief .
 The combined force of the quake and train caused several rails to come loose and the train derailed . The train derailed after several rails came loose during the quake .
 Only minor injuries were reported, and the train suffered repairable damage . Only minor damage was reported .
 An earthquake storm is a recently proposed theory about earthquakes, where one triggers a series of large earthquakes within the same tectonic plate as the stress transfers along the fault . The theory is based on a theory that earthquakes occur in the same plate as a fault .
 This is similar to the idea of aftershocks, with the exception that they take place years apart . This is a similar to a similar idea, but it takes years to get ready . The idea is that the earthquake will occur years apart, rather than years .
 These series of earthquakes can devastate entire countries or geographical regions . The series of quakes can devastated entire countries, geographical regions.
 Possible events may have occurred during the end of the Bronze Age, and the latter part of the Roman Empire . Possible events could have occurred in the late Bronze Age and Roman Empire.
 It has been suggested that this may be what may be occurring in modern day Turkey . It has also been suggested this is what may have happened in modern-day Turkey .
 Remotely triggered earthquakes have also been characterized as the very long reach of very large earthquakes . Remotely-triggered earthquakes are also characterized by the very . long reach . reach of large quakes .
 Large earthquakes can have an influence outside of the immediate aftershock zone, and actually activate other earthquakes at considerable distance . Fundamentally, it is postulated that large earthquakes can influence outside the immediate area .
 The further one gets from the initiating earthquake in both space and time, the more controversial is the association . The further a person gets from this earthquake, the further the association is .
 Most earthquakegenerating zones are in a state of being close to failure, experts say . Most quake-generating areas are in the region's most vulnerable zones, experts warn .
 If such a zone were to be left completely alone, it would generate significant earthquakes spontaneously . If such an area were left alone, earthquakes would occur spontaneously .
 Remote earthquakes are in a position to disturb this critical state, either by shifting the stresses statically, or by dynamic change caused by passing seismic waves . Remote earthquakes could disturb the critical state of the region, say experts .
 The first type of triggering may be due to static changes in the critical state . The second type of trigger may be because of static changes to the state of the state .
 Landers earthquake struck California in 1992, it is said that the earthquake map of California lit up like a Christmas tree . It is said to have lit up the state's earthquake map like Christmas trees .
 This event reinforced the idea of remotely triggered earthquakes, and pushed the hypothesis into the scientific mainstream . This event has pushed the idea into the mainstream .
 The final earthquake of the current series will occur close to Istanbul, although, as always, the exact timing is unknown . It is inevitable that the final earthquake will occur near Istanbul .
 There is scientific evidence for a long reach, mainly in the form of discrete element modeling used in the mining industry . The mining industry is one of the world's largest industries .
 If rock is modeled as discrete elements in a critical state, it is amazing at how far a single disturbance can influence the mass . The study was published in the U.S. Geological Survey, published on Monday .
 Claims are made that seismic activity in California has been activated by an earthquake in Chile . It becomes much more controversial as claims are made, such as that recent seismic activity is linked to earthquakes in the region .
 Although there have been many such associations in the historical records, the physics is difficult to justify . The physics is hard to justify, says the author of the book .
 Global climate change, also called global warming, has to do with our air and the greenhouse gases . It's also known as global climate change . It has to be done with the air and greenhouse gases in the air .
 So are volcanoes and volcanoes adding a lot of greenhouse gases to our atmosphere? True . True, but so is volcanoes . True . But volcanoes are also adding greenhouse gases, and so do volcanoes. True .
 Etna is a volcano and the most recent eruptions occurred in April 2007 . The three recorded so far, the latest being on 30Apr07 . Etna has recorded three eruptions so far .
 During the past week, about a dozen volcanoes were erupting somewhere in the world . If you check your sources, you'll learn that during the last week, there were a dozen erupting .
 It would seem that the planet, with or without our help, is going to go through a climate change; that's MY assumption . The planet will go through the climate change without help, says author .
 If we stopped emitting all greenhouse gases in an instant, we'd still get global warming, with or without Al Gore . Al Gore: We'd still have global warming with or with Al Gore, even without Gore .
 It's still a couple of years away, but we could end up with a witch riding a broom in the White House .
 A word of warning, get all your guns and ammo bought before January 20, 2009 . Get all your gun and ammunition bought before New Year's Day .
 Islamic extremists, illegal aliens surging though our borders and them all holding a protest 2 days before . I became convinced it wasn’t if, just when and what, not that I hadn't had the thought before . The Islamic extremists mostly moved to the US .
 Vladimir Putin was much more of a certainty; he was the same old thing in a new suit . Vladimir Putin's opposite number, Vladimir, was a certainty, he said . Vladimir was the president of the United States, Vladimir Putin said .
 In many ways, this was like the late 1930s, the economy was a disaster, a new war was starting up over there and the guy in the White House was cozying up to his opposite 3 number . The economy was going to be a disaster .
 Different names, Roosevelt and Stalin instead of Bush and Putin, and Blair instead of Churchill. Different names .
 Today, we already had two wars over there, one in Afghanistan and one in Iraq, says President Obama . "Today we already have two wars," he says .
 Iran had a nuclear weapons program, Syria was getting ready to invade Israel and North Korea had tested a nuclear weapon . North Korea also tested a nuke weapon, and Syria was preparing for a possible invasion .
 Iran has announced production of nuclear material at an industrial rate . Venezuela nationalized that last privately owned oil operations . Iran had announced that it would be producing nuclear material .
 People were complaining about $2.60 gas when we were paying $3,299 in Kalifornia . People complained about gas when they were paying more than $2,300 in California .
 The National Science Foundation was worried about wind turbines killing birds . Plus the National Science . Foundation worried that wind turbines were killing birds.
 Most experts expected a nuclear terrorist attack on the U.S. before the end of the decade . Most experts said a terrorist attack would not happen before the year 2000 .
 There was a growing unrest in the country and a person could sense that something was looming and whatever it was, it wouldn't be good . "Whatever it was to be good. It would be good," she said .
 America has become a divided camp; one with good, decent Christian values who just want the country to return to what it had been when they were growing up . America had become a . divided camp, one with . good Christian values . who just wanted the country . return to . what
 The other camp represents much of what is wrong with society, liberal attitudes, pro right to choose, with many more than willing to openly embrace illegal aliens, terrorists and the Good Lord only knows what else .
 Nobody should have a semiautomatic anything when it came to guns, they claimed . Nobody should be allowed to keep a gun in the U.S.
 Hitler invoked article 48 and became a dictator for life . Using his new authority as Fuehrer, Hitler invoked Article 48 to become a dictator . Using article 48, he invoked his authority to become dictator for the life .
 Of course, things are far different here; this is a free country, with just a few rules, CNN.com reports . "Of course, . Things are far . different here," she says .
 Tax firms that have complete copies of the IRS code and regulations plus the state codes and regulations need a small room to hold it . Tax firms need to be able to keep copies of IRS and state codes .
 If you had a full copy of the U.S. code and regulations, the clerk should be able to keep up, but you'll need a larger room .
 "Everyone who knows my work knows that I'm superstitious and believe that bad things happen threes. Everyone who knows this is superstitious," she says .
 As improbable as some of the happenings, they're always possible, if somewhat unlikely . As improbable, they are always possible .
 As a result of the terrorist attacks on 9/11/01, the U.S. went to war, first in Afghanistan and next in Iraq . The United States is now at war in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 "That was a dirty trick he pulled on us to make us buy a new hot water heater," says Bob Greene . Greene says he was forced to buy the new water heater .
 I hope the bank will let us have the money to get your cataracts fixed. I hope we can get the money . I hope you can pay for the surgery .
 For two, I can fix them up nice and buy some 30 round Pro Mag magazines . For two of these magazines, you can buy a Pro Mag magazine for two .
 I have to swap out my MIA Muzzle Break for a flashhider with the bayonet lug . I also have to trade out my missing missing muzzle muzzle break for a muzzle break .
 Mossberg sold the ghost ring sight kit and I could get a gunsmith to install it . Better still, Mossberg . Mossberg also sold the gunsmith's gunsmith .
 Derek was in Fiippin and we were here, in Palmdale, California . Fine in theory, but Derek was there, and we're here . Derek was here, and it's fine in theory .
 The price in Kalifornia went over $4 a gallon before the rest of the nation hit an average of $3.50 a gallon . The refineries couldn't produce gas fast enough and the price in California hit $4 .
 I occurred to me that John didn't understand how Medicare part D worked . John didn’t understand how part D works . John's wife says he's not a patient .
 Without insurance, prescriptions ran about $1,000 a month without insurance . "That little gap in there took food off our table," she says .
 He talked about a storm, but I'm not sure it's the same storm this story is about . CNN.com's John Sutter says he's not sure the storm is the same thing .
 "We wait until I was over the hump on the prescriptions and then for the shotguns to be on sale," he says . "So we wait until we get the prescriptions, then we wait to get the shotguns on sale. So we wait."
 I'd often spared with my amigo over the phone insisting I'd never buy a Mossberg . I've often said that he'd always buy one of the world's most expensive guns .
 "I don't have a SU-16 like he does, but Ron's got one and I got some 30 round M-16 magazines for him," he says . "Ron's got a 30 round magazine for him. I don't know what I'm going to do."
 "I got them before the year 2000 and no one can prove otherwise. Well, I guess they are," he says . "I guess they're, I got them in 2000," he adds .
 By the time summer was over, we had a case each of Brenneke slugs, 00 Buck and #4 Buck . By summer's end, there had been more than 100 cases of 00 Buck slugs .
 In Atlas Shrugged, society stagnates when independent productive achievers began to be socially demonized and even punished for their accomplishments . Society had been far more healthy and prosperous by allowing, encouraging and rewarding selfreliance and individual achievement .
 Independence and personal happiness flourished to the extent of people were free, and achievement was rewarded . Individual ownership of private property was strictly respected . Individual happiness flourished when people were allowed to own private property .
 The hero, John Galt, lives a life of laissez-faire capitalism as the only way to live consistent with his beliefs . The hero of the film, The Walt Disney's Walt Disney World War II, will be released on Friday .
 It portrays fascism, socialism and communism any form of state intervention in society as systemically and fatally flawed . The film portrays fascism and communism as a systemically flawed state intervention .
 Rand claimed that it is not a fundamentally political book, but that the politics portrayed in the novel are a result of her attempt to display her image of the ideal person and the individual mind's position and value in society . Rand claimed the politics in the book are a response to her image
 Rand argues that independence and individual achievement enable society to survive and thrive, and should be embraced . Rand argues individual achievement enables society to thrive .
 She argues that coerced self-sacrifice causes any society to self-destruct . She argues over time, coerced self sacrifice causes social institutions to self destruct .
 She is similarly dismissive of faith beyond reason, in a God or higher being, or anything else as an authority over one's own mind . She is similar to her disdain for faith in the world beyond reason .
 The book positions itself against religion spe9 cificaiiy, often directly within the characters' dialogue .
 It was around the same time that I read her older book, The Fountainhead . It was also around the time that she read her old book, "The Fountainhead," she said .
 Fie first called me a liar and next asked me when I'd pulled my head out of my butt. Fie asked me to pull my head from my butt . Fie called him a liar. He said he'd pulled his head from his butt .
 For half the money of two Mini-14s, we'd gotten the 3 590A1 s and 3 cases of ammo . "I told him the story about the women wanting guns," he said .
 Fie asked when I was going to get a Glock and I told him as soon as they started to make them out of metal, he said . Fie told him when he asked him if he wanted to get the Glock Glock he would get it .
 Fie also quotes Get yourself a Glock, and lose that nickel-plated sissy-pistol! Tommy Lee Jones United States Marshals. Fie .
 Robert Downey, Jr. played a sissy pistol in the latest episode of the Iron Iron Chef series .
 Damon and Fleataxi got to be good friends and they talk on the phone more often than Damon talks to me . Fleatxi and Damon are good friends, and they often talk to each other more often .
 Russ said I should get the hell out of the PRK, but we couldn't do it because of our finances, he says . Russ said he wanted to get out of PRK but couldn't because of his finances .
 "Thank God he keeps me up to date on the stuff I miss on the World Wide Web"
 "If Bush persists in putting missiles in Europe, we'll start the Cold War back up," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 1961 the U.S. started deploying 15 Jupiter IRBM nuclear missiles near Izmir, Turkey, which directly threatened cities in the western sections of the Soviet Union, including Moscow .
 President Kennedy regarded the missiles as being of questionable strategic value . An SSBN was capable of providing the same coverage, with both stealth and superior firepower . The missiles were regarded by President Kennedy as being an SSBN .
 Khrushchev had publicly expressed his anger at the Turkish deployment, and regarded the missiles as a personal affront . The missiles were deployed by the Turkish government in 1962 .
 Khrushchev had previously expressed his doubts to Robert Frost about the readiness of the liberal United States to fight over tough issues . It was in this environment that Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed to place nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Khrushchev devised the deployment plan in May of 1962 . By late July, over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, some of them already carrying military materiel .
 I read something called Space War and they've commented on this extensively. I read it extensively. Space War is about the future of space war . Space War will be the first of its kind .
 Putin has already said that they will abrogate the Treaty to stay out of Europe if we put ABMs in Europe . Putin has said that . Putin already said they will . abrogated the Treaty . If we put them in Europe, we will have ABMs, they will
 Russia is building new SSBNs of the Borei class that are smaller than their Typhoons . The Borei SSBN is being built by Russia in a range of sizes smaller than Typhoons.
 The Russians are going to build a new class of SSBN . They're also upgrading Typhoons to use the Bulava . The new SSBN will be built in Russia .
 The Bulava was successfully fired from a Typhoon class sub in late 2005 . The sub was fired from the Bulava sub in a Typhoon sub in 2005 .
 Russia had some adjusting to do, that war in Afghanistan had destroyed the economy of the country . Russia's economy has been hit hard by the war, which has destroyed its infrastructure .
 15 years after the Berlin Wall fell, they were ready to resume their goal of global denomination . All they needed was a small dose of capitalism and they needed it to be successful .
 They had money now, from oil and gas, gold and diamonds, with hydrocarbons being their main source of income . They said they had money from oil, gas and gold, but not from diamonds .
 Ours was the oldest Republican Democracy in the world . It had outlived all of the historic Democracies . Ours were the oldest . Democracy. Ours .
 Like those Democracies, we too had proven to be our worst enemy and our Republic was beginning to collapse . However, like those . Democracies . We too had proved to be . our . worst enemy, writes David Cameron .
 The Dutch West Indies remain an overseas territory of the Netherlands to this day . The West Indies are still an Overseas Territory of the Dutch .
 Scholars define an empire as a state extending dominion over areas and populations distinct culturally and ethnically from the culture/ethnicity at the center of power . An empire is a state that extends dominion over parts of its territory .
 Hegemony is the dominance of one group over other groups, with or without the threat of force . Cultural perspectives become skewed to favor the dominant group, such as cultural perspectives .
 Pax Americana is a term to describe the period of relative peace in the Western world since the end of World War II in 1945 . It coincides with the dominant military and economic position of the U.S. in the United States . Pax is a period of peace coinciding with the
 It places the United States in the military and diplomatic role of a modern-day Roman Empire, succeeding the British Empire . The U.S. is now in a state of war with the Roman Empire .
 The U.S. is often criticized of not taking up the mantle following the disintegration of Pax Britannica before the First World War due to inward-looking isola11 policies .
 During this period, no armed conflict has emerged among major Western nations, and no nuclear weapons have been used . The United States and its allies have been involved in various regional wars (such as the Korean War) and the Falklands War .
 Bush Doctrine is the name given to a set of guidelines first unveiled by U.S. President George W Bush in a speech given on 01 Jun02 .
 The policies, taken together, outlined a broad new phase in U.S. policy that would place greater emphasis on military preemption, military superiority and unilateral action . The policies were outlined together in a new phase of United States policy .
 "It allowed me to review most aspects of the American experience while it occurred," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sharon didn't totally buy into my paranoia, she was a good wife and tried . While Sharon bought into her paranoia, Sharon was a very good wife, she tried .
 "I was pretty much crippled by the diabetes, barely able to carry my new MIA rifle, she allowed me to pursue our feeble attempts to be prepared," she said .
 In many of my stories, I'd had to come up with a gimmick to allow us to build that bomb shelter in the backyard . In many cases, the gimmick was a gimmick, allowing us to have a bomb shelter . In this case, we had to find a gimmick .
 "Without the gimmick, we were just like everyone else, we couldn't afford a shelter. Without the gimmick," we would have been homeless," she says . "We couldn't even afford to have a shelter," she adds .
 It wasn't something you could get a bank to finance, either you had the money or you didn't . It was something you couldn't get the money to finance . "You had to have the money either you did or didn't," she said .
 If you wanted to risk going further into debt, you could refi the house . If you were worried about going further in debt, it could be easier to refi your house .
 When you're living hand to mouth, you save that equity for something important, like fixing her eyes . When you live hand-to-mouth, you use that equity to fix her eyes, she says . When she's living hand-touched, she saves that equity .
 She got enough for her eyes, $4,800, and a little extra I could spend on preps . She also got enough to spend on her eyes .
 $5,200 for the AV-150 and the UT1 blast door, plus shipping, costs $2,500 plus shipping . But, you can buy the two for half that price . You can also buy the blast door for half the price of the $500 .
 I had plenty of time to stake out the spot in the backyard where I wanted to put the shelter . The shelter will be located in the back yard of the house .
 There was enough money left to get the hole dug and the dirt stacked so we could put in a 10' dirt cover over the shelter . The shelter will be covered in 10' of dirt .
 A rule of thumb for calculating the depth of a floor joist for a residential property is; half the span in feet plus two inches . The depth of the joist should be half that length of a joist .
 Half of 15 is 7V2 plus 2 equals 91/2, so I probably could have gotten by with 2x1 Os, but for the difference in cost, I figured to go with the strength . Half is 7 V2 plus two equals 91V2, which is 7
 I still had about $3,000 left, but need a gasoline tank, water tank, waste tank and a sewage pump . I need to buy a gasoline, water and sewage tank, but also need a waste tank, a water tank .
 My generator used about 1 gallon per hour at full power . If we went with a 12 volt system except for the stove, and had some batteries, we could use the built in charger and maybe get by for V 2 gph.
 With the price of gas at $4 a gallon, it would almost take a bank loan to fill a 1,000 gallon tank . With the cost of filling a gas tank, it's almost impossible to pay for a full tank .
 I decided I could use plastic tanks for water and sewage and would only need a 1,500 gallon metal gasoline tank . I decided to use plastic instead of metal tanks .
 I put an ad in the paper stating I wanted to buy a used 1,500-gallon gas tank . I put it in the ad saying I was going to buy it for $1,500,000 .
 On the 7th day, the last day the ad would run, I got a call from a fella who said he had a tank but it would need to be sanded and repainted . The tank was sanded, repainted and sanded before it would run .
 After being assured it didn't leak, I told him to bring it over and I'd write him a check . "I told him he should bring it to me and I'll write a check," he said .
 I was down to $2,000 and a hole in the ground, but closer than I had been . I was finally able to get back on the road . I had to go to the bank to find a way out of the hole .
 With copper running about $4 a foot, I'd have to get by with galvanized pipes . I'd like to have a galvanized pipe made from copper .
 "I'd have to start taking vitamins to have the strength to build the shelter and install all of the plumbing," he says . Plus, he says, "I would have to take vitamins"
 "I wanted the sewage tank below the shelter, so that meant digging another hole," she says . "It's not easy to dig into a hole, so I wanted to dig another hole."
 Ron came by a couple of times and watched me digging the hole, but didn't offer to help until I was ready to install the septic tank . Ron came to the house several times to watch me dig the hole . Ron didn't want to help with the project .
 We have 18 of those small canned hams, 24 cans of Spam, 30 cans of chicken, 30 canisters of beef and 48 cans of tuna . We also have 18 cans of small cans of hams and 24 cans each of Spams .
 "We have enough for the five, but if you come, bring an air mattress or something," she says . "We're going to have a lot of air mattresses," she adds .
 "There are still a few details to work out, but we have duplicates of almost everything in the kitchen," says chef . "We still have a lot of work to do with," he says .
 "I ended up buying one wall at a time, it took a lot of wood when you were spacing everything 12"" on center. I ended up . It took a long time to buy a wall at one wall. I had to buy one wall in a row, one in a
 It also made the walls very heavy, Ron and Ron and I couldn't lift it once it was complete . The walls were very heavy and the walls were also heavy .
 I hammer an anchor into the ground and tied rope at intervals . I used a winch with a long arm to raise the first wall . I then used an anchor to anchor an anchor in the ground . The first wall was raised by a long-arm winch .
 Then we hammered nails into the sill-plate anchoring the first wall in place . The first wall was put in place in the first place .
 We added 2 diagonal support boards to keep it from tipping over and I waited for the next check to buy more lumber . We added the diagonal support board to keep the house from tipping .
 By this time, I was getting around pretty well, I only had a hammer to drive the nails and my waist was 2"" smaller and my arms 1"" larger . By the time I was able to walk again, I had lost weight .
 That stuff may be made out of wood chips and glue, but it's very heavy . That stuff is made from wood chips, glue and wood chips .
 In his 'down time' I install the gas tank, and water tank and ran the pipes . In his "down time" he installed the gas, water and gas tank . He also installed the water tank, gas tank and water .
 "When that happened, I could buy something extra for the shelter, like a shower, stool or bathroom vanity," she says . "I could buy a shower or stool, like I did with the shelter," she adds .
 "We moved the garage refrigerator and freezer to the shelter before the overhead went on. We moved the freezer and refrigerator and refrigerator into the shelter," said the mayor .
 Sharon bought new shelves for the garage and I used the old ones to furnish the storeroom in the shelter . Sharon bought a new shelf for the shelter and used the new ones for the storage .
 The final task was to roll on a heavy coat of a tar like substance to seal the shelter from outside water . It was then rolled on to a heavy coating of the tar-like substance .
 "Once we had that done, all we had to do was move the dirt back into the hole and the shelter was essentially finished," the shelter's owner says .
 We used that winch to lower things through the blast door into the shelter and my little cart to move them where they needed to go . We used to use a winch and cart to get things through blast door .
 Although we had a schedule that was supposed to tell how much money to expect each month, it wasn't up to date and we got a surprise in October . It wasn't a surprise that we were surprised by the amount of money we expected each month .
 I’d changed my mind and sent Derek money to buy me a Taurus PT1911 with 3 extra 8 round magazines . He’s changed his mind and bought Derek a new Taurus with extra magazines .
 "It took it almost 4 weeks to come in, but when it came, I had everything else and my gun collection was almost complete," she said .
 I/we also had a CD V-717 and it was installed, ready to go with the addition batteries . It was installed and ready to be added to the CD with addition batteries.
 "All I got for Christmas was some new jeans, shirts and a pair of new work boots," he says . "Since I got the .45 and .22 early, all I got was some jeans and shirts," he said .
 The boots were Corcoran Men's 10"" Black Legendary Leather Side Zip Jump Boots . The boots are Corcorans Men's . 10."" Black Legendary . Leather side Zip Jump boots .
 "If she hadn't gotten the zipper kind, I probably never would have gotten them on," he says . "I probably would have never had to get them on"
 Rule of thumb says that price of gold is about 50 times the price of silver . Price of silver is 50 times gold, according to rule of thumb .
 The sentiments of the American people pushed Hillary Clinton to the forefront of the Democratic candidates . Ruddy Giuliani was the Republican leader of the Republican Party .
 Osama Obama was doing his best to get the lead from Hillary and Romney was trying to catch up to Ruddy . It was still months before the conventions and Hillary was doing her best .
 Romney was the former governor of Massachusetts and their record on firearms isn't any better . Romney's record on guns isn't as good as his own .
 Ron Paul wouldn't take away the guns, but he was out of consideration . Tom Tancredo from Colorado was a ways back in the running . Ron Paul would have taken away guns .
 "From what I'd read on the various forums, many of my compatriots preferred one or both of them," says the author . "I'd read many of them prefer one or two of them. From what I've read, they're not quite sure what I'm going to
 We'd see how it would turn out in January and February of 2008, when most of the states were having their primary elections .
 The Dow Jones had tried to keep up with inflation and had moved closer and closer to $14,000 . Dow Jones has moved close to $15,000 in the past year .
 There was enough money to let me buy two ham antennas . I went with the MFJ-1798 10-band antenna and a Comet tri-band .
 I was counting on the next big payment from the trust to allow me to buy the Kenwood radio . The trust has been in the process of paying back the money to buy a radio .
 We were even on our bills and had about $2,500 left after we'd done all the grocery shopping . We were able to pay for all of our groceries and we were even close to $3,000 .
 It was just a card that you added and I could consider it later, she said . "It was just the card," she said. "I could consider this later," she later said .
 It showed up 3 days later from Las Vegas and I spent the day hooking it up to the antenna switches and even listened for a while, noting some channels being used by locals . It was sent to Las Vegas 3 days after it arrived .
 I put it away and sat down to go through our medical supplies, making a list of things we needed . I put the list away and went to the store to find out what we needed to help .
 "It wasn't a long list and I got her to take me to Wally World so we'd have the stuff if we needed it," he says . "It was a good day for her to go shopping and she took me to the store," he adds .
 I really wanted more 7.62x51 mm ammo, but nobody had any that was affordable . Nobody had any of the ammo that was available for $1,000 .
 I won't pay a buck a round a round for surplus ammo, even if it is on stripper clips . "I won't buy it for a dollar a round. Even if it's on strippers clips," says author .
 We had what we had and that would probably be all there was until the price came down, or we got a big pile of money . We had a lot of what we could have, but that's probably not all there is .
 With the odds of winning the Lottery as high as they were, we didn't waste our money on tickets . The odds were so high that we decided to not buy tickets .
 The COLA adjustment on Social Security was lagging way behind inflation, too . Social Security's COLA is lagging behind inflation in the past year .
 Iowa didn't make COLA adjustments on IPERS, they just paid a bonus at the end of January . Iowa's state-of-the-art budget is the largest in the country .
 As far as meds went, I had some extras but only about an 8 month supply on most things . Only one month supply of Plavix and about 8 months of other meds .
 I'd been cheating on the Zoloft for several months, only taking half a pill a day and saving the rest so maybe I had enough for 8 months if I kept taking the smaller dose . I'd only take half the pill every day and save the rest .
 As far as completing the shelter went, Ron had helped some days shoveling the dirt back in the hole and tamping it a little .
 "We still had a mound over the shelter when we were done. I misted it some and that settled it a little more," he said . "I misted the mound some more, but we still had to be done."
 I just hoped the occasional rains would help to settle it some more. "I just hoped it would help us get some more," she said. "It's a good thing we got," she added .
 It wasn't full yet, not with gas over $4 a gallon, but we were getting there at the rate of 10 gallons a week . We were getting to the full of gas at the time of this week .
 I now had a gallon bottle of PRI-G I'd gotten from that place in Oregon and had to use some of it because our pint bottles were used up .
 This year's Democratic Convention was Monday, August 25, through Thursday, August 28, 2008, in Denver . The Republican National Convention was planned to start just 4 days later, on September 1, in St. Louis .
 The Supreme Court upheld the Appellate Court in the DC case involving the 2nd Amendment . The main news was that the case was upheld .
 The state of California had outlawed even more firearms, this time semi-auto handguns . Meanwhile, the state also outlawed semi-automatics .
 "We had 4 semi-autos, 3 of them hand guns, 3 hand guns," he says . "I had my .45, my .32 and that Sterling .22," he adds .
 The only one there was any record of was the .45 and it was in Derek’s name . The .45 was in the name of Derek, who was killed in a car crash .
 We compromised on our computer setup and my desktop and Amy's laptop went into the shelter . Amy, Sharon and Sharon's desktops stayed in the house . Amy and Sharon had to put their laptops in the shelter instead of their laptops .
 It weighed in around 375#, not counting paper or the spare toner cartridge .
 I screwed something up moving it and it cost me a $250 service call from Hewlett Packard to get it to work . I screwed it up moving and it costs me $250 to move it back to work. It's a big mistake, but it's worth a lot of
 My computer was connected to internet using the Ethernet 5e cable from Staples . The cable is used to connect the internet to your computer .
 "By now, we had as many supplies in the shelter as we had in the garage when Ron looked last summer," he says . "We're going to have a lot of food and water for the winter," he adds .
 "I kept my eye on the news and the worse things got in the Middle East, the more food I moved to the shelter," she says . She says she moved to a shelter after the news broke out of the region .
 In April of 2007, I told Sharon to buy me 6 cartons of Kool’s every month . In April 2007, Sharon told Sharon she had to buy him six cartons a month . Sharon bought him 6 carton packs a month, he told her .
 I only smoke 1 carton a week and kept the extra cartons locked up in my supply cabinet . What I didn't tell her was that I only smoked 1 cartoon a week .
 After the shelter was done, I moved them down there because she never came down but once to look around . She never came back to the shelter once, but only once, to look at .
 I screwed up one other thing; the blast hatch wasn't large enough to get the twin mattresses down . The blast hatch is too small for the twin mattress to get down .
 We found some 3”x36” cot mattresses and put them on the beds I'd cobbled together out of left over lumber . The beds were made out of wood and left over wood .
 With 10' of earth overhead, we would be well protected in case of a war . It wasn't all that comfortable, but with 10' overhead, it was well protected by the earth .
 "From what I was hearing, it seemed more and more likely we'd have a terrorist attack using nuclear weapons," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: From what he was hearing it seemed 'more likely' we'd use nuclear weapons .
 Russia and the Chinese have been building up their forces in recent weeks . However, with the recent buildups by Russia and China, there was about an even chance they might attack .
 The WHO never really got a handle on H5N1 and there had twice as many cases during the last year, with the same 60% fatality rate . The WHO had a 60% chance of catching the virus .
 Gas in Europe cost about 3 times as much as it did in the United States . Europeans were really complaining about the cost of gas in the U.S.
 If you sat back and looked at the bigger picture, you could see the storm coming, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "You could see a storm coming"
 As the waves approached the shore, they'd begin to pile up, making it seem like we were getting hit by several disasters all at once . And like a tsunami, the waves would pile up like they were approaching the shoreline .
 It wouldn't take much, the economy was already in the toilet and gas was halfway between $4 and $5 a gallon, national average . Gas prices were $4 to $5 per gallon . The economy is already in trouble .
 Some states were still just under $4 a gallon and some were over $5, like Kalifornia, in places . That meant that some states were just under . $4,000 a gallon .
 In May of the previous year, gas was $2.50 in Palmdale before Mother's Day . In early May of this year, the same amount of gas was in early May .
 We'd robbed Peter to pay Paul and short changed him, making minimum payments . We'd rob Peter to . pay Paul, shortchanged him, and short-changed him. We'd made minimum payments, but we'd robbed him to . make minimum payments.
 I'd used treated lumber for the floor although it was sitting on a sheet of plastic . The plastic was attached to the side walls to keep water from getting to the floor . The floor was covered in treated lumber .
 Where I had to go through the plastic with pipes, it was carefully sealed . The plastic is carefully sealed in the plastic, and it's carefully sealed by pipes .
 The only good Republican candidates didn't appear as if they could bail the water out of the boat fast enough . Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush are the only good Republicans running for president .
 "I'd earned my disability by paying in for 24 plus years. Like the TV ad said, I'd earn my disability," he said . "Like a TV ad it said, like a disability ... I'd earned it"
 "We cut travel to a minimum, keeping the value in the Rondo and putting our gas money in the tank in the backyard," says Rondo .
 The only pills available contained something akin to aspirin and I couldn't take those because of the stomach . The only pill available was aspirin and it was difficult to take those pills .
 When the pile of dirt settled as much as it was going to, I got Ron to help me and we repaired the sprinklers, then spread the dirt out, leveling the backyard . When the dirt settled, Ron and Ron spread it out, the backyard leveled .
 We got another large check from the trust and I bought canning jars, extra lids, a pressure canner and a 19 large supply of heirloom seeds . We got a large check and bought a large number of jars and lids .
 Ron took me to Lowe's and I got one of those rototillers and tilled the soil for a garden . I got a rototillerer and used it to till the soil .
 I planted corn, potatoes, plum tomatoes and plum tomatoes, bell peppers, green beans, cucumbers, radishes, carrots, lettuce, cabbage and onions . But not all the seeds in the packet were planted in the packets .
 I didn't realize how big a project the garden would be, but having the tiller helped . I didn’t realize how much of a garden would have to do . Having a tiller helps with the garden .
 The dogs weren't happy because we couldn't let them out into the backyard until I put up a fence across the patio . The dogs were happy because they weren't allowed out until I had to put up the fence .
 The small jars were for pickles and the large ones were for vegetables . Small jars were small jars of pickles . Large jars were large jars of vegetables and small jars for small ones .
 I could do all the canning on the patio using the old gas stove and not heat up the house . I could use the old stove to make sure I didn't have to heat up my house .
 When the batches were big enough I used the 30 quart canner and the 18 quart Presto canner . When they weren't big enough, they used the 18 Quarters .
 "We didn't can any ground beef because I didn't buy any wide mouth jars," says chef . "I didn't want to can it because it's too hard to get into a wide mouth jar," she says .
 She added about 48# of bacon, 8 whole cure 81 hams, about a case of whole chickens, 4 pork loins that I cut into chops and some vegetables to the freezer .
 "I barely had the time to keep up with the news. Working like I had through the summer, I barely had to keep track of the news," she says .
 I came to depend on Russ Williams’ emails to keep me up to date on breaking news and things I should worry about . Russ Williams' emails are the best way to keep you up with breaking news, I say .
 No way could I pick up 100# so I had to have help, but the storeroom was just about full . The storeroom had to be filled with 100# .
 The shelter's utility room had the little PowerBOSS, extra oil, gardening tools and anything that I didn't want to risk storing in the shed or garage .
 Patti also grew tomatoes every year and we traded her some Roma's for some beefsteak . Patti grew tomatoes and grew them every year .
 Chris still commuted to Hollywood but he added 2 riders to share gas costs . Chris added two riders to his commute to Hollywood to share the gas .
 We got two cords of firewood we stored on the patio and took the gas log out of the fireplace . We got a gas log from the fireplace and took it from the patio .
 In the first place, I think the Democrats will win the House, Senate and White House in November . In the second place, he thinks they'll win the White House and the House .
 We have about seven hundred bases overseas and I expect they'll shut most of them down, says President Obama . "We have about 7,000 bases overseas," he says .
 The shelter was dry, there isn't much water in the ground in the desert and my backyard was no exception . "There isn't a lot of water in my backyard," she says. "I'm glad to have my backyard filled with water."
 "I'd done everything I could think to do to make sure it stayed that way, especially since it was wood construction," she says . "It's wood construction. It's a wood structure," she said .
 I think the overhead would have supported much more weight than the soil that covered it . I think it would have been much more stable than the surface that would have covered it up to the surface .
 The United States color scheme is counterintuitive, in most countries, blue represents conservatives and red liberals . The U.S. color scheme was counterintuitive .
 On November 5th, Ron called and wanted to store some stuff in the shelter . Ron called to the shelter and asked if he could store some of the items . Ron says he wants to store the shelter's items .
 All of our weapons and ammo had been in the shelter since the previous evening . Because the feds probably visit the forums, all of our guns and ammo were in there .
 I told him if there was anything we wanted, we probably had until January 20th to buy it, he said . "I told him that if there were any things we wanted we probably have until January . 20th," she said .
 The best night vision would be a Raptor Raptor and those cost as much as the rifle . Best night vision is night vision .
 We scurried trying to get everything in place before Obama became the new President . We are still trying to make sure everything is in place when Obama takes over .
 The most anyone would sell me was 1,000 rounds of each caliber . I think that everyone who owned a gun must have had the same idea . The most people who own a gun would want to sell me a gun, he says .
 I told the kids that they'd better get their guns now, Obama was bound and determined to take them away . I told them they'd had better get your guns now . Obama's gun control record is on the rise in the U.S. history .
 "I asked him if he could get me any .50 caliber Raufoss and he was quick to say no," he said . "He said no. He said he didn't want to get him a gun," he added .
 "I called Damon to see if he had gotten the shotgun and he said no, but he had the money," he said . Damon says he has the money to buy the shotgun .
 If his background check failed, send Derek the money and have him buy it . Send Derek money to buy it. Send Derek the cash and have it buy it, Derek says .
 Last year when a tornado hit Greensburg, Kansas, someone asked on one of the boards whether they should rebuild the town . The town was devastated by the tornado last year .
 Charles City, Iowa, was hit by an F-5 tornado that killed many and injured more . Charles City was hit on May 15, 1968, when a tornado hit Charles City .
 "We don't need the government to bail us out, though a little help would be nice," says President Obama . "We're not going to rely on the government, but we need it," says Obama .
 Communism is an ideology that seeks to establish a classless, stateless social organization . Communism is based on common ownership of the means of production . Communism aims to establish the stateless stateless society based on property ownership . Communism has been defined as communism in the past .
 "Maybe we'd get lucky and our new shelter won't collapse, but I wouldn't count on it," she says . "It's not a good thing for us to have a new shelter," she adds .
 "Ron and I were about as prepared as a person could be in the circumstances," she says . "We were prepared as well as possible," she adds .
 "I kept out the Nazi .32 and did the same with the rest of our firearms. I kept it out of the .32."
 After spreading out the remaining dirt, the shelter was covered with about 11' of dirt; make that make that PF 16,777,216. Actually, after spreading out . out of the remaining . dirt, we spread out the . remaining dirt . The shelter is covered with 11'
 President Obama gave a speech similar to Michael's Douglas's speech in The American President . Obama said he was going to get the guns . Michael Douglas said he would get guns .
 As Commander in Chief, he gave the Pentagon 60 days to get our troops home from Iraq and Afghanistan . President Obama has 60 days left to get his troops home .
 Joint Chiefs must have been expecting it, they had ships pre-positioned to haul our equipment back home . The Joint Chiefs had ships ready to haul the equipment back to the UK .
 It would take anywhere from 6 to 10 years to restore the broken equipment they were bringing back . The equipment they brought back would take between 6 and 10 years .
 Al Qaeda didn't wait for us to repair our equipment; I now believe they followed us home . Al Qaeda followed us back to Afghanistan, says U.S. President Obama .
 "I personally have nothing against Muslims and Mexicans, everyone should own a few," he said . "Everyone should own one," he added .
 Last year when the LAPD tried to disperse the protesters, they used rubber bullets . Last year, they tried to use rubber bullets to disperse protesters .
 Gates is considered the father of SWAT, which established specialized units dealing with hostage rescue and extreme situations involving armed and dangerous suspects . Gates established the SWAT team in the 1970s and '80s .
 Ordinary line officers, with light armament, limited weapons training, and no instruction on group fighting techniques, had been shown to be ineffective in combating snipers, bank robberies by heavily armed persons, and other high-intensity situations .
 In 1965, Officer John Nelson came up with the idea to form a specially trained and equipped unit . The unit is intended to respond to and manage critical situations while minimizing police casualties .
 As inspector, Gates approved this idea, Gates formed a small select group of volunteer officers . Gates approved the idea, and he formed a group of volunteers .
 The first SWAT team, which Gates had originally wanted to name, was born LAPD SWAT, D-Platoon of the Metro Division . LAPD SWAT is now the LAPD's SWAT team .
 This first SWAT unit was initially constituted as 15 teams of four men each, for a total staff of 60 . The first SWAT team was initially . Initially, it was formed of 15 teams, with a total of 60 men each .
 These officers were given special status and benefits, but in return had to attend 25 monthly training and serve as security for police facilities during episodes of civil unrest . The officers were also given special benefits but also had to be trained to deal with the problem .
 SWAT was copied almost immediately by most U.S. police departments, and is now used by law enforcement agencies throughout the world . SWAT is now called SWAT and used by most police departments in the United States, Europe and Asia .
 Gates made every attempt to shield the force from political influences for good and for ill . Like his mentor Parker, Gates tried to shield Gates from political influence . Gates made an attempt to protect Gates from the political influence of his mentor .
 He publicly disdained community policing, usually electing not to work with community activists and prominent persons in communities in which LAPD was conducting major anti-gang operations . He often chose not to engage in community policing .
 Coincidentally, at the time of the Rodney King beating, Gates was at a community policing conference . Gates was in the midst of the beating at the same time .
 There is no accurate count of the number of Muslims in the United States . The U.S. Census Bureau does not collect data on religious identification .
 Ron and I started to take in more meetings and eventually we ran into Clarence. Ron and Clarence . Clarence. "Clarence" was the man who ran into Ron. "Ron"
 His health had been poor lately, but we were all in our mid-sixties, so that was to be expected . He said: "His health was poor, but that was expected. He had been in poor lately."
 Ron had been experiencing clogged blood vessels for 2 years and his doctor wasn't anxious to clean them out again . Ron's doctor had to clean his blood vessels out again after 2 years of clogging .
 It took a Committee less than a week to work out the differences and the new bill passed both the House and Senate . The new bill was passed by both the Senate and the House .
 Being a Patron member of you know who, I figured, in for a penny, in . for a pound. Being a . Patron member, I decided to be in for . a penny . Being a patron member of . you know . who, he said .
 When some extra money showed up, I bought a Browning Hi-Power and a Surefire suppressor for my Ml A rifle . I bought the suppressors for my rifle .
 "In April, the trust distributed a capital gain and we were flowing in money," says founder of the trust . The trust has been distributing capital gains since April .
 He called in late May and said he'd have to drive out to bring the rifle and a few other things . He called late May to say he was going to bring a rifle and other things with him .
 He said they'd be here by the 15th and it was up to us to pay for the motel room, he was short on money . He said he'd be in the room by the 16th and the room would be paid for by the motel .
 "I gave him the money you sent me and the list of things you've always said you wanted. I gave him money," she says . "I'm not going to lie to him," she adds .
 Next he unloaded several cases of M855 and an equal number of Ml 93 ball ball, plus Ml 18LR and 40mm grenades to shoot .
 My barrel had 1 turn in 11 and you really needed 1 turn 10 to use it . My barrel was 1.5 turns in 11 . It had 1.4 turns in 10 .
 They usually blow in from the west, arriving at the prevailing wind speed . The wind usually arrives at the height of the prevailing winds in the UK .
 Storms are created when a center of low pressure develops, with a system of high pressure surrounding it . Storms form when low pressure is combined with high pressure and high pressure around it .
 This combination of opposing forces can create winds and result in the formation of storm clouds, such as the cumulonimbus . It can also be seen in the shape of a cloud, such a cloud that forms in the clouds .
 Small, localized areas of low pressure can form from hot air rising off hot ground, resulting in smaller disturbances such as dust devils and whirlwinds . Smaller disturbances can also be seen in dust devils, whirlwinds and dust devils .
 A tornado is a violently rotating column of air which is in contact with both a cumulonimbus cloud base and the surface of the earth . A tornado can be seen as a very violent column of air which is violently rotating .
 Tornadoes can come in many sizes, but are typically in the form of a visible condensation funnel, with the narrow end touching the earth . Tornadoes are typically seen in the shape of a small, but visible funnel with narrow end .
 The tornado that hit Charles City was a multiple vortex tornado . The tornado was a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate around a common center . Charles City, Missouri, was hit by a tornado .
 Multivortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, however it is very often observed in intense tornadoes . Multivort structure can be seen in tornadoes, especially in intense storms .
 There are more kinds of storms than thunderstorms, like earthquake storms, like earthquakes . There is more than a million people in the United States .
 I suspect that if the volcanoes in the Cascade Range began erupting, one after the other, someone might call that a volcano storm . Someone might call it a 'volcano storm'
 The government didn't wait very long after July 1,2009 to begin to implement the gun grab . The gun grab was implemented by the government .
 "Obviously, I wasn't the only person in Moon Shadows who had some guns," he says . "I was the fifth house they hit," he adds . "They hit. Obviously, they hit. I was the . fifth house"
 I don't have them; I sold them in a private sale after the new law passed . I don’t have them, I sold it in a . private sale . The new law requires the sale of all the items .
 Marigolds are relatively pest free and many people interplant them in their vegetable gardens to deter insect pests . Marigold is a relatively pest-free plant that is interplanting in vegetable gardens .
 Marigolds attract beneficial in30 sects such as lacewings, ladybeetles, and parasitic wasps . The data is lacking as to whether marigolds actually deter insect pests .
 The depth range of GPR is limited by the electrical conductivity of the ground, and the transmitting frequency . The depth of the GPR can be limited to the maximum possible depth range .
 Higher frequencies do not penetrate as far as lower frequencies, but give better resolution . Higher frequencies are not penetrating as far a lower frequency .
 Optimal depth penetration is achieved in dry sandy soils or massive dry materials such as granite, limestone, and concrete where the depth of penetration is up to 15 . In moist and/or clay laden soils and soils with high electrical conductivity, penetration is sometimes only a few centimeters .
 I put in a foot of clay soil about 6' down and covered it top and bottom with galvanized screening . I put it in 6' by 6' in clay soil . I covered the soil top of the clay soil with a screen .
 If Wiki was right, that would short circuit the radar and they wouldn't discover the shelter . It would be the first time the radar has been switched off .
 I had gone door to door during March and warned everyone about the new law . The feds would probably use ground penetrating radar to look for buried firearms, he says .
 "I told everyone with guns in the shelter to tell the government that they sold them to John Doe," says John Doe . "Everyone with guns at the shelter is supposed to tell them they were sold to the government," he says .
 "Sprinklers automatically watered my backyard not long before they came. Plus the sprinklers automatically watering my backyard," she says .
 Sandy Storm unloads all of her ammo and every firearm in the store . Storm had a fire sale of sorts, unloading all of the ammo and guns .
 It was ok, though, though; they only sold to regular customers and had run background checks on them before . It was OK, though. They only sold regular customers .
 When the feds showed up to grab her guns, all she had left was the legal stuff, like gun oil . She says she was left with only legal gun oil, which is legal in the country .
 As far as I could tell, I was the only NRA Life member in the housing tract . I was a member of the NRA Life Life in my home .
 "I was prepared to go to jail if I had to, riding in my wheelchair, of course," she says . She says she was "prepared to go on the streets" in wheelchair .
 He told me about the break-in and how they'd cleaned him out . I asked him what he'd done about the new law and he said he'd been cleaned out .
 He said he was unable to get more guns now and he said no, that was far beyond his means and the guns weren't insured . He said that he would not be able to get them now .
 Even if the Sheriff found them, he'd have to turn them over to the feds . Even if he found them they would have to hand them over .
 He asked about mine and I told him I'd managed to get them sold at a premium . I guessed we'd have to get crossbows or something they hadn't outlawed yet . He asked if he could sell them for a premium and he said he'd had to buy crossbows .
 According to the TV, the military had complied with the C in C, and all troops were now home from Afghanistan, Iraq, Iraq plus Kosovo and South Korea for good measure .
 Our only foreign military presence was in Germany and Japan . As soon as the Japanese Self Defense Force completed development on their project, those troops would be home .
 During WW II, three countries had atomic weapons programs, the US, Germany and Japan . The US, Japan and Germany were the only ones to have atomic weapons .
 The only two nations who tested nuclear weapons were the U.S. and the Japanese . The United States and Japan were the only nations to test nuclear weapons .
 As of 2005, 55 nuclear reactors account for 30% of Japan's electricity generated . 80% of its energy is being imported in the form of fossil fuels . Japan holds a few tons of plutonium and they have some of the finest engineering minds .
 In August 2005, Junichiro Koizumi proposed an amendment to the constitution in order to increase Japan's Defense Forces' roles in international affairs . The amendment was proposed in August 2005 .
 Article 9-2 permits a ""defense force" under control of the Prime Minister, which defends the nation and may participate in international activities . The second paragraph, forbidding the maintenance of ""land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential" is replaced by an
 This new section gun, (army or military) which has been avoided under the current constitution, is not included in the new constitution . It is not clear whether it will be used by the military or the military .
 Members of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces are currently tried as civilians by civilian courts . They are tried in civilian courts by members of the military in Japan .
 The stated reason had to do with threat posed by North Korea and China . It was the stated reason for the move .
 In 1-2 years, they could design and build more nuclear weapons than Israel has, if they chose to do so . Israel could have more nukes than any other nation has, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen says they could build more than Israel currently has .
 It is, however, a myth that Japan renamed the town ""Usa"" following WW II . It is believed that goods exported from Japan could be labeled as such as Usa .
 The town had this name long before the war, at least from 8th century, and is not where the majority of Japanese industry is located . The town is located in Japan's capital, Tokyo .
 Most foreign countries have divested their dollars, opting instead of Euros . Meanwhile, most foreign countries had divested themselves of dollars .
 The government only seized a portion of the hundreds of million firearms in the country . The government has seized hundreds of millions of firearms .
 In Palmdale, Ron pitched in during the summer of 2009 and helped me with the garden . Ron helped me build a garden in 2009 . Ron is now retired from TV production .
 He had more money than I had so he ordered a gross of regular quarts, plus more lids . He ordered more than a quarter of the usual quarts .
 In the past, he mowed his own lawn, but this year, he hired a gardener . This year he hired the gardener to mow his lawn . He says he's not mowing his lawn again .
 This year, we continued to watch the sales and canned beef stew, beef chunks and ground beef patties using wise mouth jars . This year's sales continued to be the best of the year, with sales of beef stew and beef chunks .
 Sometime after Independence Day, the feds showed up again and used a different kind of ground penetrating radar, with the same 33 results . The feds used the radar again after July 4 .
 Israel accused Syria of a cross border incursion and Iran refused to allow UN inspectors in . Iran still refused to let UN inspectors into despite the sanctions that had been imposed .
 I figured it was just a matter of time before the Middle East exploded and for once, Ron agreed with me. "I figured it would be just a couple of years," he said .
 He said he didn't really want to garden, but with the spiraling inflation, he had much choice . He didn't see that he had a much choice, but he said he had to garden .
 Patti, Linda and Sharon now only buy things from the new Eastside Costco and Sam's Club on 10th Street West . Patti and Linda now go shopping together and only buys things from new Costco . Linda, Linda, Sharon and Sharon say they now shop together at Eastside
 "I don't think God is stupid and I'm sure He had a plan. I'd have to agree, I think He's not stupid," she says .
 Although we were harvesting seeds from the garden, I didn't take a chance and ordered more of the seed packages from The Ark Institute . Although we're harvesting seeds, we didn't want to take a risk .
 We could add the chopped stalks to canned or frozen stew and collect the seeds to flavor the potato salad .
 "It's supposed to be popular in Holistic medicine, but I'm not into that," says Dr. John Defterios .
 I figure Montel Williams probably had a wart on his butt, Sharon and I get excited over different things . Sharon and Sharon get excited about different things, and I'm not sure why .
 Terrorists detonated a ~1 Okt atomic bomb in Atlanta, Georgia . The bomb was detonated by terrorists who detonated it in 1996 .
 Shep Smith was just explaining, when, poof, the channel went blank . Ron and I sat down to watch TV and shep Smith just explained, when the channel blanked .
 "I fired up the generator and pulled the main fuse, so you have power to the appliances," she says . "You can't wait to see if you're going to have power in the next few days"
 "I didn't put it up for a vote. We could either run the air conditioner or everything else," she says . "We could run air conditioners or run everything else"
 If they wanted to cool off, the shelter was in the high 50s/low 60s . Temperatures were in the 60s/60s .
 I heard Chris fire up his portable generator and then Dick and Dave started the generators in their trailer/motorhomes . Chris and Dave heard Chris start their generators . Chris: "I heard Chris and Dick fire up their portable generators"
 "It was a real chore making the turn to the blast door. I let Dave and Dick get the folding tables out of the shelter, it was real chore," says Bob Greene .
 Reports of a possible 5th bomb in the Bay area and one in Chicago, but those are unconfirmed . We are getting reports of another bomb in Chicago and a fifth in San Francisco .
 We were notified that the President will have a message on the EAS, shortly, please stay tuned. Stay tuned to the President's message, shortly .
 Early reports claim the LA bomb was detonated in the San Fernando Valley, not downtown . Early reports say it was detonated there .
 Edison says it will take hours to divert power from the Teachapi wind turbines to the Antelope Valley and Bakersfield . Edison: It will take several hours to move power from Tehachapi to Antelope, Bakersfields and Antelope .
 He got a new computer and he paid for 5 cans for me setting up his computer . He paid for five cans of beer for me to set up his new computer .
 Just before sundown, we talked it over and it was decided that since I had the meter, I'd get to stay up and wait for it to begin clicking .
 "I knew there was a reason why I shouldn't have purchased the meter. Lucky me, I knew there were a reason," she said .
 I kept the radio on while I was watching the CV-715, but they couldn't confirm either San Francisco or Chicago . The plane was headed to the U.S. from San Francisco .
 The radiation should have hit by 10pm at the latest . Figuring we were about 50 miles from the Valley, the radiation was expected to hit by 11pm .
 I took the survey meter to Lance at 11:55 and it was still not reading any increase . I took it to Lance to see if he was going to see an increase in sales . Lance says he saw no change in sales at the end of the day .
 "I quickly brought him up to date and said just knock, the dogs would wake us up, if there were any change," she said . "Just knock," she told him, "If there are any change, just knock"
 "My routine sleeping hours are 1 am to 11 am, like a baby who has his days and nights mixed up," she says . "I have a routine sleeping hour of 1 am - 11 am," she adds .
 Sharon woke him early and suggested he get a shower, the ladies wanted to make one more trip to the stores before the situation changed . Sharon suggested he take a shower .
 Normally, I get up at 11, spend an hour waking up and then do whatever I need to do . Normally, he spends an hour of waking up to do whatever he needs to do.
 "I quickly showered, dressed for a change and got my rifle out of the shelter. I quickly shower and get my rifle from the shelter," he says .
 The President moved to Cheyenne Mountain and issued a statement around 4am . The President was moved to the mountain early Tuesday morning . He has been in the area since Monday morning .
 The indication is it was terrorists and they mention al Qaeda, but no one has claimed credit . "Al Qaeda" has not claimed credit for the attack, but it's not clear if al Qaeda is responsible .
 He declared martial law until the matter of the matter is sorted out, probably 96 hours . The situation is likely to last 96 hours, he declared .
 LA area airports are closed and relief flights are coming through Palmdale Regional Airport . Relief flights are also coming through the Palmdales Regional Airport, which is closed .
 He said his generator ran out of gas during the night but they didn't have a problem . He said he didn't worry about his generator running out of power .
 Chris’ radios were fully charged and I swapped the batteries to charge the second set . The batteries were replaced by the batteries of the other set .
 Time Warner restored service just before noon and reported that power had been restored .
 I expected the women would be back shortly and either Amy or Ron could run me to the stations to refill the cans . I expected them to be back soon, but they were soon gone . Amy and Ron could be back to refill their cans .
 I wasn’t sure how much money was left in the checking account and would have to let Sharon get home to find out . Sharon was able to get home from work to check her account .
 They stopped at Patti's and unloaded her stuff, then came home and unloaded our stuff . They then came back and unloaded their stuff .
 She bought 4 bundles of Charmin, 12 cans of coffee, 50 pounds each kind of bean a bag of rice and 50 pounds of beans . She also bought 12 bundles of charcoal, Charmin and coffee cans .
 She also had 2 bottles of chili powder, 2 8# bags of macaroni and 3 cases 39 of vegetables . She was also given 2 cases of chili, chili powder and 2 8 # bags .
 "I told her we need gas to top off the tank and asked if there was enough money in the checking account," she said . "We need gas," she asked if she had enough money to top of the tank . "I said yes," she replied .
 Amy's tank was filled and there was just enough to top off her tank . Amy and her friends filled the tank and filled it with just enough .
 "Just when I was beginning to believe we'd dodged the bullet, the CD V-715 started to rise. Just when I'm beginning to . believe we're not going to die, I'm not sure what happened to the CD . Just before I believe we've dodged the
 "If it went much higher, we'd have to use the shelter for a few days at least," she says . If it went higher, the shelter would have to be used for days, she adds .
 People from southern LA County and Orange County were headed south, while people from the west valley, ergo Thousand Oaks, etc. were headed west . People from Southern Los Angeles, Orange and Orange counties headed south .
 We were getting people from the eastern Santa Clarita area and those from the western area were moving up 1-5 towards Gorman and Bakersfield . People were moving from the east to the west, the west .
 The LACSD had -8,400 Deputies to cover 3,171 mi 2 , divided up among 25 substations . The Deputies were divided among -8.400 deputies to cover the area .
 The Governor quickly activated the CNG, dividing them between the Bay Area and LA Area . It had to be a nightmare for Law Enforcement and the Governor .
 The greater San Bernardino area had their problems, too because they'd be getting fallout from the ground level detonation . The area also had problems because of the fallout of the detonation.
 Lance contracted people he knew with the Sheriff's Department and suggested that our housing tract could provide its own security . He suggested that the Department could either provide a Deputy or swear him in as a temporary Deputy .
 Reserve Deputy sworn in as a temporary Reserve Deputy with power to recruit qualified residents to aid him .
 He quickly passed out badges and swore in residents who had firearms stored, you know where, just to make it at least semi-legal for us to be armed . "He quickly passes out badges, passed out residents who have firearms stored"
 Residents were advised how to shelter in place by the CNG and California State Military Reserve . As the wind changed direction, we began to receive a small amount of fallout and residents were advised to shelter .
 All citizens who are not felons and possess a high school diploma are eligible for the program . Military veterans and those with special skills are preferred .
 The enabling legislation for the California State Military Reserve provides for a naval branch . The bill provides for the state's first naval reserve branch .
 The California Naval Militia was reactivated in 1976 by the Governor of California . The Militia was the first to be reactivated by California's Governor in 1976 .
 With the power restored, we had phones and I got a call from Fleataxi inquiring on our condition . With the day after the power had been restored, I was able to get to grips with the situation in the Philippines .
 "I brought him up to date and explained that we were getting a very small amount of fallout because the wind had changed," she said . "We were getting very small amounts of fallout," she added .
 40 49 hours had passed between the explosion and the wind change . Under the 7/10 rule it appeared that our level might not exceed a few Rads. However, we were fortunate because we were lucky .
 I know the term is dated, but if you don't like it, convert it to the new term, my equipment is old and all says Rads. Rads . I know it is dated .
 He offered to come down to help out, but suggested he didn't want to get caught up in the mess and could do more good by staying where he was and keeping us updated on what was going on around the country .
 "Some of us had very temporary credentials from the Sheriff's Department that allowed us to protect the housing tract," she said . "I also explained that some of us have very temporary . credentials from Sheriff's . Department that helped us protect the . housing tract .
 The only problem was we might have to shelter for a few days, leaving us dependent on the Sheriff and the military . The only problems was that we might not be able to get out of the shelter .
 A person can spend half his life imaging what it might be like when TSHTF happens, but until it actually happens, you never really know . Until you know what it's like, you can't imagine what it will be like .
 His highness was able to shift active and reserve forces to aid . With so few cities attacked, his highness had to shift forces to help .
 "We all saw what happened in New Orleans and that wasn't really reassuring. However, we all saw the New Orleans massacre," says CNN's John Sutter .
 "The bottom line was we were our first line of defense against fallout, bad guys and natural shortages," she said . "We were our last line of defence against fallout and bad guys"
 In a country already enduring a gas shortage and rampant inflation, it could only get worse, not better . In the past, gas shortages have led to rampant inflation and shortages .
 As close as I'd ever come to something like this was back in '68 when I went home to help out after the tornado . As close to something similar this was when I'd go home and help out with the tornado, he says .
 "I was 25 years old and in good health and reasonable condition. Back then, I was 25, and I was ... reasonable condition," he says .
 "Back then, I walked a guard tour on my Dad's property with my model 12 loaded with 00 Buck" Back then, "My model 12" was loaded with $10,000 .
 Now I had several firearms to choose from but wasn't nearly as fit or mobile . Now I have several firearms but isn't as mobile or fit as well .
 The tornado hit town a week to the day after Joyce and Joyce were married, a very long time ago . "It was a week after Joyce's wedding," she says . "I was very happy to be able to see her husband again," she adds .
 Ronnie Ray-gun space wars and George Sr. with his New World Order talk scared many many . Ronnie Ray's space wars scared many . George Sr.'s talk scared some with his talk of a new world .
 If I had to pick, I'd pick Osama Obama, he'll con the whole world into believing whatever he's doing is good for them, he says . Obama will con the world into thinking whatever he does is good, he said .
 "Sooner or later someone is going to realize that we're getting fallout and they'll panic," says President Obama . "They'll panic. Sooner or sooner than later someone will panic"
 Fleataxi will keep us informed about what's happening outside of the areas they attacked . The phones will stay up, and will send us updates on the situation outside the area .
 The John Warner Act allowed him to federalize the rest of Posse Comitatus . However that darned John Warner act allowed him federalizing the rest and he suspended Posse comitatus for the duration plus .
 Governor suspended the California firearms laws . People began dragging long forgotten firearms out of closets, caches and from who knows where .
 We who live here were so accustomed to gang problems we hadn't realized how bad it was in the large cities . We were shocked to see how much gang problems are in the larger cities, police say .
 The steady stream of trucks supplying the local Vons, Albertsons and Stater Bros, stopped rolling . The population of the AV, having suddenly grown from Vz million to close to 2 million, suddenly grew . The AV population had suddenly grown .
 Trains rolled in delivering supplies to distribution points, but the fuel shortage made distribution difficult . The fuel shortage makes distribution difficult for many people .
 The school bus usually parked near the entrance of the tract was still there, but crossways, blocking the street . The school was usually parked in front of the school bus, but now it's crossways .
 We carefully washed the garden plants eliminating the fallout as it accumulated . The garden plants were then washed out of the water .
 The ladies took over canning the produce as it was harvested and everyone shared what they had . The ladies were able to share what they could .
 I usually got stuck making the macaroni salad, one huge bowl full at a time . I usually get stuck making it one giant bowl full of salad . This recipe is the first time I've made this recipe for a recipe since 2007 .
 The problem wasn't macaroni, we had plenty, it was sliced black olives and pimento . We had plenty of olives .
 The recipe called one can each of those, celery, green onion, green pepper, grated cheese and the elbows, plus mayo . The recipe also included celery and green onion .
 On the days I made it, it was only one large stainless steel bowl, 10"" deep and 18"" across .
 We alternated with potato salad, potato salad and whatever else contributed .
 We generally used two gas grills and the oven in the patio stove to keep the house cooler . The oven was used to keep it cooler in the summer .
 The shelter was close by, probably because the shelter was nearby . I have no idea how it came to be that we did this on our back patio .
 The badges actually said Reserve Deputy and they must have been the edge that kept people from trying to take us on . The badges were the edge to keep people from taking on us .
 Some Muslim group I'd never heard of was claiming credits for the attacks . But no country claimed knowledge of the group .
 Everyone who supplied crude to the United States has stopped shipping to us claiming it's too risky . First, everyone who supplied oil to the U.S. have stopped shipping .
 "I had the impression that they might head out there, but he didn't exactly say that," he said . "I'm not sure where they might go, but I'm sure they might," he added .
 Third, Muslim declared nationwide martial law with dusk to dawn curfew . Curfew with exceptions for transportation .
 "Security shouldn't be an issue, for now. Derek was out here a while back and we have things we shouldn't, so security won't be a problem for now."
 We're still harvesting from the garden and unless they've done a flyover, they don't know about that, they won't know that . We are still harvesting and unless there's been flyover the garden is still harvesting .
 We've had rolling blackouts since the bombings, but usually get a minimum of 6 hours of power a day . We usually get about 6 hours a day of power, but have rolled blackouts in recent weeks .
 There's another one up by Bakersfield that didn't get hit as far as I know as far from I know . There's also another one that's not so far from Bakersfields .
 We have CNG and State Defense Force here, plus about a million and half refugees, we have . We have a million-and-half refugees, including a million of them refugees . We are here to protect ourselves from harm .
 "Terrorism attacks were the clouds on the horizon, signaling the beginning of the storm," he says . "I didn't know it at the time, but the terrorist attacks were ... the clouds of the horizon," he writes .
 We kept almost everyone but some of the older men in the shelter until the radiation level was back to 50mR and falling . The radiation level is currently at 50m R and falling.
 We worked 6 hour shifts and everyone logged their radiation doses . We worked in those 6 hours shifts . Everyone logged their doses .
 We only used the older men because we were past our prime and, in general terms, mean. We were only used to use them because they were past their prime . We are happy to clarify that we are not being referred to as 'mean'
 We'd seen enough of life that we didn't book any chit; it was our way or the highway . It was 'our way or highway' when it came to the end of the day .
 Arnold was re-elected in 2006 and would serve from 2007 until 1/5/2011 . Arnold served from 2007 to 2011 . Arnold was elected to the Senate in 2006 .
 Many of us thought he was a RINO, but with the attacks, he acted more like an American than an Austrian, quickly losing the RINO label . The attacks were the result of the attacks .
 'It's just a shame he can't be President, I think now, he'd be a good one. He'd be good one,' says Hillary Clinton . 'I think now I'm a good man,' she says .
 "On the other hand, I'm a free thinking Methodist, for whatever that's worth," he says . He says he's a free-thinking Methodist .
 I believe in the right for a woman to choose to have an abortion in the case of rape or incest, so I suppose that affects my conservative credentials . However, I believe that I should be able to have a woman's right to an abortion, even if she is raped or in
 I don't believe in abortion for sex selection or failure to use birth control . "If you voluntarily made the baby, you get to raise it," she says . She says she doesn't believe abortion is a form of abortion .
 "I hate people who put values behind being politically correct. Moreover, if the truth is told, I hate people ... I hate them," she says .
 The only fuel available was for the military and law enforcement . We were told that wouldn't change in the near future . Only fuel available for law enforcement and the military .
 If we could get what we couldn't grow from Target, Costco and Sam's Club, we should be ok . If we can't grow what we need from Target and Costco, we'll be ok, says CNN.com editor .
 FEMA officials complained a lot about our firearms, but because of Arnold's decree, there wasn't a whole lot they could do . Those FEMA folks actually showed up, complaining a lot of our firearms .
 We only carry firearms that would have otherwise been legal in some states before the new law . We only carried firearms that were otherwise legal in those states before .
 He was caught between a rock and a hard spot, ergo, MS-13 and the California Survivalists . He's caught between the rock and the hard spot . He says he's not sure what the group is doing .
 There are probably as many of us as there are of the gangsters; although, most of them are better armed . Most of us are probably better armed than gangsters, says the author of the book .
 Between what we could get from the stores and what we can produce ourselves, we'd eat . We'd eat more than half of what we'd get from stores .
 "We still kept the school bus across the entrance of the tract, a person couldn't be too careful," she said . The school bus was also kept in the area .
 Sharon and Sharon were still getting their trust income, social security and pensions but they didn't stretch nearly as far as they once did . Sharon and I were still still getting our trust income and social security . But they were no longer getting their pensions and trust income .
 Only gas available was black market gas that ran about $10 a gallon . The only gas available is black market .
 We used some of the gas we'd stored for the generator and limited our travel to stores or walked when we could . We were able to get some gas from the generator .
 We had to limit our purchases to one grocery cart per person; it's a long way to push a heavy cart .
 My list included smokes, toilet paper and ammo if it ever became available again . I would like to buy toilet paper, cigarettes and toilet paper .
 It wasn't if, but when, the fault was trying to ease the strain, but only a large earthquake would work . Only a large quake would help ease the pressure, experts say .
 Building inspector to look over shelter and recommend anything we needed to do to make sure it didn't collapse . Building inspector also looked at shelter and recommended anything needed to be done to prevent collapse .
 He hung a red tag on it, not because it was safe, but because it wasn't approved . He hung it on because he wasn't safe, and not because of it not being approved .
 When I explained how it was built, he said he'd have to inspect it behind the OSB before he could approve it . He said he would have to pay some fees if he approved it, and that he'd be fined .
 "Over the next 2 months we had an earthquake swarm but never a really big earthquake," says the mayor . "We had a swarm of quakes, but never really big ones," says mayor .
 With the exception of fuel, the cities were being cleaned up, food was generally available and the troops and cops maintained order . The cities were cleaned up and food was available and troops maintained order, police said .
 "They didn't say from what, so I should have known that it didn't mean much," she said . "I'm not sure what I'm going to say, but I'm sure it's not a good thing," she added .
 Sharon even began to make homemade mayonnaise from egg yolks, Dijon mustard, vinegar and oil . Sharon even started to make her own mayonnaising . Sharon says it's a great way to make your own .
 Fuel suppliers began to increase the portion of ethanol in the gasoline . Fuel suppliers also increased the amount of ethanol they use in their gasoline .
 Most states went to either gasohol all the way up to E-85 . Iowa went to 20% and most states did not . Most states used to use E-15 .
 The difference between a flex fuel vehicle and a standard vehicle is the fueling system . Flex fuel vehicles are flex fuel vehicles that can be driven by a flex-fueled vehicle . Flex-fueling vehicles can be fitted with a flexible fuel system .
 E-85 vehicle have a different tank and lines plus a special computer chip . E-86 vehicle have different tank, lines and a special chip .
 North American vehicles from approximately 1980 onward can run on gasohol (10% ethanol/90% gasoline) with no modifications . E-10 vehicles can run without modifications to gasoline .
 Sensors in both the fuel-line and in the exhaust system were used for flexible fuel vehicles . Originally, sensors in both fuel-lines and exhaust systems were used to make flexible vehicles .
 In recent years, manufacturers have opted to use only the oxygen sensor in the exhaust manifold, before the catalytic converter . Manufacturers have also eliminated the fuel inline sensor .
 As E-85 and M-85 are more corrosive, special fuel system materials are also required . Special fuel materials are needed for the aircraft .
 Some manufacturers also require special motor oil be used, particularly in vehicles using methanol fuel .
 Recently U.S. companies are offering products, originally developed in Brazil, which will convert gasoline-only, fuelinjected vehicles to flex-fuel vehicles . The products were originally developed by Brazil .
 Typical conversion packages include an electronic device to increase injected fuel volume per cycle . Some packages include a chemical treatment to protect the engine from corrosion .
 OL Taurus LX, SE and SES sedan 1999-2000 • 3.0L Ranger pickup pickup 4WD and 2WD . 3.3L Ranger pick-up 4WD, 2WD and 4WD; 3.5L SUV 4WD .
 Fleataxi told me that talks about the North American Union broke down, explaining why we had been invaded by Mexico . Fleatsaxi said talks broke down explaining why Mexico had invaded the U.S. He also said talks about North America broke down .
 He said they wanted our corn before we converted it to fuel . "They were starving without corn to make masa and then tortillas," he said . He added that they were starving .
 The 41 -member group convened last month in Washington to discuss ways to improve the emergency response to such an attack . The 41-member group is based on the premise that nuclear terror prevention efforts are inadequate .
 Sponsored by Stanford and Harvard universities, the meeting included directors of U.S. nuclear weapons laboratories, Homeland Security Department officials, former top military officials .
 Organizers have begun to prepare a summary paper that recommends several civil defense measures . Civil defense measures include building bomb shelters, setting rules to limit citizen movement after an attack to keep roadways open .
 We have had glimpses of something like this with Hiroshima, 9/11 and Katrina . We have seen glimpses with Hiroshima and 9-11 and with Katrina, he says .
 The group discussed a scenario in which terrorists detonate a 10to 15-kiloton nuclear weapon . The U.S. bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945 was comparable to that .
 Some participants argue that greater efforts are needed to prevent such a scenario . Some participants argued that those consequences would be so enormous that greater effort is needed .
 Mexicans were meeting resistance all along the border, from more than just the Minuteman Project . Those Mexicans were met with resistance from the U.S.
 A new non-profit has acquired essentially all the assets of the former organization . The group has acquired virtually all of its assets .
 I have nothing against people living in Mexico, as long as they stay there or immigrate legally . As I said earlier, I have . nothing against Mexicans, as well as those who immigrate . legally .
 Housing tract is increasingly becoming inhabited by illegals from south of the border . It's obviously rather narrow minded, but not for someone who lives there .
 They buy a home and move 3-4 families in to be able to afford the payments . They buy homes and move in to help pay off the mortgage costs .
 "We should learn to speak Spanish and adopt their culture. After that, they develop an attitude that we should learn Spanish," she says .
 I might be willing to learn a little Spanish, provided they learned a little American English . I might . learn a bit of Spanish, although I might not be willing .
 Fleataxi said that other Governors had also issued . Executive Orders refuting the new law . He said that the laws regulating firearms are all based on the power of the government to regulate interstate commerce .
 The laws are generally contained in Title 18 of the United States Code . The laws generally contain Title 18, which covers the federal Constitution .
 To the best of my knowledge and belief, all other federal criminal laws are based on the 49 Commerce Clause . All other federal crimes are based upon the Commerce Clause, the author says .
 "I quit law school because I wanted an honorable profession, like tax auditor," she says . She says she quit because she wanted to be an honest tax auditor .
 Obama is President and he's enacted the worst gun control law in history . That's not the bad part, it's that Obama is the President . The bad part is that Obama's law is the worst in history.
 Several Governors have issued Executive Orders that temporarily override the stupid federal law . The good part is that several Governors are ignoring him and have issued orders .
 The other good part is that we're well armed, as usual, here in Moon Shadows housing tract. We're not going to be surprised, but we're prepared to be on the lookout for trouble .
 Executive Orders will soon be tested in federal court and will be found to be excessive . No doubt those orders will be tested by federal court .
 Clarence has taken off for parts east and is now Fleataxi . Clarence has gone to parts east . Clarence is a good friend and has a new good buddy in the air . Fleatxi will be the last of Clarence's friends to join him .
 He's keeping us up to date from where he lives outside of where the nukes were detonated . He says he's keeping up with the latest in the news outside of the site of the nuclear blasts .
 I still don't like Glock's, but we did buy 3 Mossberg 590A1 . I hope you've got that because it's time for the fun to begin. It's time to begin .
 International Committee of the Red Cross has sought to have ammunition banned . Concerns are raised over the incendiary and explosive components and their effect on personnel . Red Cross says the ammunition will be banned .
 Trials conducted by Forsvarets Forskningsinstitutt (Norwegian Defense Research Establishment) has concluded that the ammunition most likely does not have an unlawful effect if unintentionally used against personnel . The round will have penetrated the body and exited on the other side .
 If detonated, the round will have a significant fragmentation and incendiary effect in a 30 degree cone behind the struck target . This might affect others standing in the vicinity of the target .
 The ICRC conclusion is that the ammunition is illegal against personnel . The concern is how to prevent the projectile from being used in an anti-personnel role in the event of war .
 Most nations using the round train their soldiers not to deploy the projectile against personnel, but in the heat of battle such regulations are easily overlooked . Most nations use the round .
 Many parties currently fielding the ammunition have no such regulations . Also, many parties are currently fielding ammunition without any regulations .
 Norway's official stance is that the 12. mm MP round should not be used against personnel . The official stance of the Norwegian Government is that such a round is not allowed to be fired .
 Giuliani restated his personal opposition to abortion but support of a woman's right to choose . Giuliani: "I'm not anti-abortion, but I'm pro-choice. I'm not pro-abortion," Giuliani said . Giuliani said he opposes abortion but supports women's rights to choose
 These targets had a 3"" red bullseye, and were black out to a 9"" circle . The 5 ring was a 16"" circle, and the 5 ring is a 16."" circle .
 "I waited while he replaced the targets, then we measured out an additional 600' in 100' increments . We measured out the additional 600" in 100" increments . "We measured out 600' of the targets and 100' of them in 100-meter increments"
 With the scope on maximum magnification and adjusted to 1,000-yards, the 16"" ring wasn't really large enough . The scope was set to be used at 1,500 yards .
 "We left before a LEO showed up and wanted to examine my rifle and Ron's 20-round magazines," the officer says . The LEO wanted to inspect the rifle and magazines .
 "I can tell you, I'm going to be very careful shooting my shotgun, it hurt. I can tell me, I was going to have to be careful," she said .
 Some claim that shooting a .50 caliber rifle is like shooting as 12 gauge . Some claim it's like shooting a 12 gauge 12 gauge rifle . Some say it's impossible to shoot as 12 Gauge .
 A 4 gauge is the largest 'shotgun' made; 3 gauge and larger are called 'punt' guns . A '4 gauge' gun is a 4 gauge gun made; a 3 gauge gun is called a 'gungun'
 I'd ruined my hearing when I was in the Air Force, using cigarette filters as earplugs . I'd used cigarette filters to make sure I didn't have to use them in the military .
 I had ringing in my right ear until about 2004, when I started to go deaf in that ear . I started going deaf in 2004 when I went deaf in the right ear .
 You younger guys should take heed, life's a bitch and then you get old. Life's a bit of a bitch, he says . Life's been a bitch for a long time, he adds .
 I said the storm clouds were on the horizon, as indicated by the terrorist attacks . I said that storm clouds are on the . horizon, and indicated by terrorist attacks, he said. I said .
 The U.S. dollar took another pounding on German, French and British exchanges this morning . It hit the lowest point ever known in West Germany, hitting the lowest ever known .
 Americans are the most generous and possibly the least-appreciated people in all the world . It has declined there by 41% since 1971 and this Canadian thinks it is time to speak up for the U.S.
 As long as sixty years ago, when I first started to read newspapers, I read of floods on the Yellow River and the Yangtse . As long . ago, . when I . first started . reading newspapers, when . I first . started reading of floods, I . read
 They have helped control floods on the Nile, the Amazon, the Ganges and the Niger . They have also helped control flood waters in the Amazon and Ganges .
 The rich bottom land of the Mississippi is under water and no foreign land has sent a dollar to help . Today, the rich bottom of the . Mississippi is . under water .
 Germany, Japan and, to a lesser extent, Britain and Italy, were lifted out of the debris of war by the Americans . The Americans poured in billions of dollars and forgave other billions in debts . The U.S. helped lift Germany and Japan from the debris .
 None of those countries is today paying even the interest on its remaining debts to the U.S. None of the countries are today paying the interest .
 When the franc was in danger of collapsing in 1956, it was the Americans who propped it up . Their reward was to be insulted and swindled on the streets of Paris .
 59 American communities have been flattened by tornadoes this spring . So far this spring, 59 have been hit by twisters in the U.S.
 War-mongering Americans are writing about the decadent U.S. in their own country . And now, newspapers in those countries have written about the Americans, they say .
 "I'd like to see one of those countries that is gloating over the erosion of the United States dollar build its own airplanes," says President Obama . The U.S. dollar has been eroded by more than a decade .
 "You talk about American technocracy and you find men on the moon, not once, but several times ... and safely home again," says President Obama .
 "You talk about scandals and the Americans put theirs right in the store window for everybody to look at," the president says of the scandal .
 Most of them are getting American dollars from Ma and Pa at home to spend here . They are right here on our streets in Toronto, most of them... unless they are breaking Canadian laws... .
 Let someone else buy the bonds, let someone else build or repair foreign dams or design foreign buildings that won't shake apart in earthquakes . Let's get rid of the bonds. Let's let the government buy foreign bonds. Buy the bonds .
 When railways of France, Germany and India were breaking down through age, it was the U.S. who rebuilt them . Americans rebuilt the railways in the 1930s .
 "I can name to you 5,000 times when the Americans raced to the help of other people in trouble," says President Obama . Obama: "I'm not surprised that the Americans are helping each other in trouble"
 "I don't think there was outside help even during the San Francisco earthquake," says John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not surprised that there wasn't outside help during the earthquake"
 Our neighbors have faced it alone and I am one Canadian who is damned tired of hearing them kicked around . Our neighbors are facing it alone, and I'm not happy to be kicked around. I'm one Canadian .
 They are entitled to thumb their noses at the lands that are gloating over their present troubles . And when they do, they are right to thumb noses at those that gloatate over their troubles .
 The American Red Cross was told at its 48th Annual meeting in New Orleans this morning that it was broke this morning .
 This year's disasters... with the year less than half-over... has taken it all and nobody... but nobody... has helped . Nobody has helped. Nobody has been able to help .
 "I oft times think the Canadians appreciate America more than we Americans," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz says he thinks Canadians appreciate U.S. more than Americans .
 Neither Ron nor Ron nor I favor the North American Union . Neither does they favor the U.S.
 We barely made it back before dark, saved only by daylight savings time . It was the first time we had been to the beach in a week .
 Chris and Dave were out of work and Dick was only working 3 days a week . Dick was working only a few hours a week. Chris was working just a few days a day . Dick and Dave had no idea what was going on for Dick .
 Once rebuilding started, assuming it did, he’d make up for it, probably working 14 hours a day, he says . He'd probably work 14 hours per day to rebuild .
 Compare our situation to the days after 9/11, the country didn't stop, it simply slowed down . The country's response to the terrorist attacks has slowed down since the attacks in 2001, says CNN.com .
 When you realize how much debris they had to remove from the WTC site, they didn't slow down for long . The WTC site was the site of the 9/11 terrorist attacks .
 The interval between the troop withdrawals and the invasion our southern border was far too brief . We didn't have peace for long, the interval between . the . troop withdrawal and the . invasion of our southern . border was . too brief, the author says .
 They probably assumed that the new gun law had eliminated the firearms in the hands of private citizens . The law was passed in 2012, but it has since been overturned .
 They’d done better to remember the words of Yamamoto, about waking a sleeping giant, Yamamoto said .
 "Most of our equipment might have been beat up, but most of it still worked," he says . "I wouldn't have gone up against an Abrams even if it needed an overhaul," he adds . "We might have had a lot of equipment beat up but most still worked"
 He completed the MSO school and only recently got his promotion to Sgt.st Class . He only recently completed the school .
 He wanted to know if we were ok and I explained that Ron and Ron and I sighted in the rifles and that Tac-50 was just too heavy for an old man . He said he and Ron sighted the rifles in order to avoid being shot in the head .
 The Mexican Army had reported copied the G36; they were a better rifle than our Ml6 . The Mexican army had copied the rifle, but it was a better weapon than our own . The G36 was reported copied by the Mexican Army .
 On February 1,2007 a meeting was held in Mexico City, attended by representatives of the Mexican Defense Ministry and Heckler and Koch . The meeting was also held by representatives from Heckler & Koch and Mexico's Defense Ministry .
 HK representatives decided that FX05 wasn’t a copy of the G36V and dropped the dispute . After an inspection and exhibition of the weaponry involved, the HK representative decided that the FX05 was not a copy . The dispute has been dropped .
 All soldiers have some sort of firearm, the real test is the soldier, not the gun, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The real test of the soldier is the test of him, not his gun"
 Their guns had the new 52 caliber barrel, replacing the 39 caliber barrel . The guns were replaced with a 52 caliber caliber .
 He had some souvenirs, some of the FX05 ""Xiuhcoatl"" rifles, with the assault rifle version with the longer barrel . He had a souvenir of some of those .
 Derek said little about Kosovo, less about Iraq and refused to discuss this latest war he'd been involved in . Derek refused to talk about Kosovo and Iraq .
 They could presume what they wanted, but they never found out which backyard held it . They never found it, but it was a backyard .
 Doctor in Lancaster said he'd killed too many red cells from fallout and should take iron and eat meat, especially liver, to get back up to snuff .
 The real reason I wanted the Tac-50 was because it was illegal, cheaper and more accurate than a Barrett Barrett . "The real reason is because it's illegal and cheaper than Barrett," he says .
 "I hoped once I got my blood straightened out, I'd have more strength and could carry it, if needed," she said . She hoped once she got more strength, she'd be able to carry it .
 The follow up blood test showed a minor improvement in my blood . The doctor said to keep doing whatever I'd decided, it was working . The follow-up blood tests showed minor improvement .
 The Angeles National Forest was red level dry, as was the Los Padres, Yosemite, and the others . The Los Padres and Yosemite National Parks were also red-level dry .
 The fires built from individual, regional fires to a firestorm . The haze filling the AV made it nearly impossible to breathe .
 West of Palmdale, when we went shooting at Christmas 2006, everything was burning . "Everything was burning and it was working its way closer to town," says author of the book .
 I'd seen it burn at Avenue S and 10th Street West back when I was living on the Westside . I’d seen it burning at Avenue . It was the first time I saw it .
 Fire was south of our house maybe 3 miles and came up to the aqueduct . That fire was south, probably 3 miles from our house . It was a fire that came from the house .
 It wouldn't be the first time a fire jumped the aqueduct . It's the Angeles National Forest, which is home to Angeles National Park .
 The rule of 3s; we've had 4, so we have 5 more to go, provided, of course, we get through this . We have had 4 of the 3s so far, but we've also had 4 more than that .
 Shirley and Shirley's home is west of 47th and south of Avenue S Clarence . Ron and Linda live off of Avenue R-4, 4 blocks south of me and east about 6 blocks . Linda and Ron live off the same block as Shirley . Shirley and Linda's homes are located
 Firefighters put in a fire line along Pearblossom Road and managed to stop the fire there . Firefighters also stopped the fire on Pear Blossom Road in the early hours .
 The rifle can then be mounted in any Mil Spec pintle socket for ease of transport and immediate operation . The rifle is then placed in any socket socket for use .
 We have a fair stockpile already, but you can never have too many guns or too much ammo . We have plenty of guns, but never have enough ammo or too many .
 "After talking to Derek, I'm not sure we'd want up armored HMMWVs, they're awfully heavy," says Derek . "I'm sure we wouldn't want them," he says .
 The extras double the previous quantity of the things he'd given me before, exclusive of the A3s but with 12 nearly new Mexican Assault Rifles and 2 full cases of magazines .
 "I assume Derek sent all of them to him and he got the pick of the litter. I assume Derek sends all of the ones to him," he said .
 "What we got wasn’t in bad shape, the rifles hadn't been out that long and hadn't really been used that much. What we got was a rifle that had been out of use that much," police say .
 "Those guys on the east coast who got busted for a few grenades had nothing on us," says Navy SEAL team leader . "We're not going to be busted for anything on us. We're going to do it," he says .
 Derek's estimate of the load I'd be carrying was about as much as I weighed . Derek's estimates were about as many as as as he weighed . He said he'd carry a load of about a half a million pounds .
 Ron even laughed about my MIA, claiming the rifle and ammo were more than my limit . Ron even said he was more than his limit, claiming that he had a limit of 12 .
 "I told myself I wouldn't get even when he started lugging around the Super Match. I told myself he wouldn't be getting even," he said .
 "We kept everything clean and oiled, and tucked away where they hopefully wouldn't find it," she said . "We're not going to let them find it. We're not letting them get into trouble," she added .
 Now that things had finally settled down, I was back to my usual position sitting in front of my computer in my robe, checking whatever news I could find on the internet and speculating about what would happen next .
 In March of the current year, I checked my new government approved California ID card, just to see how old I really was . I checked it out in March of this year, checking out my new ID card .
 Kalifornia would never miss a chance to take away more of your rights. I'm sure it must have one, Kalifor California would never have one .
 BB guns still legal, but you must be 18 to buy the BB's . BB guns are still legal in the U.S.
 Flea's sweetheart, Fineswine, introduced legislation banning .50 caliber rifles in mid-2007 . Flea introduced legislation in 2007 .
 Cops were worried the gangsters might buy one and shoot holes in their LAVs . They were worried they might buy a gun and fire holes into their cars .
 On March 31st, they sealed off the housing tract and announced they were staying until they got the guns . They announced they would stay in the area until they had the guns back .
 It was warming up, so Ron came over and we rototilled the backyard getting ready to plant . It was warm enough to get ready for the spring, but it was getting warmer .
 We had the money, so I ordered another 30 quart All American pressure canner . We had to buy a new 30 quart pressure cooker .
 By limiting the number of crops we planted, we were able to more or less maximize output . However, by limiting the amount of crops, we could maximize output, he says .
 "I didn't plant much corn, it takes way too much space for what you get," farmer says . "It takes too much time to plant," he says .
 This year would be Roma tomatoes, potatoes, onions, cucumbers, green beans, green peppers and little of the other crops . This year's crop would include Roma tomatoes and potatoes, potatoes .
 A row of beets, a few pints of those will last forever; I may be the only one who likes them. Well, maybe a row of . beets . I may . be the . only one . who likes to like them.
 It was cheaper, even now, to buy quart jars of peaches and pears from Costco than can them . It's cheaper now to buy peaches from Costco rather than can .
 As long as the Gestapo was here, we couldn't store the food in the shelter, forcing us to stack it on the back patio . The problem, of course, was that as long . as long as . long . time, it was forced to stack the food on the
 Sharon insisted on loading up on more toilet paper, coffee and important stuff than in previous years . Sharon insisted she loaded up on the toilet paper and coffee .
 Maybe she knew something I didn't, or, maybe she finally got the message, but don't count your chickens . Maybe she knows something she knew, or maybe she didn't . Don't count her chickens .
 I let my whiskers grow, cut them back weekly with a hair trimmer, then shave . I let them grow, then cut back with a trimmer then shave. I'm not afraid to shave, but I'm very happy to shave.
 This year, we planted Kennebec oblong, late, eyes shallow, high specific gravity, good chipper, general purpose use. This year we planted a late-season, late-year-old, late and eyes shallow . This year’s Kennebeck ob
 They gave a pretty good yield and kept well, but did better up north, not really a baking potato . The potato was a good yield, but not a good baking potato.
 "We didn't need to plant many crops, it was easier to go to Costco or Sam's Club," says Bob Greene . "It was easier than going to Costco and Sam's . Club. We didn't want to grow many crops," says Greene .
 We bought 100# pintos from Albertsons and 50# bags of rice from Costco . We also bought 50# rice bags from Costco and 100# bags from grocery stores .
 We can't buy Mexicorn by the case, unless we order a few cases . We can only buy cases by case, but we can buy it by case . I love Mexicorns, but it's too late for us to buy a case .
 Cigarettes came from them too, but required several trips through the checkout lanes due to their 2 carton limit . Cigarettes were also required by the checkout .
 "One would have thought they'd eliminated that because of our troubles, but they didn't," he says . "They didn't eliminate that," he adds . "One of the biggest problems in the world has been in the past few years."
 We knew the clock was ticking, but we knew it was ticking . We were either dead or converts. However, we knew that we were either going to die or convert to Christianity .
 "We both monitored the news, but he subscribed to some sources I didn't," he says . "We were both monitoring the news. We both monitored ... but he didn't like some of the news," he adds .
 We were waiting for chemical warfare attacks, a pandemic, WW III, or worst, a natural disaster that couldn't be blamed on anyone . We were . waiting for . chemical warfare . attacks, pandemic . or worse, we were waiting .
 These things are always somebody's fault, even though it's the sheeple who aren't prepared . The sheeple are always the fault, and it's not their fault, says the author of the book .
 A 3-day supply means you're basically out of what you need, a 3-month supply means a lot more . A 3 month supply means that you've been paying attention. A 3 day supply means .
 The first clue I had that the next disaster had arrived was when I woke up to find myself laying on the floor. "The first clue" was when he woke up, he said .
 The house didn't come down and all those preparations we'd made when we'd had the swarm, helped . The house was saved by the swarm and the swarm was able to stay alive .
 "I got dressed, grabbed a new pack of smokes and headed to the kitchen slider," he says . "I'm going to get my hands on the slider. I'm not going to let it slide down the slider."
 All the light poles were down and our front patio cover wasn't looking too solid . The light poles had been down and the patio cover didn't look solid .
 The back patio cover is still up and looks more solid than the front patio cover . I half expect it to be down, but as I made my way to the backyard, I discovered it still up .
 Rule of thumb is if the quake doesn't bring things down, it loosens them and the first aftershock brings them down, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: If the quake didn't bring down, the quake loosens things, it would bring them down
 Our fireplace chimneys were built from wood and are an extension of the house . Unlike the homes you often see on TV, our chimneys didn't come down because they were made from wood .
 These are relatively inexpensive homes. That had to do, I suppose, with the fact that they were relatively inexpensive .
 She told me to fill the urn and we'd figure out later how to get it top side side . She told him to fill it up and fill it in the top .
 The main problem with being a neighborhood preparedness nut is they all show up when something happens . "The main problem is being a neighbor is not being prepared for something," she says .
 The patio cover looks loose and the sliding door is stuck . So far, the only problem I see is the front patio cover is loose .
 Aftershocks went on all day, the aftershocks generally becoming smaller as time passed . It went on for several hours, with the most of the quakes becoming smaller and smaller .
 Dick told me he wouldn't rest the earthquake valve on the gas line until it settled down . Dick said he won't rest it on until it settles down .
 Lance had switched his standby unit to propane and Dick had gone around and shut off the gas valves for all of the homes . Lance switched the standby unit into propane . Dick shut off all the homes' gas valves .
 Patti fixed her grill potatoes and Sharon pulled out a couple of tri-tips to thaw them . Patti fixed her potatoes, Sharon fixed her tri-tip potatoes on the grill . Sharon and Patti cooked the potatoes for the first time ever .
 Dick checked later that afternoon and we didn't have gas coming into the housing tract . Dick checked after that afternoon that the gas didn't come into the tract .
 We didn't have water either, but I hadn't noticed due to our water tank . We had no water either. We had to use a water tank to make sure we had water .
 KTPI said that the fracture ran from southeast of Palmdale all the way to Gorman . The fracture is believed to be the largest in the area .
 Palmdale's sole source of electricity was the wind turbines at Tehachapi, California . They're out on Sierra Highway, south of Avenue M, Palmdal is out of town .
 They also reported another declaration of a state of emergency; I guess we didn't rate a live feed . We also reported a declaration of an emergency .
 It seems that even your humble servant occasionally asks a semi-intelligent question . It seems even your servant occasionally has a semi intelligent question .
 "I don't know the answer; I haven't gotten to that part of the story, yet," he says . Unfortunately, he doesn't know what the answer, yet . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do next," he asks .
 The thrust of that was, regardless of the cause, global climate change has major security implications . The thrust was that regardless of that, global . climate change . has major . security implications, the government said .
 Another report pointed out around the same time that Khan was still, possibly, helping countries to develop nuclear weapons . Another report said Khan was helping countries develop nuclear arms .
 In the discussion following the movie '10.5' it was suggested that no number of nuclear weapons could either trigger or halt earthquakes . In the debate following the film 10.5, nuclear weapons can't be used to trigger earthquakes .
 Whittier Narrows quake shook the crap out of our condo in Panorama City, California . That quake shook us out of bed in our condo, we say .
 The Palmdale earthquake shook southern California . The earthquake is still shaking, but it probably shook the state .
 They could be bringing aid, but I think it more likely they’re bring back the troops, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Law and Order seems to be the order of the day whenever there is a disaster . CNN.com will feature iReporter photos of the disaster in New York City .
 In Kalifornia, the Governor suspended gun laws after the terrorist attack, go figure. Go figure . The Governor suspended the law after the terror attack .
 "We're the disaster area, but I haven't heard whether or not the Governor did that again," says mayor . We're still in the state of emergency, but it's not clear if the governor will return .
 Kali is unique, the slogan, the land of fruits and nuts describes both agriculture and many of the people . Kali is a unique place in the world of fruit and nuts . The slogan, "Land of the Land of Fruit and Nuts" describes both farming and farming .
 Flea couldn't call and see if we were ok because the phones were out, again, again . Flea's phone was out again, so he couldn't check if he was OK . The phones were also out of work, again. Flea says .
 I guess we should have had both cable and telephone based internet access . We should have both internet access and phone based access .
 The only thing working is my battery powered radio, full time and the other radios when we can spare the power . We have a full time radio and full-time radio full time .
 "All he has is 2 meters and that's basically line of sight radio, so I couldn't call him on the Kenwood, either. All he has ... is basically line-of-the-vision radio . "I'm not sure if he'll be able to call him
 We're over the hump, but nothing really terrible had happened to us, yet, yet . We're not going to have a lot of things to do with this year's election season .
 "We did end up getting a low interest loan, the damage was less than the deductible," says mother-of-one . "We were able to get a low-interest loan, but the damage is less than deductible"
 The house was tweaked and none of the windows or doors would open or close . None of the doors or windows were able to be opened or closed .
 I like that picture from space, it makes the house look twice as large as it really is, says author . I like to see a picture of the house taken from space .
 'If we could sell it based on that picture, it would bring a half million easy. If we were able to sell it, we would bring it back easy. It would be an easy sell-out to the world,' says the owner of the film .
 The point is that it doesn't matter what the disaster is, if you're involved it means everything to you, to you . If you are involved in a disaster, it's important to you to be involved in it, to your life .
 The twister comes by in a long way from your shelter when it comes by bend over and kiss your butt goodbye . On the other hand if you're a long ways from shelter when you're in danger, bend over .
 The stove on the patio kept the stove working with a line from the generator and a set of jets . The stove was powered by a generator and jets .
 Getting into the shelter when we had no power was almost a double whammy . Getting in the shelter was 'almost a double-whammy' for the shelter, she says .
 "We were so focused on our immediate problems, we had no idea that the world was getting ready to explode," says Hillary Clinton . Clinton: "We're so worried about the world that we're going to explode"
 The dollar wasn’t worth the paper it was printed on and the new favorite currency was the Euro . The Euro is now the world’s favorite currency .
 The Chinese were still building their military, using up their dollars before they lost all of their value . The Chinese are still using their dollars to build up their military .
 I'm always tempted to say Iron Eagle when I see one; either that or Tomcat . "Iron Eagle" is the name of an Iron Eagle, or "Tomcat" when you see one .
 Congress started in 2007 when they cut a billion or so from the Future Combat Systems . Congress started cutting the system in 2007 . Congress also cut a $1 billion from Future Combat systems .
 It made too much sense to replace the Ml 6 with the XM8, says Derek . Derek agreed with me, it made too many sense .
 Best piece of mobile artillery... but, they could build 3-4 Ml 09A6s for the price of one .
 Crusader displaces the M109A6, Paladin, SPH and M992, Field Artillery Ammunition Supply Vehicle . Crusader is a replacement for the M110A6 and the M992 . Crusader was launched in 2010 .
 In 1996, the Army reduced the force structure from battalions of 24 guns to 18 guns . The force structure has been reduced to a battalion of 18 guns per battalion .
 Final three-months of operational tests began in fall 2004 . Improvements will be made based on soldier and test feedback before the final three-month of tests .
 The final decision will be up to the Army's senior leadership . In early 2004 weapons officials said they were confident the XM8 weapon system will be adopted .
 If all went well, the XM8 would be ready for fielding by late summer 2005 . If all goes well, it would be the first time a prototype has been built .
 Congress denied $26 million dollars funding for 7,000 rifles for a test fielding of the XM8 in 2005 . In 2004 Congress denied funding for $26million dollars for the test rifle . Congress denied the funding for the rifle in 2004 .
 The battery life had been extended, and a more heat-resistant plastic hand-guard added . The new version of the device has a longer battery life .
 The rifle still had goals that were unmet, primarily associated with the weapon's weight . But the rifle still has goals that still need to be met, including weight .
 The 66 weight of the carbine prototype has since grown to 7. lb according to a brochure released by HK and General Dynamics in January 2005 . HK and GMD released the prototype carbine in 2005 .
 During 2004 the Army came under pressure from other arms makers to open up the XM8 to competition . The Army was under pressure to open it up to competition in 2004 .
 ATK and H&K had actually won the original XM29 competition . ATK argued that the weapon being adopted was substantially different from the original design of the original weapon that was won .
 The Army has a legislative obligation to give preference to US-based manufacturers . In addition, the Army has an agreement with Colt Defense that required the Army to involve Colt in certain small-arms programs .
 On 31 October 2005, the XM8 program was formally suspended, ""pending further United States Army reevaluations of its priorities for small caliber weapons, and to incorporate emerging requirements identified during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom .
 It is constructed almost entirely of a tough, glass fiber reinforced polymer material . It is almost entirely made out of glass fiber .
 Main weapon components consist of glass fiber reinforced polymer with stainless steel inserts . The main weapon components consists of glass fibers reinforced polymer .
 This has enabled weight to be kept very low without sacrificing strength, durability or robustness . The weight has been kept low but not sacrificed strength or strength . This has led to the development of the world's most robust aircraft .
 The gas-operated weapon works extremely reliably and only requires a minimum of maintenance . The self-regulating gas block works extremely reliable and only needs to be maintained .
 Even during the use of practice ammunition, the G36 works absolutely reliably without using any muzzle attachments . The G36 can be fired without using muzzle attachments or muzzle attachments.
 I'm not so sure about those Beta-C magazines though, think feed problems . Think feed problems. I'm sure there's no problem with Beta-A .
 The rifle is capable of firing tens of thousands of rounds without having the need to clean . The rifle can be fired without the need for cleaning or cleaning .
 This is in contrast with the direct impingement system of the Ml 6, which requires more frequent cleaning to cycle reliably . This is the same system as the Mm 6, and requires frequent cleaning of the bike .
 National Guard planners set in motion a training exercise to test the force’s abilities as the first military responder to a nuclear explosion . The exercise was destined to fail .
 H Steven Blum said his staff deliberately put together the worst possible scenario . He said the worst scenario would test the limits of the Guard’s ability to respond to such a disaster .
 More than 2,000 National Guard troops and hundreds of state and federal emergency response agencies worked through a disaster scenario of a 10kiloton nuclear explosion in Indianapolis . The scenario played out on a sprawling, 1,000-acre rural training area just outside of Indianapolis .
 The exercise put in place new capabilities and technologies developed since 9/11 that have yet to be tested in an exercise of this scale . Named “Vigilant Guard,” the exercise put into place in place .
 Blum said they would stress any successful solutions until they, too, would eventually fail . In fact, even as early communications problems are overcome, Blum says they would continue to stress success .
 Muscatatuck Urban Training Center is a self-contained city-like training area . The city-sized training area is a training center for the Marines . Helicopter helicopters circled the skies of the training area in Muscat at the center .
 Smoke rose from rubble piles as jackhammers blasted away at the piles of concrete . Jackhammers also blasted away from the concrete piles .
 Satellite communications gear poked up outside a city of tents and travel trailers that served as command posts . Satellite communications equipment poked up from tents, travel trailers .
 Those simulating being injured cried as they were carried to decontamination tents where their “wounds” could be cared for . Those simulated injuries were carried out in decontaminating tents .
 Nearby, a crew extricates a person from a multi-story high rise by strapping her to a gurney and lowering her down the side of the building . Nearby a crew extracted the person from the building from a high-rise .
 The only things missing from the training, thankfully, were actual injuries . He said the only thing missing was actual injuries, thankfully .
 “There’s nothing simulated about the perspiration and the fatigue that they’re feeling while doing this,” Blum said. “The perspiration ... is nothing simulated,’ he said .
 The adjutant general said that his state simulated a request for about 80,000 guardsmen to respond to the disaster . The state simulated the request for 80,500 guardsmen, he said .
 Guardsmen from surrounding states responded, including Kentucky, Ohio and Illinois . In reality, guardsmen from around the world were from Kentucky and Ohio .
 He said this training is critical to establishing the relationships that would be needed during an actual emergency . He said that this training was critical to establish the relationships needed for an emergency .
 Prior coordination makes actual relief efforts seamless and instills confidence in the community, he said . Prior coordination is key to the success of relief efforts, he added .
 Morgan: "If those threads do not connect in a common way, the citizens will ... start to lose confidence in the local units of government" Morgan: “One of the things that we know at the local level is that, if those threads don't connect, ... the citizens
 Kim Sencingiver said efforts to extract simulated victims were working well between the civilian and military responders . Sencingivers said efforts are working well with the civilian, military responders.
 “The National Guard and the local responders have been doing an excellent job,” she said .
 Army Sgt.st Class Ted Blanford is a member of the search and extraction team from the 1194th Engineer Company from Ohio . “They are doing exactly what they are trained to do better than anybody expected,” he said .
 “We know that we are here to save lives and that’s what we’re doing,” he said . ‘We are here,’ he said.
 “Train them to the most demanding standard you can, and give them the best equipment you can find in the world,” he said . “Then you have a capability that hopefully can save you and your family when you need it,’ he said.
 Northern Edge started May 7 and runs through May 18 and is a joint training exercise in Alaska in which military and civilian agencies respond to simulated terrorist incidents . Northern Edge is a training exercise that involves responding to simulated terror incidents .
 Hurrex ran from April 30 to May 10 and simulates three hurricanes striking the New England states . Hurrex was a command post exercise simulating three hurricanes in New England .
 Victor E Renuart Jr. said lessons learned from the exercise will benefit the entire country in establishing how his command will respond .
 You know it's coming and you hope deep down in your soul it isn't . Speaking of which, you know it was coming . You hope it's not coming, but you know deep down inside your soul .
 God knows our souls and no doubt hears our prayers, be they spoken or not . God hears them, even though they may not be heard .
 I'd felt that way once before, during the month of October in the year 19 and 62. I'd also felt the same way during the year of October, during that time .
 President Kennedy would be making an announcement at the time of Kennedy's death . "I can't remember the Tech Sergeant's name, but he came around and told us to listen up," he said .
 There was a lot of speculation, and some of those civilians had fought in WW II or Korea or both . Some of the civilians had served in the U.S. or Korea .
 SAC ended up at DEFCON 2, the highest we'd ever been, as far as I know, as well as the highest ever . SAC was at the highest level of DEFCon 2, a record high .
 "I would see the B-47s with their nuclear weapons from our barrack's room window," he says . "Like I've said, I would see them with their weapons from the barrack"
 Congress says we can't build the reliable replacement warheads and we have to keep nukes on all of our D-5s . Congress says it can't be built the reliable replacements .
 Some of the fighters can carry nukes, too. Aw hell, round it off at 4,000 because of nukes .
 "No one in their right mind would start a nuclear exchange with someone who has 4,000 nuclear weapons they can deliver in waves," says Kim Jong-Hussein .
 President Obama has a "tremendous military buildup" in the U.S. military, says CNN's John Sutter . "He doesn't have as many as many, but he does have this tremendous military buildup," he says .
 A crackpot in Tehran, another in Pyongyang and a third in Caracas, radical Muslims scattered all over the globe . Add to that a crackpot . Tehran, Pyongyang and Caracas and a bunch of radical . Muslims scattered .
 "I somehow think a pandemic might be better, not that it's a good choice," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "A pandemic may be better" than a natural disaster, but that's not a good thing .
 "There all kinds of disasters and I've considered most of them, written about them," he says . "Still, I come back to a nuclear exchange," he adds .
 Once the missiles start to fly, it's all over except for the dying . Whether it's by accident, or on purpose, once missiles start flying, all over is over . The U.S. has been hit by a number of missiles over the past few years .
 I've often said being dead, wouldn't be bad; it's the getting there part that most of us fear . "Being dead, isn't bad. It's getting there that most people fear," he says .
 It could be slower and you'd die of radioactive poisoning in a couple of days . It could also be slower than you could die from radioactive poisoning . But it could be faster and you would die in a few days .
 For most people, those are the obvious choices; because they didn't prepare . For most folks, those choices are obvious choices, because they don't prepare. For most, it's the obvious choice .
 If they don't hit your house or even your city, it starts to get interesting . If you don't get hit, it will be interesting .
 I've sent out a few hundred copies of my seven_ten_rule.xls spreadsheet . I've also sent a copy of it out to everyone in the world .
 It's the others you need to worry about; they'll panic, maybe get their hands on a weapon and take what you have . The others you worry about are the ones who panic, panic and get their weapons .
 "There are about 600,000 files on this computer. And then, there are all of those downloads I've done," says the author . "I've done a lot of downloads, and there are 600,00 files on my computer"
 "I haven't done as much as I probably should have, but it's more than most people have done," he says of his career . "I'm not the most successful person in the world," he adds .
 If the day comes that there are missiles in the air, you'd best have the knowledge to go with that AR-15 and the Radway ammo .
 The M4 has a ""S-1-3" trigger group, while the M4A1 has a 71 trigger group . The M 4A1 and M4M4A4 have different trigger groups and trigger groups .
 If you want a real 5.56x45mm, get an H&K G36, it doesn't care if you don't clean it . It doesn't matter if it's not clean it. Get a real G36 for you . Get a G36 .
 Al Qaeda said it seized ""crusader"" forces, while suicide bomber killed 50 people in Kurdish north . Thousands of U.S. troops search for three soldiers missing in Iraq .
 Heckler & Koch Incorporated serves the commercial and local/regional law enforcement markets . Heckler and Koch has offices and distribution facility in Trussville, Alabama .
 There was little talk among the two dozen scientists and other specialists about carbon taxes or alternative energy sources .
 Some were contemptuous of calls for international cooperation and the policies and lifestyle changes needed to curb greenhouse-gas emissions . Others had concluded that the world’s politicians and bureaucrats are not up to the job of agreeing on such reforms .
 "If we opt for getting them now, I think the best plan would be to not repaint them," says author . "The best plan" would be not to repaint, he says .
 If we leave them in their military paint scheme, we can hide them in plain sight . We can't hide them from the public, but if we do, they will be hidden in the shadows .
 It became a struggle about whether we wanted the Hummers bad enough to simply steal them . It became about whether it was enough to steal them. The Hummers were stolen from the U.S. government .
 If we took them before the war, it was stealing; if we waited it was strategic reallocation . If we waited, it would be strategic re-allocation. If we didn't take them before, we would be stealing, it's stealing . It's not stealing,
 I concluded that it was really only a matter of timing, stealing is stealing, regardless of what you chose to call it .
 Engine: 6.2 liter Turbo diesel 190hp . Max Speed: 78mph 73 . Max speed: 78 mph 73 . Weight: 12,100 lbs. (12,100 kg)
 If China or Russia does attack us, that means that the government failed to provide for the National Defense, a duty of the government . The government is responsible for the defense of the country, says David Cameron .
 If they're not going to do what we pay them to do, I want my money back, with interest . Not in the nearly worthless money they're printing, it's worthless money .
 Soon it was time to think about planting garden and with that looming, we wouldn't have time to run up to Barstow . Soon, we would be thinking of planting garden .
 It made sense to park them at the entrance of Moon Shadows Housing tract, most people would just assume the military was there checking on something .
 As insurance, we had Chris installed an under-dash cutoff switch; trite, but it worked .
 We kept the M240s in my garage with several hundred rounds of belted 7.62x51 mm . We kept them in the garage with hundreds of rounds of ammunition .
 It indicates that attack upon the continental United States, Canada, or United States installations in Greenland by hostile aircraft or missiles is considered probable, is imminent, or is taking place . The U.S. installations are located in Greenland .
 "When I came down the street with the Hummer, yelling at people, we soon had a line down the sidewalk of people wanting in the shelter," he says . "We soon had to come down the road with the . Hummer," he adds .
 The ground shook, not unlike an earthquake, but different. We ended up with the usual crowd and had no more than locked the blast hatch when the ground shook .
 About the only thing most of them had of their own in the shelter was a few changes of clothes, firearms and whatever they brought from their refrigerators . The only thing they had of them own is a few clothes and firearms .
 "I learned a lot of new card games, but really had trouble concentrating," says CNN.com's Emily Swindell .
 "I was worried that we might lose water and the garden wouldn't get irrigated," says mother-of-one . She was worried about losing water and her garden would not be irrigated .
 "I was even worried that someone might figure out the cutoff switches and steal the Hummers," says owner . The Hummers are the first Hummers ever to be driven by a Hummer .
 "I didn't understand how those security devices that Chris used worked, or I wouldn't have been worried about the vehicles," says CNN's Chris Knight . Knight: "I'm not sure how the security devices in Chris' vehicles worked"
 It was one of those 1990s security devices that you had to insert a link in, probably a coded link of some kind . It was probably a security device that you needed to insert in .
 Don't get me wrong, I expected it anytime anytime and had made all the preparations that time, money and stealing allowed. Don’t get it wrong, he said . I expected to make it happen anytime, but I had made it happen .
 There are two types of preparation, physical, ergo food, shelter, etc. and mental and that requires no description . Preparation is physical and mental, and it's not just mental .
 Some of us, the Squirrels, TB2Kers, War Rifles and others were probably as ready as we could be, under the circumstances .
 "It began to get warm in our hole in the ground, but all we could do was run fans and move the hot air around," says the team . "All we can do is run fans, move air around and move fans around"
 To have air conditioning in the shelter would have required a much larger generator . "I'd considered that, but ... it would have needed a much bigger generator," she says .
 A Friend got his large shelter facility ironed out, he hadn't said otherwise . Apparently A Friend had a large amount of work done .
 Flea was up in the mountains but I couldn't recall if he had the basement . Flea's basement was the basement, but he had a basement, he said. Flea said he was going to find the basement.
 The hands on the clock seemed to slow down as the shelter heated and the outside radiation level rose . The hands of the clock appeared to slow as the radiation levels rose .
 During the first 2 weeks, I didn't bother to connect the antennas, assuming there would be too much static to raise anyone on the ham bands . The first time I connected the antennas was when I first thought there would not be any more static .
 Chris took over the duties of keeping the generator oil changed and someone had brought a case of Miller Genuine Draft .
 In the end, I settled for a Coca-Cola Classic, I didn't want to go where a bottle of beer would take me; they only had a case .
 "I could smoke in there and maybe I just felt better cleaning the guns and making sure we were ready when the time came to leave. I could smoke," he said. "Maybe I just wanted to clean the guns"
 Of all the people in the shelter, only 4 of us smoked, Ron, Linda, Amy and me. Of all of the people who lived there, only four of them smoked . Ron says, "Only 4 of them smoke," Linda and Amy smoked .
 Our first stop would probably be an archery shop in Barstow, England . We would like to visit MCLB, Bar Stow, and visit the archery store .
 If the damage to this country was as extensive as one might imagine, firearms would become nothing more than clubs . The damage to the U.S. might be so extensive, it would have to be seen as a club .
 We also had a discussion of the TTAPS study and how that projection would affect global warming . We also discussed how the study would affect the climate .
 We still have climate change, but the majority felt temps would go down, not up, not down . The majority of those surveyed felt the temps should go down not up .
 "When they were all satisfied that they were right, I mentioned nuclear summer," he said . When they were satisfied, he said: 'When they're all satisfied, I mention nuclear summer'
 I had enough files and studies on my computer to convince Albert Einstein that time warp was possible . I had . enough files to convince him that time . warp is possible .
 I printed out one copy of some of the issues to help people become better informed . I printed them out so they could be better informed of their experiences .
 We were near the peak of the solar cycle, that didn't help . Unfortunately, we were near a peak of solar cycles . We're not sure how long it will take for us to find out .
 It was time to see if we could get the school bus to run and put it across the entrance to the housing tract . The school bus would be able to run across the front of the property .
 Ml 114s, should make someone think twice about trying to come in . That and the Ml. 114s should make people think twice .
 "What I didn't expect to happen at all happened next, about a week later," she says . "I'm not sure what happened next," she adds .
 They had 10 reloads for the gun and enough 7.62 and .50BMG to last until the guns wore out . They also had enough ammunition to last for 10 reloadings .
 ET and his 3 kids came along, in a separate vehicle, a tanker full of JP8 . ET's favorite ET came along with his kids in separate vehicle .
 It was a commercial double bottomed tanker like most often seen out here on the west coast . It was one of the commercial double-bottomed tanker seen in recent years .
 He had the only Deputy's badge, which was moved to the shelter after the shelter . He had moved everything over there after we came out of the shelter, police say .
 I hadn't expected my boys to show up; however, LEO or one of those military units could always come and visit . "I hadn't been expecting my boys show up," she said .
 Ronnie Barrett wouldn’t service LEO owned M82A1s, but I'm sure he would service the Ml 07s, if the need arose . While Ronnie Barrett would not service the LEO-owned, he would be happy to do so .
 We weren't taking any chances; until the LA County Sheriff returned our badges, we limited ourselves to staying close to the law . We were not allowed to wear badges until the badges were returned to their hands .
 When you consider that, there really wasn't a reason to do so, not after WW III had happened . "There wasn't really a reason for doing so," says CNN's John Sutter .
 It would still take 3 people to man the armor, a commander, loader and gunner . The armor would still be needed for the entire team .
 As a Sergeant First Class, Derek technically qualified as a tank Platoon Sergeant . As a tank Sergeant, Derek became a tank platoon sergeant .
 He said if he moved back to Iowa, and returned to his old unit, he wouldn't be well received because he'd advance 2 ranks in a different unit . He said he would be well-received if he returned to Iowa .
 The current move was to perform maintenance on all of the Ml A1 s, upgrading them to Ml . A2SEPs . We did talk and he explained that he said that the current move is to upgrade the A1 .
 The best we could hope for now was perhaps completing the vehicles already at the civilian company performing the upgrades . Even that seemed unlikely, even that seems unlikely .
 When he saw the bows and arrows he asked if he was planning for the long term . He asked if I was planning to go on the hunt, he said yes .
 Associated Power 79 carried all kinds of MQ Whisper Watt generators in sizes up to 1875kva .
 By now, you should have noticed this piece is more philosophy oriented and less oriented to entertainment . This is more philosophical oriented than entertainment .
 There is no shortage or more entertaining stories out there, Fleataxi, Greene, ChiliPalmer and several other authors can write the entertainment . I'll continue to stress survival philosophy .
 If you can get your hands on something by Halffast, AT Hagan or TS Sherry, they're better reads . The best reads are likely to be written by a few of the authors .
 If you draw a line from Dave to Dick's, the house in between is Jose and his new girlfriend . Jose and Dick's house is Jose's new girlfriend, Jose says .
 You have probably noticed the absence of my favorites, the cowboy guns, ergo, single action revolvers and lever action center fire rifles . The absence of cowboy guns is a departure from the traditional cowboy guns .
 I like them and will keep an eye open in case I get the chance to strategically reallocate a few, but they're impractical because on the reloading time . I will keep the eye open for a few of them .
 The Gun Shop has dozens of used guns, mostly used . The gun shop in London is known for its gun sales .
 I wasn't the same man I had been 10 years before and had nothing in common with the boy he was in the Air Force, save his love of firearms . "I wasn't a man I'd been ten years before," he says of his time in the military .
 When someone suggested simply helping ourselves to whatever was available, I opposed the idea . I opposed it, saying it would be a waste of money .
 I explained that I saw a difference between looting and strategic reallocation . "I explained that there was a difference," he said. "Looting is not looting, it's a strategic move," he added .
 If you acquired necessities that no one was claiming, it might qualify as the latter . It might be the first time you've acquired necessities you've been able to claim .
 "If you confronted someone to take what they had, probably so you would have more, it was looting, pure and simple," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It was looting," he says .
 The garden had to be replanted with short season crops, I can only assume the fallout got to the emerging vegetables .
 We traded for 2 steers and while it was a mess, I got them cut into something edible, barely . We got the steers into something that was barely edible .
 Jose had a rooster and the following year produced a lot of eggs and some meat . The following year he had a few eggs and meat . Jose says the rooster was a success .
 A hog produces 2 large hams and 2 smoked picnics, plus a fair amount of slab bacon . A hog can produce 2 big hams, 2 large picnials, plus 2 large slab hams .
 Two Hummers equipped with M240s and backed up by 120mm gun, a Ma Deuce and 2 7.62 machine guns must have kept them away . Hummers also armed with 120mm guns, a 120mm weapon, and a Ma deuce .
 The fences in the center of the tract came down, making way for a very large garden . The garden was planted the following year with heirloom seeds . The fences came down .
 The remaining residents located their kids and placed them in the empty houses in the tract . Eventually, the remaining residents of the tract located their children .
 Realizing we were actually short on armament, we made one trip to MCLB, Barstow . Realizing that we were short, we went to Barstown to find out what was needed .
 We recovered Ml 4s, Ml 6s and an assortment of other weapons plus a lot of ammo . We recovered a number of weapons and ammo .
 We cleaned out what remained of Cold Steel in Ventura and worked over several abandoned pharmacies, assuring us a 5-year supply, at least .
 The wind turbines will provide electricity from the wind turbines in the near future . The storm is expected to last for a year .
 The population of the Antelope Valley dwindled, eventually falling to under 100,000, possibly fewer . The population was estimated to be at least 200,000 people .
 While he had recovered from the Whipple's Disease, he lost his job when they nuked Salt Lake City . He was able to recover from his injuries .
 "I talked to him on the 75-meter band, he was trying to reach me using a neighbor's ham rig," he says . "He tried to talk to me on a 75-m band, trying to get me to reach him," he adds .
 I always figured that if anyone could do well after the war, it would surely be the Mormons . The Mormons would surely do well in the post-World War II era .
 As long as we could get water, the AV would continue to produce crops and raise livestock . The AV would be able to raise livestock and produce crops as long as possible .
 There was quite a bit of Jet A available in the AV, enough to run the few Hummers we recovered . There was also quite a lot of jet A available .
 We didn't require an alarm siren in the tract, all one had to do was grab a gun and ammo when he/she heard the turbine whine up on the Abrams . The turbine whine was the first time an Abrams turbine had been heard .
 Eventually, somebody opened a new locker plant and processed the beef, pork and poultry, for a share . Eventually, the meat and poultry were processed in the locker plant . The meat, poultry and pork were processed at the plant .
 Damon became the wealthy one in the end, he wasn't afraid to shop LA and found a lot of gold and silver, especially coins . Damon was able to buy a large amount of gold in Los Angeles .
 We managed to gather a fair amount of staples, cigarettes and toilet paper . We also collected toilet paper, toilet paper and staples .
 The city of Palmdale had managed to repair the water and sewer lines damaged in the earthquake before the war . The city managed to do the job before the earthquake .
 Ron showed us a little known propane storage facility, giving us gas for our gas appliances . Ron shows us how to get gas for your gas appliances using propane . Ron also shows you how to use propane to make your own home .
 Dick didn't have enough jets to convert everything, but he knew where to get what he needed . Dick knew where he needed to get the equipment . Dick's plane was too small to fit into a plane .
 I was able to refill my gasoline tank and find enough PRI-G to stabilize it until it ran out . "I'm not afraid to go on the road again. I'm glad to be able to get back in touch with my car," she says .
 When, in time, we had several large diesel fueled generators and the equipment to synchronize them, thus retained power . When, it was lost electrical power, the generators were used to keep power .
 We would do so until we were out of Jet A, #2 diesel and parts to rebuild the generators . We would continue to rebuild generators until we had enough fuel and parts for repairs .
 Chris welded together a gun rack of sorts mounted on a cart I could pull with my chair . The gun rack was mounted to a cart that could be pulled with a chair .
 With my chair set to the slowest speed, I could make dozens of laps around the housing tract, checking on people and keeping an eye out for would be thieves . With the speed of a chair set at a slow pace, he could make several laps around a housing tract .
 "I got a lot of visiting done and never once fired a weapon. Stated another way, I got a little visiting done," he says . "I never once shot a weapon," he adds .
 They had moved into Moon Shadows after the war, mainly for security, perhaps for security . They had been moved into the Moon Shadows in the 1950s .
 I still had almost 1,000 rounds of that South African surplus left over to go with the military ammo we'd picked up . We still had a lot of ammunition left over from the surplus left .
 I gave Derek my Loaded and kept the Super Match, telling him it was his when I went. I gave him my Loaded . I also gave Derek his Super Match and kept his Loaded .
 Derek disposed of the LAWs and grenades when he thought they were no longer safe to use . He said he disposed of them when he believed they were safe .
 "We were careful to preserve our ammo and only shot enough to stay proficient with our weapons. We were careful not to use our guns. We wanted to preserve their ammo and stay proficient," says the author .
 Clarence never heard from Clarence again, or Fleataxi, or from Fleatxi, he presumed I was the remaining amigo . "Because of Clarence, I presumed I would be the last amigo," he says .
 "What little shooting I did do showed that I was far better with iron sights than those darned scopes," he says .
 Derek and Damon swapped rifles and I told Damon he could have the Loaded when I went, if he wanted it . Eventually, Derek and Derek and I swapped rifles . Damon and Derek exchanged rifles .
 I ran out of Humalin and was forced to manage my diabetes with diet only, even the pills were gone . Even the pills are gone, and I'm forced to diet only .
 I didn't have much pancreas left, but that little that was left seemed to work fine . 98% of the time, I was able to keep my blood sugar under 200. 98% the time .
 "They say that old age serves to restore the memory, and it did with me," he says . "Old age serves as a good memory," he adds. "Old old age restores the memory"
 I can tell you that because somehow I managed to keep my old Dell computer running, as well as the HP laptop that Amy gave me to use . Amy gave us a laptop that she gave us to use, but it was too small to take it out .
 Damon had found enough toner cartridges so he could get to 1. million copies with his printer . Damon had to find the cartridges to get the printer to print 1 million copies . Damon's printer was able to print more than 1,000 copies .
 That included one maintenance kit to be used at 600k copies, with instructions on how to install the kit .
 There were several pallets of 3 hole drilled paper and a few cases of ring binders . There were also several cases of 3 holes drilled paper .
 "One of these nights, I was going to go to bed and not wake up the next morning, it was my turn," she said . "I'm not going to be able to go home and I'm going to have to go back to sleep"
 The Abrams, Challenger, Leopard, Leopard and Leclerc tanks are the current main battle 82 tanks . The Abrams and Challenger tanks were developed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 "I knew the story, but it was one of those stories you could never get enough of of," she says . "It's one of the stories I knew, but I knew it very well," she adds . "You can't wait to hear the story," she writes .
 The British developed the armor, the Germans the gun, we developed the engine and the French developed an autoader . We developed the engines, armor and an autoloader, the British developed .
 The British developed the first tank during WW I and the French went with smaller, medium tanks . As you know, the British developed a tank during WWII .
 During the 2nd war, the Germans had a jump on the Allies, especially in their guns . During the Second World War, the Allies had a bigger advantage than the Germans .
 They had the biggest and meanest tanks in that war, but they never had a chance to really develop and refine them, mostly because of that madman they had running the country . They never had to develop them, especially because of the madman who was in charge of the country
 The Russians and U.S. far outstripped German tank production . While they were under gunned and armored, they were able to overcome the German tanks .
 Each country has its own version of the 4 models, each country favoring their version .
 In the end, we went with the Abrams using our own gun and British armor . "In the end of the day, we decided to use our own weapon and armor," the author says .
 The British and Germans also went with their particular model, both using the British armor . The Germans and the British used the same armor .
 Our gun was too small and targeting system unrefined, leading to the Ml A1, with the German gun, heavier armor and improved fire control system . The MlA1 had heavier armor, better armor and a better gun control system.
 The Challenger II, Leopard II and Ml A2 Abrams went on sale in the UK, Germany and Germany . The Challenger I, Leopard I and Leopard II were all new models .
 We came up with the SEP, a partial upgrade, mostly of the targeting system . The SEP is the latest in a series of upgrades to the system's targeting system.
 We had intended on using the new engine developed for the Crusader to replace the Abrams turbine, but that fell by the wayside when the Army dropped the project . We had hoped to use the engine for the new aircraft but the project was dropped .
 What we should have done was replace the engine with the Crusader engine and the gun with that L55 gun the Germans use. What should have been replaced with a Crusader engine?
 "Anything you'd find would be seriously out dated and I doubt it would do any good," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We visited a while longer, him telling war stories and me recounting my life . We visited him again, and he told war stories about his life .
 The next day, Sharon checked on him after he hadn't gotten up to get ready for guard duty . "Sharon checked on me the next day," she said. "I'm not going to get up and get ready to guard duty."
 "A few hundred years of shoveling coal and we get to go upstairs. Because we all recovered, I worked a deal," he says . "Because we all recover, I'm glad we're going upstairs," he adds .